##  Weerasinghe v. Dissanayake and Others - SLR - 406, Vol 1 of 1997 [1993]
LKSC 32; (1997) 1 Sri LR 406 (1 January 1993)

** **

**406**

**WEERASINGHE**

**v _._**

**DISSANAYAKE AND OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT

DR. AMERASINGHE, J.,

RAMANATHAN, J. AND

WIJETUNGA, J.

S.C. APPLICATION NO. 143/95

FEBRUARY 7 AND MARCH 25, 1997.





_Fundamental Rights ‑ Article 12(1) of the Constitution ‑ Transfer of
educational personnel serving a Provincial Council ‑ List 1 (Provincial
Council List) Appendix III. 3 ‑ Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution._



The petitioner who was a Class II officer of the Sri Lanka Education
Administrative Service complained that whilst he was in the service of the
North Central Provincial Council on secondment, he was transferred to the
Ministry of Education and Higher Education by the Education Service Board of
the Public Service Commission in violation of his rights under Article 12(1)
of the Constitution in that _inter alia,_ officers who are so seconded cannot
be transferred without the approval of the Head of the relevant Department of
the Provincial Council.



**Held:**



(1) In terms of Appendix III.3. List 1 (Provincial Council List) of the
Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution there are two kinds of officers who
are subject to the power of transfer and disciplinary control of a Provincial
Council (1) those who

407



belong to a National Service but serving a Provincial Council on Secondment
(2) those who belong to the Provincial Public Service.



(2) The petitioner did not belong to either class of officer referred to an
Appendix III.3; he had not been seconded nor was he a member of the Provincial
Public Service. He belonged to a third group ‑ those who belong to a National
service, but whose services had been made available to Provincial Councils to
support and assist them but not upon the basis of secondment. Persons in the
third group would remain subject to the powers of transfer and disciplinary
control of the Public Service Commission.



**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.



_L. C. Seneviratne, P.C._ with _Nigel Hatch_ for petitioner.



_Kolitha Dharmawardene, D.S.G._ for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._



  
April 4, 1997\.  


**DR.** **AMERASINGHE, J.**



In 1960, the petitioner was appointed a Temporary Assistant Teacher at the
Maha Bellankadawala Vidyalaya, Anuradhapura, by the Director of Education,
North Central Province. In 1968, he was appointed a Graduate Assistant Teacher
of the Wannitammannawa Maha Vidyalaya, Anuradhapura, by the Director of
Education, North Central Province. While at that school, in 1982, he was
appointed to Class V of the Sri Lanka Education Service by the Education
Services Board of the Public Service Commission and, in 1985 he was appointed
to Class III of the Sri Lanka Education Administrative Service and continued
to serve at Wannitammannawa Maha Vidyalaya.



The petitioner was appointed to the Deepani Maha Vidyalaya, Anuradhapura and
later in February 1990, transferred to the Anuradhapura Division Education
Office by the Secretary of the North Central Provincial Council's Ministry of
Education, Health, Transport, and Youth Affairs. On 26 August 1992, while he
was serving in the Anuradhapura Division Education Office, the petitioner was
appointed by the Education Service Board of the Public Service Commission as a
Class II officer of the Sri Lanka Education



408



Administrative Service. On 26 August 1992, the petitioner was appointed Deputy
Director of Education, Anuradhapura Division Education Office by the Secretary
of the North Central Provincial Council's Ministry of Education, Health etc.
On 01 January 1993, the petitioner was appointed Director of Education,
Anuradhapura Education Zone, by the Secretary of the North Central Provincial
Council's Ministry of Education, Health etc. but it seems he continued to
function as Deputy Director. On 28 March 1995, the Secretary of the Education
Service Board of the Public Service Commission (the third respondent) wrote to
the petitioner stating that he had been transferred to the Ministry of
Education and Higher Education. The fourth respondent was appointed by the
Education Service Board of the Public Service Commission to fill the vacancy
created by the transfer of the petitioner. On 10 April 1995 and 20 April 1995
the petitioner appealed in writing to the Secretary of the Education Service
Board of the Public Service Commission. He also interviewed the Secretary on
12 April 1995. Consequently, the earlier order was varied and petitioner was,
by letter dated 06 May 1995 issued by the Secretary of the Education Service
Board, attached to the North Central Province Education Department,
Anuradhapura.



The petitioner alleged that his fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 12(1)
of the Constitution have been violated by his transfer to the Ministry of
Education and Higher Education. The petitioner's case is that although he did
once belong to the Sri Lanka Education Administrative Service, yet when
Provincial Councils were established, he was employed by the North Central
Provincial Council which appointed him to various posts and paid his salary.
He states that, in terms of Public Administration Circular No. 25/91 dated 03
July 1991, officials released to a Provincial Council would serve that Council
for a period of four years; at the end of that period, the officer was
entitled at his request to have his service with the Council extended. Until
such a request was made he could not be transferred without the approval of
the Head of the relevant Department of the Provincial Council. He had neither
requested a transfer, nor had the transfer been made with the approval of the
Head of his Department. On the other hand, the Additional Secretary
(Education), on the

409



directions of the Minister of Education of the Provincial Council, had
objected to the transfer of the petitioner. The petitioner maintains that the
Secretary of the Education Service Board had no power to transfer the
petitioner and frustrate his legitimate expectation of serving the North
Central Provincial Council.



While it is not in dispute that the petitioner did serve the North Central
Provincial Council and was appointed to various posts by that Council, there
was no evidence placed before us to show that he had been released to serve
the Provincial Council on secondment. All that the petitioner has been able to
say is that "to the best of his knowledge and belief he signified his consent
to be released to the North Central Provincial Council in terms of ...
Circular 25/91." The petitioner referred to Public Administration Circular
10/89. That Circular prescribes the manner and form of release, and he could
hardly be heard to say that he was ignorant of the procedures and requirements
for release to serve on secondment.



If the petitioner had not been released on secondment in terms of the
prescribed manner to serve in the Provincial Council of the North Central
Province, then he would have been subject to the authority of the Education
Service Board of the Public Service Commission and could legitimately have
been transferred by that Board. If he had been released, as he believed, he
might have come under the authority of the Provincial Council until 23 April
1993. After that date, however, he would, it seems, have been subject to the
control of the Education Service Board even if he had been released on
secondment, for Public Administration Circular No. 56/89 (1) issued on 23
April 1993 states that to be the case. On the date of the letter intimating
his transfer, namely 28 March 1995, the petitioner was subject to the
authority of the Education Service Board of the Public Service Commission in
terms of Circular No. 56/89 (1).



However, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that if Circular No.
56/89 (1) did permit the Education Service Board "to transfer any officer in
the all‑island services during their period of release to the Provincial
Public Service unilaterally then ... this Circular is contrary to the
Constitution which by the 13th Amendment

410



Provincial Council List has vested the transfer and disciplinary control of
such officers in the Provincial Council. This circular, can only be made
operative if such transfers are made on the recommendation or approval of the
Provincial Public Service or the relevant Provincial Ministry. Further the
question arises whether the consent of the officer should not be obtained if
he is to be transferred out of the Province since his consent is obtained in
respect of his transfer or appointment to the Provincial Public Service."



The petitioner was neither transferred nor appointed to the provincial public
service, and therefore the question of obtaining his consent before he was
transferred does not arise. He did serve the North Central Provincial Council
under some arrangement or on the basis of some tacit understanding, with
regard to which the Court was not provided with any information. More
importantly, there was no evidence placed before us to show that the
petitioner was seconded in the manner prescribed by the relevant circulars to
the Provincial Council, let alone being transferred or appointed to the
provincial public service. The petitioner continued to be a member of the Sri
Lanka Education Administrative Service and while he was serving the Provincial
Council was promoted to Class II of that Service by the Education Service
Board of the Public Service Commission.



Education and Educational Services are indeed placed on List 1 (the Provincial
Council List) by the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, but there is no
unqualified devolution. List 1 states that the subject of education is
devolved "to the extent set out in Appendix III". Appendix III.3 states as
follows: "The transfer and disciplinary control of all educational personnel,
i.e. Teachers, Principals and Education Officers, Officers belonging to a
National Service but serving the Provincial authority on secondment will have
the right of appeal to the Public Service Commission. Officers belonging to
the provincial public service will have a right to appeal to the Public
Service Commission against dismissal."



At first sight, the phrase "all educational personnel" would suggest that each
and every person, without exception, engaged in providing

411



educational services, whether as a teacher, principal or as an education
officer, would in terms of Appendix III.3 be subject to the powers of transfer
and disciplinary control of the relevant Provincial Council.



However, the legal meaning of Appendix III.3 is that there are two kinds of
officers who are subject to the power of transfer and disciplinary control of
a Provincial Council: (1) those who belong to a National Service but serving a
Provincial Council on secondment; and (2) those who belong to the provincial
public service. A distinction is made between those who belong to a National
Service and serve a Provincial Council on secondment on the one hand, and
those who are members of a provincial public service. The former have a right
of appeal to the Public Service Commission in respect of all matters connected
with their employment, for, although for the time being they are subject to
the powers of transfer and disciplinary control of the Provincial Council they
serve, they are nevertheless members of a National Service coming therefore
within the purview of the Public Service Commission. Those who belong to the
provincial public service too have a right of appeal to the Public Service
Commission, but only against an order of dismissal.



The petitioner does not belong to either class of officer referred to in
Appendix III.3: he has not been seconded nor is he a member of a provincial
public service. He belongs, in my view, to a third group ‑those who belong to
a National Service, but whose services have been made available to Provincial
Councils to support and assist them but not upon the basis of secondment.
Persons in the third group would remain subject to the powers of transfer and
disciplinary control of the Public Service Commission.



In the circumstances, I am of the view that the transfer of the petitioner was
valid and in no way frustrates his legitimate expectations. The Secretary of
the Education Service Board of the Public Service Commission has adduced
evidence to establish that other officers having the status of the petitioner
have also been transferred and that there has been no invidious
discrimination.



412



For the reasons set out above, I declare that the petitioner's fundamental
rights under Article 12(1) of the Constitution have not been violated and make
order dismissing the petition; but, having regard to the important and
debatable questions he has raised for consideration, without costs.



**RAMANATHAN, J. ‑** I agree.



**WIJETUNGA, J. ‑** I agree.



_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/32.html_  

