##  Hubert Fernando v. Kusumananda De Silva - SLR - 187, Vol 1 of 1991 [1991]
LKSC 32; (1991) 1 Sri LR 187 (19 January 1991)

**187**

**HURBERT FERNANDO  
V.  
KUSUMANANDA DE SILVA**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
GOONEWARDENA, J,  
D.C. NEGOMBO CASE NO. 2570/L  
CA. 425/81 (F)  
CA. (LA) S.C. APPLICATION NO. 8/88  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 17/88  
7 AND 11 DECEMBER 1990  
  
_Contract - Specific performance - Agreement to sell - Substituted obligation  
_  
**  Held-**

On the terms of the agreement to sell no alternative was made available to the
vendor as to the mode of performing the contract. The return of the deposit
was no alternative in any true sense. Hence the vendor was obliged to make
specific performance on the purchase fulfilling his obligations. There was
here no substituted obligation.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
_1\. Thaheer v, Abdeen_ 57 NLR 1  
_  
2\. Kannagammah v. Kumarakulasingham_ 66 NLR 523  
  
**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal  
  
_H.L. de Silva, P.C. with G. Dayasiri, P.M. Ratnawardene and Janaka de Silva_
for plaintiff -appellant.  
  
_P.A.D. Samarasekera, P.C. with Bimal Rajepakse_ for defendant - respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

19 January 1991  
  
**GOONEWARDENA, J  
  
**This was an action filed in the District Court by the present appellant as
plaintiff against the present respondent as defendant, seeking to enforce by
way of specific performance an agreement to transfer

**188**

premises bearing assessment No. 200, Weboda Road, Negombo called and known as
'Brindhaven'. The agreement which was notarially attested as required by the
Statute of Frauds was produced at the trial of the action marked P1. It
provided that the consideration for the transaction of sale contemplated
thereon was a sum of Rs. 80,000/-. M. its execution a sum of Rs. 8000/- was
made payable by the plaintiff, the purchaser, as a 'deposit . . . .being
1/10th share of the purchase consideration'. The balance sum of Rs. 72,000/-
was to be paid to the vendor, the defendant, at the time of the execution by
him of the contemplated deed of transfer and the deposit of Rs. 8000/- made
was to be treated by him as a part payment of the purchase price of Rs.
80,000/-. The purchase itself had to be completed not later than 31st July
1979.  
  
Conveniently, at this point, I would reproduce the two principal clauses of P1
of importance to the question of specific performance, thus:-  
  
"5\. If upon the purchaser duly observing and performing the terms and
condition set forth in this agreement the vendor shall wilfully or otherwise
refuse or fail to execute the deed of transfer as provided for in clause 3
hereof then and in that event the vendor shall refund, to the purchaser the
said sum of Rupees Eight Thousand (Rs. 8000/-) deposited as aforesaid or
alternatively the purchaser shall on giving thirty (30) days notice to the
vendor have the right to enforce specific performance by the vendor of the
agreement herein entered into.  
  
6\. If upon the vendor duly observing and performing the terms and conditions
set forth in this agreement the purchaser shall fail wilfully or otherwise to
complete the purchase as provided for in clause 3 hereof then and in that
event the vendor shall retain the said sum of Rupees Eight Thousand (Rs.
8000/-) deposited as aforesaid as liquidated damages and not as a penalty or
alternatively the vendor shall on giving thirty (30) days notice to the
purchaser have the right to enforce performance by the purchaser of the
agreement herein entered into."  
  
It was admitted that the plaintiff at the execution of P1 paid the defendant
the deposit of Rs. 8000/- and took the steps stated to be required of him in
the aforesaid clause 5, but by letter P3 the

**189**

defendant refused to sell the property and returned the sum of Rs. 8000/- so
deposited with him. Thereupon the plaintiff sent back this sum to the
defendant and gave him notice as set out in clause 5 and upon the failure of
the defendant to perform the contract of sale, instituted this action.  
  
In the trial Court the District Judge, placing reliance upon certain passages
in the judgment of Gratiaen J in the case of Thaheer v Abdeen (1), concluded
that it could not be said that the mere refund by the defendant of the sum or
Rs. 8000/- was the performance of a substituted obligation for the plaintiff's
right to specific performance, as was the defendant's contention, that under
the Roman Dutch Law a purchaser is entitled to the right of specific
performance provided that he had carried out his part of the contract and that
in the event of a breach of the contract it is not the defaulting party but
the innocent one who is entitled to exercise the option of an alternative
remedy. Consequently he declared judgment for the plaintiff and that resulted
in an appeal to the Court of Appeal.  
  
The Court of Appeal overturned the judgment of the District Judge and that in
turn has resulted in the present appeal being taken. That Court considered
that the words 'or alternatively' as used in clause 5 demonstrated an
intention to create a right to elect given to the vendor. Of importance to
emphasize is that the Court of Appeal considered that this was a right given
to the vendor and that the return of the part payment of Rs. 8000/-
necessarily implied that the 'primary obligation' to sell came to an end
taking away the plaintiffs right to demand specific performance, but that if
on the other hand the defendant failed or neglected to return or refund the
said deposit of Rs. 8000/- and instead chose to keep it, that only then the
'primary obligation' to sell was kept alive so as to place the defendant under
a duty to convey the property to the plaintiff capable of being enforced by
way of specific performance. The Court of Appeal concluded that therefore the
purchaser, the plaintiff, was denied the right to seek specific performance
and that the language of clause 5 was not open to the construction placed upon
it by the District Judge.  
  
In argument before us, in essence the contention of learned Counsel for the
plaintiff Mr. H. L. de Silva was that clause 5 of P1 did not contain
alternative modes of performing the contract available to the

**190**

defendant. He contended that the mere return of a deposit could not in any
sense be considered a performance of the contract.  
  
Conversely, learned Counsel for the defendant Mr. Samarasekera commended the
approach of the Court of Appeal and urged us to adopt it as being the correct
one, having regard to the provisions of the document P1. He placed strong
reliance himself on the judgment of Gratiaen J in Thaheer v Abdeen (Supra) and
emphasised the importance of the following passages (at P 4 and 5):  
  
"The conclusion which I have reached is that the language of clause 8 is not
open to the construction contended for on behalf of the purchaser. The parties
must clearly have appreciated on 3rd October, 1947, that failure on the part
of the 'vendors' to secure a conveyance of the entire property to the
purchaser on or before 31st December, 1947, in terms of the contract could
result from a variety of causes. For example.  
  
(1) the sanction of the District Court to the proposed sale might not be
obtained or not be obtained in time;  
  
(This was a reference to the agreement to sell inter alia certain undivided
rights in the property belonging to minors)  
  
(2) the title of the premises might not be 'deduced to the satisfaction of Mr.
John Wilson' - Clause 5;  
  
(3) One or more of the 'vendors' might back out of the transaction during the
interval between the date of the contract and the date fixed for completion.  
  
In the first of these contingencies, specific performance of the indivisible
obligation to secure the sale of the entire property would in the very nature
of things have been impossible, because the 'vendors' could not be compelled
to achieve a result which it was beyond their power to bring about. Clause 8
certainly provides the purchaser's only remedy in that particular contingency,
namely, that the vendors' shall forthwith' (the words are imperative, and
exclude the notion of an option being granted to either of the parties) refund
the part consideration previously deposited with them and also pay an agreed
sum by way of

**191**

liquidated damages.  
  
What then if the vendors should, for some other reason equally within the
contemplation of the parties, default in the performance of their primary
obligation? Clause 8 equally provides that in any such contingency the deposit
must 'forthwith1 be refunded and a like sum paid to the purchaser by way of
compensation.  
  
It follows from this analysis that what was clearly intended to constitute a
substituted obligation upon the first contingency referred to must equally
have been intended to constitute the sole obligation arising upon a default in
any other contemplated contingency. Had it been the intention of the parties
that the substituted obligation provided by clause 8 should represent the
purchaser's sole remedy in one situation, but that the alternative legal
remedy of specific performance (i.e. under the general law) should
nevertheless be reserved to him at his option in another, it would have been a
simple matter to insert in the contract express terms making separate
provisions for each separate contingency".

Counsel referred in this context to certain provisions in P1 which made the
transaction in question subject to (a) in the vendor's title being
satisfactory (b) vacant possession being granted and (c) the boundaries being
properly defined on a plan (clause 4). He pointed to clause 7 of P1 which
provided that the vendor shall be entitled if the purchase did not materialise
for any reason whatsoever (other than the reasons referred to in clause 4) to
appropriate the deposit (without prejudice to his other rights) against
damages payable and made further provision to enable the vendor to refund to
the purchaser the deposit of Rs. 8000/-in case the requirements of clause 4
were not met. His argument was that if as Gratiaen J held, provision for
certain contingencies impliedly excluded specific performance there, likewise
specific performance was by contract expressly excluded in the instant case.
He adopted the approach of the Court of Appeal that the vendor by the terms of
clause 5 had a choice as to whether he should keep the deposit of Rs. 8000A or
else refund it. If the vendor, he contended chose to keep it he was liable to
specifically perform the contract. If on the other hand he elected to return
it the matter ended there. In other words the effect of what he submitted was
that the whole question hinged upon the

**192**

decision which the vendor had the right to make under clause 5, whether to
refund the deposit or else to retain it.  
  
I think that it is possible to say at this point itself that since by clause 6
which deals with a situation in which the purchaser was in default, there was
a clear right of election given to the vendor to demand specific performance
to compel the purchaser to buy the property or alternatively to retain the
deposit of Rs. 8000 as damages, it would not be correct to consider (as the
Court of Appeal in the event did) that by clause 5 which deals with a
situation in which the vendor was in default and which also refers to a right
to obtain specific performance given to the purchaser, there was once again a
right of election given to the vendor to return the deposit or in the
alternative to specifically perform the contract of sale. It is neither
reasonable nor logical to think that the parties intended that clause 5 as
well as clause 6 should both give such a right of election only to the vendor
in either instance, that is, whether the default was his or that of the
purchaser.  
  
Since the word 'alternative' figures prominently in this case, in the belief
that it would serve the purpose of facilitating an understanding of what that
word should in this context properly signify, I have reproduced from the
texts, provisions ( which include the effect of the case law as well) of both
the Roman Dutch Law which admittedly is the law applicable in this case and
also of the English Law, and if that has been done to an extent that might
appear excessive or unnecessary, that was in order to extract the principles
comprehensively and to place the problem we are faced with in a correct legal
perspective. I have also not been unmindful of the probability that these
books are not too readily available and that the reproduction of these
passages could therefore also serve a somewhat general useful purpose.  
  
As regards the Roman Dutch Law, Wessels on The Law of Contract in South
Africa1 (2nd Edition 1951) states thus:-  
  
Section 1453 "The object of an obligation may be either a single thing or a
single act, or else it may consists of several things or several acts, or of
both things and acts. In the former case we say that the object of the
obligation is 'simple1, in the latter case that it is 'compound'.

**193**

If the object of the obligation is compound, the promise may be framed in such
a way as to be fulfilled only when all things are delivered or all the acts
are performed (conjunctive obligation), or else that the delivery or a single
thing or the performance of a single act absolves the debtor (facultative or
alternative) ..."  
  
Section 1454". . .In the facultative obligation there is a promise to deliver
some definite things or to perform some definite act, but at the same time the
debtor reserves to himself the right to perform his contract by some other
prestation, e.g. I promise to deliver A, but I reserve to myself the right of
delivering B instead. The primary object of the obligation is A but I have the
power (facultas) of substituting B . . .An obligation is said to be
alternative when the promise involves two prestations, but in such a way that
the debtor is absolved by either prestation, I promise to deliver A or B. Both
are equally due until the choice is effected, but after that only the one
chosen is due . . .".  
  
Section 1459 "If two things are promised alternatively and one of them at the
moment of the clinching of the contract belongs to the creditor, the agreement
must be regarded as a simple promise of the other. . .".  
  
Section 1460 "If one of the alternative promises is the performance of an act
and the other the payment of money, we must gather from the contract and the
circumstances whether the payment of the money is intended merely as a penal
clause or whether it is to operate as a liquidated debt. If the clause
providing the money payment is a penalty, it is not 'in obligation, for the
law will then consider it a mere accessory undertaking and only due if the
principal obligation is not executed, and then only to the extent of the
actual damage suffered.  
  
If, however, the payment of the money is not construed to be a penal clause,
but an alternative prestation, then directly the performance of the act
becomes impossible or the promissor refuses to carry it out or cannot do so,

**194**

the money is due . . ."  
  
Section 1461 English Law is similar . . .  
  
As regards the English Law in the work 'A Treatise on the Specific Performance
of Contracts' by Fry (6th Edition 1985) it is stated thus:  
  
Section 140 "From the principles stated in the last Chapter, it appears that
where a contract is substantially performed by the payment of a sum of money,
the Common Law remedy being adequate, Equity will not interfere. Hence, in
cases where there is added to the contract a clause for the payment of a sum
of money in the event of non performance the question arises whether the
contract will be satisfied by the payment, or whether it will not. In the
former case, Equity will not interfere; in the latter it may".  
  
Section 141 "The question always is, what is the contract? Is it that one
certain act shall be done, with a sum annexed, whether by way of penalty or
damages, to secure the performance of this very act? or is it that one of two
things shall be done at the election of the party who has to perform the
contract, namely, the performance of the act or the payment of the sum of
money? If the former, the fact of the penal or other like sum being annexed
will not prevent the Court's enforcing performance of the act, and thus
carrying into execution the intention of the parties: If the latter, the
contract is satisfied by the payment of a sum of money, and there is no ground
for proceeding against the party having the election to compel the performance
of the other alternative".  
  
Section 142 "From what has been said it will be gathered that contracts of the
kind now under discussion are divisible into three classes:-  
  
(i) . . .Where the sum mentioned is strictly a penalty - a sum named by way of
securing the performance of the contract as the penalty in a bond . . .;

**195**

(ii) Where the sum named is to be paid as liquidated damages for a breach of
the contract;  
  
(iii) Where the sum named is an amount the payment of which may be substituted
for the performance of the act at the election of the person by whom the money
is to be paid or the act done. . ."  
  
It will be convenient to consider the three classes of cases separately.  
  
Section 143 (i) "A penalty (strictly so called) attached to the breach of the
contract will not prevent it from being specifically enforced . . .".  
  
Section 146 (ii) "The difference between penalty and liquidated damages is, as
regards the Common Law remedy, most material. For according to the Common Law,
if the sum named is not a penalty, but the agreed amount of liquidated
damages, the contract is satisfied either by its performance or the payment of
the money. But as regards the equitable remedy the distinction is unimportant;
for the fact that the sum named is the amount agreed to be paid as liquidated
damages is, equally with a penalty strictly so called, ineffectual to prevent
the Court from enforcing the contract in specie".  
  
Section 153 (iii) "In the third class of contracts which may be distinguished
as alternative contracts, the intention is that a thing shall be done or a sum
of money paid at the election of the person bound to do or pay.  
  
In these case, the contract is as fully performed by the payment of the money
as by the doing of the act, and therefore where money is paid or tendered
there is no ground for interference by way of specific performance or
injunction".  
  
Section 154 " The question to which of the three foregoing classes of
contracts any particular one belongs is of course a question of construction.
In considering it 'the Courts

**196**

must, in all cases, look for their guide to the primary intention of the
parties, as it may be gathered from the instrument upon the effect of which
they are to decide, and for that purpose to ascertain the precise nature and
object of the obligation'. Consequently each case depends on its own
circumstances . . .".  
  
Section 155 "On this question it is by no means conclusive that the contract
may be alternative in its form. For never the less the Court may clearly see
that it is essentially a contract to do one of the alternative . . . ".  
  
Section 158 "The fact that the benefit of the contract would result to one
person or flow in one channel and the benefit of the sum if paid, in another,
is a strong circumstances against considering the contract alternative in its
nature  
  
If these citations bring out anything clearly it is that in every reference to
an 'alternative obligation' there is to be found that upon a performance
thereof some benefit (generally monetary) passes to the creditor from the
debtor, which in the instant case would come from the vendor to the purchaser.
This is strongly brought out by an expression often used in this context "an
alternative obligation of equal work". As Wessels in his work "The Law of
Contract in South Africa" (ibid) points out at section 385 "The object of the
obligation to which the contract gives rise in the thing or act which has been
promised". In the case of two alternative obligations this must apply to
either of such alternatives. Can it be said that one of the obligations in
clauses 5 was such that if the vendor defaulted the purchaser should merely
get back his deposit? To put it somewhat differently can it reasonably be said
that the object of this so called alternative obligation looked at from the
purchaser's angle was to get back his own money whereas by contract in the
event of the purchaser's default the vendor could claim the alternative of
damages. I certainly do not think so.  
  
What then is the true effect of the vendor retaining or endeavouring to return
to the purchaser the deposit. Fry in his work on Specific Performance of
Contract (ibid) in Chapter VI deals with The Deposit1, such as is also entered
in P1. So much of sections 1477 and 1478

**197**

in such chapter as are relevant are reproduced thus:-  
  
Section 1477"lt is common on sales of real estate for the purchaser to pay to
the vendor at the time of the contract a portion of the purchase money by way
of part payment......"  
  
Section 1478"The deposit unless paid on any special terms, is not merely part
payment but is an earnest: so that, on the one hand if the contract be
performed, it is brought into account as part payment: On the other hand if
the purchaser makes default it may be retained by the vendor. The deposit is
therefore security for the performance of the purchaser's part of the contract
. . Where without any default on the part of the purchaser the contract fails,
the deposit and all other part payments ought to be repaid . . ."  
  
A deposit then, as explained above, being something which has to be paid back
to the plaintiff where he was without default it cannot, when so paid back, as
I see it, be considered the performance of an alternative obligation under the
contract. As I understand section 1459 of Wessels on "The Law of Contract in
South Africa" (ibid) the words I earlier referred to "If two things are
promised alternatively and one of them at the moment of the clinching of the
contract belongs to the creditor the agreement must be regarded as a simple
promise of the other", are a pointer in that direction.  
  
Counsel for the respondent read out the dictionary meaning of the word
'alternative' as part of his argument as to the alternatives he claims were
available to the defendant under clause 5. In this regard the judgment of the
Court of Appeal, as I read it, emphasises an aspect suggesting that the first
of the choices was one given to the vendor to refund the deposit of Rs. 8000/-
which upon being refunded brought the matter to an end, so that the situation
pertaining to the exercise of the right of specific performance said to be
available to the purchaser did not arise, and in that way treated then as
alternative choice available to the vendor. It seems to me that this way of
looking at it, made as it is to depend upon the order in which these claimed
alternatives occur in clause 5 can be misleading as I shall endeavour to show.
If, as contended, the stipulations in clause 5 are true alternatives, then it
should be possible to rearrange

**198**

the structure of such clause without in any way distorting its meaning by
transposing these two claimed alternatives to read, thus:  
  
"If upon the purchaser duly observing and performing the terms and conditions
set forth in this agreement the vendor shall wilfully or otherwise refuse or
fail to execute the deed of transfer as provided for in clause 3 hereof then
and in that event the purchaser shall on giving thirty (30) days notice to the
vendor have the right to enforce specific performance by the vendor of the
agreement herein entered into or alternatively the vendor shall refund to the
purchaser the said sum of Eight thousand (Rs. 8000/-) as aforesaid".  
  
Referred in this way one sees that the meaning thereby conveyed suggests a
"right of election" available to the purchaser, unlike in the structure of
clause 5 as it exists in P1. It seem to me therefore that if they were true
alternatives, clause 5 rendered as set out above should not achieve the result
of altering the party having the right of election from the vendor to the
purchaser. By contrast a like exercise with respect to clause 6 does not bring
about such a result. The inference therefore must be that there is no
alternative made available to the vendor here as to the mode of performing the
contract and I would express my view that the return of the deposit was no
alternative in any true sense, despite that use of the word in clause 5 with
unfortunate consequences for the plaintiff.  
The 'alternative' referred to in clause 5 was not in reality an inference to a
performance of an act in any particular way but rather to a non performance or
breach. The word 'discharge' when used in relation to a contract can be
understood to mean, the contractual obligation being extinguished, and as
pointed out in section 2117 of 'The Law of Contracts in South Africa1 by
Wessels (ibid), the various modes whereby that can be brought about are
grouped under three heads namely (1) performance or payment (2) mutual
agreement (3) operation of law. The expression 'discharge of a contract' is
sometimes used in a sense suggesting a breach, and as Wessels also points out
(at section 2912) "English text - books speak of the discharge of a contract
by breach" although as he comments (at section 2913) "It is doubtful whether
that Civil Law regarded a breach of contract in this light". Therefore when
one encounters a provision in a contract which at first glance may take the
appearance of an

**199**

'alternative' (as here) one can all too easily fall into the error of
confusing a 'breach' for a 'performance' in the context of an obligation being
discharged or extinguished.  
  
The case of Thaheer v Abdeen (Supra) as also the later case of Kanagammah v
Kumarakulasingham (2) which purported to follow it must be distinguished. If
however the judgment in the latter of these cases is in conflict with the
conclusion I reach in the instant case, with respect I would have to disagree
with it. As contended by Counsel for the appellant the technique of
interpretation used by Gratiaen J in the circumstance of the case before him
is inappropriate here. To apply what Gratiaen J said in the former case to the
facts of the present one in the manner suggested would be far from taking the
correct course. As Gratiaen J himself pointed out there, "it would have been a
single matter to insert in the contract express terms making separate
provision for each separate contingency". That I think has been done in the
document under consideration here. Further, in the instant case the right of
seeking specific performance was granted to both parties (thereby conforming
to the aspect of mutuality) and thus by express inclusion in the contract,
unlike in that case where this right was being claimed only as available under
the Roman Dutch Law applicable, and where the contract there made provision
for the repayment forthwith by the vendor of the deposit and a further sum by
way of liquidated and ascertained damages.  
  
To recapitulate, what then is a contract? What are the legal relations created
by it? The striking difference between the position of the vendor and the
purchaser is this. In the event of a breach, as an alternative to specific
performance the vendor by contract gave himself the right to recover damages,
whereas by contract, as an alternative to specific performance the purchaser
by contract did not give himself that right and was content to get back his
deposit. It seems to me therefore that it is possible to think that at the
time the contract was entered into there was a greater anxiety on the part of
the vendor to see that the sale went through for it may well be said, to use
the words of Fry in specific performance (ibid) already referred to, that 'the
sum was annexed by way of damages to secure the performance of this very act1.
Analytically what were the rights and duties of the parties? Counsel for the
appellant contended that clause 5 created rights in the purchaser with
correlative duties on

**200**

the part of the vendor, while clause 6 did the reverse. I do agree. In a
situation of the vendor's default clause 5 gave the purchaser 'the right' to
enforce specific performance placing the vendor under a corresponding duty to
comply. If the purchaser chose not to exercise that right, he instead had the
right (or entitlement which the common law in any event gave him) to get back
his deposit with the corresponding duty cast on the vendor to pay back that
deposit. In a situation of the purchaser's default, clause 6 on the other hand
gave the vendor 'the right1 to enforce specific performance placing the
purchaser under the corresponding duty to comply. If the vendor chose not to
enforce that right, he instead had the right to retain the deposit as
liquidated damages and the purchaser was under a corresponding duty to permit
that.  
  
The general position under the Roman Dutch Law is referred to by Wessels in
his Law of Contract in South Africa (ibid) thus:-  
  
Section 3102"Prima facie, every party to a binding agreement who is ready to
carry out his own obligation under it, had a right to demand from the other
party, so far as it is possible, a performance of his undertaking in terms of
the contract. As remarked by Kotze, C.J. in Thompson v Pullinger (1894 1 O R
at 301): The right of a plaintiff to the specific performance of a contract
where the defendant is in a position to do so is beyond all doubt1.  
  
Section 3013"lt is therefore part of our law that a defendant who has broken
his contract has not got the option of purging his default by the payment of
money. For, in the words of Story (Equity Jurisp., S 717 (a): 'It is against
conscience that a party should have a right of election whether he would
perform his contract or only pay damages for the breach of if. The election is
rather with the injured party, subject to the discretion of the Court* (per
Innes C.J. ibid. See also Shill v Milner 1937 A D 191; Nobertson Municipality
v Jansen 1944 C.P.d. 526 at p 543)  
  
In the instant case there was an express right available to the plaintiff in
the event of the defendant's breach to demand specific performance and there
was no alternative mode of performance

**201**

made available to the defendant.  
  
I am of the view that the Court of Appeal misdirected itself in regard to the
conclusion reached that the plaintiff was not entitled to demand specific
performance of the contract as claimed. The contract Itself examined against
the background of the relevant law gave the plaintiff that right. In the
circumstances I would while reversing the judgment of the Court of Appeal
restore the judgment of the District Court and accordingly allow this appeal
with costs payable here and in both Courts below.  
  
**AMARASINGHE, J - I agree.  
  
DHEERARATNE, J - I agree.  
**  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/32.html_  

