##  Hassan v. Fairline Garments International Ltd. and Others - SLR - 137, Vol
2 of 1989 [1989] LKSC 32; (1989) 2 Sri LR 137 (21 August 1989)

**

137

HASSAN  
v.  
FAIRLINE GARMENTS INTERNATIONAL LTD. AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT  
S.C. APPEAL No. 50/88,  
CA. APPLICATION No. 1064/87,  
T.E.U./C/56/85,  
ATUKORALE, J., H.A.G. DE SILVA, J., AND BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
MAY 12TH, 25TH AND 26TH AND JUNE 06TH, 1989.

_

Industrial dispute - Termination of employment _\- _Transfer of the worker to
a different establishment without consent - Is such right implicit in every
contract of service in the absence of contractual provisions or statutory
provisions to the contrary?  

_

Assignment of new functions to the workman - Did the contract of employment
permit it? - In any event does the transfer in law amount to a termination? -
Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special Provisions) Act No. 45 of 1971
as amended by  
Law No. 04 of 1976.

The appellant workman had been appointed as the purchasing officer of the
respondent company. When he had functioned in that capacity for several years
he was informed by the respondents that he would no longer be required to do
purchasing as that function was being delegated to a subsidiary company and he
was asked to conclude the existing purchasing assignments. Thereafter the
appellant was informed that he had been transferred to Jetro, a subsidiary
company of The respondent company, and asked to commence the new assignments
there which were different from purchasing. Having refused to discharge those
functions the appellant complained to the Commissioner of Labour that the
respondents have stopped his work without his or the Commissioner's written
consent and asked the Commissioner to restore him in the capacity of
purchasing officer as per his letter of appointment which however included a
clause inter alia that the appellant should carry out all duties entrusted to
him by the respondent company.

**

Held **-

1\. A workman has an inalienable right to choose for himself the employer he
will serve. Once the contractual relationship between himself and his employer
is established, the employer cannot transfer his services to another without
his (the employee's) consent or against his will.

2\. (It is reasonable to infer that the appellant's appointment was to a
specific post, namely that of purchasing officer, which doubtless would have
required skill and experience of some sort. The clause that the appellant
should carry out ali duties  
entrusted to him by the respondent company in the context must be construed to
mean duties within the ambit of a purchasing officer. It cannot possibly be
taken to embrace every kind of duty which the company may decide to assign to
him.

3\. The proposition that the employer enjoys an implied right, in the absence
of contractual provisions or other rules to the contrary to transfer a workman
from one establishment to another at a different place within the service of
the employer has no application to the present case as here the appellant was
transferred to another place of work not within but outside the respondent's
service

**138**

and in the service of another and altogether different company, namely,
'Jetro.'

(4) The whole purpose of the Termination of Employment {Special Provisions)
Act is to ensure that the workman continues in employment in the same capacity
in which he was employed by his employer.

Per Atukorale, J. - "The decision in _Ceylon Estates Staff's Union_ Vs. _The
Superintendent, Meddecombra Estate_ (1) and several other decisions from
Ceylon, Indian and English Common Law jurisdiction, referred to by
Weeramantry, J. in his judgment relates to instances where the workman had
been transferred from one division of an estate or from one department of a
company or from one establishment o" a business concern to another division,
department or establishment at a different place within the service of the
same employer or management'.

**

Cases referred to:

**_

  1. Ceylon Estate Staff's Union v. The Superintendent, Meddecombra Estate _73 NLR 278
_  


  2. Nokes V Doncaster Amalgamated Collieries Ltd. _(1940) A.C. 1014
_  Kundan Sugar Mills V Ziyauddin _and _Others A.LR._ 1960 S.C. 650  

**

APPEAL** from Judgment of the Court of Appeal

_

Dr. H.W. Jayewardene, Q.C. _with _Ifthikar Hassim, Harsha Amerasekera, Harsha

Cabraal _and _H.L. Jayasuriya_ for appellant.

_

Faiz Mustapha, PC. _with _Shirley Fernando, Rauff Hakim, M.S.M. Suhaid, Nigel
Hatch   _and _Hemasiri Witanachchi_ for 1st respondent

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_August 21, 1989,

**

ATUKORALE, J.

**

This is an appeal, with leave of the Court of Appeal, from its judgment
quashing by way of a writ of certiorari the order (P5) of the Commissioner of
Labour made under s.6 of the Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special
Provisions) Act, No.45 of 1971, as amended by Law No.4 of 1976, directing the
1st respondent Company, the employer, (hereinafter referred to as the Company)
to re-instate the appellant, the workman, in the post of Purchasing Officer
and to pay him his wages for the period of his non-employment. The Company -
Fairline Garments (International) Ltd. - is a limited liability company
incorporated under the provisions of the Companies Ordinance and carrying on
the business of the manufacture of garments. The letter of appointment dated
3.9.1982 issued by the Company to the appellant, in so far as is relevant for
our purposes, reads as follows:

**139**

Dear Sir,

**

Appointment as Purchasing Officer

**

We have the pleasure to appoint you as the Purchasing Officer of our Company
subject to the following terms and conditions:

1) Your appointment shall be with effect from 14th September 1982.

2) Your appointment is subject to a period of probation of three months and in
the event of your voluntary termination of services  
during this period you are required to give one month's notice in writing to
the management.

3) You will be placed on an initial salary scale of Rupees two thousand
(Rs.2,0007-) per mensem ....  
  
4) You will faithfully observe and honestly carry out all duties entrusted to
you .... and shall further refrain from divulging to any third party or
otherwise any and all information of a confidential nature concerning this
Company that you may acquire in the course of the performance of your duties.  
  
5) ..................  
  
6) ..................  
  
7) ..................  
  
8) ..................  
  
9) ..................  
  
10) ..................

**

**

We wish you every success and hope you will have a long and happy career with
us."

It is signed by a Director on behalf of the Company. It also contained certain
conditions in regard to the termination of the appellant's services, after
confirmation, by either party upon notice or by the Company without notice.
The appellant accepted this appointment and was, after the expiration of the
probationary period, confirmed in and functioned as the Purchasing Officer of
.the Company until the present dispute arose about three years later.

In or about August 1985 the Company decided to set up a subsidiary company -
Fairline Crescent - located at Pettah (where most of the purchasing work had
to be done) to handle its overall purchasing functions. On 7th August 1985 the
Company, through its

**140**

General Manager (Lovell). addressed the following memorandum (A5) to the
appellant:

"It has been agreed with the Chairman that you will no longer be required to
attend to purchasing mainly because this function is being delegated to
Fairline Crescent in Pettah.

From today you will only conclude the current assignments you are carrying out
and thereafter report to me from this office for further instructions. '

On 12th August the appellant was informed by Lovell to report to Faleel or
Sarath at Jetro Textile Mills (Pvt.) Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as Jetro)
at Katubedda. The appellant accordingly reported to Sarath, the Factory
Manager of Jetro, who gave him the note A6 stating that he had no specific
instructions regarding his problem and requesting him to report for
instructions the following morning by which time he would have things
clarified. Accordingly on the 13th August the appellant reported for
instructions. Sarath asked him to await Faleel's arrival. Faleel was a
Director of Jetro. Faleel did not turn up that day and the appellant left at
closing time without doing any work. On the next day (14th August) the
appellant again reported for instructions and met Faleel who arrived at about
4.45 p.m. Faleel asked him to supervise some carpenters and welders working on
the 2nd floor but the appellant protested that he could not do that type of
work. Faleel then requested him to collect a letter that was in the car in
regard to his functions. He collected this letter (A7) and left at about 5
p.m. It read:

August 13, 1985  
Re-location.

To: Mr. Kamil Hassan  
From: The Group Manager

I confirm the note given to you on 12th morning, that you are transferred With
immediate effect to Jetro Textile Mills (Pvt) Ltd., where you have been asked
to report to Mr. Faleel for further instructions regarding your full
functions.

It the Chairman's wish that you handle matters related to Grey Stores,
Finished Products, bonding etc. No doubt Mr. Faleel will give more details
including the programme to complete separate facilities for storing and
'bonding before 30th August.

The vehicle you are now using should be taken with you and all petrol .?? wail
as maintenance expenses should be drawn direct from

**141**

Jetro. Mr. Faleel will lay down standards regarding petrol and maintenance
expenses claimable.

I wish you all the best in your new assignment."

This letter was signed by Lovell with copies to Faleel and another. On 15th
August the appellant did not report for work but sent a telegram (A8) to
Faleel at Jetro stating that he is unable to report for work and requesting
for leave and that a letter will follow. On the next day (16th August) he
addressed letter (A9) to the Commissioner of Labour complaining as follows:

Dear Sir,

Violation of the Termination of Employment Act by  
Fairline Garments (International) Ltd. of 36,  
Kynsey Road, Colombo 8.

1\. I was employed as Purchasing Officer of Fairline Garments (International)
Ltd., with effect from 14th September 1982 by _letter dated 3rd September
1982._ (photocopy annexed marked "A").3

By letter dated 7th August 1985 (photocopy annexed marked "B") I was informed
that my purchasing functions had been stopped.

Thereafter have been instructed to work under other companies and I have been
assigned new functions which have nothing to do with my contractual duties as
Purchasing Officer.  

My employment as Purchasing Officer with Fairline Garments (International)
Ltd. has come to an end.

My prior written consent has not been obtained for this change of employment
nor has the prior written approval of the Commissioner of Labour been
obtained.

Therefore, please be good enough to restore me to my employment as Purchasing
Officer as per my letter of Appointment marked "A".

I annex for your information, marked "C", a copy of my letter dated 16th
August 1985 to Fairline Garments (International) Ltd."

**142**

The letter (A 10) sent by the appellant to the Company referred to in the last
paragraph as well as in the telegram is as follows:

**"ATTENTION MR. SAMUEL S. LOVELL, GENERAL MANAGER.**

Dear Sirs,

I refer to my _telegram dated 15th August 1985.

_

I have brought to the notice of the Commissioner of Labour the contents of
your letter dated 7th August 1985, and the subsequent events, and I have
requested him to inquire into the matter and _restore me to my employment as
Purchasing Officer in terms of your letter of appointment dated 3rd September
1982.

_

I am anxious to resume my employment under you as Purchasing Officer in terms
of the said Letter of Appointment. Please be good enough to advise me when you
are prepared to re-instate me.

I am copying this letter to the Commissioner of Labour for his information and
necessary action."

The following correspondence then ensued between the Company and the
appellant. By its letter dated 19th August, the Company sent the following
reply to the appellant:

"Dear Sir,

Reference is made to your letter dated 16th August 1985. Firstly, you have
failed to comply with the contents of the memo dated 13th August wherein you
were required to take up an urgent and important assignment at one of our
Subsidiary Companies, but you have so far failed to respond at least by your
attendance. Your attitude and action as an executive is most disappointing.
Ample opportunity was also given you to discuss your feelings with either the
Directors or the undersigned but you have chosen to disregard reasonable means
and resorted to an intransigent approach.

I am therefore requesting you to report once again to your new posting and
commence your new assignments which are of extreme importance to the Company,
which includes purchasing to a considerable extent."

It was signed by Lovell, Group General Manager and copied to Faleel of Jetro.
It was produced marked A 22. The appellant then sent the following reply (A
23) dated 22nd August to the Company:

"Dear Sirs,  
  
I do not accept the correctness of what is set out in your letter dated

**143**

_

19th August 1985.

_

Please advise me by return whether your memorandum dated _7th August 1985_
which states that I "will no longer be required to attend to purchasing mainly
because this function is being delegated to Fairline Crescent in Pettah" and
subsequent letters assigning me to other employments and duties are cancelled,
and whether you are prepared to reinstate me as Purchasing Officer of Fairline
Garments (International) Ltd.

This letter is written without prejudice to my complaint to the Commissioner
of Labour."

The Company also despatched the following letter (A20) dated 23rd August to
the appellant, which the appellant maintained had been pre-dated:  
  
"Dear Sir,

With reference to the letter dated 19th August 1985, it is noted with regret
that you are still refusing to comply with the simple instructions which
originated from the Chairman himself. Your failure to report to work since
14th August '85 leaves us no option but to issue you this letter of severe
caution and placing a deadline for you to report to Mr. A.CM. Faleel, the
Director of Jetro Textiles Pvt. Ltd., where you were assigned work on 12th
August '85. Should you fail again to resume work within 7 (seven) days hereof,
we will consider you as having vacated your post and take action accordingly.

In the meantime, we must ask you to immediately return the Company vehicle you
are issued as in any event you are not carrying out any business activities
and keeping the vehicle in your possession is totally unwarranted ..."

To this the appellant sent to the Company the following reply (A27) dated 29th
August:

"Dear Sirs,

I write with reference to your letter dated 23rd August 1985 ....

I regret to state that you have failed to acknowledge or give a straight
forward reply to:-

(1) My letter dated 16th August 1985 where I have requested you to re-instate
me immediately as Purchasing Officer in terms of my Letter of Appointment.

**144**

(2) My letter dated 22nd August 1985 where I reiterated my request.

Please be good enough to confirm unequivocally whether you will restore me to
my employment as Purchasing Officer of Fairline Garments (International) Ltd.,
and whether your letter dated 7th August 1985 is withdrawn.

Although it would appear from your letters that you are attempting to force me
to abandon my contractual employment as Purchasing Officer of Fairline
Garments (International) Ltd., I refuse to abandon or vacate my said
employment, and I hold you to the terms set out in my letter of appointment
dated 3rd September 1982.

If you are not prepared to reinstate me to my position as Purchasing Officer
of Fairline Garments (International) Ltd., I have no objection to your sending
your driver or other representative duly authorised to take possession of the
vehicle after issuing me a proper receipt.

I am copying this letter to the Commissioner of Labour for necessary action."

Finally on 6.11.1985 the Company sent the following letter (A26) to the
appellant: "Dear Sir,

Further to the letter dated 23rd August 1985 sent to you by our Group General
Manager under registered cover, we write to inform that you, by your conduct,
have vacated your post with effect from 7th August 1985.

We will, however, deposit your earned wages from 1st August 1985 to 7th August
1985 with the Commissioner of Labour, today."

On 30th August the Company took over the vehicle which was in the appellant's
possession - vide A21. This substantially is the documentary evidence in the
case. The oral evidence, which comprised of that of the appellant and Lovell
(the General Manager), established, inter alia, that in compliance with the
instructions given in A5 of 7th August the appellant attended to his current
assignments relating to purchasing work of the Company on Wednesday the 7th,
Thursday the 8th and Friday the 9th of August, on which day he concluded the
same. Saturday the 10th and Sunday the 11th were not working days. On Monday
the 12th, the first day after the conclusion of his current purchasing
assignments, he reported to the office address of the Company at No. 36,
Kynsey Road, Colombo 8.

**145**

Lovell had left a note to him requesting him to report to Sarath or Faleet at
Jetro, which, as set out by me already, he did on the same day. The appellant
acknowledged the payment to him by the Company of his wages up to 14th August,
1985.

The Commissioner of Labour made order directing the Company to reinstate the
appellant in the post of Purchasing Officer with effect from 8.9.1987 and to
pay him a sum of Rs. 139,437.50 cts. as back wages for the period of his non-
employment. The Commissioner did not set out any reasons in his order. In
quashing this order the Court of Appeal took the view that neither the re-
location of the appellant's place of work nor the assignment to him by the
Company of new functions, both being permissible in terms of the contract of
employment, amounted to a termination of the appellant's services. In regard
to the first of these two matters the Court of Appeal held that there was
considerable authority for the proposition that the employer enjoys an implied
right, in the absence of contractual provisions or other rules to the
contrary, to transfer a workman from one establishment to another at a
different place within the service of the employer. Reliance for this
proposition was placed mainly on the decision in Ceylon Estates Staffs' Union
v. The Superintendent, Meddecombra Estate (1). In that case the workman who
was the senior (and the acting head) factory officer of the northern division
of Meddecombra Estate was transferred by the management to its southern
division as the senior assistant factory officer on the same terms and
conditions as those attached to his post in the northern division. The workman
repeatedly refused to accept this transfer to the southern factory.
Weeramantry J., in the course of his judgment, stated that the employer's
right to transfer his staff within his service was too well established to
need elaboration and had received firm recognition in Ceylon, India and under
the English Common Law. He cited several decisions from all three
jurisdictions to support this legal position. But, as rightly pointed out by
learned Queen's Counsel, the decisions referred to by Weeramantry, J. in his
judgment relate to instances where the workman had been transferred from one
division of an estate or from one department of a company or from one
establishment of a business concern to another division, department or
establishment at a different place within the service of the same employer or
management. In fact learned Queen's Counsel did not dispute the appellants
liability to be transferred to another branch or

**146**

department of the Company, although he maintained that even so it should be in
the same capacity, namely that of a Purchasing Officer. It was, therefore, his
contention that the decision in The Ceylon Estates Staffs' Union v. the
Superintendent, Meddecombra Estate (supra) which the Court of Appeal purported
to follow had no application to the facts and circumstances of this case, the
reason being that here the appellant, the workman, was transferred by the
Company, his employer, to another place of work not within but outside its own
service and in the service of another and altogether different company,
namely, Jetro.

Upon a careful consideration of this submission of learned Queen's Counsel I
am inclined to uphold the same. It seems to me that the Court of Appeal was in
error when it held that the legal principle referred to and adopted by
Weeramantry, Jin the aforesaid case had application to the facts of this case.
The contents of A5 and A7 read by themselves and in the light of the
subsequent letters A22 and A20 make it abundantly clear that the Company
directed the appellant to work at another company. A5 of 7th August informs
the appellant that he will no longer be required to do purchasing work for the
Company and that he should conclude his current purchasing assignments. A7 of
13th August transfers him with immediate effect to Jetro. These two documents
by themselves show that, in so far as the Company was concerned, the
appellant's duties and functions at the Company had ceased and that he was
directed to commence work at Jetro. This position is fortified by the fact
that a new subsidiary company (Fairline Crescent) was floated to attend to the
Company's purchasing work. It is also confirmed by the contents of both A22,
in which the Company insisted that the appellant should take up an assignment
at one of its subsidiary companies (Jetro) to which 'new posting' he was again
requested to report to commence his 'new assignment', as well as A20 in which
the Company regretted that the appellant had still failed to report for work
at Jetro. Admittedly Jetro, being itself a limited liability company, is a
legal entity quite distinct and different from the Company even though it was
one of its subsidiaries. Employment in or under the Company is not employment
in or under Jetro. Learned President's Counsel reiterated before us that the
so-called transfer constituted nothing more than a re-location of the
appellant's place of work from the Company's head office at Kynsey Road to its
bonded store at Katubedda, which is a transfer within the service of the
Company. No

**147**

doubt Lovell in his oral evidence did endeavour to show that it was so. He
went ever) further and tried to maintain that the Stores assignment, though
envisaging a variation of the appellant's former functions, did not entail new
functions totally alien to them. But, in my view, no weight can be attached to
his oral testimony in view of the explicit and unequivocal language in which
the letters A5, A7, A22 and A20 are couched. Their contents can admit of no
other construction than that the appellant was required by the Company to
report to and commence work at Jetro in a new assignment and not at the
Company's store at Katubedda. In A7 Lovell himself states that the appellant
is transferred with immediate effect to Jetro Textiles Mills Ltd., where the
appellant, according to A20, was assigned work. Nothing more is necessary to
discredit Lovell's oral evidence on this point.

I shall now refer to the contract of employment. A1, the letter of
appointment, shows that the appellant's contract of employment was with the
Company. He was recruited and employed by the Company. He in turn agreed to
serve the Company. He undertook and was obliged to work for the Company, for
which he was paid by the Company. His hours of work and the power of control
over his work were laid down and exercised by the Company. But there is
nothing in the contract which would enable or empower the Company to transfer,
unilaterally, the right to or the benefit of his services to another legal
person or entity. The Court of Appeal seems to have placed some reliance on
clauses 4 of A1 to justify the transfer of the appellant. This clause, no
doubt, expressly provided that the appellant should carry out all duties
entrusted to him by the Company. But there is no agreement (expressed or
implied) that he should obey orders or carry out duties of another company. A
workman has an inalienable right to choose for himself the employer he will
serve. Once the contractual relationship between himself and his employer is
established, the employer cannot transfer his services to another without his
consent or against his will. In this connection the following observations of
the House of Lords in _Nokes v. Doncaster Amalgamated Collieries Ltd._ (2) are
of relevance:

"It is, of course, indisputable that (apart from statutory provision to the
contrary) the benefit of a contract entered into by A to render personal
service to X cannot be transferred by X to Y without A's consent, which is the
same thing as saying that, in order to produce the desired result, the old
contract between A

**148**

and X would have to be terminated by notice or by mutual consent and a new
contract of service entered into by agreement between A and Y."

Learned Queen's Counsel relied very strongly on the decision in _Kundan Sugar
Mills v. Ziyauddin and others_ (3) which he submitted was conclusive of the
issue before us. In that case the workmen were employed by the appellant-Mills
at a sugar mill at Amroha in the year 1946. In 1951 the partners of the
appellant-Mills purchased another sugar mill at a different place (Kiccha).
They closed the latter mill and started it at another place, Bulandshahr. In
1955 the General Manager of the appellant-Mills ordered the transfer of the
workmen to the new mills at Bulandshahr. The workmen refused to obey the
transfer order in consequence of which the General manager dismissed them. It
was not disputed that the partners of the sugar mills at Amroha owned also the
sugar mills at Bulandshahr; that they became the owners of the former mills in
1946 and of the latter mills in 1951 which was later in or about 1955 started
at Bulandshahr; that though the same partners owned both mills they were two
different concerns or entities, and that there was no express term in the
contract of service between the employer-appellant and the workmen that the
latter should serve in any future concerns which the appellant might acquire
or start. It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the right to
transfer an employee by an employer from one of his concerns to another is
implicit in every contract of service. Subba Rao J. in dealing with this
submission said:

"The argument of the learned counsel for the appellant that the right to
transfer is implicit in every contract of service is too wide the mark. Apart
from any statutory provision, the rights of an employer and an employee are
governed by the terms of contracts between them or by the terms necessarily
implied therefrom. It is conceded that there is no express agreement between
the appellant and the respondents (workmen) where under the appellant has the
right to transfer the respondents to any of its concerns in any place and the
respondents the duty to join the concerns to which they may be transferred. If
so, can it be said that such a term has to be necessarily implied between the
parties? When the respondents 1 to 4 were employed by the appellant, the
latter was running only one factory at Amroha. There is nothing on record to

**149**

indicate that at that time it was intended to purchase factories at other
places or to extend its activities in the same line at different places. It is
also not suggested that even if the appellant had had such an intention, the
respondents 1 to 4 had knowledge of the same. Under such circumstances without
more, it would not be right to imply any such term between the contracting
parties when the idea of starting new factories at different places was not in
contemplation. Ordinarily the employees would have agreed only to serve in the
factory then in existence and the employer would have employed them only in
respect of that factory. The matter does not stop there. In the instant case,
as we have indicated, the two factories are distinct entities, situated at
different places and, to import a term conferring a right on the employer to
transfer respondents 1 to 4 to a different concern is really to make a new
contract between them."

In the instant case, however, there is no material to establish the precise
date of incorporation of Jetro - whether it was before or after the
appointment of the appellant as the Purchasing Officer of the Company. As such
I do not think it can be said that the Indian decision is conclusive of the
issue before us. But in the light of the facts and circumstances of the
instant case the decision does lend support for the proposition contended for
by learned Queen's Counsel.

In regard to the second matter referred to by me above, namely, the finding of
the Court of Appeal that the contract of employment permitted the assignment
of new functions to the appellant by the Company, I am of the view that this
finding too is erroneous. The Court of Appeal based its finding on clause 4 of
the letter of appointment A1 which has already been referred to by me. A1,
however, is titled 'Appointment as Purchasing Officer'. It appoints the
appellant to the post of purchasing officer of the Company. In pursuance
thereof the appellant functioned as the? Company's purchasing officer from the
date of his appointment until the present dispute arose about 3 years later.
He protested on the very first date that he was called upon to do work other
than that of purchasing. It is thus reasonable to infer that the appellant's
appointment was to a specific post, namely, that of Purchasing Officer, which
doubtless would have required skill and experience of some sort. Clause 4 must
in the context be construed to mean duties within the ambit of

**150**

a purchasing officer. It cannot possibly be taken to embrace every kind of
duty which the Company may decide to assign to him.

Learned President's Counsel submitted that even if the appellant had been
transferred to and asked to work at Jetro, it did not in law amount to a
termination of his services by the Company. In short his submission was that
our Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special Provisions) Act, No. 45 of
1971, (unlike the English law) was intended to protect the employment
relationship and not the contract of employment. He contended that,
historically and otherwise, the primary objective of our Act was to ensure
that a workman is not thrown to the wolves, as it were, by being deprived of
the means of his livelihood. He urged that in the instant case there was no
radical or fundamental change in the functions of the appellant who was
guaranteed continued employment at Jetro upon the same terms and conditions as
he enjoyed under the Company. As such he maintained there was no termination
within the provisions of the Act. I am unable to agree with this contention of
learned President's Counsel. Such a construction would enable the employer to
decide for himself the nature of the employment that a workman should do. The
whole purpose of the Act is to ensure that the workman continues in employment
in the same capacity in which he was employed by his employer. S. 6. of the
Act makes this very clear. The interpretation sought to be placed by learned
President's Counsel would render nugatory the salutary protection granted to
workmen under the Act.

For the above reasons the appeal is allowed, the judgment of the Court of
Appeal is set aside and the order of the Commissioner of Labour is restored.
The 1st respondent Company is directed to reinstate the appellant in the post
of its Purchasing Officer on or before 22nd September 1989 with all back wages
from the date of his non-employment to the date of his reinstatement. All such
back wages including all benefits which the appellant would have been entitled
to will be paid by the Company on or before 22nd September 1989\. The
appellant will also be entitled to costs fixed at Rs.1500/-.

**

H.A.G DE SILVA, J, -** I agree .

**

BANDARANAYAKE, **J, - I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/32.html_  

