##  Nandawathie v. Rajakaruna and Others - SLR - 283, Vol 1 of 1986 [1986]
LKSC 32; (1986) 1 Sri LR 283 (27 February 1986)

**

283

NANDAWATHIE  
v.  
RAJAKARUNA AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., COLIN-THOME, J. AND ATOKORALE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 37/85.  
C A. APPLICATION No.2045/80.  
C.A. L.A (S.C.) No. 8/85.  
FEBRUARY 13, 1986.

_

Writ of Certiorari - Section 71 (S. 71 (2) (c)) of the Finance Act, No. 11 of
1963 as amended by Law No. 16 of 1973 - Determination to acquire by People's
Bank on application of transferor of a land on a conditional transfer and
vesting order by Minister - Statutory income - Jurisdictional error.

_

Where on an application made on 16.3.1976 to the People's **** Bank by the
transferor of a land upon **** a conditional transfer the Bank at the inquiry
held by it on 5.3.1977 being satisfied that the applicant's statutory income
did not exceed Rs. 10.000 in view of the certificate issued by the inland
Revenue Department, recommended that determination be made to acquire the land
whereupon the Minister sanctioned a vesting order-

**

Held-

**

(1) The Court of Appeal erred in basing its decision on a certificate of
21.12.1977 issued by the Assessor of the Department of inland Revenue,
Regional Office, Kurunegala stating the assessable income, as that could not
have been the certificate of the inland Revenue Department on which the
people' Bank acted on 5.3.1977.

(2)  The relevant years of assessment were 1974/75, 1973/74 and 1972/73 and
the average statutory income of the applicant being less than Rs. 10.000 per
annum, she was eligible to make the application and there was no
jurisdictional error vitiating the determination of the people's Bank or the
vesting sanctioned by the Minister.

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal reported at - _[1985] 1 SLR 393
(Rajakaruna v. R. J. G. de Mel, Minister of Finance and Another).

_ _

J. W. Subasinghe, P.C._ with _Miss B. G. S. J. Nandadasa_ and _G. D. S. de
Silva_ for 3rd respondent-appellant.

_

P. A. D. Samarasekera, P.C_. with _Miss k. Kumararatne_ and _K. Abeypala_ for
Petitioner-respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**284**

February 27, 1986. **  
SHARVANANDA, C.J.

**

Arnolis Appuhamy, the father of the 3rd respondent-appellant transferred a
paddy field to the petitioner-respondent, subject to the condition that it
would be retransferred to Arnolis Appuhamy on payment of a certain sum of
money within ten years as stated in the Deed of Transfer No. 8827 dated
14.6.1952. Arnolis Appuhamy failed to repurchase the paddy held within the
period of 10 years and died on or about 1972 leaving the appellant as sole
heir. Thereafter on 16th March 1976 the appellant made an application to the
2nd respondent, the People's Bank, in terms of section 71 of the Finance Act,
No. 11 of 1963 as amended by Law No. 16 of 1973 for the acquisition of the
said field. The People's Bank held an inquiry into the application and made
determination on 25.3.1977 to acquire the said field. At the inquiry the
petitioner-respondent objected to this acquisition on the ground that the
applicant's income exceeded R s 10, 000, per annum. This objection is based on
section 71 ( _2_ ) ( _c_ ) of the Finance Act as amended by Law No. 16 of
1973. This section reads thus :

"No premises shall be acquired under sub-section (1) unless the Bank is __
satisfied that the average statutory income of the person making the
application and of the other members of the family of which is the head,
computed under the provisions of the written law relating to the imposition of
income tax, for the three years of assessment immediately preceding the date
on which such application was made by him, does not exceed a sum of ten
thousand rupees "

At the inquiry held on 5.3.1977 into this objection, the inquiring officer has
recorded that-

"according to certificate issued by the Inland Revenue Department submitted by
the applicant her average statutory income does not exceed Rs.10,000. I
disallow his objection and recommend that determination be made to acquire the
property."

Thereafter the respondent-Bank made determination to acquire the held and
notified the determination to the 1st respondent, the Minister **** of Finance
and the latter made Vesting Order and caused it to be published in the Gazette
of 11.7.1979.

**285**

The petitioner-respondent by his application dated 29.9.1980 to the Court of
Appeal sought a Writ of Certiorari to quash the Vesting Order dated 11.7.1979
on the ground that the 3rd respondent was receiving an income in excess of the
amount stipulated in section 71 of the Finance Act, and that the Vesting Order
was illegal and _ultra vires_. The petitioner-respondent in his application
did not give any precise facts to substantiate his application that the 3rd
respondent-appellant was in receipt of an income exceeding Rs. 10,000 per
year. The 3rd respondent in her affidavit dated 20.1.1981 filed in the
proceedings stated "that the entire income does not exceed the statutory
income stated in the Finance Act No. 11 of 1967 as amended by Act No. 16 of
1973 and therefore the third respondent is both eligible and is entitled to
make this application in terms of the relevant provisions of the said Act".
There is no counter affidavit by the petitioner-respondent to these averments
of the appellant in her affidavit. At the argument on 11.2.1985, before the
Court of Appeal it is recorded that "at the hearing before us the document
upon which the second respondent-Bank was 'satisfied' that the applicant's
statutory income did not exceed a sum of ten thousand was produced. This was a
document dated 21.12.77 issued by the Assessor of the Department of Inland
Revenue, Regional Office, Kurunegala. This document sets out the 'assessable
income' and the 'taxable income' of the 3rd respondent for the years of
assessment 1975/76, 1974/75 and 1973/74. There is not one word in ** _**_ that
document to indicate what the 'statutory income' of the 3rd respondent was for
the relevant years of assessment. 'Statutory Income' is a concept which a
different from 'Assessable Income' and 'Taxable income' in terms of the scheme
of the Inland Revenue Act No. 4 of 1963 as amended ................ Having
regard to this document both Dr. Cooray, Counsel for the 2nd respondent-Bank
and Mr. Premaratne, Deputy Solicitor-General, Counsel for the 1st respondent,
very properly conceded that the 2nd respondent-Bank had, while taking into
account an irrelevant matter, namely the 'Assessable Income' or the 'Taxable
income' failed altogether to consider the relevant matter, namely, 'Statutory
Income' of the 3rd respondent. In other words, the 2nd respondent-Bank had
failed to consider a matter which the statute itself directed it to take into
account and the result is that the purported determination of the 2nd
respondent-Bank is a nullity. There is little doubt that the error is one
which goes to the jurisdiction **** of the tribunal (Bank).

**286**

This conclusion of the Court of Appeal is vitiated by the fact the document
referred to in the order on which the Court held that there was jurisdictional
error ........... could not _ex facie_ have been the certificate referred to
by the Officer who held the inquiry into the 3rd respondent's application on
15.3.1977. This document is dated 21.12.77 and hence it could not have been
the certificate which was produced before the inquirer on the 15.3.1977. It is
surprising as to parties concerned had overlooked this vital fact. The Court
had been induced to accept this document by the concession made by Counsel for
the Bank and by the Deputy Solicitor-General. The Court had erred in holding
that the document dated 21.12.77 was the certificate on which the inquirer
acted on 15.3.77 in overruling the petitioner-respondent's objections.

Further in terms of section 71(2)( _c_ ) of the Finance Act No. 6 of 1963 as
amended by Act No.16 of 1973 the relevant years of assessment for
consideration are the years of assessment 1974/75, 1973/74 and 1972/73 as the
application of the appellant to the Peoples' Bank in terms of section 71 of
the Act is dated 16.3.1976. The Court of Appeal was in error in taking into
account in computing the statutory income of the appellant the year of
assessment 1975/76.

The appellant has filed with his petition of appeal, the relevant notices of
assessment for the year of assessment 1974/75, 1973/74 and 1972/73. They show
that the appellant's statutory income was Rs. 9,332, Rs. 4,590 and Rs.14,471
respectively for those years of assessment. Thus it will appear that the
average statutory income of the appellant or the relevant period according to
section 71(2)( _c_ ) of the aforesaid Act was less than Rs.10,000 and that it
was competent for the appellant to make the application for relief.

The objections of the petitioner-respondent that the average income of the
appellant exceeded Rs.10,000 per year cannot be sustained. There is no
jurisdictional error which would vitiate the determination of the 2nd
respondent-Bank or the vesting order sanctioned by the 1st respondent-
Minister.

I set aside the order of the Court of Appeal and allow the appeal of the 3rd
respondent-appellant. The appellant is entitled to the costs in this Court and
in the Court of Appeal.

**

COLIN-THOME, J** \- I agree.

**

ATUKORALE, J. **\- I agree. _  
  
Appeal allowed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/32.html_  

