##  Board of Trustees of Tamilnadu University Movement v. De Silva, F.N. and
Others - SLR - 361, Vol 1 of 1982 [1982] LKSC 32; (1982) 1 Sri LR 361 (6 April
1982)

# 361



**SUPREME COURT**



**Board of Trustees of Tamil University Movement**

**v.**

**F. N. de Silva and others**



_S.C. Appeal No, 79/80 ‑ CA Appeals_

_1556/79 ‑ L. T. Case No. 13/6716  25/77_

_ _

Power of Labour Tribunal to change caption of Plaint‑ Industrial Disputes Act.



The Appellant is a charitable organization incorporated under Section 114 of
the Trust Ordinance. The Respondent is a Trade Union of which 10 ex employees
of Appellant are members. The Appellant terminated the services of the 10
employees who applied to the Labour Tribunal for reinstatement and back wages.



Upon objections made by the Respondent the Caption 'Tamil University Movement'
stating that it was a non‑existent person the L.T. President allowed the
Petitioner to change the caption from Tamil University Movement to "Board of
Trustees, Tamil University Movement" on the ground that no prejudice was
caused to the other Party.



Respondent appealed to the Court of Appeal to quash the order by Writ of
Certiorari. The Court of Appeal confirmed the decision of the Labour Tribunal.



Respondent appealed to the S.C.



_Held._ Our Labour Tribunals in the exercise of their duty to make just and
equitable orders have the power to amend captions in applications where the
Respondent is sufficiently identified but wrongly named.

#  

# 362

#  

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal



Before: **                **Wanasundera J., Wimalaratne J., Ratwatte J.,

 Victor Perera J., & Colin Thome J.



Counsel: **            **_  K. Kanag‑Iswaran_ for the Petitioner‑Appellant.

_  S. Mahenthiran_ for the 2nd Respondent ‑Respondent.

Argued on: **          **6th April, 1982.

_Cur. adv. vult._



Decided on:       6th May 1982



**WIMALARATNE J.**



_             _The Tamil University Movement is said to be a charitable
organisation which conducts, inter alia, an Agricultural and Animal Husbandry
Centre and Farm at Uppuveli in Trincomalee, where it employs persons in and
around the farm as labourers etc.  The Trustees of the Movement, seven in
number, applied to the Minister of Justice for their incorporation under
section 114 of the Trusts Ordinance (Cap. 87), and by order published on
16.6.66 they were incorporated. One of the clauses in the order of
incorporation is that the Board of Trustees "shall be able and competent in
law to sue and to be sued, to answer and be answered, to defend and be
defended in any Court or elsewhere in all causes and actions in respect of the
said Tamil University Movement."



The services of ten employees were terminated in or about February 1977. They
were all members of the Ceylon General & Industrial Workers Union. The Union
took up the cause of these employees and on 1.8.77 made ten applications under
section 31 B (1) of the Industrial Disputes Act (Cap. 131) to the Labour
Tribunal of Colombo seeking redress by way of reinstatement and back wages.
The respondent to these applications was named in the caption as "Tamil
University Movement, 16 Fountain Lane, Colombo 10". The "Secretary Tamil
University Movement" filed answers on 4.10.77 and pleaded, inter alia, that
"the Applications could not be maintained against the T.U.M. and have been
filed against the wrong person" When the applications were taken up for
inquiry on 7.2.78 the objection to maintainability was clarified; the Tamil
University Movement was neither a natural nor an artificial person and could
not, therefore,



# 363



be made a party. The Union thereupon sought permission to amend the
applications by substituting "The Board of Trustees of the Tamil University
Movement" as respondent. Objection was taken to this as well, because the
Tribunal had no powers to amend. But the Tribunal permitted the Union to amend
the applications, which amended applications were served on the respondent on
5.6.78. The respondent filed written submissions setting out its objections to
the amended applications, but the President made order on 4.4.79 accepting the
amendment on the ground that no prejudice can be caused in allowing the
amendment.



The respondent invoked the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal and sought by
way of certiorari to quash the orders of the Tribunal allowing the amendment.
The main arguments before that Court seem to be (a) that the actions were a
nullity because they had been filed against a non existent person, and (b)
that a Labour Tribunal has no jurisdiction to order amendment of pleadings.
The Court of Appeal dismissed the applications for the reason that although
the Tamil University Movement per se is not a legal person, still nobody would
be misled as to the identity of the party from whom relief is being sought.
The error in naming the Tamil University Movement as the respondent is one of
name and description and not of identity.



The judgment of the Court of Appeal is comprehensive, and embraces the powers
of a civil court to substitute or add the right party where the wrong party
has been named. It seems to us unnecessary to consider the powers of civil
courts as regards amendments except to refer to the case of _Velupillai Vs.
The Chairman_ , _Urban District Council_ (1936) 39 NLR 464. In that case the
party named as defendant to a civil action for damages was the "Chairman,
Urban District Council." On objection taken that the action against the
Chairman was not properly instituted, the District Judge dismissed the action.
The Supreme Court allowed the plaintiff, in appeal, to amend the caption by
substituting the U.D.C. for the Chairman, despite the fact that as a result of
the amendment the defendant was prejudiced in that it was deprived of the
defence of prescription. In the course of his judgment Abrahams C.J. had this
to say.‑



"I think that if we do not allow the amendment in this case we should be doing
a very grave injustice to the plaintiff. It would appear as if the shortcoming
of his legal adviser, the



# 364



peculiarities of law and procedure, and the congestion in the Courts have all
combined to deprive him of his cause of action and I for one refuse to be a
party to such an outrage upon justice. This is a Court of Justice, it is not
an Academy of Law." at p.465.



Learned Counsel for the respondent‑appellant contended that _Velupillai's
case_ (above) has been wrongly decided in that Abrahams CJ appears to have
followed the case of _Lord Bolinbroke Vs. Townsend_ (19 Q.B.D. 394) where the
defendant named was Townsend, the clerk of the local Board of Health (which
was a body corporate). In permitting the Board to be substituted for Townsend,
the Court was substituting an artificial person for a natural person. But in
_Velupillai's_ case an artificial person was substituted for a non‑existent
body, which is not permissible. Despite this contention of learned Counsel, it
would appear that Abrahams CJ was quite aware of what he was doing and that
the two cases were not identical because he said that that case _" bears a
close resemblence_ to the case of _Lord Bolinbroke Vs. Townsend "_ at p. 465.



Though it has been contended that an "employer" within the meaning of section
48 of the Industrial Disputes Act has to be a person or a body of persons, and
that such person or persons have to be either natural or artificial, it should
be noted that the legislature has recognised certain "non persons" as capable
of being employers. Recognition has, for example, been given a "firm" in
section 48 itself, and by subsequent legislation to Superintendents and
Managers of Estates who could be sued in that designation alone without their
actual names being given. Accordingly no hard line should be adopted when
premission is sought to substitute a "person" for a " non person" who has
mistakenly been made respondent in an application before a Labour Tribunal.



No provision for amendment of captions has been included in the Industrial
Disputes Regulations made by the Minister, by virtue of the powers vested in
him under section 39 (1) of the Act, to make regulations in respect of the
procedure to be observed by labour tribunals. Section 31C of the Act provides
that it shall be the duty of the tribunal to make all such inquiries into
applications made under section 31B, and to hear all such evidence as the
tribunal may consider necessary, and thereafter make such order as may appear
to the tribunal to be just and equitable. A labour tribunal will not



# 365



in my view, be able to discharge its duty of making a just and equitable order
if it is to be hamstrung by technicalities in the correction of mistakes in
captions, when the party against whom redress is claimed can easily be
identified. It seems to me that the same liberal approach as was adopted in
Velupillai's Case may safely be followed in cases before Labour Tribunals as
well. Such an approach has in recent years been adopted in problems relating
to the corrections of mistakes in describing the employer before a Labour
Tribunal. In the _Manager, Ury Group, Passara Vs. The D.W.C._ (1968) 71 NLR
47, Samarawickrema J. thought that there should not be the same insistence on
the proper naming of the respondent before a Labour Tribunal as there would
be, for example, in the case of an application to a Court of Law. If there is
such a designation or description from which the identity of the employer can
be known, it should be sufficient. On the face of it the application should be
against a natural or legal person for the purpose of enforcement. But where it
is not, then a suitable amendment of the caption could be effected before an
order is made. In the case of _The Suptd: Deeside Estate, Maskeliya Vs.
Ilankai Thozhilar Kazahakan_ (1968) 70 NLR 279 Siva Supramaniam J. allowed the
appeal of the employer on the sole ground that any order made in favour of the
employee could not be enforced against the Suptd: of the estate who was named
as the employer. The employee was unrepresented at the appeal and no
application appears to have been made even at that stage to amend the caption
by naming a Person as employer against whom an order could be enforced. In the
subsequent _Ury Group Case_ (above) Samarawickreme J. did not disagree with
the view taken in the _Deeside Estate Case_ that the application should be
made against a legal or natural person. The amendment of the caption was only
for the purpose of making the order enforceable against the person who was
intended to be sued. In _Suptd: Nakiyadeniya Group Vs. B.A. Cornelis Hamy_
(1968) 71 NLR 142 (decided on 31.8.68) Wijayatilake J. did not adopt the
course taken by Samarawickrema J. when the latter judgment was brought to his
notice for the reason that although it appeared to be practical and
expeditious, he did not think that when the tribunal had made an unenforceable
order an appellate Court could ex mero motu make any such amendment to take
effect retroactively. That case is easily distinguishable because the
application to amend the caption in the present case was made to the Tribunal
itself after the respondent had, in the answer, taken the plea that the wrong
person had been named as respondent.



# 366



It is significant that soon after the decisions in the _Deeside Estate Case_
and the _Nakiyadeniya Group Case_ , the legislature introduced an amendment by
Act No. 39 of 1968 (W.E.F.11.10.66) making it sufficient to designate the
employer as "the superintendent" or "the Manager" of the estate where the
employer is known as the superintendent or the manager. In the instant case
the document of incorporation itself by enabling the trustees to defend
actions in respect of the Tamil University Movement, has impliedly recognised
the possibility of the Movement itself being made a party.



An argument was also advanced that after Sri Lanka adopted a Republican
constitution, institutions created for the settlement and adjudication of
industrial disputes have been placed on a par with institutions created for
the administration of justice; and as actions instituted in Courts of law
against non existent persons are null and void so also should be applications
instituted before labour tribunals. Such changes in our Constitution have not,
however, deterred out courts from recognising the main duty of labour
tribunals, which is still that of making just and equitable orders. Our Courts
have accordingly continued the exercise of amending captions in applications
where the respondent was sufficiently identified, but wrongly named
notwithstanding the absence of statutory provisions or regulations enabling
such amendments ‑ vide, for example, the judgment of Rajaratnam J. In
_Karunadasa Vs. Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation_ (S.C. 62/75 L.T.
1/8129/73; S.C. Minutes of 9.4.76). It seems difficult to understand how
Labour Tribunals, which are also "institutions for the administration of
justice which protect, vindicate and enforce the rights of the people"
according to Article 105(l) of our constitution can be expected to make just
and equitable orders if their powers of amendment, where necessary, are not
recognised.



For these reasons I would affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeal, and
dismiss this appeal with costs payable to the 2nd respondent, and direct the
Tribunal to conclude these cases as early as possible.



Before I conclude this judgment it is necessary to refer to the unnecessary
delay entailed in the hearing and disposal of these cases. The workmen
complained that their services were unlawfully terminated in February 1977
more than five years ago. It is a matter for regret that the inquiry into
their grievances has not even as yet commenced.



# 367



The tribunal made its order substituting the Board of Trustees on 4.4.79, a
little over three years from today. The employer's application to quash the
order by way of certiorari was filed in the Court of Appeal on 12.7.79. The
only documents that the employer was required to file in terms of the Supreme
Court Rules were copies of the proceedings, which consisted of the pleadings
before and the order of the tribunal, and the documents material to the case,
which were the gazette publication of incorporation and the application
containing the amended caption. They were all filed in the Court of Appeal
along with the petition and affidavit. The President of the Labour Tribunal
was named as the 1st respondent only because the order sought to be quashed
was one made by him, but there was no necessity to have required him to cause
to be produced the record at that stage. Indeed, the Court of Appeal quite
correctly did not call for the record nor did it order stay of proceedings.
Under these circumstances the Tribunal ought to have carried on with the
proceedings. If that course had been taken this inquiry may have reached
finality by now.



**WANASUNDERA J:** ‑ I agree.



**RATWATTE   J:** ‑ I agree.



**VICTOR PERERA J:** ‑ I agree.



**COLIN THOME J:** ‑ I agree.



_**Appeal dismissed**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/32.html_  

