##  Velmurugu v. The Attorney General and Another - SLR - 406, Vol 1 of 1981
[1981] LKSC 32; (1981) 1 Sri LR 406 (9 November 1981)

**406**

**VELMURUGU  
v.  
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND ANOTHER**

**SUPREME COURT  
ISMAIL, J., WEERARATNE, J., SHARVANANDA, J.  
WANASUNDERA, J. AND RATWATTE, J.  
S. C. NO. 74/81.  
OCTOBER 19,20', 21 AND 30, 1981.  
**  
_Fundamental Rights-Fundamental rights of freedom from torture or cruel,
inhuman or discriminatory treatment or punishment-Fundamental right of freedom
from arrest except according to procedure established by law - Articles 11 and
13 of the Constitution -Administrative practice.  
_  
The petitioner a member of the District Development Council for Amparai was
prevented by army officers when travelling in a car with 3 others to go to the
4th Colony. He was stopped at the junction on the 4th colony and obliged to
turn back and go back towards Kalmunai. On the way he apparently received
various complaints of houses being burnt and assault. The petitioner put down
the 3 persons who were in his car and proceeded back again towards the 4th
Colony.  
  
On the way he met Fr. Elmo Johnpulle who was going on a motor cycle towards
the 4th Colony ostensibly regarding. the safety of his parishioners. The
petitioners then got on to the pillion of the motor cycle and both of them
went on the motor cycle to the junction of the colony.  
  
At this junction on the orders of the 2nd respondent the petitioner was taken
into custody by army personnel and put into a jeep. The petitioner was not'
informed of the charge nor given the reasons for his arrest. The 2nd
respondent told the army and police officers that they could take petitioner
and do as they like with him and left the place. In consequence of what the
2nd respondent said the petitioner was then put on the floor of the truck and
subjected to torture and/or cruel, inhuman and/or discriminatory treatment or
punishment by the army personnel. Thereafter the petitioner was taken to the
Central Camp Police Station where his statement was recorded on-directions of
the 2nd respondent. The 2nd respondent instructed the recording officer not to
take down anything about the torture. He was made to sign the statement
without reading it.  
  
On the night of 9.8.1981 the petitioner was produced before the Magistrate to
whom he complained, of difficulty to walk. The Magistrate however does not
support the petitioner on this point.  
  
The Doctor found injuries on the petitioner but the petitioner although he had
complained of assault by army men had told the Doctor nothing about the 2nd
respondent.  
  
The petitioner complains of illegal arrest and torture and/or cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment and punishment.  
  
**Held: (Sharvananda, J. and Ratwatte, J. dissenting)  
**  
The test applied is the degree of proof, that is, preponderance of
probability, used in civil cases which is not so high as is required in
criminal cases. But there can be degrees

**407**

of probability within this standard. The degree depends on the subject-matter.
Where the allegation is a serious one of torture and inhuman treatment by the
executive and administrative authorities-of the State, a high degree of
probability which is proportionate to the subject-matter is necessary.  
  
2\. Under our Constitution it is he illegal acts of the executive organ alone
that could be the subject-matter of proceedings. under article 126.  
  
The liability of the State extends to the unlawful acts of a wide class of
public officers, including subordinate officers at peripheral levels who in
nowise constitute the decision making core of the administration. This is a
new liability imposed directly on the State by constitutional provisions. The
common law test of tortious stability cannot provide a sufficient test.  
  
Article 11 which gives protection from torture and ill-treatment is the only
fundamental right that is entrenched in the Constitution in the sense that an
amendment of this clause would need not only a two-third majority but also a
Referendum. It is also the only right in the catalogue of rights set out in
Chapter I I I that is of equal application to everybody and which in no way
can be restricted or diminished. This right occupies a preferred position and
it is the duty of this court to give it full play and to see that its
provisions enjoy the maximum application.  
  
The State should be held strictly liable for any acts of its high state
officials. The liability in respect of subordinate officers should apply to
all acts done under colour of office, i.e. within the scope of their
authority, express or implied, and should also extend to such other acts that
may be ultra vires and even in disregard of a prohibition or special
directions provided that they are done in the furtherance or supposed
furtherance of their authority or done at least with the intention of
benefiting the State.  
  
The application of a concept of administrative practice can extend State
responsibility to cases where the material before court can show that
occurrence of the acts complained of can be attributed to the existence of a
general situation created or brought about by the negligence and indifference
of those in authority. In the instant case if liability is to be imputed to
the State, it must be on the basis of an administrative practice and not on
the basis of an authorisation, direct or implied, or that these acts were done
for the benefit of the State. It is not possible to characterise those acts,
if they had taken place as alleged as acts incidental to the authority and
powers vested in those persons nor have they been performed to further some
objective of the State. They seem to be in the nature of individual and
personal acts due to some aberration or idiosyncrasy. They are also suggestive
of the venting of some grievance of a personal or private nature or in
consequence of some strong passion, prejudice or malice. They are admittedly
illegal and criminal acts and not merely acts that are unauthorized and ultra
vires.  
  
The alleged acts of torture and. ill-treatment cannot impose liability on the
State as a matter of law. The alleged acts have not been authorised,
encouraged, or countenanced or performed for the benefit of the State.  
  
The Commission of the acts has also not been proved.  
  
**Cases referred to:**  
  
_(1) Maharaja v.. Attorney-General of Trinidad and Tobago, 119781 2 All ER
670, 679 PC, (No. 2) [1979] AC 385, 396.  
  
(2) Thornhill v. Attorney-General 119801 2 WLR 510, 519, 520 (P.C.).  
  
(3) Ex parte Commonwealth of Virginia 100 US 339, 346._

**408**

_(4) Virginia v. Rives (ex parte Commonwealth of Virginia) 100 U.S. 313, 321.  
  
(5) Neal v. Dalaware 103 US 370.  
  
(6) Holme Telephone and Telegraph Company v. City of Los Angeles 227 US 278
57L. ad. 510, 515.  
  
(7) Raymond v. Chicago Union Traction Company (1907) 207 US 20 -52 L. ed. 78.  
  
(8) Iowa - Des Moines National Bank v. Bennett (1931) 284 US 239 - 76 L. ad.
265.  
  
(9)United States v. Classic (1941) 313 US 299. (f0) Civil Rights Cases (1883)
109 US 3.  
  
(11) Shamdasani v. Central Bank of India Ltd. AIR 1952 SC 59.  
  
(12) Thadchanamoorti v. A. G. (S C. 63/80 - S C. Minutes Of 14.8.19801.  
  
(13) Ireland v. United Kingdom (Jan. 18, 1978 -Decisions of the European Court
of Human Rights).  
  
(14) Sunday Lake Iron Co., v. Wakefield (1918) 247 US 350'.62 L. ad. 1154.  
  
(15) Kathiraning Bawat v State of Saurashtra AIR 1952 _

_(16) Baten v Baten [19511 Probate 35  
  
(17) Blyth v Blyth [1966]1 All ER 524  
  
(18) Loveden v Loveden (1810) 2 Hagg. Con. 1.3  
  
(19) University Grants Commission Case (S. C 57 of 1980) - S. C. Minutes of 8.
8\. 1980  
_  
**Application** for infringement of Fundamental Rights under Articles 11 and
13 of the Constitution.  
  
_V. S A. Pullenayagam with R. Siriniwasam, S. C. Chandrahasan, G. Kumaralingam
C. V. Vivekanandan, Miss M. Kanapathipillai and T. Pakyanathan_ for
petitioner.  
  
_G. P. S. de Silva Addl. S. G. with D.C. Jayasooriya S.S.C. and S Ratnapala S.
C._ for 1st respondent.  
  
_K. N. Choksy with Henry Jayamaha and P: Illeperuma_ for 2nd respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 9, 1981  
**ISMAIL, J.  
**  
The petitioner in this case is an elected member of the Amparai District
Development Council, is a retired teacher and a prominent member of the Tamil
United Liberation Front in that area. The 2nd respondent had earlier served in
the Kalmunai District as an Assistant Superintendent of Police and was
presently stationed at Nuwara Eliya in the same capacity until he was drafted
temporarily and assigned duties as the Coordinating Officer in charge of the
Central Camp Police area in the Amparai District. It would appear that this
posting has been made in consequence of communal disturbances which had flared
up in that area in particular some days prior to the date on which the
incident in respect of which this application is made by the petitioner had
occurred. It is obvious that the 2nd respondent had been brought down from
Nuwara Eliya and entrusted with special functions by reason of his knowledge
of the locality, the people and other factors.

**409**

 In these proceedings the petitioner has invoked the special jurisdiction of
the Supreme Court under Article 126 of the Constitution on the basis that
being a citizen of Sri Lanka, he has the fundamental right enshrined in the
Constitution not to be subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman or
discriminatory treatment or punishment, as well as the fundamental right not
to be arrested except according to the procedure established by law, and that
when arrested he had to be informed of the reason for his arrest, which rights
have been declared and recognised in articles 11 and 13 of the Constitution.  
  
The petitioner on this day in consequence of the communal disturbances that
had occurred for several days. in that area had conferred with the Tamil
United. Liberation Front Members of Parliament for Nallur, Udupiddy and
Pandirippu and several others. While discussions were going on, as a result of
certain information which had been conveyed to him and the others, he states
he left in a car with four others including the driver to go to the 4th colony
which came within the area covered by the. Amparai District Development
Council.  
  
They left at about 4.30 p.m. and as they came up to the junction of the 4th
colony a jeep had come from the opposite direction manned by army personnel
and stopped in front of this car. The petitioner states that he got down from
his car and introduced himself to the army officer, who appeared to be the
leader of the group, that he was a Member of the District Development Council
for Amparai. He says that the officer was adamant and told him he did not care
whether the petitioner was a member of the District Development Council or
whether he was a Member of Parliament and ordered him and others who were with
him to turn back and go away. He at that stage made further remonstration but
the army officer was adamant. He thereupon turned back, returned with the
others in the car towards Kalmunai.  
  
On the way back he had apparently met certain other persons who made various
complaints to him of houses being burnt and assault. He then put down the
other three persons in the car, turned back and proceeded towards the 4th
colony, in spite of the order earlier given by the army officer.  
  
Whilst he was so proceeding he states he met one. Rev. Elmo Johnpulle who was
also proceeding towards the 4th colony on a motor bicycle ostensibly regarding
the safety of his parishioners. The petitioner states he then got on to the
pillion of the motor bicycle of Fr. Elmo and the two of them proceeded and
came up

**410**

to the junction of the 4th colony. There he had seen a shop owner who. was
known to him standing in front of his-shop with two armed constables on,
either side of him. As he went up, he saw four or five jeeps and two army
trucks with army and police personnel came up to the spot where the petitioner
was and halted there. He then states that the 2nd respondent who was in one of
the jeeps had recognised the petitioner and gave an order to arrest him,
whereupon some of the army personnel, who were armed had come running up to
him, had taken him into custody and put him into the rear of the jeep in which
the 2nd respondent was.  
  
The petitioner complains that he was not. informed of the charge nor was he
given any reasons for his arrest. In the meantime Fr. Elmo on orders of the
2nd respondent had been taken to the police station by an armed constable. He
also referred to an incident at about 6 or 6.30 p.m. while they were
proceeding in the course of which certain accusations were made against him by
the 2nd respondent in the presence of army and police officers, in the course
of which the 2nd respondent had berated him and he says that ultimately in
paragraph 12(d) of the petition, the 2nd respondent told the army and police
officers to take the petitioner and to do as they like and thereafter the 2nd
respondent left the place leaving the petitioner in the hands of the army and
police personnel. Thereafter he has in paragraph 13(1a) to (1g) specified the
acts of torture and or cruel inhuman and or discriminating treatment or
punishment he had been subjected to by the army personnel. He states al-I
these acts were done to him after he was put on the floor of the truck in
which there. were about 20 or 30 army personnel. It is important to. bear in
mind that it is the petitioner's case that this treatment was meted out to him
in consequence of what the 2nd, respondent is alleged to have stated in
paragraph 12(d).  
  
Subsequently he states that the truck was stopped in a lonely. spot and he was
asked to walk without looking back. He walked some distance and when he looked
back he saw two soldiers standing with guns aimed at him as if to shoot him.
At that stage some other soldiers he states ran up to those two soldiers and
prevented them from shooting. Then he was ordered back into the truck and when
he got into the truck they had proceeded to the Central Camp Police Station.
He states that thereafter he was ordered to get down and he walked into the
police station As he entered the police station the 2nd respondent who was
watching from inside the station had made certain remarks in Tamil and
subsequently had ordered a police officer to record a statement

**411**

from the petitioner but the 2nd respondent had ordered the recording officer
not to take down petitioner's complaint about the 2nd respondent's conduct and
the torture he was subjected to. He states that he was then made to sign the
statement without . it being read to him:  
  
In respect of recording of this. statement there is an affidavit of M.A.
Kamaldeen who was 'the officer, who had recorded that statement of the
petitioner at the Central Camp Police Station (P.S. 10889). He in his
affidavit had denied the several. allegations made by the petitioner in
respect of the recording of that statement and denied that the petitioner made
any reference to any illegal conduct by the 2nd respondent or that he had been
subjected to torture. He also stated that there was no occasion for 2nd
respondent to order that certain matter should not be recorded by him since
the petitioner did. not make any such complaints. He has specifically denied
the averments in paragraph 18 of the petition and affidavit.  
  
To the averments made in paragraph 13(b), (c) and (d) and paragraph 17 of the
petition one A. G. Weerasekera a Major in the Sri Lanka Army has filed an
affidavit expressly denying the allegations in the several paragraphs. In the
affidavit he states that he saw the petitioner inside the police station
sometime after 6.30 p.m. that evening and the petitioner had introduced
himself as the District Development Council Member for Amparai and had asked
him for his name and the unit to which he was attached. He had told him that
he was in command of the Army Operation Room at Amparai. He states that the
petitioner did not at that time complain to him that he had been subjected to
torture or assault by army personnel or any other persons. He says if any such
complaint had been made he would have immediately investigated, into that.
complaint. He has also specifically denied the entire incident referred to -in
paragraph 13(1 a), (b).  
  
The next step is when the petitioner was produced before the Magistrate at his
bungalow on the night of 9th August 1981. The petitioner had made various
allegations regarding what is stated to have happened in the presence of the
Magistrate in paragraph 19 of the petition. In the course of the averments in
this paragraph of the, petition the petitioner states the Magistrate had
requested the 2nd respondent to drop the petitioner at a convenient point on
the petitioner telling the Magistrate that he was finding it difficult to
walk.

**412**

There is a comprehensive report by the Magistrate which had been filed in this
case and the Magistrate categorically states that the petitioner's statement
that he had told him he was finding it difficult to walk was absolutely and
categorically false. He stated that the petitioner at no stage mentioned to
him about any difficulty in walking or any discomfort nor did he even complain
of any physical assault, degrading treatment or bodily abuse. The Magistrate
further stated that he walked and talked as a normal parson. It is quite clear
therefore when one examines the Magistrate's report to this Court the record
of what had occurred and what he had observed during the period the petitioner
was before him, no complaint whatsoever of any physical, discomfort or of his
being harassed or of his being subject to any torture or of his sustaining any
injury had been made by the petitioner to the Magistrate. This report is also
to the effect that ,as far as the Magistrate could observe the petitioner did
not appear to him to suffer from any physical discomfort, pain or injury. When
one reads the petition and the affidavit it is clear that the petitioner does
not appear to have any complaint with regard to the conduct of the Magistrate.
On the other hand it appears from the facts stated by the petitioner that the
Magistrate had been very sympathetic towards him and considering the turbulent
times and the communal violence that had been prevalent in that area and in
spite of the persistent urging by the 2nd respondent, the Magistrate had
refused to remand the petitioner and had taken the petitioner at his word and
released him on certain undertaking given by him and had asked him to report
at the Magistrate's Court on the 12th. It is manifestly clear therefore that
the Magistrate had acted fairly and sympathetically towards the petitioner,
and the petitioner nowhere in his affidavit or petition makes any complaint of
prejudice or bias or ill-will on the part of the Magistrate. It is also clear
when one reads the petition and affidavit that the petitioner had told the
Magistrate certain things in response to the 2nd respondent's requests to the
Magistrate and it appears to me from these facts that there was no impediment
whatsoever preventing the petitioner from informing the Magistrate that he was
subjected to cruel and inhuman treatment at the instance of the 2nd
respondent. The petitioner has not set out any tangible or possible reasons as
to why he did not tell the Magistrate' that he had been subjected to torture,
assault or inhuman treatment etc. at the instigation of and instance of the
2nd respondent 'The failure on the part of the petitioner to have told the
Magistrate what had happened to him is to my mind very significant.

**413**

In paragraph (2) of the petition there it-reference to an application made by
the petitioner's attorney for a private practitioner to examine the petitioner
as the DMO was not available. This motion had been dated 10.8.81 but the
Magistrate states that this motion was really. supported on 11.8.81 and by
that time DMO had already returned. In that motion there is no reference
whatsoever to the 2nd respondent being responsible for any of the injuries or,
what injuries were inflicted at the instance of the 2nd respondent. It is to
be noted that this motion had been filed by one Mr. Sivapalan an Attorney at
Law on behalf of the suspect:  
  
On the 12th the suspect had been present in Court and he was represented by
Attorneys M. Samsudeen, Mustapha, Kandiah and Sivapalan. The journal entry
indicates what the suspect had stated viz. that he be permitted to enter
hospital, and that he had been permitted to do so. Even on that date no
indication was given to Court that injuries which necessitated an order of
hospitalisation by the Magistrate, had been inflicted at the instance or
instigation of the 2nd respondent:  
  
The next matter which merits attention is the medical report of DMO Kalmunai
dated 11.8.81. The doctor had described the. various injuries he had found on
the petitioner. He states the petitioner gave a history of assault by army men
on 9.8.81. Even to the D.M.O. apparently the petitioner had not stated that
those injuries were inflicted on him at the instigation or at the instance of
2nd respondent The 2nd respondent's name does not even figure at all in that
complaint.  
  
Subsequently the petitioner has been examined by the JMO on 12.8.81 whose
medical legal report has been marked P2. The short history given by the
petitioner to the JMO is assault by army personnel, even in this there is no
reference whatsoever to the 2nd respondent or his being responsible for the
injuries suffered by the petitioner:  
  
The next important document which has a bearing on the matters in issue in
this case is the document 2R15. 2815 is a recording of the petitioner's
statement at Ward No. 11 of the Batticaloa hospital by the Batticaloa Police.
This statement has been- recorded on 14.8.81. It is in evidence that the 2nd
respondent was not attached to the Batticaloa police and had no connection
with the Batticaloa police at any relevant period. The petitioner in 2R15 had
made a comprehensive and detailed statement of everything which he states had
occurred on this date. The main complaint of the petitioner in this case
against the 2nd respondent in so far as the injuries on him are concerned is
what is stated in paragraph 12(d) of the petition and affidavit. Though this
statement 2815 had been made five days after the alleged incident yet this
statement does not contain any allegation against the 2nd respondent

**414**

on the basis of what is stated in paragraph 12( d) of the petition.. When one
reads this document it is clear that there is no reference whatever to the`
2nd respondent instigating or urging army personnel and others to do what-they
like with him. According to the sequence of events indicated in 2115 after
Chandra Perera and the army officer left the petitioner had stated that the
army personnel had put him into the lorry and from thereon proceeded to
subject him to inhuman treatment. When one reads the trend of events as
disclosed in 2R 15 the impression one gets on what the petitioner had told the
police is that after the 2nd respondent and the army officer had gone away
from the scene, the army men had put him into the lorry and had proceeded to
assault him. 21115 is in Tamil which is the language of the petitioner. The
statement had been read out to the petitioner who had admitted it was correct
and had signed it. P.C. 671 Raveendrarajah had certified that he had
accurately and faithfully recorded the statement of Velmurugu, that is the
petitioner.  
  
As far as I can see from the facts in this case until this petition was filed
in this Court on the 9th September 1981 there had been no complaint made to
any person in authority or to any responsible person, whatsoever, that it was
at the 2nd respondent's instigation or urging that the army personnel had
proceeded to attack the petitioner in this case and cause those injuries.  
  
Mr. Pullenayagam contended that there was no reason for the petitioner to
falsely implicate the 2nd respondent and saddle him with this charge of being
responsible for the several injuries sustained by the petitioner. One has to
remember that the petitioner is the elected member of the Amparai District
Development Council, is a retired teacher and a man who is actively engaged in
political activity for the Tamil United Liberation Front. On his own admission
he had been in close association even on this day with the higher-ups in the
TULF, namely, Messrs. M. Sivasithamparam, T. Rasalingam and P. Ganeshalingam
Members of Parliament for Nallur, Udupiddy and Pandirippu respectively and Mr.
Sivasithamparam is the President of the Tamil United Liberation Front It is
clear therefore that the petitioner considered himself a man of some
importance and a man of some standing in that area and that people did
generally look up to him for action at least in the political sphere. What
therefore would have been the reaction .of the petitioner to the various acts
against the

**415**

petitioner attributed to the 2nd respondent in several paragraphs of the
petition? In paragraph 12 he states that the 2nd respondent had recognised the
petitioner and shouted out, "You are here, arrest him". Even when they were
proceeding at about 6 or 6.30 p.m. he states the 2nd respondent ordered' the
vehicles to stop at a. lonely spot, the petitioner was then asked to get down
from the jeep on the orders of the 2nd respondent. The army and police stood
around in a circle having put the petitioner along with. the 2nd respondent
and their commanding officer in the centre (vide para .12). The 2nd respondent
had then addressed the army and police officers and told them interalia that
(a) Mr. Amirtha lingam was a leader of the Tamil United Liberation Front and
the tiger movement; and that the petitioner was the local leader for the
Amparai District, that Mr. Amirthalingam was. causing the banks to be robbed
and was distributing the money so got through the petitioner, that the
petitioner was the cause of all the communal violence against the Sinhala
people in the area and even for the 1977 incident in Jaffna ,that, he was
behind the burning of the Timber Depot at Pandirippu and such otherfalse,
mischievous and utterly malicious allegations. He further said that the
petitioner , and the said Messrs Sivasithamparam, Rasalingam and Ganeshalingam
Members of Parliament have been roaming the area inciting the people, that
they were Jaffna people who had no business in that area.  
  
In paragraph 19 the petitioner states that the 2nd respondent made all sorts
of malicious, communal and false allegations against the petitioner and even
falsely stated that there. were number of complaints against the petitioner
and strongly urged the learned Magistrate to remand the petitioner: Further
on-he states that the 2nd respondent then began to make some communal
statement against the petitioner and that the learned Magistrate had asked the
2nd respondent to keep quiet.  
  
In paragraph (20) the petitioner states that oncoming out of the learned
Magistrate's bungalow after the Magistrate had switched off the lights and
locked his door the 2nd respondent got' hold of the petitioner by the collar
of his shirt and told him in Tamil "that so long as this Perera lives, Perera
will some day shoot the petitioner". In the same paragraph he states that a
little while . later while dropping the petitioner at the junction the 2nd
respondent has stated "if I see you at the Central Camp area I will shoot
you".  
  
It appears to me therefore that if reasons were needed for implication of the
2nd respondent by the petitioner, the peti-

**416**

tioner's statement with regard to the conduct of the 2nd respondent to which I
have made reference would be enough motive for petitioner. to implicate the
2nd respondent falsely. One has to keep in mind that if the 2nd respondent had
used this language attributed to him as described in the petition both in the
presence of: the army and police. personnel and in the presence of the
Magistrate and the threat held out to the petitioner indicated in paragraph
20, the petitioner would have been a person who would have had ample ground to
falsely implicate the 2nd respondent. Accordingly Mr. Pullenayagam's
contention that there was no motive for the petitioner to falsely implicate
the 2nd respondent in a charge of this nature appears to me without substance.
There is no doubt that if the 2nd respondent had used the words at various
instances ascribed to him the petitioner must have felt utterly humiliated,
resentful, hurt and even infuriated.  
  
Even in petitioner's statement 2R 15 he had stated that Chandra Perera ASP had
the intention to make the police and army officer have a bad opinion about him
and attributed to him these words:  
  
"This is the District Development Council Member. He is a big rogue. He is the
organiser of the Tiger group. He was responsible for the communal riots. This
fellow with Mr. Sivasithamparam, Mr. Rasalingam and Mr. Ganeshalingam have
gone round the place and instigated racial violence, they should be taught a
proper lesson".  
  
He ran him down further and abused him as a terrorist Mr. Chandra Perera asked
him "How are you", 'then he said "What business have you got here", "I
replied, 'I would definitely come as a Member of the District Development
Council in order to find out the needs of the people' then he said that he had
come to. know that Mr. Sivasithamparam and others came and added what business
have they got - he also abused them."  
  
Therefore when one takes into consideration talks and behavior attributed to
the 2nd respondent by the petitioner in the petition and in 2R 15 can one say
that the petitioner was without a motive to implicate the 2nd respondent
without justification, particularly since the petitioner states that all the
allegations made by the 2nd respondent were false, without foundation and were
made maliciously in order to disgrace him and diminish his standing in the
eyes of various people.  
  
Therefore when one considers the various opportunities that existed for the
petitioner; if he was truthful, to state the real cause of his injuries was
attributable' to the instigation offered by

**417**

the 2nd respondent and that injuries were inflicted upon him in consequence of
such implication, then it is patently clear that the petitioner had several
opportunities open to him at which he could have mentioned the 2nd respondent
as a person who caused those injuries to be inflicted on him. The petitioner
had not mentioned the 2nd respondent as being responsible for these injuries
in his first statement recorded by D. C. Kamaldeen. The army officer
Weerasooriya in his affidavit states no mention was made to him of any
injuries being inflicted on him on this evening and it is patent that no
allegation in respect of injuries were made to him implicating the 2nd
respondent. Then when one considers the fact that the petitioner was produced
by the 2nd respondent before the Magistrate, the Magistrate makes quite clear
that at no stage had any complaint been made to him of any injuries suffered
by the petitioner nor any accusations made that the 2nd respondent had been
responsible for instigating the army personnel to deal with him as they chose.
I f the petitioner's story is' true that the injuries were inflicted at the
instance of or at the instigation of the 2nd respondent he could have
mentioned the 2nd respondent by name or description to the DMO or JMO. He has
failed to do so and finally even in the comprehensive statement made by the
petitioner to P.C. 671 Raveendrarajah at the Batticaloa General Hospital there
is no reference whatsoever to the 2nd respondent asking army personnel to take
him and do as they wish and injuries being inflicted upon the petitioner in
consequence of such conduct by the 2nd respondent. All these facts which I
have enumerated throw considerable doubt on petitioner's allegation that
injuries were inflicted on him by army personnel at the instance or at the
instigation of the 2nd respondent.  
  
The evidence in this case discloses that as a result of communal disturbances
there have been several cases of looting, arson, assault and other violent
crimes prevailing in this area for several days prior to this incident. The
evidence also discloses that the 2nd respondent had been specially drafted to
serve in this area from Nuwara Eliya because of his knowledge of the locality,
terrain and the general background of the people in this area. He had been
designated as the Co-ordinating Officer between various police stations in the
area and also between police and army detachments - vide paragraphs 10, 11, 12
of the 2nd respondent's affidavit. It is also in evidence that earlier as a
result of communal disturbances in 1977 this entire area had been subjected to
a great deal of unrest and violence particularly since there were a large
number of colonies populated both by the Sinhalese and Tamils and there were
also Muslim settlements. In view of the recent history of this area the
authorities had been apparently apprehensive, and maybe justifiably so, that
eruption of communal violence in that area had

**418**

to be dealt with effectively. Perhaps it is with this background in mind that
the 2nd respondent had been specially sent to this area since he had
considerable knowledge of the area as he had earlier been stationed at
Kalmunai.  
  
The facts also indicate that even at the time of this particular incident
there had been a series of other incidents consequent as communal violence had
flared up between the major communities. In this background it has to be borne
in mind that the 2nd respondent had been saddled with a great deal of
responsibility and in order to effectively deal with the various situations
that arose and were likely to arise, he had been entrusted with the task of
coordinating action between the police and the army. When one views this
matter in the light of the 2nd respondent's responsibilities and his duties
and the demands that would be made on his personal services, it is clear that
once the petitioner had been arrested in view of the prevailing situations in
that area one could not have reasonably expected the 2nd respondent to have
kept the petitioner under his eye so to speak throughout the entire period he
was in custody from time of arrest till he was handed in at the Central Police
Station later on in the evening. It is also clear from the evidence that
immediately after the 2nd respondent had arrested the petitioner, the 2nd
respondent had entrusted the petitioner to either the army or police personnel
who were present and the 2nd respondent had had to rush to the 3rd colony in
order to deal with certain incidents involving arson, looting and physical
assault taking place there. The responsibility placed on the 2nd respondent
clearly and manifestly indicate that he had to be alert to everything that was
happening in that area and he himself had to personally co-ordinate security
forces to deal with situations as and when they arise. It is in this. light
that one has to view the action of the 2nd respondent when after he arrested
the petitioner he had to rush in order to deal with a situation which had
arisen in the 3rd colony.  
  
Mr. Pullenayagam impressed on us that after the 2nd respondent had taken the
petitioner into custody, in the interval between the convoy of vehicles
leaving the 4th colony and the 2nd respondent's meeting it again at the 3rd
colony, the 2nd respondent had failed to satisfy this Court as to how the
petitioner had been placed in custody and who was responsible for his custody
and on his failure to explain this, one must necessarily accept the
petitioner's version of what is stated to have occurred during this period. As
I have pointed out it would have been humanly impossible for the 2nd
respondent to have kept a fatherly eye on the petitioner throughout the period
he was in custody, in view of the urgent

**419**

and ugly situation that had prevailed at this time. Quite apart from that the
2nd respondent in his affidavit in paragraphs 17 to 20 had given a summary of
what had occurred at this time. Then in paragraphs 30, 31 and 32 the 2nd
respondent had specifically denied the various averments contained in paras 12
and 13 of the petitioner's affidavit and had in several paras given his
version of what had actually occurred on this date.  
  
In the circumstances it appears to me that at the most the contention of the
petitioner and of the 2nd respondent is word against word. The petitioner's
allegation in respect of what the 2nd respondent has stated to have done to
him or caused to have done to him received no corroboration whatever from
several sources which would have corroborated his story if it were true. As I
have indicated in the course of my order the petitioner's version of how he
came by his injuries received no corroboration from any of these sources.  
  
Then again one has to keep in mind that the petitioner is a person who has on
his own admission been very much concerned with the welfare of his people.
Even during this time of tension and terror when he was ordered by the army
officer earlier that day to go back to Kalmunai and not to be in the vicinity
of the 4th colony, he had proceeded back dropped three of his companions and
had come back again to the junction of the 4th colony where he was confronted
by the army and the police and the 2nd respondent. Viewed in this light and in
the absence of independent evidence to corroborate that he was injured on the
evening of the 8th during the period of his arrest and custody one is left to
wonder whether he could not have been injured in some other incident after the
2nd respondent had dropped him consequent on the orders of the Magistrate near
his home. There is not an iota of evidence apart from the assertion of the
petitioner to indicate that he had suffered any kind of injury or physical
discomfort during the period up to the time he was released by the Magistrate.
I am adverting to this aspect of the matter purely for the reason that Senior
Attorney appearing for the petitioner contended that it was incumbent on the
2nd respondent to explain the injuries on the petitioner. Such explanation in
my opinion, could only arise if the facts point to the conclusion that
injuries were sustained by the petitioner after arrest and during the period
of his custody. To my mind there is considerable doubt as to how and when the
petitioner came by his injuries.

**420**

Mr. Pullenayagam submitted that two questions of law emerge for consideration
in this case, firstly the burden of proof required in a case of this nature
and secondly whether an act of this nature by an individual which is outside
the scope of his legitimate duties would come within the ambit of executive or
administrative action. Both these questions have been comprehensively dealt
with by Justice Wanasundera and I am in entire agreement with his views as
expressed in his judgment. I do not think it necessary for me, in view of the
findings of fact I have arrived at, to deal at any length or repeat my
conclusions on the two questions of law that have arisen for determination in
this case.  
  
Even on the basis that the standard of proof required in a case of this nature
is on a balance of probability, I am of the view that the petitioner has
failed to prove his allegations as against the 2nd respondent. In the
circumstances I dismiss this application with costs payable to the 2nd
respondent.  
  
**WEERARATNE, J.  
**  
I am in agreement with the judgment and order of my brother Ismail, J. to the
effect that the petitioner's allegations against the second respondent have
not been established on the facts which have transpired in this case. In view
of this finding the questions of law raised before us do not arise.  
  
**SHARVANANDA, J.  
**  
By his application dated 9th September, 1981 made to this Court under Article
126 of the Constitution, the Petitioner has alleged that one D. K. Chandra
Perera, who at the relevant time was a Police officer in the service of the
Government holding the rank of Assistant Superintendent of Police, had
infringed the fundamental right conferred on him by Article 11 of the
Constitution, namely, freedom from torture, by causing the Army to commit
various acts of torture on 9th August 1981 while the Petitioner was in his
custody. The Petitioner along with his application has filed his affidavit
testifying to the circumstances in which he was taken into custody by the 2nd
Respondent when he was functioning as the Coordinating Officer of the Central
Camp Police in the Amparai District, along with the Army, in charge of
security arrangements, and how, while he was in such custody, the 2nd
Respondent, saying, inter alia, that the Petitioner was the cause of all the
communal violence against the Sinhalese people of the

**421**

area, told the Army to take him and do as they like with him and how. in
consequence various- acts of. torture were committed on him by the Army. He
has cited the Attorney-General and the said D. K. Chandra Perera as 1st and
2nd Respondents, respectively, to this application. The 2nd Respondent has
filed affidavit admitting taking the Petitioner into custody on 9th August
1981, but denying that he instigated the Army to torture the Petitioner, and
also denying that the Army ever indulged in the acts of torture described by
the Petitioner in his affidavit.  
  
Article 11 of the Constitution guarantees that "no person shall be subjected
to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment." The
practice of torture is prohibited in all civilized societies. Article 11 is on
the same lines as Article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The.
fundamental nature of the human right of freedom from torture is emphasized by
the fact that no derogation is permitted from this right under any conditions,
even in times of war, public danger or other emergency. This human right of
freedom from torture is vouched not only to citizens, but to all persons,
whether citizen or not. The Constitution is jealous of any infringement of
this human right. This care is not to be exercised less vigilantly, because
the subject whose human dignity is in question may not be particularly
meritorious.  
  
By way of preliminary objection to the application, the Attorney-General
submitted that the material before the Court did not disclose an infringement
by "executive or administrative action" of the fundamental right guaranteed by
Article 11 of the Constitution-He stated that only violations of fundamental
rights by executive or administrative action attracted the remedy prescribed
by Article 126 of the Constitution. He contended that the phrase "executive or
administrative action" in Article 126 signified "State action" and that a
wrongful act of a Public officer, assuming it to be done under colour of
office, was no more than an . individual or private wrong, unless it was
sanctioned by the State or done under State authority. Counsel for the 2nd
Respondent adopted the said objection and associated himself with the
submissions of the Additional Solicitor-General who appeared for the 1st
Respondent at the argument before this Court. He urged that when a State
officer commits an act in contravention of Chap. l l l of the Constitution,
such an act is not justiciable under Article 126, although performed in the
course of his public duties, unless such act is supported by the executive
branch of the State. He stressed that unless there is the element of State
support, given antecedently or subsequently, the executive or administrative

**422**

action postulated by Article 126 is of there. His argument was that "executive
action" represented "the action of the collective will of the State and not
that of the individual Public officer."  
  
The preliminary objection raises questions of great public importance
regarding the dimension of the Constitutional remedy afforded by Article 126
of the Constitution for infraction of fundamental . rights. The essence of a
.fundamental right lies in its enforceability against the organs of the State.
The freedoms and rights enshrined in Chap. III of the Constitution are but
empty formulae if they may be infringed upon with impunity without incurring
any sanction. Judicial review is necessarily the bulwark of the freedoms
guaranteed by the Constitution. Article 4(d) of the Constitution provides that
"Fundamental rights which are by the Constitution declared and recognized
shall be respected, secured and advanced by all the organs of the Government
and shall not be abridged, restricted or denied, save in the manner and to the
extent hereinafter provided". The framers of the Constitution, however, have
made justiciable only the :infringement or imminent infringement by executive
or administrative. action of the fundamental right or language right declared
and recognised by Chap. III or Chap. I V of the Constitution. This Article is
directed against the Executive and is designed as a corrective for executive
excesses only. Under the Constitution; the Supreme Court is the Court charged
with the duty. of safeguarding the fundamental rights and liberties of the
people by the grant of speedy and efficacious remedy under Article 126, for
the enforcement of such rights. The importance and beneficial effect of this
jurisdiction cannot be overestimated.. This Court has been constituted the
protector and guarantor of fundamental rights against infringement by State
action of such rights; in :view of the vital nature of this Constitutional
remedy, it is in accord with the aspirations of the Constitution that this
Court should take a liberal view of the provisions of Article 126, so that a
subject's right to the remedy is in no manner constricted by finely spun
distinctions concerning the precise scope of the authority of State officers
and the incidental liability of the State.  
  
It is to be noted that. the claim for redress under Article 126 for what has
been done by an executive officer' of the State is a claim against the State
for what has been done in the exercise of. the executive power of the State.
This is not vicarious liability; it is the liability of the State itself; it
is not a liability in tort at all; it is a liability. in the public law of
`the State..- vide Maharaja v. Attorney-General of Trinidad ((1978) 2 A.E.R.
670 at 679 P. C.) (1).

**423**

 If the State invests one of its officers or agencies with power which is
capable of inflicting the deprivation complained of; .it is bound by the
exercise of such power even in abuse thereof; the official position makes the
abuse effective to achieve the flouting of the subject's fundamental rights.
The, State had endowed the officer with coercive power, and his exercise of
its power, whether in conformity with or in disregard of fundamental rights,
constitutes "executive action", The official's act is ascribed to the State
for the purpose of determining responsibility, otherwise the Constitutional
prohibition will have no meaning.  
  
The idea. underlying Article 126 is that no one by virtue of his public office
or position should deprive a citizen of his fundamental rights without being
amenable to Article 126, even though what. the official did constituted an
abuse of 'power, or exceeded the limits of his authority. This sweep of State
action, however, will not cover acts of officers in the ambit of their
personal pursuits, such as rape by a Police officer of a woman in his custody,
as contended by the. Additional Solicitor-General; such act has no relation to
the exercise of the State power vested in him. The officer had taken advantage
of the occasion, but not his office, for the satisfaction of a personal
vagary. His conduct is totally unconnected with any manner of performance of
his official functions.  
  
The "Executive" may be broadly defined as "the authority within the State
which administers the law, carries on the business of the Government and
maintains order within and security from without the State." (Wynes -
Legislative and Executive Powers in Australia (Third ' Edition at p. 507).
Executive functions thus include, in addition to execution of the law, the
conduct of military operations, the provision of supervision of such welfare
services as education, public health, transport, etc.  
  
The 2nd Respondent is a Police officer charged with law enforcement duties. In
the performance of his duties, he represents the executive arm of the State.
"It is beyond question that a Police officer in carrying out his duties in
relation to the maintenance of order, the detection and apprehension of
offenders and the bringing of them before. a judicial authority is acting as a
Public officer carrying out an essential executive function of any sovereign
State - maintenance of law and order . . . . . It is also beyond question that
in performing these functions, Police officers are endowed with coercive
powers by the common law, even apart from any statute. Contravention by the
Police of any of the human rights or fundamental freedoms of the individual .
. . . . thus fall squarely

**424**

within what has been held by the Judicial Committee in Maharaja v. A. G. of
Trinidad and Tobago (1979 A. C. 385 at 396) (1) to be the ambit of the
protection afforded by section 6, viz. contravention by the State or by some
other public authority endowed by law with- coercive powers." (Thornhill v.
Attorney-Genera/ (P.C.) (1980) 2 W. L. R. 510 at 519, 520) (2).  
  
The Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution provides that "no
State shall make or enforce a law which shall abridge the privileges or
immunities of the citizen of the United States . . . . . . . not deny to any
person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws." The
prohibitions of this Amendment extend to State action through its judicial, as
well as through its legislative, executive or administrative branch of
Government. The judgments of the Supreme Court of the United States of America
as to what actions constitute "State action," vis-a-vis the Constitutional
prohibition, furnish helpful guidance for the resolution of the question in
issue.  
  
In Ex parte Common wealth of Virginia (100 US p. 339 at 346 (3)) , speaking by
Mr. Justice Strong, the Court said, referring to the prohibitions of the
Fourteenth Amendment:  
  
"They have reference to actions of the political body denominated a State by
whatever instruments or in whatever modes; that action may be taken. A State
acts. by its legislative, its executive or its judicial authorities. It can
act in no other wav. The Constitutional provisions therefore must mean that no
agency of the State or of the officers or agents by whom its powers are
exerted, shall deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection
of the laws. Whoever by. virture of public position under a State Government
deprives another of property, life . or liberty without due process of the
law, or denies or takes away the equal protection of the laws, violates. the
Constitutional inhibition; and as he acts in the name and for the State, and
is clothed with the State's power, his act is that of the State. This must be
so, or the Constitutional prohibition. has no meaning, when the State has
clothed one of its agents with the power to annul or evade it."  
  
In Virginia v. Rives - ex parte Commonwealth of Virginia - 100. US p. 313 at
321(4); the Supreme Court, dealing with the question of discrimination in the
selection of jurors by the Sheriff, stated:  
  
"If the officer to whom was entrusted the selection of persons from whom the
juries for the indictment and trial of the peti-

**425**

tioner were drawn; disregarding the statute of the State, confined his
selection to white persons and refused to select any persons of the coloured
race, solely because of their colour; his action was a gross violation of the
spirit of the State's laws, as well as the act of Congress which prohibits and
punishes such discrimination. He made himself liable to punishment at the
instance of the State, and under the laws of the United States. In. the one
sense, indeed, his act was the act of the State and was prohibited by the
Constitutional Amendment."  
  
In Neal v. Delaware (103 US p. 370)(5), a discriminating enforcement in
practice of laws which were in their terms undiscriminating was again held to
be within the aforesaid Amendment. "The action of those officers, in the
premises, is to be deemed to be the act of the State." The above passage from
ex parte Virginia 339 was reiterated in support of this proposition.  
  
In Holme Telephone and Telegraph Company v. City of Los Angeles (227 US p. 278
- 57 L. ed 510)(6); the Supreme Court held that the prohibitions and
guarantees of the Fourteenth Amendment were addressed , to and controlled not
only the States, but also every person, whether, natural or juridical, who is
the repository of State power, and that a case where one in possession of
State power uses that power to the doing of wrongs which are forbidden by the
United States Constitution Fourteenth Amendment is within the purview of that
Amendment, even though the consummation of the wrong may not be within the
powers possessed, if the commission of the wrong itself is rendered possible
or is efficiently aided by the State authority lodged in the wrong-doer. Chief
Justice White in delivering the judgment of. the Court said, with reference to
the argument that an unauthorised act of a State agent is not State action
within the meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution of the
United States (57 L. ed. at 515); that:  
  
"The proposition relied upon pre-supposes that the terms of the Fourteenth
Amendment reach only acts done by State officers which are within the scope of
the powers conferred by the State. The proposition hence applies to the
prohibitions of the Amendment, the law of principal and agent governing
contracts between individuals and consequently assumes that no act done by an
officer of the State is within the reach of the Amendment unless such act can
be' held to be the act of the State by, the application of such law of agency.
In other words, the proposition. is that the Amendment deals only with the
acts of State officers within the strict. scope of the special powers

**426**

possessed by them and does not include abuse of power by an officer as a
result of a wrong done in excess of the powers delegated. Here again, the
settled construction of the Amendment is that it pre-supposes the possibility
of an abuse by a State officer or representative of the powers possessed and
deals with such a contingency. It provides, therefore, for a case where one
who is in possession of State power uses that power for the doing of the
wrongs which the Amendment forbids, even although the consummation of the
wrong may not be within the powers possessed if the commission of the wrong
itself is rendered possible or is efficiently aided by the State authority
lodged in the wrong-doer. That is to say, the theory of the Amendment is that
where an officer or other representative of a State, in the exercise of the
authority with which he is clothed, misuses the power possessed to do a wrong
forbidden by the Amendment, inquiry concerning whether the State has
authorised the wrong is irrelevant and the Federal judicial power is competent
to afford redress for the wrong by dealing  
with the officer and the result of his exertion of power."  
  
The .Court referred with approval the holding in Virginia v. Rives (100 US p.
313) (4) that the enforcement by a State official of a non-discriminating
statute in a discriminatory mariner was within the Amendment.  
  
In Raymond v. Chicago Union Traction Company ((1907) 207 US 2.0 - 52 L. ed.
78)(7); the Supreme Court stated that the prohibitions of the Fourteenth
Amendment related to and covered all the instrumentalities by which the State
acts and reiterated that whoever by virtue of public position under a State
Government deprives another of any right protected by the Amendment against
deprivation by the State, violates the Constitutional inhibition; and as he
acts in the name of the State and for the State and is clothed with State
power, his act is that of the State.  
  
In Iowa-Des Moines National Bank v. Bennett ((1931) 284 US 239 - 76'L. ed.
265) (8), the Court held that although the prohibition of the Fourteenth
Amendment has reference exclusively to action by the State as distinguished
from action by private individuals, the rights they protected may be invaded
by the act of a State officer under colour of State authority, even though he
not only exceeded his authority, but also disregarded special commands of the
State law. "When a State official acting under colour . of State authority
invades in the course of his duties .a private right secured by the Federal
Constitution, that right is violated even if

**427**

the State officer not only exceeded his authority but. also disregarded
special commands of the State law.  
  
Misuse of power possessed by virtue of State law and made possible only
because the wrong-doer is clothed with the authority of State law is action
taken under colour of State -law. - vide United States v. Classic ((1941) 313
US 299)0}.  
  
Thus, in the U.S.A. it has been established that the guarantee. of the
Fourteenth Amendment extends to all State action and that the 'State,' in this
context, includes every repository of State power. "State action" even extends
to acts done by public officers misusing their power; it is immaterial whether
the State has authorised the act or not, provided it is done under colour of
law or authority. .  
  
The Additional Solicitor-General relied on the following passage in the
judgment of the Supreme Court of the United States in the Civil Rights cases
(109 US p. 3)(10) in support of his submission that the Constitutional remedy
is not available against violation of fundamental rights by individuals.  
  
"It is proper to state that civil rights such as are guaranteed by the
Constitution against State aggression cannot be impaired by the wrongful acts
of the individuals unsupported by State authority in the shape of laws,
customs, or judicial or executive proceedings. The wrongful act of an
individual, unsupported by any, such authority, is simply a private wrong or a
crime of that individual; an invasion of the rights of the injured party, it
is true, whether they affect his person, his property or his reputation; but
if not sanctioned, in some way by the State or not done under State authority,
his rights remain in full force, and may presumably be vindicated by resort to
the laws of the State for redress."  
  
The above passage must be understood in its context. There, the Court rested
its decision upon the explicit language of-the Fourteenth Amendment, which is
that "no State" shall deny equal protection of the laws or due processes of
the law; it does not say that "no person shall deny . .". State action alone
is forbidden to deny fundamental rights. Private individuals are no so
enjoined. Constitutional guarantees of fundamental rights are directed against
the State and its organs, both under section 14 of the United States
Constitution `and under Article 126 of our Constitution. But when a person is
deprived of his Constitutional rights by a State officer in the performance of
his duties,

**428**

a quite different situation is presented. A "State officer" is the 'State'
against which the provisions of the Fourteenth Amendment and of our Article
126 are intended.  
  
Mr. r. Choksy, in support of his submission, referred to the following passage
in Chaudhuri - Law of Writs and Fundamental Rights (2nd Ed, Vol. 1, p. 17);  
  
"Fundamental rights afford protection against State action and not against
action of private individuals - Constitutional safeguards are, as a rule,
directed against the State and its organs and not against private individuals.
Civil rights guaranteed against State action cannot be infringed by purely
private conduct, except when it is supported by State authority."  
  
To the same effect is a citation by the Additional Solicitor General from Basu
-. Commentary on the Constitution of India (Vol. I, 3rd Ed. at p. 70). After
"referring to the passage in the Civil Rights cases ((1883) 109 US p. 3) 10
quoted above, the author, states:  
  
"The rights guaranteed by Articles 19(1) and 31(1) of our Constitution (Indian
Constitution) are available only against State -action. Violation of such
rights by individuals is not within the purview. of these Articles."  
  
Reference was also made to the judgment of the Indian Supreme Court in
Shamdasani v. Central Bank of India Ltd. (A. I. R. (1952) S.C. 59) (11) where
it was stated:  
  
"Neither Article 19(1) nor Article 31(1) on its true construction was intended
to prevent wrongful individual acts or to provide protection against merely
private conduct ........ ..The language and structure of Article 19 and its
setting in Part III of the Constitution (Indian) clearly shows that the
Article was intended to protect those freedoms against State action other than
in the legitimate exercise of its power to regulate private rights of property
in the public interest. Violation of rights of property by individuals is not
within the purview of the Article."  
  
In the above case, the petition was for the enforcement of the petitioner's
fundamental rights under Article 19(1)(f) and Article 310) of the Indian
Constitution against the Central Bank of India Ltd. a Company incorporated
under the 'Indian 'Companies Act, 1882\. The Central Bank of India Ltd.
(respondent) was admittedly

**429**

not a State agency or department and hence its action was not State action.
The State was therefore in no way involved. The Constitutional remedy is
available only against a case of infringement by State action. Hence it was
correctly held that the petitioner had misconceived his remedy in applying for
a Constitutional remedy to the Supreme Court for the infringement of his
fundamental rights by a private person.  
  
In this case, if the 2nd Respondent had .committed those acts of torture
complained of by the Petitioner when he was not performing his official duty
but in the course of his personal pursuits, the Constitutional remedy under
Article 126 will certainly not be available to the Petitioner. The
distinguishing factor in this case is that' the Respondent, acting under
colour of the law, had caused the torture to be inflicted when he was holding
the Petitioner in custody.  
  
The Respondents relied also on the judgment of this Court in Thadchanamoorti
v. A. G. (S. C. 63/80- S. C. minutes of 14th August 1980)(12) in support of
their proposition as to what is meant by "executive or administrative action"
as required by" Article 126. The decision in Ireland v. United Kingdom (13) by
the European Court of Human Rights was referred to, and the following comment
of Harris in his book "Cases and Materials of International Law" was
considered pertinent in deciding what is meant by "executive or administrative
action ":  
  
"In its judgement (the Irish case), the Court approved the rule that has been
developed in the Commission's jurisprudence by which local remedies need not
be `associated where the act or acts claimed to be in breach of the Convention
is or are shown to, be in consequence, of 'administrative practice', namely, a
practice which, although unlawful under the defendant's State Law, has been
adopted or tolerated by its official or agent and not just an isolated act or
acts' in breach of the Convention."  
  
There is no justification for equating "executive or administrative action" in
Article 126 to "administrative practice" or to acts resulting from
administrative practice. ''Practice" denotes "habitual or systematic
performances" and contemplates a series of similar actions. No known canon of
statutory interpretation warrants such a narrow or limited construction of the
phrase "executive or administrative action", which, ordinarily understood,
embraces in its sweep all acts of the Administration, especially when what is
at stake is the subject's Constitutional remedy. In my view, all that is
required of a petitioner under Article 126 is that he should satisfy this
Court that the act of infringement complained of by him is the action of a
State

**430**

official or repository of State power. Any violation of fundamental rights by
public authority, whether it be an isolated individual action or consequent to
administrative practice, furnishes, in my view, sufficient basis for an
application under Article 126.  
  
The motive for the -infringement by the State officer is not relevant. In
Sunday Lake Iron- Co. v. Wakefield (1918) 247 US 350: 62 L. ed. 1154),(14) the
complaint was against the Tax Officer who was alleged to have assessed the
plaintiff's properties at their full value, while all other persons in the
country were assessed at not more than one-third of the worth of their
properties. It was held that the equal protection clause could be availed of
against the Tax Officer. A charge of violation of equal protection
(fundamental right) thus lies against an officer of State who is guilty. of
discriminatory conduct in his official capacity when carrying out the
provisions of a law which are not themselves discriminatory. In Kathiraning
Bawat v. State of Saurashtra (A. 1. R. (1952) S. C. 123)(15)B.K. Mukerjee, J.
observed as follows:  
  
"It is a doctrine of the American Courts which seems to me well founded on
principle that the equal protection clause can be invoked not merely where
discrimination appears on the express terms of the statute itself, but also
when it is a result of improper or prejudiced execution of the law: vide
Weaver on Constitutional Law, p. 404.'."  
  
The complainant under Article 126 is concerned only with the impact of a State
officer's action on a person's fundamental right; it is sufficient for him to
show that he is aggrieved by such transgression. Thadchanamoorti's case
mentioned above suffers from the fact that the judgments of the Supreme Court
of the United States or of India which are very elucidatory of the question in
issue have not been considered.  
  
It is to be noted that in Maharaja v. Attorney-General of Trinidad (1979 A.C.
85) (1) and Thornhill v. Attorney-General ((1980) 2 W.L.R. 510 (2 cited
above), the complaint in' each case was of isolated acts of infringement of
fundamental rights by a State official. The Privy Council held that the
fundamental right of the petitioner in each case had been violated by the
State. To decide the issue, the Privy Council did of embark on any
investigation whether there was an administrative practice. countenancing such
infringements.  
  
The facts in issue on this application have to be decided on the evidence
placed before this, Court in the shape of affidavits and exhibits marked by
the parties.

**431**

According to the petitioner:  
  
He is a retired teacher and an elected Member of the Amparai District
Development Council, having won the election to the said Council as a Member
of the Tamil United Liberation Front. 0n 9th August 1981, there was communal
trouble in the 3rd and 4th colonies. He had, bout 4.30 p.m. that day, become
aware that a number of houses belonging to the Tamils in that area were burnt
down. The said colonies came within the area covered by the Amparai District
Development Council. Being concerned about the happenings there, he went to
the 4th colony. He was going towards the Central Camp area Police Station with
a view to meeting the Officer-in-Charge thereof to urge protective action. As
he was going past the 4th colony junction, he was taken into custody by the
2nd Respondent, who was going in a convoy of 4 or 5 jeeps and about two army .
trucks with Army and Police personnel towards Sadayanthalawai. At a lonely
spot, the 2nd Respondent ordered the vehicles to be stopped and the Petitioner
was then asked to get down from the jeep in which the 2nd Respondent was
travelling. On the orders of the 2nd Respondent, the Army and Police officers
stood around in a circle, with the Petitioner in the centre. The 2nd
Respondent then addressed the. Army and Police officers and told them, inter-
alia, that the Petitioner' was the cause of all the communal violence against
the Sinhalese people in the area and that the Petitioner with the Tamil
Members of Parliament of the Tamil United Liberation Front were roaming the
area inciting people. The 2nd Respondent thereafter told the Army and Police
Officers to take the Petitioner and do as they like with him and left the
place leaving the Petitioner in the hands of the said Army and Police
personnel. The Petitioner was then put on the floor of the truck with about 20
or 30 Army personnel, and while the truck was moving, the Petitioner was
subjected to, inter alia, the following acts of torture and cruelty and
degrading treatment by the said Army personnel:  
  
(a) He was kicked all over the body with shod feet and trampled on his back
with shod feet;  
  
(b) He was ordered to speak in Sinhala and when he said he did not know
Sinhala, he was hit on his face by the Army personnel with their fists;  
  
(c) The petitioner was then asked to repeat after the Army personnel
disparaging and obscene statements that they made in Sinhala regarding Mr. A.
Amirthalingam and Mrs. Amirthalingam, and when the Petitioner pretended that
he did not hear them properly, they pulled and twisted his ears;

**432**

(d) The Petitioner was then asked to stand in the truck and then kicked on his
chest with shod feet by a soldier who hung on the bar of the truck with his
arms and swung his feet so as to kick the Petitioner, and when the latter
jerked backwards due to the force of the kick, he was hit and pushed forward
by other Army personnel who were standing behind him;  
  
(e) Tufts of his hair and beard were twisted and pulled and strands of hair
were plucked; portions of his beard and hair were also burnt with lighted
matches;  
  
(f) When the petitioner, tried to protect his beard and hair being so burnt,
with one of his arms he was made to lie on the floor of the truck and his arm
was twisted and placed on his back and then trampled upon with shod feet; and  
  
(g) He was hit with gun butts on his head and other parts of the body.  
  
When the truck reached the Central Camp area Police Station, the 2nd
Respondent was there at the Police Station. The 2nd Respondent then asked the
Petitioner: "How are you feeling now"? Thereafter, on the orders of the 2nd
Respondent, a Policeman recorded a statement from the Petitioner, and when he
referred to the 2nd Respondent's conduct and the torture he was subjected to,
the 2nd Respondent ordered that such matters be not mentioned and he was made.
to sign the statement which was in Sinhala. Thereafter, at about 11.00 p.m.,
he was taken to the Kalmunai Magistrate's bungalow. There, the 2nd Respondent
urged the Magistrate to remand the Petitioner. The Magistrate, however, did
not make any order remanding him, but requested him to stay indoors and appear
in Court on 12th August 1981. He did not tell the Magistrate about the torture
inflicted on him by the Army, but had told him that he found it difficult to
walk. In his statement to the Batticaloa Police on 14th August 1981 recorded
at the Batticaloa hospital he had stated the reason why he did not tell the
Magistrate that he was assaulted by the Army, He said: "Because I feared that
I would be attacked. and I was, to be taken by them again. When I was put into
the jeep again, he (2nd Respondent) showed me his revolver and said that he
would one day or other shoot me. I kept silent."' (2R15)  
  
According to the 2nd Respondent:  
  
He was posted to the Central Camp Police with instructions to intensify
security arrangements in the Central Camp Vellavalai

**433**

and Uhana Police areas with the assistance of the Army. He was directed by the
Inspector-General of Police to take steps to bring under control the communal
violence in the area. and also to take necessary steps to prevent its
escalation or continuance. His functions included liaison between' the Police
Stations in his area and also between the Police and Army detachments and
ensuring adequate patrolling and prevention of physical violence, arson and
looting. From inquiries and Police intelligence he became aware that the
Petitioner was one of those who incited violence. On 9.8.81, when he was at he
Vellavalai Police Station, shortly after 4.00 p.m. he received a message that
a Sinhalese man in the No. 3 colony had been' stabbed and his wife had been
assaulted and in consequence a large number .of huts in the No. 4 colony which
was populated by Tamil persons had been set on fire. He immediately proceeded
by jeep accompanied by two other jeeps - one a Police jeep and the other an
Army jeep -with Police and Army personnel. On the way he met the Petitioner at
the junction of the No. 4 colony. He took the Petitioner into custody pending
further inquiries on suspicion of his instigating and inciting communal
disharmony and violence, as he suspected the Petitioner of instigation in
connexion with the incidents that had just taken place. On reaching the No. 4
colony, he found several huts burnt and some still smouldering. Most of the
inhabitants had previously entered refugee camps. The remaining people had
informed him that some villagers had come across the paddy fields, set fire to
the - huts, saying that the Tamil people had stabbed Sirisena of their colony.
He observed a crowd of people in the paddy field at a distance and thereupon
he gave chase with the assistance of the Police and Army personnel. On
reaching the No. 3 colony, he made enquiries and questioned the villagers in
order to ascertain the persons responsible for burning the huts in the No. 4
colony. When he was questioning the colonists, Lt. Col. Mohandas Sumanasena
arrived there with Sirisena and two suspects, Vallipuram and Ponnadurai, who
were suspected of having stabbed Sirisenna. Thereafter he sent a message for
the vehicle which was still in the No. 4 colony to be brought to the junction
of the roads leading to the No. 4 colony and No. 3 colony. His jeep came to
the No. 3. colony and he got into the jeep and proceeded to the junction. At
the junction he found that the other vehicles had arrived from the No. 4
colony and that Lt. Col. Sumanasena had also come to the junction with his
vehicles. All the occupants, including the Petitioner, had alighted and were
awaiting him. Major Ananda Weerasekera had also come there. They all decided
to return to the Central Camp area Police Station. He travelled back in his
jeep, while the Petitioner, Sirisena and the other two suspects got into the
other vehicles in which .the Police and the Army personnel travelled. On
arrival at the

**434**

Central Camp area Police Station, at about 6.30 p.m. he instructed the
Officer-in-Charge and P. S. Kamaldeen to record the statements of the
suspects. Thereafter, at about 11.00 p.m. he produced the Petitioner before
the Kalmunai Magistrate and moved that he be remanded. There, the Petitioner
stated to the Magistrate that he would be leaving for Peradeniya on 12.8.81
after reporting to Court that day and gave an undertaking to remain indoors
till 12.8.81. The Petitioner made no complaint to the Magistrate of any
assault or incitement by him to be assaulted. Thereafter he took the
Petitioner in his jeep ,and left him in the Kalmunai town. He denied the
allegations made by the Petitioner against him:  
  
According to the record maintained by the Magistrate:  
  
On 10.8.81, Mr. Sivapalan, Attorney-at-Law for the Petitioner, filed a motion
in the Magistrate's Court that "permission be granted to take Dr.
Murugesupillai and treat the suspect at his residence, as the D.M.O: was not
available at Kalmunai." On that date itself,. the Magistrate had made order:
"D.M.O. to examine and report if the patient needs hospitalisation or other
treatment." The D.M.O. in his report dated 11.8.81 to the Magistrate states:  
  
"I examined Mr. K. Velmurugu (petitioner) of Pandirippu today at your request.
He gives me a history of assault by Army men on 9.8.81 evening with boots,
hands and rifles.  
  
On examination -  
  
He is a case of mitral incompetence (valvular heart disease) which
necessitates treatment by a physician; Probably due to assault, he has  
  
\- contusions and abrasions on the back of the chest;  
\-- painful swelling of left wrist;  
\- abrasions on legs and left ear-lobe;  
\- swelling of both ankle-joints;  
\- tender and painful left jaw-joint on movement;  
\- tender and swollen :left mastoid process where fracture cannot be excluded:  
  
I am of opinion that he should be kept under observation and treated in a
hospital where investigation facilities and Consultants are available."  
  
On 12.8.81 the Petitioner appeared in Court. The record states: "Suspect
states he desires to enter hospital. He is permitted to do so. D.M.O. should
mention his condition."

**435**

The Petitioner was admitted to the General Hospital, Batticaloa, at 4.50 p.m.
on 12.8.81 and he was examined by the J. M. O. at at 8.00 a.m. on 13.8.81. The
doctor's report P2 reads as follows:  
  
**" Short History:  
**  
Assault by Army personnel with boots and rifle. Patient was suffering from
mitral incompetence, heart disease."  
  
The medical report proceeds to set out in detail a number of injuries found on
the Petitioner and states that the injuries were caused by blunt weapon. The
J. M. O. further states that the X-rays revealed "fracture of neck of left
side of mandible:"  
  
The Petitioner was discharged from the hospital only on 25.8.81.  
  
When the present application was supported on 24.9.81 in this Court; this
Court called for the observations of the Magistrate with regard to the
Petitioner's version of what happened on 9:8.81 in the Magistrate-'s presence.  
  
In his report, the Magistrate has stated that the 2nd Respondent strenuously
urged the remanding of the Petitioner, on the ground that the Petitioner was
inciting communal feelings and that security could not be maintained if the
suspect was at large. He further stated that he did not remand the Petitioner
as 'the petitioner agreed to self-imposed confinement in his residence till
12th August.  
  
Thereafter he was to leave the area for Peradeniya till the end of the month
to sit for his Degree examination". The Magistrate has further stated that:
"The petitioner's statement that he told me that he was finding it difficult
to walk is absolutely and categorically false. The petitioner at no stage told
me of any difficulty in walking or bodily discomfiture; nor did he hint at
having been subjected to physical assault, degrading treatment or bodily
abuse. But the 2nd respondent and the petitioner were seated on chairs at the
same table as I was, and the petitioner showed no external signs of physical
strain or exhaustion. He walked, sat and talked as a normal person. I saw no
evidence of singeing of his beard nor. other marks of any injuries. The shirt
he was wearing was grimy and soiled".  
  
With reference to the Petitioner's averment in paragraph 23 of his affidavit,
"On the motion of my Attorney-at-Law Mr. Sivapalan, on the e next day, 10th
August, the learned Magistrate ordered that I be examined by the D.M.O.,
Kalmunai, and the said doctor examined me on 11th August 1981 ", the
Magistrate observes:  
  
"The application made by the petitioners Attorney was for a private
practitioner to examine the petitioner as the

**436**

D.M.O.. was not available. :Although the application was journalised on
10.8.81, it was not supported till the following day, by which time the D.M.O.
had already returned. He was therefore ordered to examine and report on the
need for hospitalisation.'  
  
This observation of the Magistrate is contradictory of the record (M. C.
Kalmunai 84155)-, according to which it would appear that the Magistrate had,
on the motion of the Petitioner's Attorney, made order on 10.8.81 itself that
the D.M.0 should examine and report. The Magistrate further states: "On 12th
August 1981, in the presence of a large throng of supporters, the petitioner
was assisted into the well' of the Court with much ceremony". In journal entry
dated 12.8.81, the record states : "Suspect states he desires to enter
hospital. He is permitted to do so. The D. M. O. should mention his
condition". However, the Magistrate in his observation . states that though
the D.M.O. had detailed the Petitioner's injuries and recommended that the
Petitioner be kept under observation and treated in a hospital, "there was no
reason to deny the application that hospitalisation would even more
effectively ensure his absence from the area, thus eliminating all possibility
of incitement." It is difficult to appreciate the relevance of this
prejudicial observation. The Magistrate appears to have pre-judged the
Petitioner.  
  
That the Petitioner had not mentioned to the Magistrate when he was produced
before the Magistrate by the 2nd Respondent on the night of 9.8.81 that he was
assaulted by the Army ordinarily should count against the Petitioner. But he
has given a good reason in his statement 2R15 to the Police dated 14.8.81 for
failing to do so. In the face of the D.M.O.'S reports dated 11.8.81 and of the
' Medical. Officer, General Hospital, Batticaloa, dated 13.8.81; it cannot be
disputed that the Petitioner had been brutally assaulted after he was taken
into custody by the 2nd Respondent on the evening of 9.8.81; we have only the
version of the Petitioner how the Army had, at the instance of the 2nd
Respondent, inhumanly treated him while he remained in the 2nd Respondent's
custody. After the 2nd Respondent, had dropped the Petitioner at midnight on
9th August 1981,'the Petitioner had stayed at home in compliance with the
undertaking he had given to the Magistrate. The motion filed by the
Petitioner's Attorney on 10.8.81 shows that the Petitioner was confined to his
house on 10.8.81 and had wanted the doctor to come and treat him there. On the
sequence of events, it cannot be seriously denied that the injuries that the
doctors found on the Petitioner resulted from the brutalities committed by the
Army on 9.8.81. The injuries speak for themselves and confirm the Petitio-

**437**

ner's version of how he came by them. The 2nd Respondent admits in his
affidavit that the Petitioner, was taken in the Army truck after the arrest
by. him. It is significant that the Magistrate should think of hospitalisation
of the Petitioner when he made order on 10.8.81 on the: application made to
him that a doctor should be allowed to see and treat the Petitioner at his
house.  
  
The conclusion is irresistible that the Petitioner received his injuries on
the evening of 9th August 1981 after he was taken into custody. There is no
suggestion by the 2nd Respondent that prior to his taking the Petitioner into
custody, he was already having those injuries. In my view, the 2nd Respondent
is untruthful when he denies the averments in paragraph 14 of the Petitioner's
affidavit that the Army personnel inflicted the acts of torture referred to
therein.  
  
The Petitioner was taken into custody by the 2nd Respondent at about 4.30 p.m.
on the 9th and continued to be in his custody until e was taken before 'the
Magistrate at about 11.00 p.m. that same night. He was responsible for the
custody and. it was his. duty to see that he Petitioner was not- ill-treated
while in such custody. The 2nd Respondent has therefore to explain what
happened to the Petitioner while he was' thus in custody. He has however not
_chosen to tell this Court as to how the Petitioner came by his injuries while
the Petitioner was in such. custody. He has also failed to explain why the
Petitioner was put in the Army truck and why he gave charge of the Petitioner
to the Army personnel to take him to the Central Camp area Police Station when
he could have taken him. in his jeep to the Police Station. The conclusion is
unavoidable that the 2nd Respondent arranged with the Army officers for the
Petitioner to be taken by them to the Central Camp area Police Station. The
Petitioner,: being in custody; had no choice in the matter. I n my opinion,
the Petitioner's version as to how the 2nd Respondent handed the physical
charge of the Petitioner to the Army with instructions that are highly
improper and ill become an officer, of his responsible position represents the
true facts.  
  
The 2nd Respondent did not become functus after. taking the Petitioner into
custody. The 2nd Respondent, as a Police officer endowed with coercive powers,
was carrying out his official duty in keeping the Petitioner in his custody
until the Petitioner was produced before the Magistrate that. night. In
carrying out such duty, he was acting as a Public Officer performing an
essential

**438**

executive function of the State - the maintenance of law and order, and any .
contravention by him of the detainee's fundamental rights constitutes
contravention by the Executive, as referred to in Article 126. According to
the Petitioner; the 2nd Respondent had addressed the Army and Police officers
that. the Petitioner was the cause of all the communal violence and had asked
them to take him and do as they like. The 2nd Respondent, the Police officer
charged with the duty of bringing under control the communal violence, in the
area, appears to have conceived that if the Petitioner could be silenced by
torture, the communal violence could be contained. Hence, he chose to achieve
that object by having the -Petitioner tortured by the Army personnel. He thus
violated the fundamental right guaranteed to the Petitioner by Article 11 of
the Constitution, namely,. freedom from torture. As stated earlier, where an
officer of a State; in` the exercise of the authority which he is clothed
with, uses the power to do a wrong forbidden by the Constitution, inquiry
whether the State had authorised the wrong is irrelevant; the State is- bound
by the way the 2nd Respondent exercised the coercive powers vested in him.  
  
The European Commission on Human Rights in the 'Greek case' commented on- the
difficulties faced by litigants alleging that public officers had inflicted or
instigated acts of torture:  
  
"There are certain inherent difficulties in the proof of allegations of
torture or ill-treatment. First, a victim or witness able to corroborate his
story might hesitate to describe-or reveal all that has happened to him for
fear of reprisals. upon himself or his family. Secondly, acts of torture or
ill-treatment by agents of the Police or Armed Services would be carried out
as far as possible without witnesses and perhaps without the knowledge of
higher authority. Thirdly, where allegations, of torture or ill-treatment are
made, the. authority; whether the Police or Armed Services or the Ministers
concerned, must inevitably feel that they have a collective reputation to
defend, a feeling which would be all the stronger in those authorities that
had no. knowledge of the activities of the agents against whom the allegations
are made. I n consequence there may be reluctance of higher authority to admit
or allow inquiries to be made into facts which might show that the allegations
are. true. Lastly, traces of torture or.. ill I-treatment may with lapse of
time become unrecognizable, even by medical experts, particularly where the
form of torture itself leaves . . . . few external marks." \- Vide Journal of
Universal Human Rights, Vol. 1, No: 4, Oct-Dec. 1979 at p.42.

**439**

It is well to bear the above comment in mind in investigative allegations of
torture by the Police or Army.  
  
The case discloses a shocking and revolting episode in law enforcement. If-
fundamental rights assured by our Constitution are to be meaningful, trampling
underfoot the fundamental freedoms of subjects by law-enforcement officers
should not be tolerated'.  
  
In my view, the Petitioner has established that he was subjected by the 2nd
Respondent and the Army personnel to torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment in violation of Article 11 of the Constitution. The 2nd Respondent
by the misuse of his official powers has compromised the State and has made
the State liable for his grave misconduct.  
  
I allow the Petitioner's application. He is entitled to the declaration that
his freedom from torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment guaranteed
to him by Article 11 of the Constitution has been violated by the 2nd
Respondent and the Army personnel.  
  
In my view, it is just and equitable that the State should pay fair
compensation for the. distress, humiliation .and suffering undergone by the
Petitioner as a. result of the aforesaid contravention by its officer. I
direct the State to pay Rs.10,000/- as such compensation to the Petition. -I
also direct that the State take appropriate disciplinary action against the
2nd Respondent for his aforesaid misconduct:  
  
The Respondents shall pay the Petitioner the costs of this application.  
  
**RATWATTE, J.  
  
**I agree with the judgment and order of Sharvananda, J. and allow the
Petitioner's application with costs. ,  
  
**WANASUNDERA, J.  
**  
I am in agreement with my brother Ismail's statement of the facts and his
evaluation of the evidence in this case. It is my view too that even adopting
the standard of proof advocated by Mr. Pullenayagam, the petition must fail.
But, since a number of important legal questions have been argued at the
hearing, and

**440**

more particularly since my judgment in Thadchanamoorti v. Attomey-General(12)
has come in for some criticism, I think in fairness to counsel l should deal
with these submissions.  
  
There Js first Mr. Pullenayagam's submission regarding the nature of the
burden of proof that lies on him to establish his case.  
  
This question has assumed some importance because there is a sharp conflict in
the material the petitioner on the one hand and the respondents on the other
have placed before us. Probably conscious of certain infirmities in his case,
Mr. Pullenayagam emphasised that we should follow the standard of proof
usually adopted in civil cases, namely proof by a -preponderance of
probability. Accordingly, he. criticised a suggestion thrown in
Thadchanamoorti's case (12) where I said that we could profitably adopt, with.
suitable. modifications, the test formulated in the Irish case. There, the
European Court on Human Rights said.-  
  
"161\. To assess this evidence, the Court adopts the standard of proof 'beyond
reasonable doubt' but adds that such proof may follow from the co-existence of
sufficiently strong, clear and concordant inference or similar unrebutted
presumptions of fact."  
  
In coming to our own findings on the facts set out earlier, we have taken the
view that the petitioner must prove his allegations to the satisfaction of the
Court. We have, in this case, tried to steer clear of using a formula or
language that may lead to any misunderstanding. But, we make clear that he
test we have applied is the degree of proof used in civil cases which is not
so high as is " required in criminal cases.  
  
When we find from case law that the words "reasonable doubt" As an ambiguous
expression and could be used aptly not only with reference to a criminal case
but also in regard to a civil case, it is doubtful whether the European Court
intended to say anything different from what we have in mind. Although the
expression "beyond reasonable doubt" has a criminal flavour, it is possible to
use that expression in other contexts.  
  
The following passage from the judgment of Lord Denning in Baton v. Baten,
[19511 -Probate. 35, cited by Mr.' Pullenayagam is particularly interesting
for the manner in which he has handled: the formulae relating to the burden of
proof in civil' and criminal cases without allowing himself to be lost in the
verbiage.

**441**

"The difference of opinion which has been evoked about the standard of proof
in recent cases may well turn out to be more a matter of words than anything
else. It is of course true that by our law a higher standard of proof is
required in criminal cases than in civil cases. But this is subject to the
qualification that there in no absolute standard in either case. In criminal
cases the charge must be proved beyond reasonable doubt - but there may be
degrees of proof within that standard . . . .  
  
So also in civil cases, the case may be proved by a preponderance of
probability but there may be degrees of probability within that standard. The
degree depends on the subject- matter. A civil court when considering a charge
of fraud will naturally require for itself a higher degree of probability than
which it would require when asking if negligence is established. It does not
adopt so high a degree as a criminal court even when it is considering a
charge of criminal nature; but still it does require a degree of probability
which incommensurate with the occasions. Likewise a divorce court should
require a degree' of probability which is proportionate to the subject-matter
....... 'The only general rule that can be laid down upon the subject is that
the circumstances must be such as would lead the guarded discretion of a
reasonable and just man to conclusion.' The degree of probability which a
reasonable and just man would require to come to the conclusion - and,
likewise the degree of doubt which would prevent him coming to it - depends on
the conclusion to which he is required to come. It would depend on whether it
was a criminal case or a civil case, what the charge was and what the
consequences might be; and if he were left, in real and substantial doubt on
the particular matter, he would hold the charge not to be established: he
would not be satisfied about it.  
  
But what is a real and substantial doubt ? It is only another way of saying a
reasonable doubt; and a reasonable doubt is simply that degree of doubt which
would prevent a reasonable and just man from coming to the conclusion. So the
phrase 'reasonable doubt' takes the matter no further. It does not say that
the degree of probability must be high as 99 per cent or as low as 51 per
cent. The degree must depend on the mind of the reasonable and just man who is
considering the particular subject-matter. In some cases 51 per cent would be
enough but not in others. When this is realised the phrase-'reasonable doubt'
can be used just as aptly in a civil case or in a divorce case or in a
criminal case."

**442**

In a later House of Lords' case Blyth v. Blyth, 1966 (1) A. E. R. 5.24,(0)
Lord Denning quoted with approval the following statement from an Australian
case as correctly setting out the law:  
  
"While our decision is that the civil and not the criminal standard of
persuasion applies to matrimonial cases, including issues of adultery, the
difference in effect is not as great as is sometimes represented. This is
because . . . . . the nature and gravity of an issue necessarily determines
the manner of attaining reasonable satisfaction of the truth of the issue and
because the presumption of innocence is to be taken into account."  
  
11r. Pullenayegam submitted that the proper: test should be gathered from the
definition of the word "proved" as contained in section 3 of the Evidence
Ordinance. The definition is as follows:  
  
"A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters before it the
court either believes it to exist or considers its existence so probable that
a prudent man ought under the circumstances of the particular case to act upon
the supposition that it exists."  
  
I do not think that those words are any different from the language quoted by
Lord Denning from Lord Stowell's judgment in Loveden v. Loveden, (1810) 2
Hagg. Con.1.3(18) when he said, "The only genera! rule that can be laid down
upon the subject is that the circumstances must be such as would lead the
guarded discretion of a reasonable and just man to the conclusion." ' In
coming to our conclusions we have taken into consideration both Mr.
Pullenayagam's submission that this Court must not in any way lay an undue
burden on .a petitioner complaining of an infringement of a human right if we
are to safeguard those rights and the counter submission by the respondents
that the liability that has been imposed is one against the State and since
the allegation is a serious one of torture and inhuman treatment by the
executive and administrative authorities of the State, a high degree of
probability which is proportionate to the subject-matter is necessary. These
rights which are alleged to have been infringed appear also to reflect certain
obligations that the Government had recognised under the U.N. Declaration of
Human Rights.  
  
I turn next to a consideration of the main submissions made by counsel
relating to the nature and extent of the liability of the State for an
infringement of the provisions of Article 11 of the Constitution.

**443**

Mr. Pullenayagam cited a number of local and foreign cases and his submission
in brief was that when a public officer acts in the name of the State and is
clothed with the authority of the State, his act must be considered as action
of the State for which the state is liable.  
  
He relied on certain dicta in my brother Sharvananda's judgment in the first
application to this Court against the University Grants Commission (S.C. 57 of
1980)(19) and in particular on Thornhill v Attorney-General, 1980(2) W.L.R.
510,(2) and Maharaja v. Attorney-General, [ 19791 A. C. 385. (1)  
  
Both the Deputy Solicitor-General G. P. S. de Silva and Mr. Choksy sought to
distinguish these cases. They suggested an interpretation of Article 11 of our
Constitution, which is much more restrictive and narrower than that outlined
by Mr. Pullenayagam.  
  
Of the two important cases relied on by Mr. Pullenayagam, the first is
Maharaja v. Attorney-General of Trinidad, [19781 (2) A :E. R. 6700) a decision
of the Privy Council. I n this case the appellant, a member of the Bar of
Trinidad and Tobago was imprisoned for contempt of Court. In charging the
appellant with contempt, the Judge had not made plain to him the particulars
of the specific nature of the contempt. 1n his appeal, the appellant alleged
that the judge had inadvertently failed to observe a fundamental rule of
natural justice and that this constituted a deprivation of liberty otherwise
than by due process of law guaranteed as a human right and fundamental freedom
by Chapter I of the Constitution of Trinidad and Tobago, 1962.  
  
The Constitution of Trinidad and Tobago contained, inter alia, provisions
setting out certain human rights and fundamental freedoms and the machinery
for granting redress for their infringement. The most: important of these
provisions for the purpose of our case are the following:-

**444**

**" CHAPTER 1**

1\. It is hereby recognised and declared that in Trinidad and Tobago there
have existed and shall continue to exist without discrimination by reason of
race, origin, colour, religion or, sex, the following human rights and
fundamental freedoms, namely -  
  
(a) the right of the individual to life liberty, security of the person and
enjoyment of property,' and the right not to be deprived thereof except by die
process of law;  
  
2\. Subject to the provisions of sections 3, 4 and 5 of this Constitution no
law shall abrogate, abridge or infringe or authorise the abrogation,
abridgment or infringement of any of the rights and freedoms therein before
recognised and declared and in particular no Act of Parliament shall -  
  
(a) authorise or effect the arbitrary detention, imprisonment or exile of any
person ........ ........  
  
(b) impose or authorise the imposition of cruel and unusual, treatment or
punishment...............  
  
(c) deprive a person who has been arrested or detained ........ (ii) of the
right to retain and instruct without delay a legal adviser of his own choice
and' to hold communication with him.  
  
(e) deprive a person of the right to a fair hearing in accordance with the
principles of fundamental justice for the determination of his rights and
obligations..  
  
(h) deprive a person of the right to such procedural provisions as are
necessary for the purpose of giving effect and protection to the aforesaid
rights and freedoms.  
  
3\. Sections 1 and 2 of this Constitution shall not apply in relation to any
law that is in force in Trinidad and Tobago at the commencement of this
Constitution:

**445**

6.11 For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that if any person
alleges that any of the provisions of the foregoing section or sections of
this Constitution has been, is being or is likely to be contravened in
relation to him, then without prejudice to any other action with respect. to
the same matter which is lawfully available, that person may apply to the
Higher Court for redress."  
  
In interpreting these provisions, their Lordships of the Privy Council said:  
  
"Read in the light of the recognition that each of the highly diversified
rights and freedoms of the individual described is s.1 already existed, it is
in their Lordships view clear that the protection afforded was against
contravention of those rights or freedoms by the State or by some other public
authority endowed by law with coercive powers. The chapter is concerned with
public law, not private law. One man's freedom is another man's restriction;
and as regards infringement by one private individual of the rights of another
private individual s. 1 implicitly acknowledges that the existing law of torts
provided, a sufficient accommodation between their conflicting rights and
freedoms to satisfy the requirements of the new Constitution as respects those
rights and freedoms that are specifically referred to."  
  
Thereafter their Lordships held that :  
  
"the order of Maharaj, J., committing the appellant to prison was made by him
in the exercise of the judicial power of the State, the arrest and detention
of the appellant pursuant to the Judge's order was effected by the executive
arm of the State. So if his detention amounted to a contravention of his
rights under s. 1(a) it was a contravention by the State against which he was
entitled to protection."  
  
In considering the question of the contravention of section 1, it was
necessary to find out whether the law in force before the Constitution came
into effect had required that the Judge must specify sufficiently the nature
of the contempt charged before a person charged with contempt could be
convicted. This was because this section proceeds on the basis that
fundamental rights which it covers are already secured to the people of that
country by existing law. Such a requirement was found to exist in the common
law, and their Lordships said that it would have been sufficient even if such
a right had been enjoyed de facto, as the constitutional provisions had
dignified those rights to the level of a constitutional right under the
constitutional provisions.

**446**

Before granting relief to the appellant, their Lordships went on to deal with
a formal objection raised by the State. The Attorney General argued that
relief should not be granted to the petitioner because it was a long
established rule of public policy that a judge cannot be made personally
liable in law for anything done by him i n the exercise or purported exercise
of his judicial functions. It is mainly on this point that Lord Hailsham
dissented from the majority view. The majority in overruling this objection
said:  
  
"In the first place' no human right or fundamental. freedom recognised by
Chapter I of the Constitution is contravened by a judgment or .order that is
wrong and liable to be set aside on appeal for an error of fact or substantive
law; even where the error has resulted in a person serving a sentence of
imprisonment. The remedy for errors of these kinds is to appeal to a higher
court. When there is no higher court to appeal to then none can say that there
was error. The fundamental human right is not to a legal system that is
infallible but to one that is fair. It is only errors in procedure that are
capable of constituting infringements of the rights protected by s. 1(a) and
no mere irregularity in practice is enough, even though it goes to
jurisdiction, the error must amount to a failure to observe one of the
fundamental rules of natural justice. Their Lordships do not believe that this
can be anything but a very rare event."  
  
Straightaway it should be mentioned that Mr. Choksy sought to distinguish'
this case and the other case coming from this same jurisdiction, to which I
will presently refer, on the ground that they are based on a wider application
of those rights than under our constitutional provisions. It would be
convenient if I now turn to Mr. Choksy's submissions.  
  
Mr. Choksy first referred to Article 4 of our Constitution and drew our
attention to the use of the terms "executive" in contradistinction to the
terms "legislature" and "judicial" in these provisions. He submitted that the
words "by executive or administrative action" contained in Article .126 must
necessarily be limited to the acts of only one of the traditional triumvirate
of State organs, namely, the legislative, the executive, and the judiciary.  
  
He next referred to Chapter V11 titled "The Executive" which deals with- the
President of the Republic, Chapter V111, also titled "The Executive.", dealing
with the Cabinet of' Ministers, and to Chapter 1X again titled "The
Executive", dealing with the Public Service. Similarly it would be found that
Chapters X;, XI and X11 are headed "The Legislature". and Chapters XV and XV1

**447**

deal with the judiciary and the Courts. It was Mr. Choksy's submission that we
have in the above provisions a definition of the term "Executive "and unlike
in the cases from the West Indies cited by Mr. Pullenayegam, our jurisdiction
in respect of violations of fundamental rights is confined to such
"infringement by executive or administrative action" and does not have the
width and range of the jurisdiction obtaining in the West Indies where
violations "by the State or other public authority" is made justiciable. In .
fact in Thornhill v. Attorney-Genera! (supra), which followed the Maharaja
case (supra), the Privy Council explained what is meant by public authority
and said that it must be understood as embracing local as well as central
authorities and include any individual officer who exercises executive
functions of a public nature.  
  
Although there is a great deal 'of force in Mr. Choksy's submission on this
point, it is possible for us. to dispose of this case on a narrower basis
without a discussion of the matter at the level of the fundamental
constitutional structure of the two countries. Mr. G. P. S. de Silva has
sought to distinguish this case on a much narrower basis, namely that in
Maharaja's case we have an instance of an inadvertent omission on the part of
the judge to comply with a fundamental right, whereas the allegations in the
instant case is in respect of certain positive and illegal acts quite outside
'the. ambit of the officer's normal functions or such functions as are
incidental thereto. Thornhill's case is in some respects closer to the present
case, in that it concerns certain wrongful acts or omissions on the part of
the police which took place in the course of an investigation and was done in
furtherance of such investigation. Thornhill's case, therefore, may have
greater relevance to the present case than Maharaja's case:  
  
It may however be mentioned that even in the Maharaja's case there was some
reluctance and hesitation on the part of the Privy Council. to make the acts
of the judiciary justiciable under these provisions. It would appear that some
pains have been taken in an effort to shift liability as much as possible away
from the judicial sphere and bring the impugned act, if not within the
executive sphere, at least as close as possible to it. It was stated that;'
though redress was claimed from the State for a violation of the fundamental
rights by the judicial arm of the State for making an order of commitment to
prison, the arrest and detention of the appellant however was effected by the
executive arm of the State.  
  
I shall now deal with Thornhill's case. The appellant in this case was
arrested and taken to a police station. in consequence of a shoot-out with the
Police. As guaranteed in section 2 c (ii) of the

**448**

Constitution. The appellant made several requests to be given the opportunity
of communicating with his lawyer. The police did not accede to his request.
The appellant was suspected by the police of committing other crimes about
which they wished to interrogate him. It would appear that there was nothing
in connection with the investigation that would have. made it inconvenient for
him to be allowed to consult his lawyers. The only reason why he was not
allowed to do so was because the police officers interrogating him were of the
view that if the appellant were to obtain a lawyer's advice as regards his
legal rights, he may decline to answer some of the questions that would have
tended to incriminate him and the police would have been less. likely to
obtain from him a confession as regards the commission of earlier offences.  
  
The reasoning in. this case is somewhat complex and involved and turns on the
interpretation of sections 1, 2 and 3 of that Constitution. Although the right
claimed by the appellant is contained in section 2 (c) (ii), it was contended
for the respondents, which included the Attorney-General, that the effect of
section 3 of the Constitution was to reduce the ambit of sections 1 and 2 and
limit them to. rights that had obtained and which could have been enforced by
a person under a written law or in terms of the common law prior to the coming
into operation of this Constitution. The respondents submitted that the
petitioner had no such enforceable right at the relevant point of time.  
  
The Privy Council however held that section 2 only spells out expressly and in
greater detail what is described in more general terms in section 1 and
section 2' c (ii) and has adequately secured the rights of the appellant to
have access to a lawyer. So interpreted, it was unnecessary to embark on a
consideration as to whether or not such a right subsisted under the law at the
commencement of the Constitution. Their Lordships however proceeded to
interpret section 1 and said that they caught up, only de jure rights, but
included de facto rights enjoyed by a person as a result of settled executive
policy or the manner in which administrative or judicial discretion had been
exercised They said that the right to consult a lawyer had in fact been a
matter of settled practice.  
  
Having given a ruling on the legal provisions, their Lordships proceeded to
consider the question of the liability of the State for the acts of the police
officers. It would appear from the judgment that there had been some
discussion about the precise relationship of a police officer to the executive
particularly because there had been previous authority for the proposition
that persons  who have' been responsible for appointing a constable were not

**449**

held to be vicariously responsible for his tortious acts done by him in.
purported exercise of his common law powers of arrest. Dealing with this
aspect of the matter, their Lordships said -  
  
'.'It is beyond question, however, that a police officer in carrying out his
duties in relation to the, maintenance of order; the detection and
apprehension of offenders and the bringing of them before a judicial authority
is acting as a public officer carrying out an essential executive function of
any sovereign state - the maintenance of law and order or to use the
expression originally. used in English "preserving the King's peace." It is
also beyond question that in performing those functions police officers are
endowed with coercive powers by the common law eve; apart from statute.
Contraventions by the police of any of the rights or fundamental freedoms of
the individual that' are recognised by Chapter I of the Constitution thus fall
squarely within what has been held by the Judicial Committee in Maharaja v.
Attorney-Genera/ of Trinidad and Tobago, No. (2) 1979 A.C. 385-396(1) to be
the ambit of the protection endowed by section 6 viz. contraventions 'by the
state' or by some other public authority endowed by law with coercive powers.'
In this context public authority must be understood as embracing local as well
as central authorities and including any individual officer who exercises
executive functions of a public nature. Indeed the very nature of the
executive functions which it is the duty of police officers to perform is
likely in practice to involve the commonest rule of contravention of an
individual's rights under section 1 (a) and (b) through over-zealousness in
carrying out those duties."  
  
Mr. Pullenayagam relied heavily on the above passage for the submission that
acts or omissions on the part of a police officer done under colour of office
or in the purported exercise of his powers would involve the state in
liability. Nevertheless he made a significant concession, namely that there
could be acts which can be regarded as an individual or personal act not
entailing liability on the State. As an example he gave the case of a police
officer arresting a woman, then taking her to the police station and raping
her. This concession however is prima facie inconsistent with the width of his
main submission,' but unfortunately Mr. Pullenayagam made little effort to
reconcile these two positions.  
  
It may be mentioned, that it is precisely in this area that one has to search
for an answer in the present case. This is particularly so because the
statement of law contained in the foregoing passage

**450**

in Thornhill's case as Mr. G. P. S. de Silva argued, need not be given the
wider meaning contended for by Mr. Pullenayagam and by no means :provides a
ready-made answer. Mr. de Silva submitted that this statement was an obiter
dictum and it was not permissible to give a wider` construction to the words
than was warranted by. the facts.  
  
It would be convenient if, at this stage, I return to the second aspect of Mr.
Choksy's argument where he had sought to demarcate the liabilty of the State
for the acts of its officers and thereafter deal with Mr. de Silva's
submissions.  
  
Proceeding from his submission that under our Constitution it is . the illegal
acts of the executive organ alone that could be the subject-matter of
proceedings under Article 126, Mr. Choksy contended further that the act of a
public officer, even in the executive. sphere, would not attract the liability
of the State unless such act can be said to constitute the act of the
executive. He explained this to mean that an act to qualify for such liability
must signify the' will of the collective body called the Executive. In this
connection he drew our attention to the provisions of the Constitution which
provides for the collective responsibility of the Cabinet and stated that
likewise an act of an executive officer from the highest level to the most
subordinate must represent and be in accordance with the collective will of
the government, if it is to ` be regarded as constituting executive action. He
was however prepared to concede that an unlawful act occurring as part of a
settled administrative practice could legitimately be included in the category
of executive acts:  
  
The effect of this argument is to further restrict the ambit of Article 1.26.
If only such acts as representing the will of the State or done in consequence
of a settled administrative practice can alone be admitted as falling within
the ambit of Article 126, then the bulk of unlawful and illegal acts committed
by executive and administrative officers-would be left without redress. Such
an interpretation would even exclude unlawful acts committed through over-
zealousness in carrying out duties which the Privy Council said involves the
commonest risk of the contravention of an individual's right, and for which
the State should be held liable. l agree with Mr. Pullenayagam when he said
that such a construction would. empty these provisions of nearly all content
and make these safeguards ineffective and void.

**451**

For the purpose of his argument Mr. Choksy laid undue emphasis on the word
"executive" to the exclusion of the connected ward "administrative" in Article
1.26. Article 126 uses the expression "executive or administrative action."
When my brother Sharvananda drew his attention to this, he said that the two
words were synonymous: and interchangeable and meant the same thing, namely
the concept of the executive. Such a view was apparently necessary for the
purpose of his argument. I n my view the terminology in, Article 126 has been
chosen with some care and the juxtaposition of these two terms conveys certain
nuances of meaning suggesting that the liability of the State extends to the
unlawful acts of a wider class of public officers, namely, subordinate
officers at peripheral level who in nowise constitute the decision making core
of the administration. I would adopt Mr. Pullenayagam's description of
executive officers as those whose hands are on the levers of power. All those
not failing within, this category are designated administrative officers. I
find Mr. Choksy's interpretation of Article 126 far too restrictive with the
result that. if accepted it would whittle down considerably the protection -
of fundamental rights guaranteed and protected by the Constitution. Further
reasons for my taking a different view will become evident from this
judgment.'  
  
I next turn to the submissions made, by Mr. G. P. S. de Silva. The
interpretation he placed on the relevant' provisions was less restrictive than
Mr. Choksy's interpretation. and he conceded that. Article 126 would catch up
unlawful acts of an executive or administrative officer provided they are
performed in the course of  his duties and under colour of authority. At the
time these events took place, a state of emergency had not been proclaimed and
the army was merely :assisting the police. Mr. de Silva submitted that .the
army personnel had no more authority than any civilian. He stated that when
the 2nd respondent handed the petitioner to the army personnel and left
saying, "Take him and do as you like," the 2nd respondent had actually
relinquished all control he had over the petitioner and was literally to use
counsel's words, "throwing him to the wolves."  
  
It is strange that the State has chosen to put the entire weight of its
argument on a statement alleged to have been made by the 2nd respondent -. but
denied by him- and which interpreted in the manner suggested by the petitioner
is certainly indefensible. Fortunately, I think, this argument is not entitled
to prevail either on . the facts or in principle. Mr. Silva also sought it
support for his argument from certain dicta in the judgments cited by Mr.
Pullenayagam, which I do not again think are very much in his favour.

**452**

In Thornhill's case, the infringement was by way of omission and it related to
a positive requirement expressed as a fundamental right, namely the duty of
the Police to allow the appellant to consult a legal adviser. In Maharaja's
case too; the infringement complained of was of an omission, namely the
failure of the judge to. comply with a legal requirement to specify the nature
of the contempt that was alleged.  
  
Firstly, it could validly be said that the facts in the instant case are
different in kind rather than degree from the facts in those cases. For the
purpose of this discussion I shall confine myself to the alleged assault by
the army personnel on the assumption that the burden of proof lying on the
petitioner in that respect has been discharged. Even this assumption will be
shown later to be unjustified. The allegation against the 2nd respondent has
been ruled out and those facts are not relevant here. Here we have an instance
of an act of commission - the performance of a positive act which is both
ultra vices and illegal in nature. To that extent it could be said that the
cases cited by Mr. pullenayagam are not of real assistance in this matter. Mr.
de Silva's argument, if l understood him right, included a further distinction
that in those decisions the unlawful acts or omissions took place in
furtherance of the matter or proceedings which those officers were lawfully
authorised to do, or in the context of powers that could be implied -or
incidental thereto. Here, there was the total absence of any authority and it
is. a case of a wanton assault. He invoked in support the concession made by
Mr. Pullenayagam contained in the example of a woman being ravished by the
police officers and wanted to know how that example differed from the present
case.  
  
Although some of the distinctions made by Mr. de Silva in respect of these
cases have -a certain, validity and the dicta relied on by him could be
pressed to serve his arguments, I do not think his analysis o¬ the problem any
more than Mr. Pullenayagam's has dealt satisfactorily with the. underlying
principles governing State liability for unlawful acts performed by these
executive. and administrative officers:  
  
The learned Deputy Solicitor-General sought to advance his argument further by
-relying on certain decisions relating to vicarious liability of a master for
the acts of his servant in the sphere of the law of tort. I am in agreement
with Mr. Pullenayagam that the test of liability formulated in those cases is
not an appropriate or safe test for application in the present case. We are
here dealing with the liability of the State under public law, which is a new
liability imposed directly on -the State by the constitutional provisions.

**453**

While the decisions relating to the vicarious liability of a master for the
acts of his servant may be useful to the extent that all cases where a master.
can be held liable in tort would undoubtedly fall also within the liability of
the State under, the constitutional provisions, the converse need not be true
unless we are to give a restricted interpretation to the constitutional
provisions. The common law test of tortious liability therefore cannot provide
a sufficient test and we have to look elsewhere for the appropriate
principles:  
  
In this regard I should like to mention that an indication of. what those
principles are has to some extent been foreshadowed in Thadchanamoorti's case
(supra), although in that case the court merely quoted certain excerpts from
foreign authorities but did not think it was necessary, in the circumstances
of that case, to enunciate those principles in any detail. When I expressed
those views I was generally having in mind a situation like the present case.
The excerpts are taken from the decision of the European Court of Human Rights
in the Irish case and certain observations about that case that appear in
Harris's "Cases and Materials on International Law," Mr. Pullenayagam alleges
that in Thadchanamoorti's case (supra) this Court had misunderstood the effect
of the ruling in the Irish case. The reference to an "administrative practice"
in that material, he states, is with reference to the plea of the need for the
exhaustion of domestic remedies required by Article 26 of the Convention and
has no relevance whatsoever to the present context. I shall examine that
contention later in this judgment.  
  
Article 11 which gives protection from torture and ill-treatment has a number
of features which distinguish it from the other fundamental rights. Its
singularity lies in the fact that it is the only fundamental right that is
entrenched in the Constitution in the sense that an amendment of this clause
would need not only a two-thirds majority but also a Referendum. It is also
the only right in the catalogue of rights set out in Chapter III that is of
equal application to everybody and which is no way can. be restricted or
diminished. Whatever one may say' of the other rights, this right undoubtedly
occupies a preferred position.  
  
Having regard to its importance, its effect and consequences to society, it
should rightly be singled out for special treatment. It is therefore the duty,
of this Court to give it full play and see that its provisions enjoy the.
maximum application.

**454**

Brandeis J. in Iowa - Des Moines National Bank v. Bennett, (1931) 284 US
3239(8) . dealing with the liability of the State for acts of public officer
said -  
  
"The prohibition of the 14th Amendment, it is true has reference exclusively
to action by, the State as distinguished from action by private individuals.
But acts done by virtue of a public position under a State Government and in
the name and for the State ................ are not to be treated as if they
were the acts of private individuals, although in doing them the official
acted contrary to an express command of State Law. Where a State official,
acting under colour of State authority invades in the course of his duties a
private right secured by the federal Constitution, that right is violated,
even if the State officer not only exceeded his authority, but disregarded
special commands of the State Law"  
  
Whatever be the application of this statement to the other fundamental rights,
in our country, in my view, Article 11 will be rendered ineffective unless we
interpret it on more or less the lines set above. But I think the guarantee
contained in Article 11 is capable of further refinement.  
  
Earlier in this judgment, when dealing with Mr. Choksy's submissions, I
favoured the view that in the relevant provisions, a distinction has been
drawn between high State officers and subordinate personnel. Such high State
officers constitute the Executive, but subordinate officers act for and on
behalf `of the State. Article 126 lends itself to this interpretation though I
find rightly or wrongly text writers and tribunals have thought on somewhat
the same lines when dealing with the liability of a State for the acts of its
officials in international law.  
  
I am inclined to the view that the State should be held strictly liable for
any acts of its high State officials. I should think, in the present case, if
the allegations against the 2nd respondent had been proved, this would have
constituted an act of the State itself and entailed the liability of the State
for such acts.  
  
The liability in respect of subordinate officers should apply to all acts done
under colour of office, i.e., within the scope of their authority, express or
implied, and should also extend to such other acts that may be ultra vires and
even in disregard of a prohibition or special directions., provided that they
are done in the furtherance or supposed furtherance of their authority or'
done at least with the intention of benefiting the State.

**455**

The above principles appear to be generally supported by the case. law and Mr.
de Silva, I think, was prepared to admit liability to this extent or almost to
this extent. The illustration  
  
Mr. Pullenayagam, gave on his own admission falls, outside these limits. As I
stated earlier, Mr. de Silva's position is that the instant case is
practically. identical with the exception indicated by Mr. Pullenayagam.  
  
My own view is that the liability indicated in the cases cited by counsel need
not be the last word on the subject. Justice and common- sense demands a
further elaboration of these principles of State liability to dispose of cases
like the present one. Mr. Pullenayegum, I am sure, would not have fought this
case with so much tenacity if he had not felt a sense of injustice about the
whole affair. It is the marginal character of cases such as this assuming that
the assault by the army personnel took place as alleged -that make them so
disturbing. If going by the case law, we were to draw the dine here so as to
exclude liability in those situations, I am not at all sure that we would have
done all we can to discharge the trust placed in us to safeguard these rights.  
  
International tribunals and jurists do not appear to agree on the .precise
principles that should govern State liability in situations such as this. It
is in this context that I found myself thinking of the concept of
"administrative practice" referred to earlier, which has come in handy in
analogous situations. The application of such a . concept could help to extend
State liability to cases like this and the one given by Mr. Pullenayagam so
that they too can be brought within State responsibility it the material
before the Court can show that the occurrence of the acts complained of can be
attributed to the existence of a general situation created or brought about by
the negligence and indifference of those in authority.  
  
In the lrish case (Ireland v. U. K., Jan. 18, 1978) !131 the Irish Government
complained to the European Human Rights Commission against the U.K.
Government's policy of internment, investigation and detention in Northern
Ireland. The Royal Ulster Constabulary (R.U.C.) Special Branch had established
a number of interrogation centres throughout the province and applied various
methods of interrogation in order to secure confessions and information about
the outlawed I.R.A. One of the allegations made against the U.K. Government
was that some of the persons arrested had been subjected to interrogation in
depth involving the use of five techniques, namely, wall standing, hooding,
subjection to noise, deprivation of sleep, and deprivation of food. These

**456**

 devices were used to. deprive prisoners of the normal exercise of their
senses to facilitate the obtaining of confessions. At the Palace Barracks
Centre, the R.U.C. forced prisoners to stand spreadeagled against a wall and
severely beat them up. At other centres various punishments were inflicted on
the prisoners. The Irish Government alleged that these. acts constituted an
"administrative practice" in violation of Article 3 of the European Convention
on Human Rights:  
  
It may be of interest to know that although the U.K. Government admitted from
the start that the use of the five techniques. was authorised at "high level",
such authority was "never committed to writing or authorised in any official
document, the techniques had been orally taught to members of the R.U.C. by
the English Intelligence Centre at a Seminar". It was therefore apparent that
the Irish Government came before the Commission claiming a violation based on
an "administrative practice", and not on the basis of known and specific
directions given by the U.K. Government authorising such wrongful acts. Apart
from the complaint of the Irish Government, there were also individual
complaints made on the same basis, namely, the violation of Article 3 by means
of an "administrative practice". These individual complaints were consolidated
and dealt with under the name: Donnally and others v. United Kingdom. It
should be noted that the accusation of the infringement of Article 3 was
founded solely on the basis of an administrative practice. The following
paragraph from the judgment makes this clear.  
  
"158\. Following the order of 11th February 1977 (see Paragraph 8 above) the
Irish Government indicated at the hearing in April 1977, that they Were asking
the court to hold that there had been in N. Ireland from 1971 to 1974 a
practice or practices in breach of Article 3 and to specify if need be where
they had occurred."  
  
The finding's of both the Commission and the Court also puts the matter beyond
any argument. I n paragraph 147 the Court reproduces the conclusions of the
Commission, I n sub-paragraphs iv and vi, the Commission holds -  
  
"iv. Unanimously that the combined use of the five techniques in the case
before it constituted a practice of inhuman treatment and of torture in breach
of Art. 3\.  
  
vi: Unanimously that there had been at Palace Barracks, Holywood in the autumn
of '1971 a practice in connection

**457**

with the interrogation of persons by members of the R. U. C. which was inhuman
treatment in breach of Art. 3 of the Convention."  
The Court's own conclusions regarding the violation of Article 3 are as
follows:  
  
"3\. holds by sixteen votes to one that the use of the fire techniques in Aug.
and Oct. 1971 constituted a practice of inhuman and degrading treatment which
practice was in breach of Art. 3.  
  
6\. holds unanimously that there existed at Palace Barracks in the Autumn of
1971 a practice of inhuman treatment, which practice was in breach of Art. 3."  
  
The confusion in Mr. Pullenayagam's mind has apparently arisen because the
question of an administrative practice can also have particular relevance in
another connection. The Court said:  
  
"The concept of practice is of particular importance for the operation of the
rule of exhaustion of domestic remedies."  
  
Article 26 provides that before a complaint can be entertained under the
Convention, a party must exhaust all domestic remedies. I n the Irish case
apparently that had not been done. So, when that plea was taken in that case,
it was countered by the complainant Government that if a Government
countenances an administrative practice that is a violation of the Convention,
domestic remedies in that country are likely to be non-existent or ineffective
and accordingly a plea under Article 26 should be ruled out. The allegation of
the existence of an "administrative practice" was thus relied on by the Irish
Government not in subsidiary manner by way of defence - though it came in
useful also as a defence \- but it constituted the main thrust of the
complainant Government's case. A practice, the Court said, does not itself
constitute a violation separate from the act complained of, meaning that in
certain circumstances where there is the need to rely on the existence of an
"administrative practice", the specific act complained of becomes a violation
only when it is viewed against the background of-such practice. This ought to
be sufficient to dispel any misunderstanding that Mr. Pullenayagam may have
that Thadchanamoorti's case has substituted the test of "administrative
practice" as against the test of executive or administrative action" required
by Article 126 of our Constitution.

**458**

The concept of "administrative practice" therefore appears to carry with it
certain features that give it wide-ranging application in a number of
different situations. In the Greek case, a complaint was made in 1967. by the
three Scandinavian countries, Denmark, Norway and Sweden against Greece, after
army officers in Greece had seized power by a coup detect. One of the charges
was that of torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners.  
  
The Commission, after carefully reviewing all evidence, concluded that torture
had been inflicted in a number of cases and that there was a strong indication
that the acts of torture or ill-treatment were not isolated or exceptional,
nor limited to one place. It was of the view that there was a practice or
torture and illtreatment by the Athens Security Police of persons arrested for
political reasons, that the Greek authorities, confronted with numerous and
substantial complaints and allegations of torture and ill-treatment, had
failed to take any effective steps to investigate them or remedy the
situation.  
  
In the course of its order, the Commission gave a ruling on the impact of an
"administrative practice" in relation to a plea of the exhaustion of domestic
remedies. The Commission said:  
  
"25\. Where, however, there is a practice of non-observance of certain
convention provisions, the remedies prescribed will of necessity be side-
stepped or rendered inadequate. Thus if there was an administrative practice
of torture or ill-treatment, judicial remedies prescribed would tend to be
rendered ineffective by the difficulty of securing probative evidence and
administrative enquiries would either be non-instituted or if they were would
be likely to be half-hearted and incomplete ............  
  
The Commission then went on to give a definition of the expression
"administrative practice" which can by no means be limited in application only
to a case where plea under Article 26 is taken. The Commission said:  
  
"28 ..... two elements are necessary to the existence of an administrative
practice of torture or ill-treatment; repetition of acts and official.
tolerance. By repetition of acts is meant a substantial number of acts of
torture or ill-treatment which are the expression of a general situation. The
pattern of such acts may be either on the one hand, that they occurred in the
same place; that they were attributable to the agents of the same police or
military authority or that the victims belonged to

**459**

the same political category; or on the other hand, that they occurred in
several places or at the hands of distinct authorities or were inflicted on
persons of varying political affiliations.  
  
29\. By official tolerance is meant that though acts of torture or ill-
treatment are plainly illegal, they are tolerated in the sense that the
superiors of those immediately responsible though cognisant of such acts takes
no action to punish them or prevent their repetition; or that the higher
authority, in the face of numerous allegations manifest indifference by
refusing any adequate investigation of their truth or falsity or that in
judicial proceedings, a fair hearing of such complaints is denied."  
In the Irish case (13) these principles have been further elucidated when the
court observed -  
  
"159 A practice incompatible with the Convention consists of an accumulation
of identical or analogous breaches which are sufficiently numerous and inter-
connected to amount not merely to isolated incidents or exceptions but to a
pattern or system....... a practice does not of itself constitute a violation
separate from such breaches. It is inconceivable that the higher authorities
of a State should be, or at least should be entitled to be, unaware of the
existence of such a practice. Furthermore under the Convention those
authorities are strictly liable for the conduct of their subordinates, they
are under a duty to impose their will on subordinates and cannot shelter
behind their inability to ensure that it is respected."  
  
Mr. Pullenayagam's submission, as I stated earlier, is wide enough to take in
an alternate ground irrespective of the charge against the 2nd respondent,
that in any event the evidence was adequate to establish the probability of
the petitioner coming by his injuries at the hands of the army personnel. He
has argued backwards from the medical reports and sought to link the injuries
with the events of the 9th August. The reports show that he had ten injuries,
nine of them contusions and abrasions and one a fracture of neck of left side
of mandible, said to be grievous. The petitioner is also said to have a heart
complaint (mitral incompetence) which has nothing to do with the alleged ill-
treatment. Incidentally, the inflictment of these injuries would not
constitute torture if we are to go by the definition given to that term in the
Irish case. The injuries were found on, the petitioner on the 11th August and
since the petitioner had been exposed to a situation on the 9th night when he
was in the custody 'of army personnel

**460**

who he alleges assaulted him, Mr. Pullenayagam submits that we should hold
that the charges against the army personnel have been established irrespective
of whether or not the charge of incitement against the 2nd respondent is
proved.  
  
I have set out above as to what the burden of proof should be in a case of
this nature and how it should be applied. In all the circumstances of this
case, I am unable to say that the petitioner has proved those matters to my
satisfaction. The conduct and behavior of the petitioner leaves a serious
doubt in my mind as to whether or not the incidents spoken of by him happened
in the manner narrated by the petitioner. In fact, Mr. Choksy stated that the
material before the Court shows that the petitioner left the custody of the
authorities on the night of the 9th August as a free man without any injuries
on him or without his drawing the attention of the Magistrate to any injuries
on him and, therefore, there is no burden on the authorities to discharge as
to how the petitioner came by the injuries set out in the medical reports.  
  
Even if we were to assume that this allegation has been proved adopting the
lowest degree of probability in the range permitted by the rule of a balance
of probability, I still entertain a doubt as to whether the liability of the
State for these alleged acts could be established as a matter of law.  
  
In the instant case if liability is to be imputed to the State, it must be on
the basis of an administrative practice and not on the basis of an
authorisation, direct or implied, or that these acts were done for the benefit
of the State. If we rule out the allegations against the 2nd respondent, we
have here the case of the petitioner being roughly handled by some army
personnel while the petitioner was being transported to Kalmunai town from the
spot where he was taken into custody. This involved a drive of about half an
hour or a little more. This assaulting is alleged to have occurred on the high
road, in public apparently under the cover of darkness. It may be noted that
the instructions and the responsibility of the army to which he was
temporarily handed over was only to transport him and hand him over to the
police at the other end. The learned Deputy Solicitor-General has informed us
that at this time no emergency had been proclaimed and the army authorities
had no more powers over the petitioner than any civilian. This does not appear
to be identical with the case of an assault or ill-treatment by, say the
police, who having arrested a person, ill-treats him in the confines of the
police station and in the privacy of a secluded cell in the course of and for
the purpose of an investigation.

**461**

The incident has also to be viewed in the context of the extraordinary
conditions prevailing in the locality. It is apparent that the base passions
of many persons in that area had been excited by communal passions. There was
tension in the air. Mr. Pullenayagam suggested. that the army. personnel were
all Sinhala persons, but there is no definite evidence of it. That a few
persons belonging to other races could have been among the. personnel cannot
be ruled out. As far as the police personnel were concerned, we find them not
confined entirely to one race or community. The petitioner himself. says that
on one occasion some of the other soldiers cautioned those who were assaulting
him. The insinuation being that they cautioned his tormentors against their
leaving telltale marks of violence on the petitioner's body. The petitioner
has also said that at another point, on the journey, some soldiers intervened
and prevented the petitioner from being shot by the others. All in all the
acts complained of, if they had taken place as alleged, seem to be in the.
nature of individual and personal acts due to some aberration or idiosyncracy.
They are also suggestive of the venting of some grievance of a personal or
private nature or in consequence of some strong passion, prejudice or malice.
They are admittedly illegal and criminal acts and not merely, acts that are
unauthorised and ultra vires. It is also not possible to characterise those
acts as being incidental to the authority and powers vested in those persons
nor have they been performed to further some objective of the State.  
  
This does not of course mean that an individual can be exposed and abandoned
to the mercies of the army or police personnel and left without redress. A
high standard of discipline is expected of the armed services and "the police:
Complaints made against such personnel must be promptly and fairly
investigated. Disciplinary action should be taken where necessary and suitable
compensation, by way of an ex gratia payment paid to innocent persons who may
have suffered at their hands.  
  
In the Irish case the Court has adverted to some of the measures taken by the
U.K. Government which were designed to prevent ill-treatment and to grant
redress in such instances. These provisions can provide a useful guide to the
authorities in this country. Apart from the. normal regulations requiring
humane treatment, certain special directives had been issued in this regard.
There was a directive on interrogation prohibiting the use of coercion.
Medical examinations, the keeping of comprehensive records and the immediate
reporting of complaints were made mandatory. But the Court, added that mere
directives would be insufficient and there must be satisfactory evidence that
there has been the

**462**

diffusion and enforcement at all levels of these directives and that they were
in fact implemented and obeyed in practice. After the Parker Commission
Report, complaints both against police and army personnel were referred to an
outside authority for investigation and there was evidence of prosecution or
disciplinary action in numerous cases. In many cases compensation had been
paid.  
  
We have before us the affidavits of the three Service Commanders - the
Commanders of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force -, and also of the
Inspector-General of Police. They state in categorical terms that they have at
no time authorised, encouraged or condoned unlawful acts or breaches of
discipline among their personnel. Statute law, regulations and directions also
outlaw such, acts in categorical terms. They state that when such
infringements are brought or come to their notice they have not hesitated to
set in motion. disciplinary or. criminal proceedings to punish the offender.  
  
The Inspector-General of Police refers in particular to action he has taken in
similar cases. In 1980 alone, in consequence of complaints against members of
the Police force, 108 officers have been prosecuted, 10 officers have been
dismissed, the enlistment of 48 persons has been cancelled and 235 other
officers have been interdicted. In regard to the incidents that took place in
Jaffna in 1981, a committee of senior police officers Headed by R.
Suntheralingam, D.I.G. had conducted a full scale investigation and
proceedings have been set on foot against nearly 175 police officers.  
  
As far as this case is concerned, the D. I. G. states that when it was found
that the petitioner had complained of an assault and was warded at the
Batticaloa hospital, the. headquarters Inspector, Batticaloa, was directed to
record the petitioner's statement. In consequence of the statement recorded
from the petitioner, the Superintendent of Police, Batticaloa, has instructed
A.S.P., Amparai, to hold an investigation. The petitioner, though summoned by
letter dated 11th September 1981 to attend `an inquiry, has failed to do so.  
  
The Army 'Commander has stated that no complaint whatsoever has been made to
the army authorities by the petitioner alleging that he was tortured or ill-
treated by army personnel. Had he received any such complaint, he would have
taken prompt steps to cause investigations to be made and if the: allegations
were true, action would have been taken against the personnel guilty of such
indiscipline. He has drawn the attention of Court to a telegram

**463**

sent by the petitioner to His Excellency the President which had been referred
to him for action and on. which he had initiated proceedings. The telegram
reads:  
  
"18 morning public of Kalmunai assaulted by Army personnel. Beg to initiate
action to stop please - Kandiah Velmuruge D.D.C. Member Amparai."  
  
It would be observed that this complaint by the petitioner himself made to the
head of State does not contain one word about his own alleged torture and ill-
treatment. In the fade of material such as this, could any tribunal have
confidence in the veracity, of the petitioner or place any reliance on the
allegations he has sought to make in this case. It is for this reason that I
agree with my brother Ismail, J's conclusion that even his allegation of army
assault has not been proved to our satisfaction.  
  
On the face of this material, I do not think that the alleged acts of torture
and ill-treatment administered by army personnel has been made out or could be
imputed as a liability of the State as a matter of law. The alleged acts have
not been authorised, encouraged, or countenanced or performed for the benefit
of the State. The material before us shows that they would also not have been
tolerated by the authorities, and redress in all probability granted if there
had been a genuine complaint. In these circumstances I am of the view that no
legal liability under the constitutional provisions can be imputed to the
State.  
  
For these reasons I am of the opinion that this application fails. I would
also make an order for costs in favour of the 2nd respondent.  
  
_**Application dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/32.html_  

