##  Weerawansa v. The Attorney General and Others - SLR - 387, Vol 1 of 2000
[2000] LKSC 32; (2000) 1 Sri LR 387 (6 June 2000)

**387**

**WEERAWANSA  
v.  
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
AMERASINGHE, J. AND  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
SC APPLICATION No. 730/96  
6TH JUNE, 2000  
  
_Fundamental rights -Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act, (PTA)
\- Arrest and detention of a person by a police officer for "unlawful
activity" \- Sections 6(1) and 7(1) of the Act - Detention by order of the
Minister - Section 9(1) of the Act - Pre-conditions for a valid arrest and
detention - Arrest under section 127 of the Customs Ordinance.- Remand of the
suspect by a Magistrate - Circumstances in which the remand order would not
constitute '',judicial action" \- Articles 13(1) and 13(2) of the
Constitution.  
_  
On 04.03.96, the 2nd respondent (DIG - CID) reported to the Director - CID
regarding investigations into alleged malpractices in the Port of Colombo, in
particular, the removal of containers from the Port on forged documents with
the connivance of customs officers. The report stated that there was
information which had been checked that certain suspects had smuggled
sophisticated weapons and a dismantled air craft for the use of the LTTE.
However, there was no comparative record of any such information.  
  
On 18.03.96, the 7th respondent (Director - General of Customs) sent the
petitioner and three other officers on compulsory leave without assigning any
reason.  
  
On 23.04.96, the CID arrested one Hasheem who stated that he was an importer
of textiles and other merchandise and made payments to customs officers
including the petitioner and removed containers from the Port on forged
documents. He denied that there were any weapons or aircraft parts in those
containers.  
  
Pursuant to Hasheem's statement, Chief Inspector Mayadunne acting on the 2nd
respondent's instructions arrested the petitioner on 30.04.96

**388**

for unlawful activity claiming to act under section 6(1) of the Prevention of
Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act ("the PTA"). Thereafter the petitioner
was detained in the CID from 30.04.96 to 02.05.96 without being produced
before a Magistrate.  
  
On 02.05.96, the 2nd respondent applied to the Minister of Defence for a
detention order under section 9(1) of the PTA stating that the petitioner was
suspected of unlawful activity, to wit, aiding and abetting illegal
importation of military hardware and light aircraft parts to Sri Lanka and
clearing the suspected container. However, no material whatsoever was placed
before the Minister to support the 2nd respondent's conclusion. He suppressed
the only material facts he had (namely, the report dated 04.03.96 and
Hasheem's statement) which would have disclosed the falsity of his claim. The
Minister issued a detention order on the same day ordering that the petitioner
be detained for three months at the CID on the ground that she had reason to
suspect that he was concerned in unlawful activity be aiding and abetting the
illegal importation of explosives to Sri Lanka.  
  
When the detention order dated 02.05.96 expired, the 2nd respondent applied to
the Minister for an extention of that order. By her order dated 01.08.96 the
Minister extended it for a further period of three months. The order states
that it was made having reviewed all the facts placed before the Minister.
That order was made in respect of about 20 persons specified in the schedule
thereto; and the 2nd respondent did not even produce the application for the
extension or the facts said to have been placed before the Minister.  
  
On 02.10.96, when the CID knew that there was no justification for the
petitioner's detention, they produced him before the 4th respondent (Deputy
Director of Customs) on the ground that the petitioner was concerned in a
large scale revenue fraud. The 4th respondent took the petitioner into custody
and had his statement recorded. There was no material to warrant the suspicion
that the petitioner was concerned in a revenue fraud. The respondent also did
not notify the petitioner's arrest, detention or his transfer to another place
of detention to the Human Rights Commission as required by section 28 of the
of Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka (The HRC) Act, No. 21 of 1996 which
came into operation on 21.08.96. The petitioner was also not informed by the
4th respondent of the reason for being taken to

**389**

custody. The petitioner had been warded at the National Hospital as he was
ill, from where he was removed by the CID for production to customs. After
recording the petitioner's statement he was taken back to the National
Hospital.  
  
On 03.10.96, while the detention order under section 9(1) of the PTA was still
in force the 4th respondent instructed the Customs Prosecuting Officer to
produce the petitioner before the Magistrate under section 127A of the Customs
Ordinance. The 4th respondent claimed in his affidavit that the petitioner was
produced before the Magistrate but the court record shows that he was not
produced. The petitioner was warded at the National Hospital; and the
Magistrate ordered prison guards to take charge of the petitioner and made
several remand orders until 31.12.96 without the petitioner being produced
before him. Nor did the Magistrate visit him or arrange for an acting
Magistrate to visit him.  
  
**Held:**  
  
1\. In respect of the petitioner's arrest on 30.04.96, no reasonable suspicion
of unlawful activity arose either on the basis of the 2nd respondent's report
dated 04.03.96 or on the basis of Hasheem's statement dated 30.04.96. Hence
the purported arrest directed by the 2nd respondent was not in accordance with
section 6(1) of the PTA and violative of the petitioner's right under Article
13(1).  
  
2\. As the petitioner had not been arrested in accordance with section 6(1) of
the PTA, the CID had no right to keep him in custody without producing him
before a Magistrate, in terms of section 7(1); 'hence the petitioner's
fundamental right under Article 13(2) was infringed by the 2nd respondent.  
  
3\. The detention order dated 02.05.96 made by the Minister under section 9(1)
and the petitioner's detention thereunder were unlawful and invalid in that
(a) no material was placed justifying reasonable suspicion of unlawful
activity and (b) the order was made on the ground that the petitioner was
concerned in the illegal importation of explosives in respect of which there
was no material at all. Hence the petitioner's detention was in breach of
Article 13(2) for which infringement the State is liable.

**390**

Per Fernando, J.  
  
"The Minister did not independently exercise her statutory discretion, either
upon personal knowledge or credible information. She merely adopted the 2nd
respondent's opinion. That was a patent abdication of discretion".  
  
Per Fernando, J.  
  
"Not only must the Minister of Defence subjectively have the required belief
or suspicion, but there must also be objectively, 'reason' for such belief  
  
4.(a) The extension of the detention order on 01.08.96 and the petitioner's
detention thereunder upto 02.10.96; were unlawful and invalid in that the
extention was granted without considering whether there was in fact reason to
further deprive the petitioner of his liberty; hence the detention was in
breach of Article 13(2). for which infringement the State is liable.  
  
4.(b) If a detention order under section 9(1) is obtained within 72 hours of
arrest, non-production before a judicial officer is excused by section 7(1).
Otherwise the suspect who is detained under such order should be produced
before a judicial officer after such detention, which is a safeguard which the
PTA has not taken away. Such production is also required by Article 9 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) (as well as the
First Optional Protocol) to which Sri Lanka is a party and which should be
respected in terms of Article 27(15) of the Constitution. Since the petitoner
was never brought before a judicial officer during the entire period of
detention, his fundamental right under Article 13(2) was infringed for which
infringement the State is liable.  
  
5\. The 4th respondent took the petitioner to customs custody on 02.10.96
without entertaining a reasonable suspicion that the petitioner was concerned
in any offence and without informing the reason for the deprivation of his
personal liberty. The 2nd

**391**

respondent failed to notify the HRC of the fact of the transfer of the
petitioner's detention to customs on 02.10.96. The 2nd and the 4th respondents
thereby infringed the petitioner's fundamental right under Article 13(1).  
  
6.The order made by the Magistrate on 03.10.96 before the detention order made
under the PTA had expired and the remand order made by the Magistrate in the
absence of the petitioner were vitiated by a patent want of jurisdiction and
did not constitute ''judicial acts" which precluded relief under Article 126.
It was the executive which had the custody of the petitioner from 03.10.96 and
so the petitioner's detention was by "executive or administrative action" not
sanctioned by a judicial act. Such detention was in violation of the
petitioner's fundamental right under Article 13(2) for which the State is
liable.  
  
**Cases referred to :**  
  
1\. Channa Pieris v. A.G. (1994) Sri LR 1, 55.  
  
2\. Wickremabandu v. Herath (1990) 2 Sri LR 384, 355, 365.  
  
3\. Rodrigo v. de Silva (1997) 3 Sri LR 265, 299.  
  
4\. Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam (1985) 1 Sri LR 100.  
  
5\. Nallanayagam v. Gunatilake (1987) Sri LR 293.  
  
6\. Ekanayake v. Herath Bandra SC 25/91 SCM 18.12.91  
  
7\. W .K. Nihal v. Kotalawela SC 126/94 SCM 6.10.94  
  
8\. Kumarasinghe v. A.G. SC 54/82 SCM 6.9.82  
  
9\. Jayathevan v. A.G. (1992) 2 Sri LR 356.371  
  
10\. Farook v. Raymond (1996) 1 Sri LR 217.  
  
11\. Dayananda v. Weerasinghe (1983) 2 FRD 291.  
  
12\. Leo Fernando v. A.G. (1985) 2 Sri  LR 341.

**392**

13\. Sirros v. Moore (1974) 1 All ER 776. 785  
  
14\. Sriyawathie v. Shiva Pasupati SC 112/86 SCM 28.4.87.  
  
15\. Joseph Perera v. A.G. (1992) 1 Sri LR 199.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_T. J. Marapana, P. C. with Jayantha Fernando and P. H. Ranatunga_ for
petitioner.  
  
_S. Rajaratnam, SSC_ for the 1st to 7th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

August 03. 2000  
**FERNANDO. J.  
**  
The Petitioner is an Assistant Superintendent of Customs. He complains that
his fundamental rights under Articles 13(1) and (2) were infringed by reason
of (I) his arrest on 30.4.96 by the CID purporting to act under section 6(1)
of the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act, No. 48 of 1979 (the
"PTA"), (II) his detention from 30.4.96 to 2.5.96 under section 7(1) of the
PTA, and from 2.5.96 to 2.10.96 under two detention orders purportedly made
under section 9(1) of the PTA, (III) his transfer into the custody of the
Customs on 2.10.96, and (IV) his detention from 3.10.96 to 31.12.96 under a
purported Magisterial remand order.  
  
**PREVENTION OF TERRORISM (TEMPORARY PROVISIONS) ACT  
**  
The relevant provisions of the PTA are as follows.  
  
"6\. (1) Any police officer not below the rank of Superintendent or any other
police officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector authorized in writing by
him in that behalf may, without a

**393**

warrant and with or without assistance and notwithstanding anything in any
other law to the contrary -  
  
(a) arrest any person;  
  
(b) enter and search any premises;  
  
(c) stop and search any individual or any vehicle, vessel, train or aircraft;
and  
  
(d) seize any document or thing,  
  
connected with or concerned in or reasonably suspected of being connected with
or concerned in any unlawful activity ...  
  
7\. (1) Any person arrested under subsection (1) of section 6 may be kept in
custody for a period not exceeding seventy two hours and shall, unless a
detention order under section 9 has been made in respect of such person, be
produced before a Magistrate before the expiry of such period and the
Magistrate shall, on an application made in writing in that behalf by a police
officer not below the rank of Superintendent, make order that such person
shall be remanded until the conclusion of the trial of such person:  
  
Provided that, where the Attorney-General consents to the release of such
person from custody before the conclusion of the trial, the Magistrate shall
release such person from custody.  
  
(2) Where any person connected with or concerned in or reasonably suspected to
be connected with or concerned in the commission of any offence under this act
appears or is

**394**

produced before any court other than in the manner referred to in subsection
(1), such court shall order the remand of such person until the conclusion of
the trial: provided that...  
  
9\. (1) Where the Minister has reason to believe or suspect that any person is
connected with or concerned in any unlawful activity, the Minister may order
that such person be detained for a period not exceeding three months in the
first instance, in such place and subject to such conditions as may be
determined by the Minister, and any such order may be extended from time to
time for a period not exceeding three months at a time. . ." [emphasis added]  
  
Articles 13(1) and 13(2) provide two valuable safeguards each: that a person
may be arrested only "according to procedure established by law", and must be
told the reason for arrest, and that a person deprived of liberty must be
brought before the judge of the nearest competent court according to procedure
established by law, and must not be further deprived of liberty, except upon
and in terms of the order of such judge made in accordance with procedure
established by law.  
  
The procedure for arrest established by section 6(1) is not significantly
different to the procedure established by law for arrest for other offences,
and does not dispense with the need to give reasons. However, sections 7(1)
and 9(1) authorise detention by the executive without a prior judicial order
and for longer periods than under the general law (but those provisions did
not expressly dispense with the need to bring a detainee before a judge). When
the PTA Bill

**395**

was referred to this Court, the Court did not have to decide whether or not
any of those provisions constituted reasonable restrictions on Articles 12(1),
13(1) and 13(2), permitted by Article 15(7) (in the interests of national
security, etc), because the Court was informed that it had been decided to
pass the Bill with a two-thirds majority (SC SD No. 7/79, 17.7.79). The PTA
was enacted with a two-thirds majority, and accordingly, in terms of Article
84, the PTA became law despite any inconsistency with the Constitutional
provisions.  
  
I have therefore to consider whether the Petitioners arrest was "in accordance
with procedure established by law", namely by section 6(1), and whether he was
informed of the reason for arrest, and also whether his detention was in
accordance with Article 13(2), read with sections 7(1) and 9(1).  
  
**1\. ARREST ON 30.4.96  
**  
The CID had been investigating allegations of malpractices in the Port of
Colombo relating to imports - in particular, that containers were being taken
out of the Port on forged documents with the connivance of Customs officers.
On 4.3.96, the 2nd Respondent (DIG, CID) reported to the Director, CID, that  
  
" Reliable information has been received that the suspects involved in the
smuggling of containerized cargo had smuggled into the country, a large number
of sophisticated weapons and a dismantled aircraft for the use of the LTTE.

**396**

2\. This informant has given me credible information earlier which when
checked were found to be correct. Hence all efforts should be taken to
interrogate the persons involved in these illegal operations to unearth
material owing to the security risk involved beside the colossal loss of
revenue to the Government." [emphasis added]  
  
I will assume that the 2nd Respondent did in fact receive some information
from an informant. However, it is clear that his report was not a
contemporaneous record of that information, but only a summary which he made
subsequently. At no stage did he produce a contemporaneous record
(withholding, as he was entitled to, the name of the informant). In the
affidavit which the 2nd Respondent filed in these proceedings he did not
assert that the "suspects" or "the persons involved" included the Petitioner;
he stated that he had directed investigations, and that several persons
including Customs officials had been interrogated - but not the Petitioner.
The "information" had been received just five weeks after the Central Bank
bomb explosion, and if it had actually implicated the Petitioner it would have
been a serious dereliction of duty for the 2nd Respondent to have delayed
questioning him for eight weeks.  
  
Thus we do not know what exactly the informant did tell the 2nd Respondent. It
is very likely that the informant did not implicate the petitioner, and I hold
that at that stage the 2nd Respondent had no reason to suspect, and did not
suspect, the Petitioner of any offence.  
  
By letter dated 18.3.96 the 7th Respondent, the Director-General of Customs,
sent the Petitioner (and three

**397**

others) on compulsory leave, without stating any reason. The Petitioner and
the other three officers submitted appeals dated 27.3.96 and 8.4.96, but
received no response. The 7th Respondent has not filed an affidavit explaining
the reason for that order nor has he produced the documents which led him to
make it. I have therefore no reason to think that that order was based on a
suspicion that the Petitioner was guilty of any offence. The 2nd Respondent
did not rely on that order.  
  
On 23.4.96, the CID arrested one Hasheem, alias Nazeer, for "forging Customs
documents and illegal importation of containers into Sri Lanka which are
suspected to have contained military hardware". No material has been placed
before us which justified any suspicion that Hasheem was involved in the
importation of military hardware".  
  
That there was a link between Hasheem and the Petitioner is not disputed. The
Petitioner acknowledged that Hasheem was one of his informants, and that on
several occasions Hasheem had given him information which had led to
successful detections.  
  
Hasheem made two statements, on 23.4.96 and 25.4.96. He confirmed that he had
given information to the Petitioner. He stated that he was an importer of
textiles and other merchandise, and that he had made payments to certain
Customs Officers, including the Petitioner, in connection with the removal of
containers from the Port on forged documents. However, he denied the
allegation that there had been any weapons or aircraft parts in any of those
containers.

**398**

Claiming to act under section 6(1) of the PTA, ,Chief Inspector Mudannayake
(on the 2nd Respondent's instructions) arrested the Petitioner at the CID
office at 4.00 p. m. on 30.4.96. He made an entry that the charges 'against
the Petitioner were explained as being aiding and abetting the illegal
importation of containers into Sri Lanka and their release from the Port on
forged documents, there being information that some of the items in those
containers were weapons and light aircraft parts. Those charges contained
three distinct elements: that containers had been illegally imported, that
they had been released on forged documents, and that they had contained
weapons, etc. Only the third could have been termed a "PTA offence". However,
in his affidavit in these proceedings, Mudannayake averred that the arrest was
because "he was suspected of aiding and abetting the illegal import of
containers containing explosives and light aircraft parts" \- i. e. on account
of the "PTA offence" alone. He made no mention of the release of containers.
The 2nd Respondent's affidavit was to the same effect, except that he made no
mention of explosives.  
  
The 2nd Respondent's affidavit confirms that it was only after Hasheem's
"disclosures" that the Petitioner was asked to report to the CID on 30.4.96.
His own summary of Hasheem's "disclosures" was as follows: Hasheem "was able
to import illegally several containers of merchandise with the connivance and
assistance of the Petitioner and some others"; "some containers which arrived
at the Colombo Harbour had been cleared illegally with the connivance of some
Customs officials"; and "the contents of these containers are unknown".
However, he added:

**399**

"There was reasonable information that container loads of arms and ammunition
and light aircraft parts have surreptitiously reached the L. T. T. E. after
arriving at the Colombo Harbour." [emphasis added]  
  
No details were given about that "information". When questioned, Hasheem had
denied that particular allegation, and it was unreasonable to have believed or
suspected from his statements that the Petitioner was connected with or
concerned in any "unlawful activity" as defined in the PTA. The Respondents
did not produce any other material to support that allegation.  
  
It is probable that the Petitioner was told the reason for arrest, namely that
he was suspected of "unlawful activity". However, neither the alleged
informant's disclosures on 4.3.96 nor Hasheem's statements gave rise to a
reasonable suspicion of "unlawful activity". I hold that the Petitioners
arrest was not in accordance with the procedure established by law (i. e.
section 6(1) of the PTA), and that the 2nd Respondent procured the
infringement of his fundamental right under Article 13(1).  
  
Possibly, Hasheem's statements to the CID may have given rise to a suspicion
that the Petitioner was involved in the illegal import and removal of
containers from the Port. I do not have to determine whether that was a
reasonable suspicion justifying an arrest on that basis because the affidavits
filed by the Respondents in this case establish that that was not the real
reason for his arrest. In any event, an arrest on that basis would have
required prompt production before a Magistrate, and would not have justified
detention under the PTA.

**400**

**II. DETENTION**  
  
**(1) Detention under section 7(1)  
**  
The Petitioner was kept in CID custody, without being promptly produced before
a Magistrate. The validity of his detention up to 2.5.96 depends on whether
there was compliance with section 7(1) of the PTA, which permits a person
"arrested under section 6(1)" to be kept in custody for a period not exceeding
seventy two hours.  
  
A "person arrested under section 6(1)" necessarily means a person arrested
because he was "connected with or concerned in or reasonably suspected of
being connected with or concerned in any unlawful activity". That phrase does
not include a person arrested for other reasons (e. g. under the Customs
Ordinance), or for no reason: such persons will continue to enjoy the full
protection of Article 13. A pre-requisite for detention under section 7(1) is
a valid and proper arrest under section 6(1): an arrest in conformity with
section 6(1), and not one which is contrary to that section, or which is only
a pretended or purported arrest under that section. "Under" in this context
has the same meaning as "in pursuance of" which was similarly interpreted (in
relation to Emergency Regulations 18 and 19) by Amerasinghe, J, in Channa
Pieris v. A. G.(1). In other words, while the general rule is that all arrests
and consequent detentions are subject to the Constitutional safeguards in
Article 13, the exception created by the PTA will apply only where the
stipulated pre-condition of an arrest under section 6(1) exists. Those
safeguards can never be circumvented by a false assertion or a mere pretence
that an arrest was under section 6(1).

**401**

I hold that the Petitioner was not arrested "under" section 6(1), but
otherwise than in accordance with section 6(1). Accordingly, the 2nd
Respondent and the other CID officers did not have the  
  
right to keep him in custody in terms of section 7(1), but were obliged to
comply with Article 13(2). The Petitioner's fundamental right under Article
13(2) was thus infringed by the 2nd Respondent.  
  
**(2) Detention under section 9(1)**  
  
An arrested person must be produced before a Magistrate, before the period of
seventy two hours allowed by section 7(1) comes to an end, unless a detention
order has been made "under" section 9(1). Such an order can only be made if
"the Minister has reason to believe or suspect that [such] person is connected
with or concerned in any unlawful activity". Not only must the Minister of
Defence, subjectively, have the required belief or suspicion, but there must
also be, objectively, "reason" for such belief. While Article 13(2) permits
detention only upon a judicial order, section 9(1) allows a Ministerial order.
However, being an order which results in a deprivation of liberty, it must be
made with no less care and consideration.  
  
The Minister's order does not depend on the validity of the preceding arrest
and detention. Even if such arrest and detention were invalid, nevertheless if
at the time the detention order was made the Minister did have reason to
believe or suspect that the detainee was "connected with or concerned in any
unlawful activity", the detention order and subsequent detention would be
lawful.

**402**

By letter dated 2.5.96 the 2nd Respondent informed the Minister of Defence
(who is H. E. the President) that the Petitioner had been taken into custody
under section 6(1) of the PTA, and applied for a three-month detention order
under section 9(l), claiming that:  
  
"2\. Investigations conducted by the C. I. D. had revealed that this person is
suspected to be connected with or concerned in unlawful activity to wit:  
  
Aided and abetted the illegal importation of military hardware and tight
aircraft parts to Sri Lanka by processing the documents portainting [sic] of
the Customs Department at the time of clearing the suspected container said to
have been [sic] contained the send [sic) article [sic].  
  
3\. It is necessary to detain him further, with a view to probe into his
unlawful activities under the provisions of the Prevention of Terrorism Act."
[emphasis added]  
  
He did not forward - or even mention - any information, statements or other
material on which he based his conclusions. Obviously, there was none. He thus
deceived the Minister into believing that the CID investigations had in fact
revealed that the Petitioner was suspected of involvement in unlawful
activity. Furthermore, he suppressed the only material facts which he had
(namely, the report dated 4.3.96 and Hasheem's statements), obviously because
they would have disclosed to the Minister the falsity of his claims.  
  
The Minister issued a detention order the same day, ordering that the
Petitioner be detained for three months at the

**403**

CID office, on the ground that she had reason to suspect that he was:  
  
"connected with or concerned in unlawful activity to wit:  
  
Aided and abetted the illegal importation of explosives to Sri Lanka by
checking and processing the documents pertaining to the Customs Department at
the time of clearing the suspected Container said to have contained the said
explosives' " [emphasis added)  
  
Dealing with the question whether there was a reasonable suspicion justifying
arrest, Amerasinghe, J, held in Pieris v. A. G. [ 1994) 1 Sri LR I.... that,  
  
"A reasonable suspicion may be based either upon matters within the officer's
knowledge or upon credible information furnished to him, or a combination of
both sources. He may inform himself either by personal investigation or by
adopting information supplied to him or by doing both. A suspicion does not
become 'reasonable' merely because the source of the information is
creditworthy."  
  
Those observations apply with much greater force to the question whether a
detention order is valid on the basis that the Minister had "reason to suspect
7, because, inter alia, a detention order. drastically curtails personal
liberty without the protection of a judicial order and for much longer
periods. A valid detention order requires the independent exercise of the
discretion conferred by section 9(1). Since the Minister had no personal
knowledge of the facts, it was essential that

**404**

she should have been supplied with "credible information". Where such
information is contained in documents and statements, those documents and
statements must be made available to the Minister. But I will assume for the
purposes of this case that a correct summary of the relevant portions of those
documents and statements, set out in a report made by a responsible officer,
may sometimes give the Minister "reason to suspect.  
  
." In this case even that did not happen. The 2nd Respondent merely informed
the Minister of his conclusions. The detention order was therefore flawed. The
Minister did not independently exercise her statutory discretion, either upon
personal knowledge or credible information: she merely adopted the 2nd
Respondent's opinion. That was a patent abdication of discretion. Further,
even if I were to disregard all those flaws, the detention order would
nevertheless be invalid because it was founded wholly upon the 2nd
Respondent's conclusions which were not merely mistaken but wilfully false,
perverse, and unreasonable.  
  
There is another unexplained feature in this case. In the detention order the
Minister made reference only to the abetment of the importation of explosives,
and made no mention of weapons and Light aircraft parts. That means that the
Minister did not believe or suspect that the Petitioner was implicated in the
importation of weapons and light aircraft parts. But at that point of time
there was no material at all pertaining to explosives. The 2nd Respondent made
no reference to explosives at any stage; and neither did Mudannayake in the
contemporaneous entry he made on 30.4.96. It was only after this application
was filed that Mudannayake fell into line with the detention order by
referring to explosives in his affidavit in these proceedings. The detention
order was flawed because

**405**

there was no reason for the Minister to have any belief or suspicion about
explosives.  
  
I hold that the detention order dated 2.5.96 and the Petitioner's detention
thereunder for three months were unlawful and invalid, and in breach of
Article 13(2), for which infringement the State is liable.  
  
When that period of three months was coming to an end, according to the 2nd
respondent's affidavit:  
  
"As the investigations into this matter was concluded [sic], an application
was made to the Minister of Defence to extend the detention order served on
the Petitioner. Accordingly, the Minister of Defence having reviewed the facts
placed before her, extended the Petitioner's detention by detention order
dated 1st August 1996 issued in terms of section 9(1) . . ." [emphasis added]  
  
The affidavit had not another word about those "facts". The Minister stated in
that detention order:  
  
". . . having reviewed all the facts placed before me in respect of each
person, [1] do hereby extend the Detention Orders issued in respect of the
persons whose names appear in the Schedule hereto for a period of three months
from the dates mentioned against their names." [emphasis added] .  
  
About twenty persons were named in the schedule. The schedule referred to D.
O. No. 1598 issued on 5.5.95, and D. O. No. 2024 issued on 4.5.96 - which
suggests that 427 detention orders had been issued in twelve months.

**406**

The higher the number of such orders, the greater the care to be exercised in
regard to requests for, and the grant and extension of such orders.  
  
In this instance, the Respondents have not even produced the request for
extension - let alone the "facts" said to have been placed before the
Minister. It is very likely that no material or report was submitted, and that
the statement in the detention order that the facts were reviewed was not
correct. Without considering whether there was in fact any reason further to
deprive the Petitioner of his liberty (and if so, for how long, and on what
conditions) a three-month extension was granted on request. Detention orders
(including extensions), whether under the PTA, or Emergency Regulations, or
otherwise, should not be made mechanically (see Wickremabandu v. Herath(2),
Rodrigo v. de. Silva(3) and the decisions cited in Channa Pieris at 57). One
matter which should have been considered was the Petitioner's health. He was
being detained at the CID office. According to the 2nd Respondent, he fell ill
during the month of June, "and was constantly taken to a private medical
clinic for treatment". It does not appear that even his poor health - relevant
both to the place and the period of future detention - was brought to the
notice of the Minister.  
  
I hold that the extension of the detention order on 1.8.96, and the
Petitioner's detention thereunder up to 2.10.96, were unlawful and invalid,
and in breach of Article 13(2) for which infringement the State is liable.

**407**

**(3) The need for production before a Magistrate, notwithstanding the issue
of a detention order  
**  
As already noted, Article 13(2) provides two safeguards: first, that a person
deprived of liberty must be brought before a judicial officer, and second,
that any further deprivation of liberty can only be upon a judicial order.
Section 9(1) expressly authorised such further deprivation of liberty upon an
executive detention order, and thus nullified the second safeguard - and that
is "law", because the PTA was enacted with a two-thirds majority.  
  
However, I am satisfied that the PTA did not take away the first safeguard.
That has to be considered in relation to two periods: the period preceding the
making of an executive detention order that has been made, and the subsequent
period.  
  
If no detention order is made, the detainee must be produced before a judicial
officer within seventy two hours of arrest - the safeguard exists, although
diluted (by section 7(1)) to the extent that production within twenty four
hours is not necessary.  
  
If a detention order is obtained within seventy two hours of arrest, non-
production before a judicial officer during that period is excused or ratified
by section 7(1).  
  
However, neither section 9(1), nor any other provision of the PTA, dispenses
with the need for such production subsequent to the making of an executive
detention order.  
  
To put in another way, a person detained under such a detention order- is "a
person held in custody, detained

**408**

or otherwise deprived of personal liberty"; the first safeguard in Article
13(2) is that he be brought before a judicial officer; and the PTA makes no
contrary or inconsistent provision. That safeguard therefore continues
undiluted. Accordingly, such non-production subsequent to the detention order
is not sanctioned by the procedure established by law.  
  
It may perhaps be suggested that such production is "of little consequence or
a minor matter", because a judicial officer cannot order the release of the
detainee. Nevertheless, it has been held that such production "is more than a
mere formality or an empty ritual, but is recognized by all communities
committed to the Rule of Law as an essential component of human rights and
fundamental freedoms", and "must-be exactly complied with by the executive"
(see Edirisuriya v Navaratnam,(4) Nallanayagam u Gunatilake,(5) and Rodrigo v
de Silva, at 323-5). That safeguard serves many important purposes. A judicial
officer would be able, at least, to record the detainees complaints (and his
own observations) about various matters: such as ill - treatment, the failure
to provide medical treatment, the violation of the conditions of detention
prescribed by the detention order and/or relevant statutes and regulations,
the infringement of the detainees other legal rights qua detainee, etc.
Indeed, he may even be able to give relief in respect of some matters.  
  
Furthermore, many decisions of this Court have drawn attention to the fact
that that safeguard is internationally recognised. Sri Lanka is a party to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (as well as the Optional
Protocol).

**409**

Article 9 of the Covenant mandates, inter alia, that "no one shall be
subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention"; that "anyone arrested or detained
on a criminal charge shall be brought promptly before a judge or other officer
authorized by law to exercise judicial power"; and that "anyone who is
deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to take
proceedings before a court, in order that that court may decide without delay
on the lawfulness of his detention and order his release if the detention is
not lawful". A person deprived of personal liberty has a right of access to
the judiciary, and that right is now internationally entrenched, to the extent
that a detainee who is denied that right may even complain to the Human Rights
Committee.  
  
Should this Court have regard to the provisions of the Covenant? I think it
must. Article 27(15) requires the State to "endeavour to foster respect for
international law and treaty obligations in dealings among nations". That
implies that the State must likewise respect international law and treaty
obligations in its dealings with its own citizens, particularly when their
liberty is involved. The State must afford to them the benefit of the
safeguards which international law recognises.  
  
In that background, it would be wrong to attribute to Parliament an intention
to disregard those safeguards. The PTA cannot be interpreted as dispensing, by
implication or inference, with the safeguard of prompt production before a
judicial officer under and in terms of Article 13(2). Such production is
imperative. Since the petitioner was never brought before a judicial officer
during the entire

**410**

period of detention, I hold that his fundamental right under Article 13(2) was
infringed for which infringement the State is liable.  
  
**III. TRANSFER TO THE CUSTODY OF THE CUSTOMS  
**  
The Petitioner s wife filed a habeas corpus application in the Court of
Appeal. Notice was issued, returnable on 25. 9. 96, on which date State
Counsel asked for further time to file objections.  
  
On 2. 10. 96 the Petitioner was warded at the National Hospital, Colombo.
Before that day - probably in consequence of the habeas corpus application -
the Attorney-General had advised the CID that there was no justification to
detain the Petitioner under the PTA. It must be noted that the detention order
(if valid) continued to be operative. It did not merely authorise the CID to
detain the Petitioner, but ordered such detention; and it ordered detention at
the CID office (and not at the National Hospital, or at the Customs office, or
elsewhere). and it directed detention for three months, and not just for two.
On 2.10.96 the CID ignored those provisions.  
  
Although the CID knew full well that there was no justification for the
Petitioner's continued detention under the PTA, nevertheless they did not
request a revocation or variation of the detention order. Instead of releasing
the Petitioner or producing him before a Magistrate, CID officers obtained
permission from the Hospital authorities to take him away for two hours. At
12.30 p. m. they took him to the CID office, and from there to the Prosecution
office of the Preventive Branch of the Customs. There, at about 2.30 p. m.,
the 2nd Respondent "produced" him before the 4th

**411**

 Respondent (Deputy Director of Customs) and other Customs officers - because,
they claimed, "the investigations raised a reasonable suspicion that the
petitioner was involved in a large scale revenue fraud which constitutes an
offence under the Customs Ordinance". The 4th Respondent confirmed that the
CID officers so stated, but did not claim either that he himself entertained
any suspicion in that respect or that he informed the petitioner that this was
the reason why the Customs took him into custody. He did not produce any
material which would have given rise to such a suspicion. He says that he
merely instructed the 5th and 6th Respondents to record a statement. The
Petitioner avers that he "inquired from the 4th Respondent whether there
[were] any allegations against him [and] the 5th and 6th Respondents answered
in the negative". The 4th to 6th Respondents have not denied that averment.  
  
The 5th Respondent commenced recording the Petitioner's statement at around
6.00 p. m. He was questioned about his career and performance in the Customs;
he felt ill, and when he inquired whether he would not be taken back to
Hospital, the 5th Respondent replied that he would be detained at the Customs
that day; and he then remarked that the 4th to 6th Respondents would have to
take the responsibility if anything happened to his life. In the meantime the
6th Respondent told the Petitioner that the National Hospital was making
inquiries about the delay in returning him to the Hospital. None of this was
denied. It was only thereafter that on the 4th Respondent's instructions the
Petitioner was taken back to the Hospital at 10.30 p. m., where he was guarded
by Customs officials.

**412**

I hold that the 4thRespondent took the Petitioner into Customs custody at 2.30
p. m. on 2.10.96, without entertaining a reasonable suspicion that the
Petitioner was concerned in any offence, and without informing him of the
reason for the deprivation of his personal liberty.  
  
The 2nd Respondent also failed to comply with section 28 of the Human Rights
Commission of Sri Lanka Act, No 21 of 1996, which came into operation on
21.8.96. That section requires (a) the person making an arrest or an order for
detention under the PTA or the Emergency Regulations, and (b) any person
making an order for the transfer of a detainee to another place of detention,
to inform the Commission. Thus, on 2.10.96, the procedure established by law
in respect of the deprivation of liberty - whether upon initial arrest or
detention, or upon a transfer of custody - included a requirement that the
Commission be notified. The 2nd Respondent does not claim that he did so.  
  
I hold that the 2nd and 4th Respondents infringed the Petitioner's fundamental
right under Article 13 (1).  
  
**IV DETENTION UPON MAGISTRATE'S REMAND ORDERS  
**  
The 4th Respondent averred that he instructed the Customs prosecuting officer
"to take necessary action to produce the Petitioner before the Magistrate and
make an application in terms of section 127A of the Customs Ordinance". At
that time there was pending in the Harbour Magistrate's Court a case against
several other Customs Officers. The Customs filed a further report in that
case on 3.10.96, seeking to make the Petitioner a party to that case.

**413**

The 4th Respondent falsely claimed in his affidavit that the Petitioner was
produced before the Magistrate on 3.10.96: the Court record confirms the
Petitioner's assertion that he was not produced. Despite that, the Magistrate
(the 8th Respondent) made order, directing two Prison guards, Jayaweera and
Ranjith, to take charge of the Petitioner until he recovered; he also called
for a medical report from the Hospital. He recorded that after he had
adjourned, Jayaweera met him in chambers and stated that Jayaweera had no
authority to be in charge of the Petitioner while he was in the Hospital. The
8th Respondent thereupon made order directing the Superintendent of Prisons,
Welikada, "to take steps" in regard to the Petitioner. The warrant of
detention, if any, was not produced.  
  
Although the Petitioner was never brought before him, the 8th Respondent made
several remand orders thereafter, and released him on bail only on 31.12.96.  
  
During this entire period, the 8th Respondent did not visit. or communicate
with the Petitioner, nor did he arrange for an acting Magistrate to do so.  
  
The Petitioner's detention from 3.10.96 to 31.12.96 was not under the PTA, but
under the general law. Two distinct questions arise: Was that detention in
violation of Article 13(2), and if so can the Petitioner obtain relief in
respect thereof in these proceedings under Article 126?

**414**

**(1) Violation of Article 13(2)  
**  
Article 13(2) requires that an arrested person be brought before the judge of
the nearest competent court. How he should be brought before the judge can be
laid down by ordinary law, but the requirements that he be brought before a
judge, and that it is not any judge but the judge of the nearest competent
court, cannot be varied or dispensed with. Those are not matters of
discretion, but pre-conditions which go to jurisdiction. Section 115 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure Act and section 127A of the Customs Ordinance
require an arrested person to be "forwarded to" or "produced before" \- which
I regard as synonymous with bringing before - a Magistrate. It is not enough
to show him to a judge, or to bring him into physical proximity to a judge; he
must at least be given an opportunity to communicate with the judge: Ekanayake
v Herath Banda,(6) The present case is virtually identical to W. K. Nihal v
Kotalawela.(7) There, while the petitioner was warded in hospital, in police
custody, the Police applied to the Magistrate for an order that he be
transferred to Prison custody and produced ten days later before the
Magistrate. The Magistrate granted that application. Dheeraratne, J, observed
that there was no provision of law "granting sanction for a Magistrate to make
such a remand order which is capable of so insidiously eroding the liberty of
the subject (see Article 13(2) . . ." See also the other decisions cited in
Channa Pieris at 76-77 In my view, two things are essential: the suspect must
be taken to where the nearest competent judge is, or that judge must go to
where the suspect is, and the suspect must have an opportunity to communicate
with the judge. If those conditions are not satisfied, the

**415**

judge would have no jurisdiction in respect of that suspect, to make a remand
order.  
  
Discussing section 115(1) of the Code, Wimalaratne, J. observed in
Kumarasinghe v. A. G.(8) that, on occasions when a suspect warded in hospital
cannot be produced before the Magistrate within the stipulated period, the
Police may produce a medical report to the effect that it would be hazardous
to move him from hospital. With respect, I cannot agree. Such an exception of
that sort cannot be implied in respect of a safeguard for liberty laid down in
ordinary law, in the absence of some ambiguity, injustice, absurdity, anomaly,
inconvenience, etc, which would justify such an inference. If there is good
reason why the Magistrate himself cannot go to the hospital, he can delegate
an acting Magistrate. Article 13(2) embodies a basic Constitutional safeguard,
almost universally recognised: that judge and suspect must be brought face-to-
face, before liberty is curtailed.  
  
I hold that the first remand order, and the subsequent extensions, were not
made in accordance with the procedure established by law. The Petitioner was
therefore detained in violation of Article 13(2).  
  
**(2) Relief under Article 126**  
  
Nevertheless, the Petitioner would be entitled to relief in these proceedings
only if those remand orders constitute "executive or administrative action".  
  
The act of a judicial officer done in the exercise of judicial power does not
fall within the ambit of "executive

**416**

or administrative action". It does not follow, however, that every act done by
a judicial officer is excluded, because a judicial officer may sometimes
perform some functions which are not judicial in character: Jayathevan v
AG,(9) Further, as Amerasinghe, J, observed in Farook v Raymond,(10) "Judicial
power can only be exercised if the court ... has jurisdiction".  
  
Turning to remand orders in particular, it cannot be said that such orders are
intrinsically or necessarily "judicial" in character - because an order that a
suspect be detained pending investigation into an offence deprives the suspect
of his personal liberty in much the same way, whether that order is made by a
judicial officer or by an officer of the Executive. It cannot be assumed,
therefore, that the impugned remand orders were intrinsically judicial in
character, and it is necessary to examine the circumstances and the manner in
which they were made.  
  
Several decisions of this Court involving remand orders made by judicial
officers were analysed in Farook v Raymond I will refer to some of them. -  
  
In Kumarasinghe v A.G., the suspect who was in hospital was not brought before
the Magistrate, and the Police failed to file a medical report. The Court was
of the opinion that the period of remand ordered by the Magistrate was quite
excessive. It was held that there was a breach of Article 13(2), but that was
"more .the consequence of the wrongful exercise of judicial discretion as a
result of a misleading Police report".

**417**

Although no relief was granted, the Petitioner was awarded costs. (The Court
did not take the view that the failure to bring the suspect before the
Magistrate deprived him of jurisdiction.)  
  
The same principle was applied in Dayananda v Weerasinghe (11). There the
suspect had been brought before the Magistrate.  
  
Those two decisions were approved in Leo Fernando v A. G.,(12) a decision of a
bench of five judges. The first question that arose related to judicial
immunity from suit. Both Colin-Thome, J, and Ranasinghe, J, (as he then was),
agreed with the observations of Lord Denning, MR, in Sirros v Moore. (13)  
  
". . . So long as (a judge) does his work in the honest belief that it is
within his jurisdiction, then he is not liable to an action. He may be
mistaken in fact. He may be ignorant in law. What he does may be outside his
jurisdiction - in fact or in law - but as long as he honestly believes it to
be within his jurisdiction, he should not be liable ... nothing will make him
liable except it be shown that he. was not acting judicially, knowing that he
had no jurisdiction to do it."  
  
Ranasinghe, J. proceeded to consider the further question (see p 369) whether
"even though the judge himself is so immune from any liability, the State
would yet be liable,. in the field of fundamental rights, for any act of a
judge which would operate to infringe a fundamental right. . ." It was
contended on behalf of the petitioner (see page 30)

**418**

that "the impugned act was not an act committed by the (judge) in his capacity
as a judge for the reason that (he] had no power or authority as a judge to do
what he did and was therefore acting outside his jurisdiction". Ranasinghe, J.
dismissed that contention because he took the view that the judge "did
undoubtedly have the power to make, upon proper material, an order remanding
the petitioner pending further investigation into an offence. . ."  
  
The petitioner in Sriyawathie v Shiva Pasupati(14) had been remanded on a
charge of murder, not for the period of 15 days permitted by section 115(2),
but sine die; no warrant of commitment under section 159 had been issued. No
indictment was served on her, and she continued in remand for seven years.
Holding that her detention was illegal, the Court directed her immediate
release, and compensation in a sum of Rs 15,000.  
  
In Joseph Perera v A.G.,(15) another decision of a bench of five judges, the
three petitioners had been remanded by a Magistrate. The Magistrate had no
power under the Emergency Regulations to grant bail except with the consent
of. the Attorney-General. L. H. de Alwis, J, held (at p 247) that the unlawful
detention of the petitioners had been by executive or administrative action,
and not in judicial proceedings, the order of remand, though made by the
Magistrate, was not in the exercise of his judicial discretion since he had
none under the Emergency Regulations.  
  
In Farook v Raymond the suspects had been remanded to Police custody. Since
the Magistrate had no power to

**419**

remand to Police custody, it was held that detention was not in accordance
with the procedure established by law. Turning to the question whether the
order constituted "executive or administrative" action, and after reviewing
the case law, Amerasinghe, J, drew a distinction which I respectfully adopt.  
  
If an officer appointed to perform judicial functions exercised the discretion
vested in him, but did so erroneously, his order would nevertheless be
"judicial". However, an order made by such an officer would not be "judicial"
if he had not exercised his discretion, for example, if he had abdicated his
authority, or had acted mechanically, by simply acceding to or acquiescing in
proposals made by the police - of which there was insufficient evidence in
that case.  
  
On the other hand, if a judicial officer was required by law to perform some
function in respect of which the law itself had deprived him of any
discretion, then his act was not judicial.  
  
The principal circumstance which distinguishes this case is the failure to
bring the Petitioner before the 8th Respondent. That resulted in a patent want
of jurisdiction. It also caused a failure of natural justice, because the 8th
Respondent acted without asking the Petitioner what he had to say.  
  
Further, on 3.10.96 the detention order made under the PTA had not expired. It
had neither been revoked nor declared invalid. Nevertheless, the 8th
Respondent did not even consider whether that order affected his jurisdiction:
e.g.

**420**

Whether it took away his power to release the Petitioner on bail? Whether he
could have ordered detention in a different place?  
  
Having regard to the patent want of jurisdiction, and the failure to consider
whether he had jurisdiction, I hold that the remand orders made by the 8th
Respondent were not ''judicial" acts done in the exercise of judicial power.
It was the executive which had custody of the Petitioner from 3.10.96, and so
the Petitioner's detention was by "executive or administrative action", not
sanctioned by a judicial act. Detention was in violation of the Petitioner's
fundamental right under Article 13(2), and for that the State is liable.  
  
**ORDER  
**  
I hold that the Petitioner's fundamental rights under Articles 13(1) and 13(2)
have been infringed as set out above, and award the Petitioner a sum of Rs.
300,000 as compensation and costs, payable on or before 30.9.2000. Of this
sum, Rs. 200,000 shall be paid by the State, Rs. 75,000 by the 2nd Respondent
personally, and Rs. 25,000 by the 4th Respondent personally.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J**. - I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/32.html_  

