##  Ramamoorthy v. Douglas Devananda and Others - SLR - 248, Vol 2 of 1999
[1999] LKSC 32; (1999) 2 Sri LR 248 (30 March 1999)

**248**

**RAMAMOORTHY  
v.  
DOUGLAS DEVANANDA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C. SPECIAL (E)  
APPLICATION NO. 2/99 WITH  
S.C. SPECIAL (E)  
APPLICATION NO. 3/99  
MARCH 24, 1999.

_Expulsion of a Member of an Independent Group - Article 99 (13) (a) of the
Constitution - Validity of the expulsion - Non-co-operation with the Group -
Failure to explain alleged misconduct - Wilful failure to attend disciplinary
inquiry - Ex parte decision to expel the Member - Natural justice._

The petitioners were Members of Parliament representing Independent Group No.
2 which contested the 1994 election for the Jaffna District. In all there were
09 Members of the Group who had been selected by the Eelam People's Democratic
Party (the 10th respondent). In June, 1997, the petitioner in this application
and the petitioner in the connected SC special (E) application No. 3/99 were
expelled from the group which expulsion was declared invalid on an application
made to Court in terms of Article 99 (13) (a) of the Constitution. Thereafter,
the 1st respondent (the Leader of the Group) summoned a meeting of Members of
Parliament of the Group for 9.9.97, inter cilia to call for the explanation of
the petitioners in respect of vilifications made against the Group and its
leader. But, the petitioner replied that he would not attend it. Following
this event the petitioner adopted a persistent and wilful policy of non-co-
operation with the Group and its activities and failed to attend Group
meetings. He also failed without excuse to speak in debates in Parliament as
required by the Group. The 1st respondent called for the petitioner's
explanation pursuant to a decision of the Group. By letter dated 23.3.98, the
1st respondent called for the petitioner's explanation for the allegation of
misconduct set out therein. The petitioner failed to give an explanation.

He was given extensions of time and every possible opportunity to explain.
But, he did not respond. Hence, on a decision of the Group a Committee of
three was appointed to hold a disciplinary inquiry into the conduct of the
petitioner.

249

The petitioner informed the Committee that the meetings of the group were mala
fide and that he will not attend meetings of the Committee of Inquiry. The
Committee gave the petitioner a further date but the petitioner did not
attend. Instead, he replied threatening to take disciplinary action against
the Group. As such the Committee held an ex parte inquiry and recommended to
the Group immediate disciplinary action. The Members decided to expel the
petitioner which decision was communicated to him by letter dated 31.1.99
setting out the grounds for the expulsion. By a letter of the same date the
petitioner in the connected SC Special (E) application No. 3199 was also
expelled.

**Held :**

1\. The ruling of the Court in 1997 in favour of the petitioner in respect of
the June, 1997, expulsion was not a bar to the impunged disciplinary
proceeding. The previous ruling was on the ground that there was a breach of
the audi alteram partem rule (a procedural flaw). It did not hold that the
charges were unfounded. In any event the earlier expulsion was on the basis of
alleged misconduct before June, 1997. The second expulsion was based on
subsequent misconduct alleged to have taken place in September and December,
1997.

2\. The fact that two of the members of the Committee of Inquiry were also
members of the first Committee of Inquiry did not justify the allegation of
bias for the reason that at the later inquiry the charges were different. In
any event, by his failure to take the objection before the Committee the
petitioner had waived the plea of bias.

3\. Even though there was no formal charge-sheet framed by the Committee, the
letter dated 23.3.98 addressed to the petitioner gave him adequate notice of
the substances of the allegations of which he was found guilty.

_Per_ Fernando, J.

"Natural justice in this respect is concerned with the substance, and not with
mere form: **. . .** what is required is that the substance of the allegation
be communicated with sufficient precision and clarity to enable the person
charged to know what he has to meet."

4\. The petitioner had no right to have been served with a copy of the report
of the Committee before it was considered by the Group. In the context of his
conduct and persistent refusal to attend the inquiry or even to attend the
Group meetings at which the said report was tabled and discussed, it is
frivolous and vexatious to claim in proceedings before the Court that he was
denied access to the report before it was considered by the Group.

250

_Per_ Fernando, J.

'It is not unreasonable to conclude that the petitioner had totally repudiated
his obligations to the Group, thereby manifesting an intention no longer to
function as a part of the Group. Although the petitioner did not expressly
resign from the Group, resignation might well have been implied from his
conduct.'

**Case referred to :**

1. _Jayatilleke v. Kaleel_ (1994) 1 Sri LR 319, 345.

**APPLICATION** under and in terms of Article 99 (13) (a) of the Constitution
challenging expulsion from membership of a recognized Independent Group.

_D. W. Abeyakoon,_ PC with _E. Thambiah_ for the petitioner.

_E. D. Wickremanayake_ with _U. Abdul Najeem_ for the 1st-08th and 10th
respondents.

9th, 11th and 12th respondents absent and unrepresented.

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 30, 1999.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.**

Thirteen candidates were nominated by the "Independent Group No. 2" (the
Group), which contested the 1994 General Election for the Jaffna District. Ten
of these candidates had been selected by the Eelam People's Democratic Party
(the 10th respondent), and three by the United National Party. On the votes
polled, the Group became entitled to nine seats; and based on the preferences
obtained, nine nominees of the 10th respondent - the petitioner, the 1st
respondent, the 3rd to 8th respondents, and another person \- were declared
elected as Members of Parliament for the Jaffna District. That ninth person
resigned shortly thereafter, and - on the basis of the preferences obtained -
was succeeded by the petitioner's brother, the 9th respondent (who is the
petitioner in SC Special (E) 3/99). We were informed that the three nominees
of the United National Party

251

were not made respondents because they had resigned from the Group.

Both petitioners were expelled from the Group by letters dated 31.1.99. They
filed applications on 26.2.99 challenging their expulsion. The Chief Justice
nominated this bench to hear those applications. When we took up this
application for hearing, counsel agreed that the decision in respect of this
application would apply to SC Special (E) No. 3/99 as well.

These applications are a sequel to two similar applications filed by the same
petitioners in respect of their previous expulsion in June, 1997 (SC Special
(E) Nos. 1 & 2/97, SCM 21.8.97). There it was held that no charge-sheet had
been served on the petitioners, and no explanation called for in regard to the
acts of misconduct alleged against them; and that although a request had been
made to them on the telephone - to come for a "formal inquiry" \- that was
totally inadequate.

Immediately thereafter, the 1st respondent as Leader of the Group, summoned a
meeting of the Members of Parliament of the Group for 9.9.97, to be held in
the Parliamentary Complex. One of the items on the agenda was to call for an
explanation from the petitioners "in respect of vilifications made, and being
made, against [the Group] and its Leader" by the petitioners. The petitioner
replied on 9.9.97 that the meeting had been summoned with the intention of
expelling him and stated that he would not attend. According to the 1st
respondent, the Parliamentary Group met regularly thereafter in the room
allocated for the use of the Group in the Parliament; notices of meeting were
sent to all Members, together with a copy of the minutes of the previous
meeting; copies of all the notices and minutes (from September, 1997, to
February, 1999) were annexed. Eight such meetings were held in 1997, but the
petitioner did not attend any, although on many of those dates he did attend
sittings of Parliament, and gave no excuse for not attending.

252

Mr. D. W. Abeyakoon, PC, relied on the petitioner's. statement in his counter-
affidavit, that he "only received some of the notices and minutes of the
meetings", but not all. What the petitioner had received was entirely within
his knowledge, and the onus was on him to identify those without ambiguity -
and that he could easily have done simply by reference to the dates of the
documents produced by the 1st respondent, without even troubling to annex
copies of what he had received. That omission becomes all the more significant
because twice - in letters dated 23.3.98 and 28.12.98 - the 1st respondent had
asserted that notices and minutes of all meetings had been sent to the
petitioner; but the petitioner failed to deny that in his replies dated 4.4.98
and 4.1.97.

There can be no doubt, therefore, that the petitioner did receive notices and
minutes of all the meetings of the Group.

The notices and the minutes of those meetings show that many matters relevant
to the Group were being discussed. Turning to the second issue relevant to
this case, on 10.11.97 the Group decided that Members should speak during the
Committee Stage of the Budget debate, and to the minutes of that meeting was
annexed a list of Members, the subjects, the dates, and the periods of time
allocated for them to speak. The petitioner was scheduled to speak on 25.11.97
on the votes of the Ministry of Forestry and Environment and on 2.12.97 on the
votes of the Ministry of Science and Technology, for just five minutes on each
occasion. A copy of the minutes of the meeting of 10.11.97 was forwarded to
the petitioner with a notice dated 18.11.97. It is common ground that the
petitioner did not speak on those two occasions, but gave neither an excuse
nor an explanation. However, in his counter-affidavit the petitioner alleged
that he had been allocated subjects which were not familiar to him in order to
embarrass him, but did not claim that he was unaware that he had been
allocated time to speak. Accordingly, it must be assumed that the decision had
been communicated to him in time.

253

The question of disciplinary action against the petitioner was discussed at
several meetings; although the Group decided over and over again that
disciplinary action should be taken and/or that his written explanation should
be called for, no steps were taken until March, 1998. By letter dated 23.3.98
the 1st respondent called for his written explanation:

"From 9th September, 1997, I had been summoning our Parliamentary Group
meetings before the Parliament meets every month. For these meetings, the
notices were sent along with the agenda to all of our Group Members, including
you.

It is observed that you had not only failed to attend any of these
Parliamentary Group meetings up to now, but also failed to give any valid
reasons for your absence from these meetings. Further, you had also failed to
carry out the decisions of the Parliamentary Group, specifically with regard
to the time allocation for the speeches to be made on behalf of the
Independent Group No. 2 during the last Budget Debate in the Parliament.

Under these circumstances, the Parliamentary Group of the Independent Group
No. 2 has come to the conclusion that you appear to be wilfully refusing to
co-operate with our Group in its activities and failing to comply and respect
the decisions of our Group.

Therefore, the Parliamentary Group has unanimously decided and authorised me
to call for your explanations as to why disciplinary action should not be
taken against you.

Please note that your explanations in writing should reach me on or before 6th
April, 1998, to enable me to forward the same to our next Parliamentary Group
meeting for its consideration and appropriate action. If you fail to respond
to this letter, I shall assume that you have no explanations to offer and
shall refer the matter to our Parliamentary Group for appropriate action."

254

The minutes show that the matter was considered thereafter at several
meetings. Thus, on 5.5.98 the Group noted that although no explanation had
been received, "as the postal service in the country was disrupted, it was
reasonable to give more time to both to send their replies". The minutes of
the meeting of 23.6.98 recorded that the petitioner's reply dated 4.4.98 had
been received only on 28.5.98, and noted that he had only said that "a reply
will be sent soon''. That reply made no complaint about the contents of the
letter of 23.3.98 or the procedure. The matter came up again at several
subsequent meetings, and on 6.11.98 it was decided to obtain legal advice. A
copy of the minutes of that meeting was sent to the petitioner with a notice
dated 9.11.98.

At the meeting held on 9.12.98 the Group decided to appoint a Committee of
Inquiry (the Committee) consisting of the 4th, 5th and 8th respondents; to
call for an oral explanation from the petitioner before the Committee; and
that the Committee should meet and hold the inquiry on 28.12.98 at 10.00 am in
Parliament. The 1st respondent was authorised to communicate this decision to
the petitioner, and to request him to appear before the Committee to give his
oral explanation. A copy of the minutes of that meeting was sent to the
petitioner with a notice dated 14.12.98; and by letter dated 17.12.98 the 1st
respondent told the petitioner:

"By your letter dated 4.4.1998 you had written **. . .** that a reply will be
sent very soon. But, so far you have not sent a reply to my letter.

The above matter was considered at the Meeting of the Independent Group 2 on
9.12.1998. To bring this matter to an end very quickly, it was decided at that
Meeting to appoint a Committee of Inquiry in order to obtain verbal
explanation from you. In accordance with that decision a Committee of Inquiry
was appointed with [the 4th respondent as President and the 5th and 6th
respondents] as Members. Further, it was decided that the Inquiry should be
conducted at the Office of the Independent Group 2 situated in the
Parliament." [translation supplied by the petitioner]

255

The petitioner's reply dated 22.12.98 was that:

" **. . .** Since I have not replied to your letters calling for explanation
as such no letter was sent for the Meeting that decided to appoint an Inquiry
Committee for which I was to attend **. . .**

**. . .** I am aware that Meetings were conducted to take actions against me
and not for any other good intentions. I consider that all actions that are
being taken against me, after the Supreme Court decision are with a narrow
view, Hence, I would like to inform you again that nothing good will come out
of my attending these Meetings." [translation supplied by the petitioner]

The petitioner did not appear before the Committee on 28.12.98, and the 1st
respondent again wrote to him the same day:

" **. . .** Not only invitations were sent to you for the Meetings that took
place this year, even the Minutes were sent. If necessary copies of these
could be sent to you.

**. . .** Therefore, to give you another ultimatum, it has been decided to
conduct and complete the Inquiry on the forthcoming 5.1.1999. By this, I
kindly request you to be present at the Office of the Independent Group 2
situated in the Parliament at 10.30 am. The Inquiry Committee with [the 4th
respondent as president and the 5th and 6th respondents] as Members will
conduct the Inquiry." [translation supplied by the petitioner]

The petitioner replied on 4.1.99 that:

" **. . .** I consider that you are constantly troubling me for you have a
grudge against me since you lost in the Supreme Court. I have stressed over
and over again that types of Meetings are only to take action against me and
not with any other good intention.

**. . .** Knowing that more than 400 are buried in the Chemmani cemetery, has
the Jaffna Independent Group taken any action so far in any of the Meetings?

256

There are 795 Remand Prisoners detained in Kalutara without Inquiries for
several years. After knowing this has the Independent Group 2 taken any
action? **. . .**

If there is no suitable reply for questions as above I and many other Jaffna
District Members jointly proposed to appoint an Inquiry Committee against you
is for you to know, who is to blame and take action against whom."
[translation supplied by the petitioner]

He did not appear before the Committee even on 5. 1. 99.

The Committee was, therefore, compelled to proceed ex parte. It found the
allegations proved, and recommended immediate disciplinary action. The Group
considered the Report of the Committee on 18.1.99. The Members agreed with the
findings and unanimously decided that the two petitioners should be expelled.
The 1st respondent conveyed that decision to the petitioner by letter dated
31.1.99, together with the reasons therefor:

"(1) You have wilfully absented yourself from the eight consecutive meetings
of the Parliamentary Group referred to in this letter.

(2) You have wilfully not complied with the decisions of the Parliamentary
Group, specifically by not speaking during the 1997 Budget Debate in
Parliament.

(3) You have wilfully desisted from giving written explanations to the points
raised in my letter of 23.3.1998.

(4) You have wilfully kept away from the inquiry into your conduct by a three-
member Inquiry Committee, which was scheduled for 28.12.1998, and then
postponed for 5.1.1999 due to your absence on the first date.

(5) Your above-mentioned actions dearly imply that you have wilfully
contravened declarations (1), (3) and (5) of the

257

Oath of the Independent Group 2 of the Jaffna Electoral District, which Oath
signed on 5.7.1994 had been declared by the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka as the
Constitution of the Independent Group 2.'

The findings of the Committee were substantially to the same effect.

Mr. Abeyakoon made several submissions in support of his contention that the
expulsion was bad in law. First, he contended that immediately after this
Court ruled in favour of the petitioner in respect of the June, 1997,
expulsion, the 1st respondent took steps directed at his expulsion, commencing
with the meeting of 9.9.97. However, that cannot be considered as unlawful or
improper because this Court did not hold that the charges in respect of which
the petitioner had first been expelled were unfounded: only that there had
been a procedural flaw, namely, a breach of the audi alteram partem rule. That
decision was, therefore, not a bar to disciplinary proceedings in respect of
the very same charges. In any event, it is quite clear that those charges
necessarily related to misconduct alleged to have occurred before June, 1997,
and the charges resulting in the second expulsion were plainly based on
subsequent misconduct alleged to have taken place in September and December,
1997.

Mr. Abeyakoon's second argument was that the findings of the Committee were
vitiated by bias, because two members (the 4th and the 8th respondents) had
also been members of the first Committee of Inquiry. Had the Committee being
inquiring into the very same charges different consideration might have
arisen. Here, plainly, the charges were different, and that particular
objection - of having formed a view and thus prejudged the matters in issue -
cannot be taken. Further, the Group consisted of only nine Members. Excluding
the two petitioners, and the 1st respondent whom the petitioners had
criticised as being "dictatorial", "systematically hostile", etc., there were
only six members to choose from. I doubt whether the Group was obliged to
choose the three who had not functioned on the first Committee. If that
principle has always to be applied, the

258

consequence would be that there would be no one qualified to inquire if ever a
third set- of charges arose.

There is another consideration which is a complete answer to Mr. Abeyakoon's
objection. As Wade observes:

"The Court normally insists that the objection shall be taken as soon as the
party prejudiced knows the facts which entitle him to object. If, after he or
his advisers, know of the disqualification, they let the proceedings continue
without protest, they are held to have waived their objection and the
determination cannot be challenged." (Administrative Law, 5th ed, page 430).

The petitioner was aware of the composition of the Committee not later than
22.12.98 when he replied to the 1st respondents letter of 17.12.98; the
minutes of the meeting of 9.12.98 would probably have reached him even before.
Even in his letter dated 4.1.99 he did not take the objection. Thus, he let
the Committee continue its proceedings without protest, and thereby waived
this plea of bias.

Third, it was contended that the letter dated 23.3.98 was not a charge-sheet;
that no proper charge-sheet was ever served on the petitioner; and that in any
event it was the Committee, and not the 1st respondent, which should have
served the charge-sheet. Natural justice in this respect is concerned with the
substance, and not with mere form: see _Jayatilleke v. Kaleel_ (1). What is
required is that the substance of the allegation be communicated, with
sufficient precision and clarity to enable the person charged to know what he
has to meet. The requirements of the law relating to criminal procedure as to
indictments and charges do not apply.

It is quite clear from the letter dated 23.3.98 that the petitioner was being
charged with having failed to attend every single meeting held in 1997,
without giving valid reasons, and with having failed to carry out the decision
of the Group "specifically" in regard to speaking in Parliament during the
1997 Budget debate. The reference made, in a general way, to failing "to carry
out the decisions of the Group', would not have justified (in the absence of
particulars) a finding that

259

there had been non-compliance with any other decision. However, there was no
decision on that basis. That letter also made it clear that in those
circumstances the petitioner appeared to be wilfully refusing to co-operate
with the Group in its activities, and that disciplinary action was
contemplated. I hold that the petitioner had adequate notice of the substance
of the allegations of which he was later found guilty.

The submission that the Committee itself should have served the charge-sheet
is quite unfounded. Almost invariably the practice in disciplinary proceedings
is that an inquiring officer or a committee of inquiry is appointed only after
a charge-sheet has been served, an explanation received, and such explanation
is found to be unsatisfactory. There is no justification at all for the
submission that it is only the Committee of Inquiry which could prepare and
serve the charge-sheet. Such a procedure would have been appropriate for an
inquisitorial body.

Mr. Abeyakoon then submitted that the Committee should have sent a copy of its
report to the petitioner, and called for his observations, before that report
was considered by the Group. That is a request which the petitioner did not
make even on 4.1.99, when he virtually defied the 1st respondent and the
Group-making allegations against the Group and threatening to appoint a
Committee of Inquiry to probe them. I hold that the petitioner had no such
right. Furthermore, the petitioner had the opportunity of perusing the
Committee's report and making representations to the Committee and/or to the
whole Group. That report was tabled at the Group meeting on 7.1.99, and
discussion was postponed for 18.1.99; notice was given on 14.12.98 of the
first of those meetings, and on 11.1.99 of the second; the second notice
expressly stated that the question of disciplinary action against the
petitioner would be considered on 18.1.99. Nevertheless, the petitioner
refused to attend either of those meetings. Having failed for several months
to submit an explanation, having refused to participate in meetings, and to
appear before the Committee, and having failed to avail himself of the
opportunity of commenting on the report at the relevant Group meetings, it is
frivolous and vexatious now to claim in these proceedings that he was denied
access to the report before it was considered by the Group.

260

Mr. Abeyakoon's fifth contention was that other Members of the Group who had
absented themselves from meetings, or had not spoken in Parliament, were not
subjected to disciplinary proceedings, and that there had thus been
discrimination against the petitioner. Those matters should have been raised
in his explanation, before the Committee, and at meetings of the Group both
before and after the Committee submitted its report. They cannot be
entertained for the first time in this Court, for that would be to take over
functions of the Committee.

Finally, it was claimed that the Committee had found the petitioner guilty of
matters with which he had not been charged. Mr. Abeyakoon conceded that the
Committee was justified in holding that the petitioner had wilfully refused to
reply to the letter dated 23.3.98, and to appear before the Committee on
28.12.98 and 5.1.99. As for the two specific charges, he conceded that the
Committee was justified, on the available material, in concluding that the
petitioner had failed to attend all eight Group meetings held in 1977 and that
this was non-co-operation; and that he had deliberately failed to participate
in the Budget debate, in breach of party discipline. While he did submit that
the petitioner had a reason for this \- that he was not familiar with the
subject - he acknowledged that the petitioner had failed to communicate this
explanation to the Committee, as he should have. It is not for this Court to
entertain pleas which the petitioner deliberately refrained from submitting to
the Committee.

Mr. Abeyakoon strenuously urged that the Committee had found the petitioner
guilty - without a specific charge having been framed \- of acting contrary to
clauses 1, 3, and 5 of the "pledge" which the EPDP nominees of the independent
Group had signed in July, 1994, as a condition of receiving nomination. The
three relevant clauses were:

1\. to act according to the decision of the Secretary-General of the EPDP who
is the Leader of the Group;

3\. within the Group, not to act contrary to the policies of the EPDP, and
upon a breach to abide by the decision taken by the Leader of the Group and
Secretary-General of the EPDP;

261

5\. if elected to Parliament, to restrict his Parliamentary activities to the
decision of the Leader of the Group and Secretary General of the EPDP.

The effect of this "pledge" was considered in SC Special Nos. (E) 1 & 2/97:

" **. . .** just as much as the party constitution is an agreement or contract
between persons for the purpose of association, the "pledge" is a contract
between the parties intended to ensure conformity with party politics."

Mr. Abeyakoon admitted that the Group has no constitution or rules. The pledge
must therefore, be regarded as setting out the basis on which the EPDP members
of the Group decided to associate as a Group. Mr. Abeyakoon strenuously
contended that the pledge gave the 1st respondent dictatorial powers, and that
the petitioner was forced to sign it in order to get nomination.

It would seem that the Committee did not find the petitioner guilty of a
breach of the "pledge" as a distinct and separate ground: the expulsion letter
shows that the Committee only found that his "above-mentioned actions" imply a
contravention of the "pledge". With or without the "pledge", a prolonged
refusal to attend Group meetings, without prior excuse or subsequent
explanation, and a refusal to perform an important function of a Member of
Parliament, would unquestionably be a serious breach of discipline of any
political party or group. When to that is added a defiant refusal to attend an
inquiry intended to ascertain his explanation, it is not unreasonable to
conclude that the petitioner had totally repudiated his obligations to the
Group, thereby manifesting an intention no longer to function as a part of the
Group. Although the petitioner did not expressly resign from the Group,
resignation might well have been implied from his conduct.

In my view, the petitioner cannot question the validity or propriety of the
pledge in these proceedings. The Group, almost from the inception, was
substantially a part of the EPDP, although in relation

262

to Parliament it had a separate identity. In the circumstances, a decision
that the objectives, policies and Parliamentary activities of the Group should
coincide with those of the EPDP was not unreasonable. Whether those were to be
determined by the entire membership, or a committee, or a single individual,
was primarily a matter for the members. The above three clauses of the pledge
reflect an acceptance by the Group that it would be the Leader of the Group,
who is also the Secretary-General of the EPDP, who would communicate and even
determine them. If the petitioner was later unable to agree with the "pledge",
he should have raised the issue within the Group and before the Committee of
Inquiry. Even assuming that he might be entitled to question the 'pledge"
outside the structures of the Group, he cannot do so in these proceedings for
the first time.

For the above reasons, I determine that the expulsion of the petitioner was
lawful and valid. I award the 1st to 8th and 10th respondents a sum of Rs.
15,000 as costs, payable by the petitioner.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Expulsion of the petitioners upheld._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/32.html_  

