##  Ramamoorthy and Rameshwaran v. Douglas Devananda and Others - SLR - 278,
Vol 2 of 1998 [1997] LKSC 32; (1998) 2 Sri LR 278 (21 August 1997)

**278**

**RAMAMOORTHY AND RAMESHWARAN  
v.  
DOUGLAS DEVANANDA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
WIJETUNGE, J. AND  
DR. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. SPL NO. (E) 1 AND 2/97  
JULY 24 AND AUGUST 01, 1997.

_Expulsion from political party - Article 99 (13) (a) of the Constitution -
Charges and the audi alteram partem rule - Failure to serve charge - sheet and
call for explanation - Termination of membership of Independent Group 2 in
Parliament._

**Held:**

Expulsion from political party (EPDP) and termination of membership of the
Independent Group 2 of Parliament were invalid as there was failure to comply
with the audi alteram partem rule. There was no charge - sheet served and no
explanation for alleged acts of misconduct was called for. A request by
telephone to come for an inquiry is totally inadequate.

The pledge given by members (of Independent Group 2) is a contract between the
parties for the purpose of the association to ensure conformity with party
policies. Yet a fair hearing was a precondition to deprivation of rights or to
the imposition of penalties and disabilities being an implied term of such
contract.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Durayappah v. Fernando 69 NLR 265.  
  
2\. Amaradasa v. The Land Reform Commission 79 (1) NLR 505, 544.  
  
3\. John v. Rees (1970) Ch 345, 402.  
  
4\. Dissanayake v. Kaleel (1993) 2 Sri LR 135, 182, 234.  
  
5\. Cooper v. Wandsworth Board of Works (1863) 14 CB (NS) 180._

**APPLICATIONS** against expulsion from political party and termination of
membership of Parliamentary Group.

_D. W. Abeykoon, PC with Chandrika Morawake and A. Rajeswary for petitioners.  
  
E. D. Wickremanayake for 1st, 2nd and 15th respondents._

279

_U. Abdul Najeem for 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th and 14th respondents.  
  
Dharmapala Senaratne for the 13th respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

August 21, 1997  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.**

Applications Nos. (E) 1 and 2 of 1997 were heard together as the material
facts are almost identical. The petitioner in application No.1 (Mr.
Ramamoorthy) is an elected Member of Parliament representing the electoral
district of Jaffna as a candidate of the Independent Group No. 2 at the
election held on 16.8.94. The petitioner in application No. 2 (Mr.
Rameshwaran) is also a Member of Parliament representing the electoral
district of Jaffna as a candidate of the Independent Group No. 2; he, however,
came into Parliament upon the resignation of another elected member of
Parliament from the Independent Group No. 2. The petitioners are brothers and
they are members of the recognised political party known as the Eelam People's
Democratic Party (EPDP). They have invoked the jurisdiction of this court in
terms of Article 99 (13) (a) of the Constitution seeking inter alia that their
expulsion from the EPDP and the termination of their membership of the
Independent Group No. 2 are null and void.

Admittedly, the 1st respondent who is a Member of Parliament, the Secretary-
General of the EPDP and the leader of the Independent Group No. 2 addressed
the letter P8 to the petitioners informing them that they have been expelled
from the EPDP with effect from 6.6.97. Similarly the 1st respondent by P9
dated 9.6.97 informed the petitioners that he has terminated their membership
of the Independent Group No. 2 of the electoral district of Jaffna.

P8 dated, 6.6.97.reads as follows:

1\. On allegations and complaints received from members of the public,
particularly from the people of the Islands of Jaffna against you, 1, in my
capacity as Secretary-General of the EPDP and Leader of Independent Group No.
2 of the Electoral District of Jaffna, constituted a Committee of Inquiry
consisting of Hon. M. Chandrakumar, MP, Hon. S. Thangavel MP and Hon. S.
Sivathasan MP to inquire into these allegations and complaints and submit a
report to me.

280

The Committee of Inquiry has found you guilty of 3 out of 4 charges. The
charges on which you have been found guilty are annexed hereto separately.

2\. You have made disparaging remarks about our Party and its policy and about
me in my role as Secretary-General of the EPDP and Leader of Independent Group
No. 2. Your remarks have been reported in the undermentioned news papers and
television.

The Island of 6th May, 1997  
  
Divaina of 6th May, 1997 ;  
  
The Midweek Mirror of 7th May, 1997  
  
Dinamina of 7th May, 1997  
  
Yukthiya of 11th May, 1997  
  
Lakbima of 11th May, 1997

Divaina of 13th May, 1997  
  
The Island of 13th May, 1997  
  
Virakesari of 14th May, 1997  
  
Daily News of 26th May, 1997  
  
Sarinigar of 22nd May, 4th June, 1997  
  
Interview given to MTV Television on 7th May, 1997

Despite the wide publicity given to the publications referred to above, you
have not denied making the said remarks either to the said newspapers, the MTV
television or to the party. In these circumstances there can be no doubt
whatsoever that in fact the contents of the newspaper articles and the
interview given to MTV television correctly published your remarks.

The Central Committee of the EPDP which met to discuss your remarks referred
to above, has found you guilty of violating party discipline.

3\. In these circumstances the Central Committee of EPDP has directed me to
inform you that you have been expelled from the EPDP with effect from the date
of this letter.

Yours truly,  
Sgd.  
K. N. Douglas Devananda, MP.,  
Secretary-General, EPDP.

281

Copy to:

1\. Secretary-General of Parliament

2\. Commissioner of. Elections.

P8A sets out the charges referred to in P8. The charges against the petitioner
in application No. 1 read as follows:

The charges on which Hon. Rajendram Ramamoorthy, MP alias Seelan had been
found guilty

1\. On the explicit directions given by the Hon. Rajendram Rameshwaran, MP and
the Hon. Rajendram Ramamoorthy, MP, some of the party cadres were compelled to
work for Rajendram Ramanathan alias Raghu, brother of both Hon. Rameshwaran
and Hon. Ramamoorthy, their parents and their family members, attending to the
following household activities and private business activities of Raghu:

cooking for the household of Raghu and parents  
  
shallow water fishing  
  
salting and  
  
drying of fish drying of breece de mer  
  
cleaning of fishing boats

Party members who questioned regarding these arrangements were told by Hon.
Rameshwaran and Hon. Ramamoorthy that the fishing business was being
undertaken by them to generate funds for the EPDP. Party members who refused
to carry out such tasks were physically assaulted or otherwise punished by
Hon. Rameshwaran and Hon. Ramamoorthy, on false charges of violating party
rules. Several members of the party were kept in solitary confinement in a
dark room for a varying number of days. Hon. Ramamoorthy thus misused his
position as an EPDP Member of Parliament.

2\. Hon. Rajendram Ramamoorthy, MP alias Seelan and Nicholas alias Lingam,
driver of Hon. Ramamoorthy, during the period June/ July, 1995, had in the
name of the EPDP, ordered fishermen of Analaitivu and Eluvaitivu, that they
should henceforth sell all their catch of crabs, prawns, lobsters, breech de
mer and fish only to Rajendram Ramanathan alias Raghu, brother of Hon.
Ramamoorthy at prices fixed by Rajendram Ramanathan alias Raghu, these prices
being much lower than market prices. The fishermen were thus

282

compelled to sell their catch at low prices for more than one year. Thus, Hon.
R. Ramamoorthy, while being a Member of Parliament belonging to the EPDP
misused his public position and deprived the fishermen of Analaitivu and
Eluvaitivu of part of their legitimate earnings.

3\. Hon. R. Rameshwaran, in September 1996, in his capacity as Member of
Parliament and EPDP Organiser for the Islands had offered to transport to
Colombo free of charge, packages of high quality seasoned tobacco belonging to
individuals in Analaitivu, and deliver to business establishments in Colombo
specified by the owners. After Hon. R. Rameshwaran accepting the packages of
tobacco in Analaitivu and transporting them out of Analaitivu, the owners
heard nothing about their produce for some months. When they contacted Hon. R.
Rameshwaran, he directed them to contact his brother Hon. R. Ramamoorthy in
Colombo who was described by Hon. R. Rameshwaran as the person in charge of
delivery in Colombo. When the individuals contacted Hon. R. Ramamoorthy in
Colombo, he directed them to go over to an establishment, other than those
specified by the owners, and to collect their dues. When the owners of the
tobacco went over to that establishment, they were asked to pay a
transportation charge of Rs. 800 per package as against the normal charge of
Rs. 300 per package. Furthermore, they found that their high quality tobacco
had been replaced with low quality tobacco in the packages. Everyone of the
owners suffered financial loss.

This is a case of intentional cheating of innocent tobacco farmers by both
Hon. R. Rameshwaran and Hon. R. Ramamoorthy, resulting in tarnishing the
reputation of the EPDP.

The petitioner in application No. 2 was found guilty of 8 charges. Some of
these charges were the same as the charges against the petitioner in
application No. 1. There is little doubt that the charges against both
petitioners were of a serious nature. As submitted by Mr. Wikramanayake, for
the 1st, 2nd and 15th respondents, the expulsion from the EPDP was for two
reasons. Firstly, the petitioners were found guilty of charges set out in P8A.
Secondly, the petitioners were guilty of making disparaging remarks concerning
the 1st respondent and the EPDP in newspapers and at an interview to the MTV.

283

The position of both the petitioners is that they were totally unaware of the
charges and the reasons for their expulsion from the EPDP until they received
P8. The principal submission of Mr. Abeykoon for the petitioners is that the
expulsion from the EPDP and the termination of the membership of the
Independent Group No. 2 are invalid for want of compliance with the audi
alteram partem rule. It seems to me that this is the crucial issue that arises
for consideration in both applications.

Mr. Wikremanayake strenuously contended in his oral and written submissions
that there was no violation of the audi alteram partem rule. Counsel urged
that the petitioners were aware not only of the allegations being made against
them but also the nature and volume of the evidence that was available. Mr.
Wikremanayake referred us in particular to the following averments in the
affidavit of the 1st respondent (paragraphs 31, 32 and 33) filed in
application No. 2:

31\. by the beginning of May, 1997, it was clear from the investigations of
the committee that the allegations against the petitioner and his brother were
serious and that there was a volume of evidence against them. I state that
thereafter on the 2nd May, 1997 I telephoned the petitioner and his brother
Ramamoorthy who live in adjoining houses at Madiwela and informed them that it
was the suggestion of the committee that a formal inquiry be held. I did
suggest to the petitioner and brother that in order to avoid embarrassment to
themselves and the party they should consider whether they should resign their
membership in Parliament. I told them that if they did not wish to resign,
they should come to my office at Layards Road, Colombo 5, on the following day
so that steps necessary could be taken to initiate and conduct a formal
inquiry.

32\. I state that thereafter the petitioner and his brother Ramamoorthy
divorced themselves completely from the party. From 3rd May onwards, the two
brothers did not attend the party's office, gave several interviews to the
media including a television interview making serious allegations against me,
stating that I was dictatorial, stating that they were going to function as
'Independents' in Parliament supporting those who helped them in their legal
problems, alleging that anyone who opposed me would, be eliminated, suggesting
that their own lives were in danger because of me,

284

that the EPDP had a killer squad which was opposed by them, claiming that they
were opposed to the party policy of seeking a Tamil-speaking regiment and that
they would state without fear that I was a racist even more cruel than
Prabakaran. I annex hereto marked 1 R17 to 1 R27 newspapers relating to the
said matters and translations 1 R25-A and 1R27-A. A cassette recording of the
television interview is also available for examination by Your Lordships
Court.

33\. When it was realised that the petitioner and his brother would not attend
the party office for the purpose of a formal inquiry being commenced, I asked
the members of the Inquiring Committee to submit a written report. That
report, dated 20th May, 1997, was submitted for consideration to the members
of the Central Committee who were available. Of the 21 surviving members,
there were (excluding the petitioner) 15 members who considered the report and
the conduct of the petitioner and his brother and unanimously decided that he
should be expelled from the party. I was then directed by the Central
Committee to inform the petitioner and his brother Ramamoorthy that they had
been expelled from the party. I did this by the letter dated 6th June, 1997,
which has been marked as P8. I herewith annex 5 affidavits from the Central
Committee Members and marked as 1 R28-B, 1 R28-C, 1 R28-D and 1 R28-E.

Mr. Wikremanayake submitted that if this court accepts the position as set out
above, it follows that the petitioners were afforded an opportunity of being
heard but that they had refused to avail themselves of that opportunity. In
the circumstances, there was nothing more that the 1st respondent could have
done and there was sufficient compliance with the audi alteram partem
principle.  
  
However, it is not disputed that no charge-sheet was served on the
petitioners. No explanation in regard to their alleged acts of misconduct was
called for. As rightly submitted by Mr. Abeykoon, if the 1st respondent was in
a position to have sent the petitioners P8 and P9, what was the difficulty in
serving a charge-sheet and calling for an explanation? The question of holding
a formal inquiry would arise only thereafter. A request to the petitioners on
the telephone to come for a formal inquiry is totally inadequate. It was far
too serious a matter to be dealt with in that informal manner. The fact , that
the petitioners were duly elected Members of Parliament and that

285

they were the elected representatives of the people is a very relevant
consideration. What is more, the consequences of expulsion from the EPDP and
the termination of membership of the Independent Group No. 2 are, as complete
as could be imagined, to use the words of the Privy Council in Durayappah v.
Fernando, 69 NLR 265.(1) As observed by Sharvananda, J. (as he then was) in
Amaradasa v. The Land Reform Commission, 79 NLR (volume 1) 505 at 544(2) It is
of the utmost importance to uphold the right and indeed the duty of the courts
to ensure that powers are not exercised in breach or the principles of natural
justice when the exercise of such powers impinges on the basic rights of
citizens.

I now turn to the second ground of expulsion from the EPDP referred to above.
Mr. Wikremanayake strongly urged that there is no dispute in regard to the
disparaging remarks made by the petitioners concerning the 1st respondent and
the EPDP in the newspapers and in an interview to the MTV. The petitioners,
however, have not admitted all the news items attributed to them. In any
event, the authenticity, the correctness and the accuracy of the news items
can be ascertained, and findings reached thereon, only at a fair inquiry after
adequate notice of the allegations has been given to the petitioners. H. W. R.
Wade in his work on Administrative Law (6th edition at page 535) . emphasizes
the basic principle that fair procedure comes first and it is only after
hearing both sides that the merits can be properly considered. In this
connection, it is well to bear in mind the dangers expressed by Megarry, J. in
John v. Rees (1970 ch. 345 at 402)(3). As everybody who has anything to do
with the law well knows, the path of the law is strewn with examples of open
and shut cases which, somehow were not; of unanswerable charges which, in the
event, were completely answered; of inexplicable conduct which was fully
explained; of fixed and unalterable determinations that, by discussion,
suffered a change. Having regard to these principles, I hold that there has
been a failure to afford a fair opportunity to the petitioners to correct or
explain or contradict the alleged disparaging remarks concerning the 1st
respondent and the EPDP.  
  
Apart from P8, the other document which is challenged in these proceedings is
P9. The contents of P9 read as follows:

286

121, Park Road,  
Colombo 6,  
09.06.1997.

You have been duly informed that the EPDP of which you were member has now
expelled you from the party.

You contested the Parliamentary Election as a candidate of the Independent
Group No. 2 of the Electoral District of Jaffna of which I was the leader. You
would also recall that you gave an under taking at the time of submission of
nomination papers that you will conduct yourself in accordance with all the
stipulations in a pledge signed by you. A copy of that pledge is annexed
hereto for your easy reference.

In view of the fact that you have been expelled from the EPDP and have
violated the pledge given by you, your conduct has left me with no alternative
but to terminate your membership of the Independent Group No. 2 of the
Electoral District of Jaffna.

In view of the consequences that must necessarily flow, I am forwarding a copy
of this letter to the Secretary-General of Parliament for necessary action.

Yours truly,  
Sgd.

K. N. Doulgas Devananda, MP.,  
Secretary-General, EPDP  
Leader, Independent Group No. 2  
Electoral District of Jaffna.

Copy to:  |

 1\. Secretary-General of Parliament

 2\. Commissioner of Elections.  
  
  
---|---  
  
On a reading of P9 it would appear that there were two reasons for the
termination of membership of the Independent Group No. 2. The first is the
expulsion from the EPDP and the second reason is the violation of the pledge
given by the petitioners. I have already considered the validity of the
expulsion from the EPDP. I agree with , the submission of Mr. Wikremanayake
that just as much as the party

287

constitution is an agreement or contract between persons for the purpose of
association, the pledge is a contract between the parties intended to ensure
conformity with party policies. Fernando, J. in Dissanayake v. Kaleel (1993) 2
SLR 135 at 182(4) exhaustively reviewed the cases and stated: Although the
rights in question arose essentially from contract, a fair hearing was a
precondition to deprivation of rights or to the imposition of penalties and
disabilities being an implied term of such contract. In the words of Willes,
J. in Cooper v. Wandsworth Board of Works (1863) 14 CB (NS) 180(5) . . . the
rule is of universal application, and founded upon the plainest principles of
justice. I accordingly hold that the termination of membership of the
petitioners of the Independent Group No. 2 on the ground of alleged violation
of the pledge is subject to the audi alteram partem rule, and there has been a
failure to comply with it.

Mr. Wikremanayake relied strongly on the judgment of Kulatunga, J. in
Dissanayake's case (supra) - The learned Judge, however, in the course of his
judgment clearly stated: The right of a MP to relief under Article 99 (13) (a)
is a legal right and forms part of his constitutional rights as a MP. If his
complaint is that he has been expelled from the membership of his party in
breach of the rules of natural justice, he will ordinarily be entitled to
relief; and this court may not determine such expulsion to be valid unless
there are overwhelming reasons warranting such decision. Such decision would
be competent only in the most exceptional circumstances permitted by law and
in furtherance of the public good the need for which should be beyond doubt.
at page 234 (The emphasis is mine). In considering the campaign carried on by
the petitioners in that case between 28.08.91 and 6.9.91 Kulatunga, J. took
the view that it amounted to a threat to stable government in the country, a
campaign that was likely to confuse or inflame the public mind against the
Head of the State, the government and the party in power. The learned Judge
added . . . this case involves the interests of a party which has been voted
into power by the electors and above all the interests of the public who are
often the victims of such indisciplined controversy. No such weighty
considerations are present in the applications before us. I accordingly hold
that strict compliance with the audi alteram partem rule was a precondition to
a valid expulsion from the party (EPDP) as well as the termination of the
membership of the Independent Group No. 2 of the electoral district of Jaffna.
This the respondents have failed to do.

288

For the reasons set out above, I determine that both P8 and P9 are of no force
or avail in law and that they are invalid.

In all the circumstances, I make no order as to costs of these proceedings.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
**  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

**_Expulsion from party and termination of membership declared invalid._ s**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/32.html_  

