##  De Silva and Others v. Jeyaraj Fernandopulle and Others - SLR - 22, Vol 1
of 1996 [1995] LKSC 32; (1996) 1 Sri LR 22 (30 November 1995)

**22**

**DE SILVA AND OTHERS  
v.  
JEYARAJ FERNANDOPULLE AND OTHERS.**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO, J.  
PERERA, J. AND  
WIJETUNGE, J.  
S.C. APPLICATIONS  
NOS. 66/95 & 67/95 (CONSOLIDATED)  
SEPTEMBER 13 AND 27, 1995.  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Prevention of exercise of legitimate rights by the use
of armed thuggery and intimidation and pressure on the Law Enforcement
au­thorities \- Constitution, Articles 12 (1), 12 (2), and 14 (1) (c) -
Parliamentary (Powers and Privileges) Act, No. 21 of 1993 ss. 3.4,7,9-
Parliamentary Privi­lege- Statements made in Parliament - Statements recorded
in Hansard.  
_  
The 1st to 62nd petitioners in application No. 66/95 are members of United
Airport Taxi Services Society Ltd., (UATSSL), the 63rd petitioner; while the
1st to 29th petitioners in application No. 67/95 are members of the Airport
Taxi Serv­ices Co-operative Society Ltd., (ATSCSL) the 30th petitioner.  
  
The two Societies had entered into agreements with the Airport and Aviation
Services (Sri Lanka) Ltd., the 14th Respondent to enable their members to
provide taxi services for passengers disembarking at the Colombo
Interna­tional Airport, Katunayake ("Airport) for a period of six years
commencing from 31 January, 1991. The said agreements were valid till 31
December, 1996.  
  
A third Society by the name of Airport Taxi Services Society Ltd., ("ATSSL)
too had entered into a similar agreement with the 14th Respondent. These three
societies had 200 taxis operating at the Airport and were the only taxis so
permitted by the 14th Respondent at the time. A monthly fee of Rs. 1,000/- was
payable in respect of each vehicle. The 14th Respondent also was at liberty
itself to provide similar services or through other persons or bodies. The
ATSCSL were allocated numbers from 1 to 63, the ATSSL from 64 to 115 and
UATSSL from 116 to 200. Passengers seeking the services of a taxi were
required to obtain such services from the counter of the 14th Respondent which
allocates a taxi on a duty turn commencing from number 1 to number 200 so as
to ensure that the services of all 200 taxis were fairly and equally
distributed.  
  
The 14th Respondent had made no complaint about the manner in which the
petitioner societies and their members discharged their obligations under the
agreements.

**23**

The members of UATSSL and ATSCSL were predominantly supporters of the United
National Party (UNP) while the members of the ATSSL were predomi­nantly
supporters of the People's Alliance (PA) and actively campaigned for the
parties which they supported at the General Elections and Presidential
Elec­tion of 1994.  
  
On 31 January, 1995 the 1st to 7th Respondents held a public meeting at the
airport premises and with the aid of armed and marked thugs threatened and
intimidated the petitioners and despite the presence of nearly 150 to 200
po­licemen who looked on passively, have from 31 January, 1995 prevented the
petitioners from entering the airport and engaging in their occupation.
Several complaints to the Police and other authorities have been of no avail
and now the taxi services at the Airport are being exclusively performed by
the 16th Respondent company with a membership of 400 members and having as
Secretary of the Company Felician Fernandopulle the brother of the 1st
Re­spondent. The petitioners claim that the 1st to 7th Respondents have
brought pressure on 8th to 13th Respondents who are high ranking Police
Officers and on the 14th and 15th Respondents who are the Airport and Aviation
Services (Sri Lanka) Ltd., and its Chairman respectively to achieve their
objective.  
  
The petitioners complain of infringement of their fundamental rights under
Articles 12(1), 12(2) and 14(1) (g) of the Constitution by the Respondents.  
  
The 1st Respondent who is a Deputy Minister of the PA Government whilst
denying the allegations against him, states he attended the inauguration of a
new taxi-service on 01 February, 1995 on invitation as the Chief Guest. He
went to Katunayake at 9.30 a.m. and was the first of the invitees to arrive
there. Within minutes, the Transport Manager of the Airport came with the
officials and the other invitees, the 2nd to 6th Respondents who are members
of Parliament or Provincial Councillors from the District and the members of
the new taxi service also arrived. The opening ceremony was peaceful and
concluded at 11.00 a.m. There was no violence or threats, all 400 members of
the 16th Respondent company are not members of the PA.  
  
The 2nd to 6th Respondents also denied the allegations against them and at the
hearing it was conceded that there was no evidence of their involvement.  
  
The 7th Respondent who is the Co-ordinating Secretary to the Deputy Minister
(1st Respondent) also denied the allegations against him and adopted the
averments in the affidavit of the 1st Respondent. The Colombo International
Airport Taxi Services (Pvt) Ltd., the 16th Respondent was incorporated on 03
January, 1995 and he (7th Respondent) was its Chairman. The Company applied to
the 14th Respondent for permission to run a taxi service at the Airport and
this had been approved and numbers 200 to 600 had been allocated to the

**24**

16th Respondent company. Permission was granted to operate the taxi service
from 1.00 a.m. on 01 February, 1995. A simple ceremony was organised on 31
January, 1995 to inaugurate the new taxi service and he (7th Respondent)
invited the 1st Respondent to attend as Chief Guest at the ceremony as well as
the 1st to 6th Respondents. Officials of the Airport authorities and the
Katunayake Police were also informed about the ceremony. The 7th Respondent
says he left the venue at 11.15 a.m.  
  
The 10th and 13th Respondents who were the Senior Superintendent of Police and
Chief Inspector of Police, Katunayake Police Station stated that on
instruc­tions of the Deputy Inspector- General of Police Western Province-
Northern Range they attended the Airport on 31.1.95 to provide security with
about 80 Police Officers as 1st and 2nd Respondents and several other members
of Parliament were due to attend. No information regarding anticipated
violence was received. They saw 1st and 2nd Respondents speaking to the crowd
but they did not hear any of the persons asking any taxi operator to leave the
Airport premises or threats of smashing up of vehicles. They deny that marked
or armed thugs were present or that any incidents leading to a breach of the
peace took place and they saw no mass exodus of taxi operators. No com­plaints
of any such incidents were made to any officer on that occasion. A complaint
marked P4 (A) dated 1.2.95 and several complaints corresponding to P6(1) to
P6(49) were made at the Katunayake Police between 1.2.95 and 10.2.95 but the
allegation that no action was taken on them was denied. Steps were taken to
patrol the Airport premises but no incidents as were alleged were detected.  
  
The Manager of the 14th Respondent, Airport and Aviation Services (Sri Lanka
Ltd.) also filed an affidavit denying that any public meeting was held at the
Airport on 31.1.95 or that any of the incidents alleged by the petitioners
took place. On 31.1.95 the members of the 16th Respondent produced 38 vehicles
for inspection and Turn Numbers 201 to 238 were issued to these vehicles. He
noticed that the 1st, 2nd, 4th and 7th Respondents were present on 31.1.95 and
he noticed them talking to the persons there. He did not notice any mass
exodus of taxis of the three companies which had subsisting agreements with
the 14th Respondent company nor any commo­tion or any masked or armed persons.  
  
In reply to the 1st Respondents affidavit denying the remarks attributed to
him, the petitioners filed a counter-affidavit dated 31.5.93 annexing extracts
from the Hansard of 7.2.95 where the 1st Respondent was involved in exchanges
in Parliament over what took place on 31.01.95 at the airport.  
  
The 1st Respondent's responses in Parliament reflect on the accuracy and
credibility of statements in his affidavits filed in Court and he did not seek
an

**25**

opportunity to file a counter affidavit in explanation.  
  
**Held** ( **Perera, J**. dissenting)  
  
1\. In the absence of any counter-affidavit from the 1st Respondent, his
remarks in Parliament cannot be interpreted, discounted or otherwise
questioned as being general statements about thuggery, or general political
views about political opponents or wrong doers or otherwise. The Court must
take Hansard as it is, as setting out certain facts without attempting to draw
inferences from those facts or to come to any conclusion as to the truth or
otherwise of what the 1st Respondent said. The 1st Respondent's affidavit is
thus contradicted by the fact that he made statements in Parliament which are
quite inconsist­ent with his affidavits. Those inconsistences are so grave,
that his affidavit cannot safely be acted upon. The consequence is that, as
between the peti­tioner's and the 1st Respondent's versions it is more
probable that, the 1st Respondent did (as alleged by the petitioners)
instigate those present, by labelling the members of the petitioner-societies
as UNP stooges and by uttering threats intended to drive them away from the
Airport.  
  
2\. The 1st Respondent's statements in Parliament are not regarded as
amount­ing to admissions or corroboration of the petitioners' version, or as
substan­tive evidence, but only as facts (i.e. inconsistent statements)
relevant to the credibility of his affidavit.  
  
3\. The petitioners' version is in no way internally inconsistent while the
1st Respondant's version is unreliable because it is seriously contradicted by
his own previous statements.  
  
4\. The infirmities in the 1st Respondent's affidavit do not help the
petitioners to tilt the balance in so far as the 7th Respondent is concerned;
for his affidavit is not undermined by other inconsistent statements.  
  
5\. The petitioner's claim that their members have not been able to obtain
even a single duty turn after 1.2.95 is given credence by the 14th
Respondent's failure to furnish the relevant information. The petitioners have
established on a balance of probabilities that, with seven exceptions on
01.2.95 they did not receive any hires after 9.30 a.m. on 31.1.95; and beyond
reasonable doubt, that on and after 2.2.95 they received no hires. This was
because of threats of violence and not voluntary.  
  
6\. On 31.1.95 the 1st Respondent rendered himself liable, as he had
insti­gated those who chased away the petitioners with threats of violence;
thereaf­ter the police were guilty of inaction, in circumstances in which they
were under a duty to provide reasonable protection to the petitioners; and the
14th and 15th

**26**

Respondents, despite knowledge of what was taking place over a long period of
time, acquiesced in the treatment meted out to the petitioners. They are all
responsible for violation of the petitioner's fundamental rights under Article
12(1), 12(2) and 14(1) (g) read with Article 14 (1) (c) of the Constitution,
which violations continue.  
  
7\. The statements made in Parliament can be admitted but they must be taken
as they appear in Hansard without any gloss being put on them. Statements in
Parliament are relevant as facts and not as evidence of the truth of their
con­tents. The statement firstly may be used, not as substantive evidence, but
to contradict his evidence given orally or in an affidavit, in judicial
proceedings in terms of section 155 (c) of the Evidence Ordinance. Secondly
the statement may be used as substantive evidence to establish the intention
or motive with which some act was done or statement was made outside
Parliament. How­ever this second principle is not being relied on in the
instant case but only the first.  
  
**Cases referred to:**  
  
1\. _Faiz v. Attorney-General and Others_ S.C. 89/91 S.C. Minutes of 19.11.93.  
  
2\. _Upaliratne v. Tikiri Banda and Others_ S.C. 86/95, S.C. Minutes of
5.9.93.  
  
3\. _Church of Scientology v. Johnson Smith_ (1971) 3 NLR 434; (1972) 1 All ER
378 QBD.  
  
4\. _J. B. Textiles Ltd., v. Minister of Finance_ [1981] 2 Sri L.R. 238,260-1
(CA); (1981) 1 Sri L.R. 156, 161, 164 (S.C).  
  
5. _Strickland v. Mitsui Bonnici_ AIR 1935 PC 34, 35.  
  
6 _De Zoysa v. Wijesinghe_ (1945) 46 NLR 433,437.  
  
7\. _Weerasinghe v. Samarasinghe_ (1966) 69 NLR 262, 264.  
  
8 _. Schmidt v. Secretary of State for Home Affairs_ (1968) 3 All ER 795
(QBD).  
  
9\. _Laker Airways Ltd., v. Department of Trade_ , (1977) 2 All ER 182 (CA).  
  
10\. _Dissanayake v. Kaleel_ [1993] 2 Sri L. R. 135.  
  
11\. _Jayatilleke v. Kaleel_ [1994] 1 Sri L.R. 319.  
  
**APPLICATIONS** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Tilak Marapone, P.C._ with _D. Weerasuriya, N. Ladduwahetty,_ and _S. Cooray
for petitioners._  
  
_R. K. W. Goonesekera_ with _J.C. Weliamuna_ for 1st to 7th Respondents.  
  
_Chanaka de Silva S.C._ for 8th to 15th and 17th Respondents.  
  
_Faisz Musthapha, P.C._ with _Dr. Jayampathy Wickramaratne_ and _Gaston
Jayakody_ for 16th Respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**27**

November 30, 1995.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.**  
  
I am in entire agreement with the reasoning, findings and order of my brother
Wijetunga.  
  
It is only after judgment was reserved that a question of Parliamentary
Privilege arose, because of my brother Perera's views as to the factual effect
of the statements made by the 1st Respondent in the course of proceedings in
Parliament on 7.2.95, and as to their legal relevance. Since he disagrees with
us as to the 1st Respondent's liability, it has become necessary to set down
our views as to the conclusions set out in his draft judgment, which I have
had the advantage of seeing.  
  
**I. THE STATEMENT MUST BE TAKEN AS IT IS**  
  
In regard to the factual aspect, Perera, J. interprets and explains the
statements made in Parliament, as being a "fighting reply to jibes, or "a
political speech", or "a general statement": this, it seems to me, is truly to
question proceedings in Parliament, contrary to the very principle he af­firms
(instead of admitting and acting on them in toto without question, as we
should). For that is what is done when it is suggested that what the Member
said is not what he really meant, or that it ought not to be taken literally,
and that accordingly the balance of probability is not in favour of the
Petitioners. That directly contravenes section 3 of the Parliament (Pow­ers
and Privileges) Act ("the Privileges Act"). The law is clear: the state­ments
can be admitted, but they must be taken as they appear in Hansard without
trying to put a gloss on them.  
  
**II. THE EXTENT OF THE PRIVILEGE  
**  
The second issue, as to Parliamentary Privilege, is one which no one even
mentioned, even in passing. Neither the 1st Respondent nor his Coun­sel raised
it in the Pleadings, in the written submissions, or in the oral argument-
although the Court specifically drew the attention of Counsel to the effect of
the Hansard extracts on the reliability of the 1st Respondent's affidavit. And
they have not sought to raise it even after judgment was reserved.

**28**

**1\. Taking Judicial Notice of the Privilege**  
  
There is no dispute that section 9 of the Privileges Act requires the Court to
take judicial notice of Parliamentary privileges, immunities and powers. But
what those privileges are must be determined according to law. For the reasons
set out in this judgment, I am of the view that clearly the Act does not
prohibit the admission of the statements made by the 1st Respondent in
Parliament, and that seems to be the reason why there was no objection to the
admission of the Hansard extracts.  
  
**2\. Admissibility of the Statement as a Fact**  
  
With respect, I cannot agree that any question arises in this case whether
those statements "could be relied on as against the 1st Respondent as an
admission or as evidence of his **state of mind** ". The statements are
treated by Wijetunga, J, as **facts** , and nothing more; neither directly nor
indirectly does he make any comment or criticism as to their accuracy or
propriety, or their motivation or effect, or whether they are unjust or
unfair; and he does not try to explain or interpret them in any way, or to
draw any inferences from them. He adheres to the long-established principle
that statements in Parliament are relevant as facts; and does not use them as
evidence of the truth of their contents.  
  
This principle has been unequivocally recognised in the two precedents
mentioned in Perera, J's draft judgment.  
  
**In Church of Scientology v. Johnson-Smith, (3) Browne, J, said:**  
  
"But the Attorney-General limited what he said . . . . He said that [the
Hansard] could be read simply **as evidence of fact, what was in fact said in
the House, on a particular day by a particular person.** But, he said, the use
of Hansard must stop there and that counsel was not entitled to comment on
what had been said in Hansard or ask the jury to draw any inferences from it."  
  
Samarakoon, CJ., commented on that passage in **J. B. Textiles Ltd v. Minister
of Finance, (4)**  
  
"Even in this case certain excerpts from Hansard were in fact permitted to be
admitted in evidence and the Court ruled somewhat inconclusively

**29**

that it could be read simply **as evidence of fact** , what was in fact said
in the House on a particular day by a particular person."  
  
He went on to say, quite categorically, and leaving no room for doubt:  
  
"Hansards are admissible to prove the course of proceedings in the Legislature
(section 57 (4) Evidence Ordinance). They are evidence of **what was stated by
any speaker** in the Legislature: Strickland v. Mifsud Bonnici,(5) De Zoysa v.
Wijesinghe,(6) Weerasinghe v. Samarasinghe, at 264(7) However, even this use
of statements is subject to some qualifica­tion. One such is that the
statements must be accepted in toto-without question." (at p. 164)  
  
In Strickland v. Mifsud Bonnici,(5) AIR 1935 PC 34(8) the Privy Council said:  
  
"Further, as regards the reports of debates, it is
clear...................that **they can only be evidence of what was stated by
the speakers** in the Legislative Assembly, and are not evidence of any fact
contained in the speeches."  
  
Samarakoon, CJ, referred to two other decisions: Schmidt v. Secretary of State
for Home Affairs(8) and Laker Airways Ltd v. Department of Trade.(9)  
  
In the former, the Home Secretary refused to extend the residence per­mits of
two alien "scientologists", relying on a statement made in Parlia­ment by the
Minister of Health setting out Government policy in regard to "scientology".
They asked for **a declaration** that the Home Secretary's decision was
unlawful and void. The Minister's statement (which included an observation
that "scientology" was socially harmful) was used to judge the validity of the
Home Secretary's decision.  
  
In the latter, in an action for **a declaration** , the Court of Appeal took
into account an announcement made in the House by the Secretary of State in
regard to aviation policy, in holding that in nullifying the licence given to
Laker Airways, there was an improper exercise by the Secretary of the
prerogative power.

**30**

In the J. B. Textiles case, a business undertaking was vested by a vesting
order made in 1976; due to a prorogation, this could not be laid before the
National State Assembly within sixty days as required by law; in 1977 there
was a change of government; the new Minister of Finance revoked that vesting
order, and immediately made another, which was duly laid before the National
State Assembly. The company challenged the 1977 order as being mala fide. This
attack was in two stages: that the 1976 order was mala fide, and that the 1977
order was intended to "continue" the 1976 order, and was therefore vitiated by
the same mala fides. The mala fides of the 1976 order was proved by evidence
other than state­ments in the National State Assembly, but to establish that
the 1977 order was "linked to the 1976 order, a statement made by the Prime
Minister in the National State Assembly was relied on. Samarakoon, CJ, decided
that the Hansard could be admitted to prove that link.  
  
Further, despite the statutory Advisory Board holding that the acquistion was
unjustified, the Government did not revoke the vesting order. In that
connection, Samarakoon, CJ, referred to another statement in Hansard, one made
by the Minister of Irrigation as to the reasons for the Govern­ment's
subsequent refusal to divest the undertaking, in order to contradict the
affidavit filed in Court by the Minister of Finance, who gave different
reasons (see [1981] 1 Sri LR at 170). He said:  
  
"The two reasons do not tally. I need say no more."  
  
A conclusion which seems applicable here with even greater force, be­cause the
affidavit of the Member does not "tally" with his own statements in
Parliament.  
  
**3\. Admissibility (a) to contradict, or (b) to prove motive, etc.**  
  
These cases illustrate two distinct principles regarding the use of a
statement made in Parliament. First, it may be admitted, as evidence of a
fact, namely what a Member said; and this may be used, not as substan­tive
evidence, but to contradict his evidence, given orally or in an affidavit, in
judicial proceedings. This is in terms of section 155 (c) of the Evidence
Ordinance. Second, such a statement may even be used as substantive evidence,
to establish the intention or motive with which some act was done, or some
statement was made, outside Parliament (as Samarakoon,

**31**

CJ, used the Prime Minister's statement to establish the link between the 1977
order and the 1976 order, and thus to prove its mala fides). The two decisions
of the Court of Appeal in England fall into this category, and are of greater
authority than the decision of a single Judge of the Queen's Bench Division in
the Church of Scientology case.  
  
The view has been expressed that "a complaint of an infringement of a
fundamental right made to this Court cannot be founded on what was said or
done by a Member of Parliament in the course of the proceedings in the House",
and that such statements cannot "be relied on to support a cause of action
**** which arises from something done outside the House". I refrain from
comment, because nothing of that kind is being done here. The Petitioners do
not seek either to make the 1st Respondent liable for what he said in
**Parliament** on 7.2.95, or to rely on his statements to **support their
cause of action**. On the contrary, they seek to make him liable for what he
said and did **outside Parliament** , on another day, one week earlier. They
are not being allowed **to question his statements** in Parliament, but only
to challenge his **affidavit** (and **only** his affidavit) filed in this
Court. They say, how can this Court accept or act on his affidavit in the
light of the admitted fact that he made statements in Parliament which are
gravely inconsistent with that affidavit? Thus they rely on his statements
**not to support their cause of action, but to discredit his affidavit.**  
  
Ordinarily I would hesitate to disagree with the considered opinion of
Samarakoon, CJ; especially a decision in a case which was argued for twelve
days in the Court of Appeal, and for another four in this Court. More so here,
without the benefit of an iota of research, or a minute of submis­sions, by
Counsel, upon an issue on which we ought not to have to depend on our own
researches. And for that reason I have confined my observations to the two
decisions cited by Perera, J., and the precedents referred to therein, and
refrain from comment on recent decisions of this Court (Dissanayake v. Kaleel,
(10) Jayatillake v Kaleel, (11)) relevant to the liability or penalty to which
a Member may be subject in respect of pro­ceedings in Parliament
notwithstanding section 3 of the Privileges Act. But in this case we do not
have to consider whether Samarakoon, CJ was wrong in regard to the second of
the above principles, for this case is covered by the first principle, as the
use made by Wijetunga, J, of the Hansard extracts is well within that
principle.

**32**

**4\. Form and Result of Proceedings - Irrelevant to Admissibility**  
  
I have now to consider the suggestion that the J. B. Textiles case could be
distinguished on the basis that Samarakoon, CJ, held that statements in
Parliament (really, the National State Assembly) could be admitted be­cause he
was dealing with a Certiorari application, where the quashing of an order
"does not result in any liability being imposed on a Member of Parliament".
This is tied up with another suggestion, that because there is an allegation
of the violation of a fundamental right, the Hansard cannot be admitted.  
  
It seems to me that such a distinction introduces two factors which the
Privileges Act does not recognise. The immunity conferred by that Act (or the
lack of it) does not depend on the form of the proceedings in which the issue
arises: whether it is an application for Certiorari, Mandamus, or
Pro­hibition, or a fundamental rights application or an action for a
declaration, or damages. If the Act confers immunity, that immunity must be
given effect to, whatever the form of the proceedings. Likewise, that immunity
does not depend on the result of the proceedings: whether it is the grant of
Certiorari to quash, an order of Mandamus, or a declaration of nullity, or
damages. If the Act grants immunity, it must be upheld, whatever the re­sult
of the proceedings.  
  
To put it another way, if the Act does not allow a Member's statement to be
"questioned", it cannot be questioned, whatever the form or outcome of the
proceedings in which it is sought to be questioned. But if it is used in a
manner which does not amount to "questioning" it, then it is admissible,
whatever the form or outcome of the proceedings in which it is sought to be
used.  
  
Let me illustrate that using the facts of the J. B. Textiles case. Suppose
that the Minister of Finance declares (outside Parliament) when making a
vesting order that the undertaking is being acquired because it is being used
in a manner detrimental to the national economy; but states in Par­liament,
conscious of his duty not to mislead Parliament, that it is be­cause the
proprietor is politically opposed to him. Evidence of the latter statement is
clearly admissible, under the first principle set out above, to contradict the
Minister's assertion that he acted in the interests of the national economy,
and thus to have the vesting order quashed or annulled.

**33**

And it is admissible whether the issue arises in proceedings for Certiorari to
quash, Mandamus to divest, a declaration of nullity, a declaration of the
infringement of fundamental rights, or for damages; and whatever their
out­come. A judge cannot say, when the Hansard is sought to be marked, "I will
allow it and act on it, if I am going to grant Certiorari (or a declaration),
but not if I decide to grant Mandamus (or damages)".  
  
Suppose, instead, that the Minister refrains from giving any reason when he
makes the vesting order. The J.B.Textiles case (as well as the two decisions
of the English Court of Appeal) is authority for the admission of his
statement in Parliament, as substantive evidence, to prove one essen­tial
ingredient of the complainant's case: that the vesting order was made mala
fide; regardless of the form or outcome of the proceedings. But, let me
stress, that is the **second** principle, and our decision today does not
depend at all on that principle.  
  
This supposed distinction, based on the imposition of "liability" and the form
of the proceedings, is untenable for another reason. The grant of Certiorari
(as in the J.B.Textiles case) is today, in public law, indistinguish­able from
the grant of a declaration in a fundamental rights application. If the
quashing of the vesting order in that case involved no imposition of
"liability", then equally the grant of a declaration here imposes no
"liability" \- and that is the first relief which Wijetunga, J, grants as
against the 1st Respondent. Although in my view the award of compensation
would have made no difference, yet in fact we propose no order for
compensation. There can therefore be no valid objection to the grant of that
declaration. It must be remembered that the J.B.Textiles case dealt with
vesting orders made **before** the 1978 Constitution; they were not subject to
judicial re­view on the ground of the violation of fundamental rights. Now,
however, Article 126 (3) shows that such a vesting order can be challenged by
a writ application to the Court of Appeal, in which the violation of
fundamental rights is also duly pleaded; thereupon the whole matter must be
referred to this Court. It cannot possibly be argued that in those
circumstances this Court could grant Certiorari to quash, but not a
declaration of nullity for infringement of Article 12.  
  
It is relevant to mention that in both Schmidt v. Secretary of State for Home
Affairs (supra) and Laker Airways v. Department of Trade, **declarations**
were **sought** , and the Court of Appeal did not consider that this ren­dered
the statements made in Parliament inadmissible.

**34**

 As to the award of costs, it can hardly be contended that an order for
payment of the costs of the litigation is a liability in respect of the
state­ments made in Parliament. There is nothing in the judgment in the
J.B.Textiles case which made the question of the admissibility of the Hansard
depend on the absence of an order for costs. So there can be no objection to
the award of costs in this case.  
  
**5\. Admissibility if there is no other evidence**  
  
It is also suggested that Samarakoon, CJ, admitted the Hansard be­cause
"Parliamentary intervention was a step in the procedure and an integral part
of the acquisition process . . . . . **Indeed there would be no other
evidence** as to this stage of the acquisition process". That is an
assumption, and it is plainly contradicted by the facts of that case. The
operative mala fides of the original vesting order made in 1976 was
estab­lished by evidence other than statements in the Legislature; showing
that there can be other evidence. Indeed, Samarakoon, CJ, admitted the Hansard
only to establish that there was a link between the the 1976 order and the
1977 order, and there is no reason why that link could not have been
estab­lished by proof of acts or statements outside the Legislature. The
_J.B.Textiles_ case cannot be distinguished on that basis.  
  
Indeed, to do that would be wrong in principle. If a statement is pro­tected
by section 3 of the Privileges Act, the Court cannot deny such protection
simply because there is no other evidence.  
  
**III. CONCLUSION**  
  
The view taken by Perera, J, seems to be that "Hansard is a closed book as far
as the Courts are concerned" (see [1981] 2 Sri LR at 260-1, CA). With respect,
I would adopt the observations of Samarakoon, CJ, who unequivocally rejected
that view:  
  
"The Hansard is the official publication of Parliament. It is published to
keep the public informed of what takes place in Parliament. It is neither
sacrosanct nor untouchable. Comment and criticism are on a different plane
which might give rise to a breach of privilege. That aspect does not arise for
decision here. I am of the view that documents P9 and P11 are admissible to
prove the statements of the Minister [of Irrigation] and the Prime Minister
subject to the rules limiting their use as herein before stated."

**35**

In accordance with that decision, we have accepted the statements in toto.
There was no objection on behalf of the 1st Respondent, to the ad­mission of
those extracts, presumably because of that decision. Those extracts have been
used, in accordance with the law as authoritatively laid down by this Court,
only to contradict the 1st Respondent's affidavit.  
  
It is for these reasons that I find myself unable to agree with Perera, J.  
  
**PERERA, J.  
**  
I have had the advantage of perusing the judgment of my brother, Wijetunga J.
in this case. I am in agreement with the finding that on the proved facts, the
Petitioners are entitled to a declaration that their funda­mental rights under
Articles 12 (1), 12 (2) and 14 (1) (c) read with 14 (1) (g) have been
infringed by the 10th, 11th, 13th and 14th Respondents and the reliefs granted
to the Petitioners arising from such violations.  
  
I am however unable to associate myself with the finding that the Peti­tioners
are entitled to a declaration that the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioners
under Articles 12 (1), 12 (2) and 14 (1) (c) read with 14 (1) (g) have been
infringed by the 1st Respondent and the order made against the 1st Respondent
for the payment of costs in a sum of Rs. 50,000/- to the Petitioner Society in
Application No. 66/95 and the Petitioner Society in Application No. 67/95 for
the reasons set out hereinafter.  
  
I might state at the very outset that in my view the Petitioners have failed
to establish on the proved facts that the 1st Respondent has acted in
violation of any of their Fundamental Rights.  
  
In this case the 1st Respondent has filed an affidavit dated 23.05.95 denying
the allegations made against him by the Petitioners. In this affida­vit, he
has averred that he was invited to be the Chief Guest at the inaugu­ration of
a New Taxi Service on 31.01.95 which was to be held at the premises opposite
the Air Port. Accordingly, he went to Katunayake around 9.30 a.m. and was the
first among the invitees to arrive there. Within a short while, the Transport
Manager of the Air Port came with some offi­cials. Then the other invitees,
i.e. the 2nd to 6th Respondents who repre­sent electorates in the District and
the members of the new Taxi Services also arrived.

**36**

Thereafter the Director of the 16th Respondent, welcomed the gather­ing,
followed by the Transport Manager of the Air Port who addressed them on the
formalities of the operation of Taxis at the Air Port and explained the
requirements in regard to the standard expected of Air Port Taxis. The 1st
Respondent and the 2nd to the 7th Respondents spoke a few words. The ceremony
was concluded by about 11.00 a.m. In his speech, the 1st Re­spondent wished
the new Taxi Service all success. No statement had been made by anyone that
the members of the Petitioner's Societies were U.N.P. stooges etc.  
  
The 1st Respondent has specifically denied that the members of the
Petitioners' Societies were asked to leave the premises within 15 minutes, and
that if they failed to do so, they would have to face the consequences. The
1st Respondent states that the ceremony was peaceful and that there was no
incident of violence or intimidation against the Petitioners whatso­ever and
that he was in fact unaware the they were even present. He spe­cifically
states that the averments contained in paragraph 8 of the Petition which
contained allegations against him are false.  
  
The facts set out by the 1st Respondent in his affidavit is supported by the
7th, 10th and 13th Respondents who have filed affidavits substantially
corroborating the facts set out by the Respondent. The 1st Respondent's
version also finds support in the averments contained in the affidavit filed
by a Director of the 16th Respondent, Nandawansa de Silva.  
  
Thus the allegations made by the Petitioners against the 1st Respond­ent are
denied by him and his version finds support in the affidavits filed by the
7th, 10th and 13th Respondents and by a Director of the 16th Re­spondent.  
  
In response to this denial on the part of the 1st Respondent, the Peti­tioners
have filed a counter affidavit dated 31.05.95, annexing extracts from the
Hansard of 07.02.95 (P16) which is a record of the proceedings of Parliament
on that date.  
  
Presidents' Counsel on behalf of the Petitioner invited this Court to re­ject
the 1st Respondent's denial and the facts as set out in this affidavit having
regard to the contents of P16, a statement made by the 1st Re­spondent in
Parliament on 07.02.95. The relevant extracts from the Hansard P16 have been
fully reproduced in the judgment of Wijetunga, J.

**37**

As regards the statements attributed to the 1st Respondent in the Hansard
referred to (P16), Counsel for the 1st Respondent has in my view, rightly
submitted that such statements must be considered in the proper context. The
reference to the Katunayake incident in Parliament that day has been triggered
off by a statement made by a Member of Parliament based on a newspaper report
which appeared in the "Divaina". Counsel submitted that the contents of the
said report itself have been proved to be false. There was no reference
whatsoever to the 1st Respondent in that report. It was counsel's submission
that the 1st Respondent in this in­stance has merely retorted or given a
"fighting reply" to the jibes as is wont to happen in the floor of the House.
This he contended was not a considered reply to an adjournment question. It is
a political speech which cannot be taken literally as an admission by the 1st
Respondent or the accuracy of what was in the newspaper or his involvements in
violence on that day. Counsel submitted that the Court should therefore not
place any reliance on the contents of P16 and invited the Court to reject the
same.  
  
In my view there is much substance in the submission of Counsel on this
matter. The Petitioners' allegations against the 1st Respondent re­main
uncorroborated. I am of the opinion that it would be highly unsafe to tilt the
scales in favour of the Petitioner in this case, relying upon, a gen­eral
statement made by the 1st Respondent in Parliament particularly hav­ing regard
to the special circumstances in which the 1st Respondent made the statement
attributed to him.  
  
Having regard to the facts set out above, I see no compelling reason to reject
the averments in the affidavit filed by the 1st Respondent denying the
allegations against him, which denial is borne out by the affidavits of
several of the Respondents to this Application. I hold therefore, that the
Petitioners have failed to prove that the 1st Respondent has acted in
viola­tion of any of their fundamental rights.  
  
Be that as it may, in the instant case yet another important issue relat­ing
to Parliamentary Privileges and Immunities arise in my view for deter­mination
by this Court. The question whether proceedings of Parliament (marked P16)
could be relied on as against the 1st Respondent as an admission or as
evidence of his state of mind or to discredit the averments in his affidavit
filed in Court raises the wider issue of Parliamentary Privi­leges and
Immunities. The Hansard (P16) was produced with the counter

**38**

affidavit of the Petitioner and as such the Respondent had no right to file
further pleadings in relation to it. Whether there is a specific plea or not,
in view of the provisions of Section 9 of the Parliamentary (Powers and
Privi­leges) **Act. No. 21 of 1953 (Cap. 283 I. E. C)** "All Courts in Sri
Lanka are required to take judicial notice of all privileges, immunities and
powers of the House".  
  
Section 9 states as follows:  
  
"All Privileges, Immunities, and Powers of the House shall be part of the
general and public law of Ceylon and it shall not be necessary to plead the
same but the same shall in all Courts in Ceylon be judicially noticed".  
  
Hence, whether the issue is pleaded or not, all Courts are bound to take
judicial notice of Parliamentary Privileges and Immunities and to consider
whether the reception of any evidence is in violation of any such Privilege or
Immunity.  
  
Our law of Parliamentary Privileges and Immunities is contained in the said
Act No. 21 of 1953. However, Sec. 7 of the Act states that in addition to the
Privileges and Immunities contained in the Act, the House and the Members
"shall hold, enjoy and exercise" the Privileges and Immunities for the time
being held, enjoyed and exercised by the House of Commons of the United
Kingdom and the members thereof.  
  
Section 3 of the Parliamentary (Powers and Privileges) Act lays down the basic
rule as to the freedom of speech, debate and proceedings in the House as
follows:  
  
"There shall be freedom of speech, debate or proceedings in the House and such
freedom of speech, debate or proceedings shall not be liable to be impeached
or questioned in any Court or place out of the House."  
  
According to Erskine May the phrase "proceedings in the House" has to be given
a wide meaning to encompass not only what transpires in the course of debates
but also to include "everything said or done by a mem­ber in the exercise of
his functions as a member in a Committee of either House, as well as
everything said or done in either House in the transac­tion of Parliamentary
business (Parliamentary Practice: Erskine May, 21st

**39**

Edition page 92). Therefore the statement attributed to the 1st Respondent
0made at adjournment time when questions were being answered, comes within the
"proceedings of the House". The freedom of speech thus en­joyed by a member of
Parliament is absolute, ** "subject to the rules of order in debate, a member
may state whatever he thinks fit in de­bate, however offensive it may be to
the feelings, or injurious to the character of individuals; and he is
protected by his privilege from any action for libel as well as from any other
question or molesta­tion" **(vide Erskine May - page 84).  
  
Statutory recognition is given to this Privilege and Immunity enjoyed by a
member in Section 4 of the Parliamentary (Powers and Privileges) Act as
follows;  
  
"No member shall be liable to any civil or criminal proceedings, arrest,
imprisonment or damages by reason of anything which he may have said in the
House or by reason of any matter or thing which he may have brought before the
House by petition, bill, resolution, motion or otherwise".  
  
These provisions of our Act are derived from Section 9 of the Bill of Rights
of 1968 of England which declared that;  
  
"The freedom of speech and debate or proceedings in Parliament, ought not be
impeached or questioned in any Court or place outside Parliament".  
  
Therefore the Immunity is not restricted to civil or criminal proceedings but
applies in relation to all proceedings in all Courts. It is clear that a
complaint of an infringement of a Fundamental Right made to this Court cannot
be founded on what was said or done by a Member of Parliament in the course of
proceedings in the House. In this case the complaint or the cause of action
does not pertain to anything said or done by the 1st Respondent in Parliament.
It stems from his alleged statements and acts at the Katunayake Air Port
premises. The question to be considered is whether the statement made by the
1st Respondent in proceedings in the House could be relied on to support a
cause of action which arises from something done outside the House.  
  
This question was considered in the case of Church of Scientology of
California v. Johnson-Smith(3). In that case the Defendant, a Member of

**40**

Parliament was sued for libel in respect of what was said by him in the course
of a television interview. The Defendant raised the plea of fair com­ment. The
Plaintiff then sought to refute this plea inter alia by reading extracts from
the Hansard to prove malice on the part of the Defendant, Member of
Parliament. The Court invited the assistance of the Attorney­-General to
consider the question whether Parliamentary Privileges might be infringed by
the reception of such evidence. Browne J, accepted the submission of the
Attorney-General as to the scope of Parliamentary Privi­lege. He stated as
follows: (at page 437)  
  
"I accept the Attorney - General's argument that the scope of Parlia­mentary
Privilege extends beyond excluding any cause of action in re­spect of what is
said or done in the House itself. And I accept his proposi­tion, which I have
already tried to quote, that is that what is said or done in the House in the
course of proceedings there, cannot be examined outside Parliament for the
purpose of supporting a cause of action even though the cause of action itself
arises out of something done outside the House. In my view this conclusion is
supported both by principle and authority . . . . . . . . . . I also accept
the other basis for this privilege which the Attorney-General suggested, which
is, that a member must have a complete right of free speech in the House
without any fear that his motives or intentions or reasoning will be
questioned or held against him thereafter".  
  
Thus it is seen that the scope of Parliamentary Privilege is not limited to
the exclusion of any cause of action in respect of what was said or done in
the House itself but extended to the examination of the proceedings in the
House for the purpose of supporting a cause of action which itself arose out
of something done outside the House. If the principle there enunciated is
applied to the facts of this case, the Petitioners cannot rely on any
statement made by the 1st Respondent (Member of Parliament) in pro­ceedings in
the House to support their complaint of an infringement of a Fundamental Right
committed by him elsewhere. The Petitioners would be committing a breach of
privilege when they seek to rely on such evi­dence and I am of the view that
this Court should not countenance such a transgression..  
  
The proceedings of Parliament as contained in the Hansard can be used for
limited purposes in judicial proceedings. Such use of extracts from a Hansard
can never be violative of the freedom of speech enjoyed by a Member of the
Parliament which is protected by privilege.

**41**

In J. B Textile Industries Ltd. v. Minister of Finance and Planning (4) this
Court held that the Court of Appeal erred in coming to a finding that the
Hansard containing statements made in Parliament could not be used by the
Petitioners in support of their case as to mala fides. It has to be borne in
mind that this case was for an application for a Writ of Certiorari to quash a
vesting order made by the Minister of Finance under the Business Undertakings
(Acquisition) Act No. 35 of 1971. The conclusion of Ranasinghe, J. (as he then
was) in the Court of Appeal (1981) 2 Sri. L. R. (p. 238) was that a statement
in the Hansard cannot be used for any other purpose besides the use of it to
interpret statutes. Samarakoon, CJ. held that this view was erroneous and that
Hansards are admissible to prove the course of proceedings in the legislature
(Sec. 57 (4) Evidence Ordi­nance) subject to some qualifications, one being
that the "statements must be accepted in toto- without question" (page 164 ).
It is clear from his judgment that this could be done only without impinging
on the privileges and immunities of a Member of Parliament. He has
specifically cited with approval the dictum of Browne, J. in the Church of
Scientology Case (supra). At page 166 he states as follows:  
  
"Ranasinghe J. has referred to three cases. The first is the case of Church of
Scientology v. Johnson-Smith(3). The defence was one of quali­fied privilege.
To defeat this plea the Plaintiff sought to establish express malice by
reference to Hansard to prove what the Defendant had done and said in
Parliament. This attempt was disallowed on the rule that "what is said and
done in the House in the course of proceedings there, cannot be examined
outside Parliament for the purpose of supporting a cause of action even though
the cause of action itself arises out of something done outside the House" per
Browne, J. **There is no doubt that the use of the passage in Hansard would
have made the Defendant liable in damages which he would have otherwise
avoided.** Such use would have been a fetter on the freedom of speech in
Parliament besides clinching the claims for damages by what he said or did in
the House as a Member of Parliament".  
  
It is quite clear that Samarakoon, CJ. adhered to the view that pas­sages in
Hansard cannot be used so as to impose thereby any liability on a Member of
Parliament "which he would have otherwise avoided". Such use would have been a
fetter on the freedom of speech in Parliament". Samarakoon, CJ. appears to
have been strongly influenced by the legal background of the acquisition
proceedings, to arrive at his conclusion in that case. At page 161 he stated
as follows.

**42**

"I will first refer to the legal background and then set out the passages in
Hansard (P9) relied on and then deal with the use sought to be made of it. The
Business Undertakings (Acquisition) Act is one of the most drastic pieces of
legislation that was ever placed in our statute book. It provides for the
compulsory acquisition by the Government of any business undertak­ing together
with the property necessary for the undertaking by the mere publication in the
Gazette of a Primary Vesting Order. The law does not provide any guidelines as
to when an acquisition should be permissible, such as the need for a public
purpose or even as a sanction for unlawful conduct of the owners. No reason
whatsoever need be assigned for an acquisition. When this law was debated in
Parliament, the spokesman for the then Government stated that there would be
two safeguards against the misuse or abuse of this law. They are first, that
Cabinet approval must be given for an acquisition and second that the law has
cast a mandatory duty on the Minister of Finance to have the Primary Vesting
Order laid before Parliament for its approval within a specified period of
time thus providing the opportunity for a full debate on the proposed
acquisition. From this it would be seen that Parliamentary intervention is a
step in the procedure for acquisition and is an integral part of the
acquisition process".  
  
It was because Parliamentary intervention was a step in the procedure and an
integral part of the acquisition process that he held that statements in
Parliament could be admitted and acted upon in toto without question. Indeed
there would be no other evidence as to this stage of the acquisition process.
Furthermore, an application for a Writ of Certiorari does not result in any
liability being imposed on a Member of Parliament. The Writ of Certiorari is
only an instrument of judicial review of administrative action and if issued
it only results in the impugned administrative/ministerial act being quashed.
On the other hand if a statement made by a Member of Parliament, in
Parliamentary proceedings is used to support a finding that such Member
committed an infringement of the Fundamental Right of a person outside
Parliament, that would amount to a violation of the unfet­tered (except by
rules of order in debate) freedom of speech enjoyed by a Member of Parliament
and may amount to a breach of privilege which is a matter exclusively within
the jurisdiction of the Parliament itself.  
  
In point of fact I have failed in my endeavours to discover a single de­cided
case in which a liability has been imposed on a Member of Parlia­ment.

**43**

I therefore hold that on the proved facts the Petitioners in both
appli­cations have failed to establish that their rights under Article 12 (1),
12 (2) and Article 14 (1) (c) read with Article 14 (1) (g) have been violated
by the 1st Respondent in the instant case. The reliefs prayed for by the
Petitioners in both Applications against the 1st Respondent are accordingly
dismissed with costs.  
  
After I prepared the judgment in draft, I have had the benefit of see­ing the
judgment in draft of my brother Fernando, J. which has been written upon a
perusal of my draft judgment. Since, certain words in my judgment have been
reproduced in isolation by Fernando, J. and made the subject of specific
comment, I have thought it fit to briefly elucidate some matters relevant to
the foregoing reasoning.  
  
I do not agree with the statement of Fernando, J. that the question of
Parliamentary privilege does not arise for consideration in this case since it
was neither pleaded by the 1st Respondent in his pleadings nor urged by his
Counsel in submissions.  
  
Learned Counsel for the 1st Respondent urged on a factual basis that no
reliance be placed on the statements alleged to have been made by the 1st
Respondent in Parliament. The matters urged by learned Counsel as to the
factual basis have been dealt with by me in my judgment. I have made the
comments reproduced by Fernando, J. as an assessment of the circumstances in
which the statements at­tributed to the 1st Respondent were made in
Parliament. By doing so, I have not ventured to "question proceedings in
Parliament" as stated by Fernando, J. The prohibition as to questioning of
proceedings in Parliament, outside the House, is based on the fundamental
premise of the freedom of speech enjoyed by every Member of Parliament which
is protected by absolute privilege and immunity.  
  
My comments do not in any way detract from the freedom of speech enjoyed by
the 1st Respondent as a Member of Parliament in relation to proceedings of
Parliament. On the contrary, they are in support of the freedom of speech and
the absolute privilege enjoyed by a Member of Parliament. Therefore my
comments cannot contravene the prohibi­tion against questioning of proceedings
in Parliament.

**44**

Section 9 of the Parliamentary (Powers and Privileges) Act specifi­cally
requires "all Courts" to take judicial notice of all privileges and immunities
of the House. Therefore the "question" of Parliamentary Privilege arises by
operation of Law when a liability is sought to be imposed on a Member of
Parliament which may be an infringement of the freedom of speech enjoyed by
such a member of Parliament. It is in this context that I have set down in
this judgment the basis and the extent of the freedom of speech and the
corresponding absolute privi­lege and immunity enjoyed by a Member of
Parliament.  
  
Further I cannot agree with Fernando, J. that "the statements (in the Hansard)
are treated by Wijetunga, J. as facts and no more". Indeed, they are "facts ".
Under the Evidence Ordinance anything capable of being perceived by the senses
and a mental condition of which a per­son is conscious is a "fact" (section
3). But it has to be borne in mind that these facts are used as evidence by
the Petitioners. The eviden­tial purpose as noted by Fernando, J. is to
"discredit" the "affidavit" of the 1st Respondent. In the language of the
Evidence Ordinance (sec­tion 155 (c) the Petitioners are seeking to "impeach"
the credit of the 1st Respondent by relying on the statements in Parliament
said to be inconsistent with the affidavit filed by him in Court. The freedom
of speech guaranteed to every Member of Parliament in proceedings of
Parliament, would be illusory and devoid of content if a Member's credit is to
be impeached in subsequent judicial proceedings on the basis of what was said
by him in the House. The law as to freedom of speech and the corresponding
absolute privilege and immunity would be on a fragile basis if it's content is
that a Member may state what he thinks fit in Parliament but face the
consequence of what he has stated in subsequent judicial proceedings
instituted against him. If such an in­terpretation is given the freedom of
speech guaranteed by the Bill of Rights of 1688 in England and sections 3 and
4 of our Act would itself be in jeopardy and become qualified.  
  
In my view statements in Hansards may be used as evidence in legal
proceedings, as permitted by law, subject to the specific limita­tion that the
freedom of speech guaranteed to a Member of Parliament is not thereby
violated. In this instance when the Petitioners seek to use the Hansard to
contradict the 1st Respondent and to impeach his credit they are infringing
the absolute privilege and the immunity en­joyed by the list Respondent which
is a corollary of his freedom of speech in Parliament. Therefore, "the use
made of the Hansard", by

**45**

the Petitioners cannot be "perfectly proper" as stated by Fernando, J. However
it has to be noted that further down in the judgment Fernando, J. has stated
that "it is unnecessary to decide in this case whether a statement made in
Parliament can be used to establish the violation of a fundamental right". He
has also stated "that the issue involves intri­cate questions of law which can
be determined only after a full argu­ment". He has not stated what these
"intricate questions of law" are. These comments are inconsistent with the
specific finding already made by him, that the use of the Hansard by
Petitioners to discredit the affidavit of the 1st Respondent and thereby to
support a decision against the 1st Respondent that he has infringed a
fundamental right of the petitioners , is "perfectly proper". It appears that
Fernando, J. has attempted to sever the stage of discrediting the affidavit of
the 1st Respondent from the stage of entering a finding against him that he
infringed the fundamental rights of the petitioners. These two are stages of a
single process of deciding on the complaint made to court by the Petitioners
that the 1st Respondent infringed their fundamental rights and should
therefore be held liable to compensate them by paying damages in a sum of Rs.
40,000/- each per month and further dam­ages for violation of their
Fundamental Rights. It is clear from the judg­ment of Wijetunga, J. and the
evidence in the case is equivocal and that the finding against the 1st
Respondent is made on the basis of the statements made by him in Parliament.
In other words, the scale is tilted against the 1st Respondent on the basis of
these statements alleged to have been made by him in Parliament. If so, I
cannot com­prehend the comments of Fernando, J. that these statements are not
relied on by the Petitioners to support their cause of action against the 1st
Respondent. Indeed, the Petitioners have produced the Hansard with their
counter affidavit as evidence against the 1st Respondent thereby and to
support their complaint to court and claim for damages against the 1st
Respondent. In my view, it is here that the Petitioners committed a breach of
the absolute privilege and immunity enjoyed by the 1st Respondent. I am
further of the view that the court should not accede to such a breach of
privilege by relying on the statements as against the 1st Respondent.  
  
I have in this judgment referred to the judgment of Samarakoon, C.J. in the
J.B.Textiles case (supra) firstly to demonstrate that he has accepted the
decision of Browne, J. in the Church of Scientology case (supra) and secondly
to distinguish the nature of proceedings in the

**46**

J. B. Textiles case with the nature of proceedings in the instant case.
Fernando, J. appears to have misunderstood what has been stated by me when he
drew the following inference;" Perera, J's view, therefore necessarily means
that it would be legitimate to exclude the Hansard extracts in a fundamental
rights application, if they are relied on to prove a violation for the purpose
of obtaining only a declaration (which is the first relief granted in this
case)". **The intrinsic nature of a particular proceeding has to be determined
by the relief sought from court by the applicant in that case and not from the
relief that is finally granted by Court. Such a test is vital in considering
whether any item of evidence adduced by a party could be acted upon by
Court.** It is in this context that I noted that in an application for a Writ
of Certiorari (J.B.Textiles case) a Petitioner is only seeking to quash the
impugned order and not to impose any liability on the officer who made that
order. Fernando, J. has made the point that a Writ of Mandamus has also been
prayed for in that case "and if granted there would have been a duty which is
a liability to act in a particular way under pain of contempt". A writ of
Mandamus lies only to dis­charge a Public or Statutory Duty. It is to be borne
in mind that no personal liability whatsoever is cast on the particular
authority in such a proceeding. An order for costs is made by court in all
cases. Surely, the fact that an order for costs is made cannot be the
determinant of the nature of a particular proceeding. It is because of the
fact that there is no personal liability that is sought to be imposed in an
applica­tion for a Writ of Certiorari or for that matter a Writ of Mandamus
that the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990 published in
Government Gazette No. 645/4 of 15.1.1991 provides (Rule 5 (2)) that a public
Officer may be made a Respondent in an application for a Writ of Certiorari by
a reference to his official designation only (and not by name). Rule 5 (3) (c)
provides that where the public officer who is a Respondent ceased to hold
office pending the proceedings, his suc­cessor in office will be bound by the
order finally made by Court. Such a provision is there in the Rules in
relation to an application inter alia for a Writ of Certiorari and a Writ of
Mandamus for the simple reason that no personal liability is sought or imposed
on an officer whose order is challenged in such an application. On the
contrary where there is an infringement or an imminent infringement of
fundamental rights the person affected seeks "relief or redress in respect of
such infringe­ment" (Article 126 (2) of the Constitution) The relief or
redress sought is never limited to a declaration but extend to claims for
compensation and damages against the Respondents, as in this case. Rule 44 (1)
(b)

**47**

of the Supreme Court Rules 1990 published in Government Gazette 665/32 dated
7.6.91 requires an applicant to "name as Respondents .............. the person
or persons who have infringed or are about to infringe such right". This
requirement has been placed since the applicants invariably claim relief
personally as against the Respondents Thus the two types of proceedings are
intrinsically different. It is in this context that I have accepted the dictum
of Browne, J. and the com­ments made by Samarakoon, C.J. in affirming that
dictum.  
  
Further, I cannot agree with the observation of Fernando, J. that "the
guarantee of equality in Article 12 seems . . . . . . . to be a superior norm
to the law governing Parliamentary Privilege". An observation as to what is
higher and what is lower, must be made only upon a full evaluation of its
implications and then too only if it is strictly neces­sary to arrive at a
final decision in the case. To my mind, the law as to Parliamentary Privilege
guarantees to a Member of Parliament the full freedom of speech subject to
rules of Debate and Order in the House. This freedom is the cornerstone of a
democratic Parliamentary sys­tem. It is for this reason that the freedom of
speech has been guaran­teed by the Bill of Rights which dates back to 1688.
The Right of Equality basically guarantees to all persons "equality before the
Law" and "the equal protection of the Law" (Article 12(1) of the
Constitution). The term of "Law" is used in its widest sense and would include
the Law of Parliamentary Privilege. To say the least, an applicant who is
pleading a case of equality before the law cannot urge that the Law of
Parlia­mentary Privilege should not apply in relation to his case. Therefore,
I do not feel inhibited in applying the Law of Parliamentary Privilege in
deciding on this application especially so when the law specifically requires
the Court to take judicial notice of such privilege.  
  
Finally I wish to state that I am unable to agree with the view ex­pressed by
Fernando, J. that the question of Freedom of Speech in Parliament and of the
absolute privilege and immunities enjoyed by a member does not arise for
consideration in this case where a Hansard is used as evidence against the 1st
Respondent who is a Member of Parliament. It is to be noted that Counsel for
the 1st Respondent has specifically submitted that the contents of the
relevant Hansard should not be acted upon as against the 1st Respondent. Hence
the observa­tions of Fernando, J. that the 1st Respondent did not object to
any reference being made to Hansard extracts is in my view incorrect.

**48**

The ratio in the _J. B. Textiles_ case (supra) does not apply to the facts and
circumstances of this case in view of the distinct difference in the
respective nature of the proceedings and the claim of the Peti­tioners for
compensation against the 1st Respondent.  
  
For the foregoing reasons, I cannot agree with any of the comments made by
Fernando J. I see no basis to depart from my conclusions stated on a matter in
which the Court is bound to take judicial notice.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J.**  
  
These two applications were taken up for hearing together, of con­sent, as
they relate substantially to the same matter and the Respond­ents in both
applications are the same.  
  
The 1st to 62nd Petitioners in Application No. 66/95 are members of the United
Airport Taxi Services Society Ltd. ("UATSSL), the 63rd pe­titioner and the 1st
to 29th petitioners in Application No. 67/95 are members of the Airport Taxi
Services Co-operative Society Ltd. ("ATSCSL"). the 30th petitioner.  
  
The two societies had entered into agreements with the Airport and Aviation
Services (Sri Lanka) Ltd., the 14th Respondent, to enable their members to
provide taxi services for passengers disembarking at the Colombo International
Airport, Katunayake ("Airport"), for a period of 6 years commencing from
1.1.91. The said agreements are valid until 31.12.96. A third society by the
name of Airport Taxi Services Society Ltd. ("ATSSL") too had entered into a
similar agreement with the 14th Respondent. These three societies had 200
taxis operating at the Air­port and were the only taxis so permitted by the
14th Respondent at the time. A monthly fee of Rs. 1000/- was payable in
respect of each vehicle. It is common ground, however, that the 14th
Respondent was at liberty to provide similar services itself, or through other
persons or bodies, by means of similar agreements or otherwise.  
  
In terms of the said agreements and the other arrangements made between the
parties from time to time, the members of ATSSL were allocated numbers from 1
to 63, ATSSL from 64 to 115 and UATSSL from 116 to 200. Passengers needing the
services of a taxi were re-

**49**

quired to obtain such services from the counter of the 14th Respond­ent, which
would allocate a taxi on a duty turn commencing from number 1 and ending at
200, so as to ensure that the services of all 200 taxis were fairly and
equally distributed.  
  
The agreements between the parties included the following cov­enants:  
  
"1\. The Company will operate a taxi information counter. The pas­sengers
wishing to obtain a taxi will indicate his/her destination to the officer at
this counter. Thereupon the passenger will be provided with a coupon which
indicates the destination and the standard rate to that destination. thereupon
the passenger will give one copy of this coupon to the taxi despatcher of the
Operator and the taxi despatcher shall assist the passenger into the taxi
first in line at the 'taxi stall' immedi­ately in front of the terminal area.
The despatcher shall thereupon sig­nal by suitable method to the next taxi in
line.  
  
2.  
..............................................................................................................................  
..............................................................................................................................  
  
3\. The Manager [of the Company] shall maintain performance records of each
taxi authorised to operate at the Airport and shall inform the Operator of the
nature of the performance. The performance will be recorded on the prescribed
form a copy of which will from time to time be sent to the Operator. Renewal
of this contract will depend on the performance level attained by each taxi."  
  
The 14th Respondent has made no complaint about the manner in which the
petitioner-societies and their members discharged their ob­ligations under the
agreements.  
  
The petitioners claim that the members of UATSSL and ATSCSL were predominantly
supporters of the United National Party ("UNP"), while the members of ATSSL
were predominantly supporters of the People's Alliance ("PA"). They further
state that the vast majority of the membership of the two petitioner-societies
worked for the UNP at all elections including the last General Election and
the Presidential Election and it was well known that they engaged themselves
actively in the aforesaid election campaigns.

**50**

The petitioners allege that in January 1995, they became aware of a plan to
deprive them of engaging in their lawful occupation, in the exer­cise of their
rights in terms of the said agreements to provide taxi services at the
Airport, and to substitute in their place, the supporters of the 1st to 7th
Respondents, and of the PA to provide these services. In particular, they
became aware of a move by the 1st to 7th Respond­ents, together with other
supporters of the PA, to hold a public meeting on 31.1.95. at the premises of
the Airport and to intimidate the peti­tioners and members of the two
petitioner-societies, so as to chase them away and prevent them from operating
taxi services at the Airport.  
  
On receipt of this information, and in anticipation of violence directed
towards them. they met Mr. Wijepala Mendis, Member of Parliament for the
Gampaha District on 30.1.95 and appealed to him to obtain police protection at
the venue of the meeting scheduled for 31.1.95. The petitioners claim that, in
consequence of their representations, Mr. Mendis communicated with the
Inspector-General of Police request­ing that adequate security be provided to
the petitioners and members of these two societies. The petitioners also
appealed to the 15th Re­spondent, the Chairman of the 14th Respondent, by
letters dated 31.1.95 (P2) apprising him of the developments and requesting
that adequate steps be taken inter alia to provide security for the members
and their vehicles in terms of their agreements.  
  
On 31.1.95 the 1st to 7th Respondents held the public meeting as scheduled at
the premises of the Airport. The main theme at this meet­ing was that the
members of the two petitioner-societies were support­ers of the UNP and should
therefore be prevented from operating taxis at the Airport. The petitioners
claim that the 1st Respondent addressed a gathering of about 300 to 400
persons and stated that the members of these two societies were UNP stooges
who had earned enough dur­ing the last several years and that they should take
their vehicles and leave the Airport premises within 15 minutes, failing which
they would have to face grave consequences. The 7th Respondent too made a
vociferous speech thereafter on similar lines. They also claim that sev­eral
armed and masked thugs, including one who got on top of a Pajero vehicle
bearing No. 64-1585, were in the vicinity using abusive lan­guage and
threatening the petitioners and other members of the two societies who were
present to leave the place immediately before they were set upon and their
vehicles smashed up and damaged.

**51**

The petitioners further state that though there were around 150 to 200
policemen, including the 10th to 13th Respondents and several security
officers of the 14th Respondent on duty at this location, none of them made
any attempt to dissuade the speakers from inciting the crowd or the thugs from
intimidating their members.  
  
They, therefore, had no alternative but to leave the premises, as the police
officers present did not appear to take any steps to afford them protection.
They have annexed to their petitions, marked P3 (A) and P3 (B), reports
pertaining to the said meeting as appearing in the 'Divaina' of 1.2.95 and the
'Sunday Leader' of 5.2.95. They have also produced marked P4 (A) a copy of a
complaint made to the police in regard to the incidents of 31.1.95.  
  
The petitioners further state that the armed thugs who intimidated the members
of the two petitioner societies on 31.1.95 continued to be in the Airport
premises even thereafter, indeed even as at the date of these applications,
preventing their members from entering the Airport and engaging in their
occupation. The police officers and the security personnel of the 14th
Respondent who were detailed for duty at these premises did not take any
preventive action.  
  
Several complaints have been lodged at the Katunayake Police Sta­tion by the
petitioners and other members of these two societies per­taining to the
aforesaid intimidation and wrongful restraint but the po­lice have failed to
take any action. The petitioners have annexed marked P6 (1) to P6 (49),
receipts obtained from the police in proof of the fact that they have made
such complaints to the police. They have also complained to the 14th
Respondent in this connection and have pro­duced a copy of that letter dated
8.2.95 marked P6. They further state that they have written to the 8th and 9th
Respondents and appealed on several occasions to the 10th, 11th, 12th and 13th
Respondents to take necessary action against those responsible, but these
Respond­ents, being influenced by the 1st to 7th Respondents, have failed to
take any action on the several complaints and appeals made by them. They have
produced marked P6 a copy of a letter dated 3.2.95 written to the 15th
Respondent by their lawyer, in this connection. They have also annexed two
other affidavits marked P10 and P10 from two of their members who are taxi
drivers.

**52**

The petitioners state that meanwhile, the 14th Respondent has per­mitted the
members of the 16th Respondent to provide taxi services at the Airport. They
have produced marked P12 a photo copy of a memo­randum distributed by the 14th
Respondent announcing the mobiliza­tion of this new taxi service with effect
from 1.2.95. The 16th Respond­ent company comprises of 400 members, who the
petitioners claim are supporters of the PA and have benefitted in this way due
to the influence exerted on the 14th and 15th Respondents by the 1st to 7th
Respondents. The Chairman of the 16th Respondent company is the 7th
Respondent. The Secretary of the company, they state is one Felician
Fernandopulle, the brother of the 1st Respondent. They have annexed marked
P13, a copy of a news report appearing in the 'Dinamina' of 1.2.95 which makes
such reference. The petitioners fur­ther state that a few members of their
societies who are supporters of the PA have also been included as members of
the 16th Respondent company.  
  
The petitioners allege that as they are thus prevented from entering the
Airport to perform their services in terms of the agreements, the taxi
services at the Airport are now exclusively performed by the mem­bers of the
16th   Respondent who are all supporters of the 1st to 7th Respondents and the
PA. They claim that the 1st and 7th Respond­ents have brought pressure to bear
on and influenced the 8th to 13th Respondents and the 14th and 15th
Respondents to achieve this objective.  
  
By reason of such conduct which constitutes administrative and/or executive
action on the part of the 8th to 15th Respondents, the peti­tioners complain
of the infringement of their fundamental rights under Articles 12(1). 12 (2)
and 14 (1) (g) of the Constitution, by the Re­spondents.  
  
The petitioners state that on an average each of them earned about Rs.
40,000/= per month by providing the taxi services at the Airport and they have
been deprived of this income commencing from 1.2.95. The monthly revenue
reports for July and August, 1994, prepared by the 14th Respondent have been
produced in support.  
  
Leave to proceed has been granted in respect of the alleged in-

**53**

fringement of Articles 12(1), 12 (2) and 14 (1) (g) of the Constitution. read
with Article 14(1) (c).  
  
The 1st Respondent by his affidavit dated 23.5.95 whilst denying the
allegations against him, states that he was invited to be the chief guest at
the inauguration of the new taxi services on 1.2.95 which was to be held at
the premises opposite the Airport. Accordingly, he went to Katunayake around
9.30.a.m. and was the first among the invitees to arrive there. Within
minutes, the Transport Manager of the Airport came with the officials. Then
the other invitees, i.e. the 2nd to 6th Respondents who are Members of
Parliament or Provincial Councillors from the District and the members of the
new taxi service also arrived.  
  
Nandawansa de Silva, a Director of the 16th Respondent, welcomed the
gathering. Thereafter, the Transport Manager of the Airport addressed them on
the formalities of operation of taxis at the Airport and ex­plained the
requirements in regard to the standard expected of Airport taxis. The 2nd to
7th Respondents and the 1st Respondent himself spoke a few words. The ceremony
was concluded by about 11.a.m. In his speech, he wished the new taxi service
all success. Nobody said that the members of the petitioner-societies were UNP
stooges, etc. The 1st Respondent specifically denies that the members of the
peti­tioner-societies were asked to leave the premises within 15 minutes,
failing which they would have to face the consequences. He claims that the
ceremony was peaceful and that there was no incident of vio­lence or
intimidation against the petitioners whatsoever and that he was unware that
they were even present.  
  
The averments contained in paragraph 8 of the petition, he states, are false
to the knowledge of the petitioners. In that paragraph in S.C. No. 66/95 the
petitioners allege that:  
  
"The 1st Respondent addressed a gathering of about 300 to 400 persons and
stated that the members of the 63rd Petitioner Society and those of the
Airport Taxi Services Co-operative Society Ltd, were UNP stooges who had
earned enough during the last several years and that they should take their
vehicles and leave the Airport premises within 15 minutes. He also stated that
they would otherwise have to face grave consequences. Thereafter the 7th
Respondent made a

**54**

vociferous speech in which he too in a very intimidatory manner de­nounced the
members of the aforesaid two Societies stating that they were supporters of
the UNP and enemies of the people and called upon them to immediately leave
the Airport premises threatening that or else their vehicles would be smashed
up. Meanwhile a masked thug got on top of a Pajero vehicle bearing number
64-1585 and shouted out ordering the aforesaid members to immediately leave
the place before they were set upon and their vehicles were smashed up."  
  
The petitioners and any other persons entitled to operate taxis, he says, were
not prevented from operating taxis. The 10th to 13th Re­spondents have never
been influenced by him or the 2nd to 7th Re­spondents to desist from taking
action on complaints allegedly made by the petitioners. Nor have his vehicles
been used to intimidate taxi drivers.  
  
The new taxi service was introduced in a manner authorised by law and without
any political influence as alleged by the petitioners. He denies that all 400
members thereof are supporters of the PA. He claims that the petitioners have
been politically motivated to make false alle­gations against him and he has
not violated any of the fundamental rights of the petitioners.  
  
The 2nd to 6th Respondents too, while denying the allegations con­tained in
the petitions, state that they have perused the affidavits of the 1st and 7th
Respondents and they are in agreement with the aver­ments contained therein.
They further state that each of them spoke a few words and wished the new taxi
service all success and thanked those who invited them for the ceremony. They
also deny that they violated the fundamental rights of any of the petitioners.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the petitioners conceded during the hearing
that there was no evidence of any involvement by the 2nd to 6th Respondents in
the alleged violation of the petitioners fundamental rights and stated that he
was not seeking any relief against them. The allegations against them must,
therefore, be rejected.  
  
The 7th Respondent who is the Co-ordinating Secretary to the Deputy Minister
of Planning, Ethnic Affairs and National Integration (the 1st

**55**

Respondent) while denying the allegations against him, states that he too is
in agreement with and adopts the averments contained in the affidavit of the
1st Respondent.  
  
He further states that the Colombo International Airport Taxi Serv­ices (Pvt.)
Ltd. (16th Respondent) was incorporated under the Compa­nies Act on 3.1.95. He
is the Chairman/Director of the company. The company applied to the 14th
Respondent for permission to run a taxi service at the Airport which was
approved. Thereafter an agreement was entered into between the 14th and 16th
Respondents. The 14th Respondent allocated numbers from 200 (sic) to 600 to
the 16th Re­spondent company. Permission was granted to operate the taxi
serv­ice from 1.00 a.m. on 1.2.95. A simple ceremony was organised on 31.1.95
to inaugurate the new taxi service at the Airport. He invited the 1st to 6th
Respondents for the inauguration ceremony. The 1st Re­spondent was to be the
chief guest. Officials of the Airport authorities and the Katunayake Police
were also informed about the ceremony.  
  
The rest of the averments of his affidavit are substantially the same as those
of the 1st Respondent. He denies that he made a vociferous speech as alleged
by the petitioners or that any threats were directed by him at the
petitioners. He says that he left the venue around 11.15.a.m. However,
consequent to the complaint marked P4 (A) [of 1.2.95], he made a statement to
the Katunayake Police who were in­vestigating the said complaint, denying the
allegations.  
  
Nandawansa de Silva aforementioned, a Director of the 16th Re­spondent, has
filed affidavits for and on behalf of the 16th Respondent. The contents of his
affidavits too are substantially the same as those of the 1st and 7th
Respondents, except that he adverts to matters pertaining to the formation of
the two petitioner-societies and the events leading to the inauguration of the
taxi service on 31.1.95. He also men­tions that the 16th Respondent, by letter
dated 11.1.95 (16R5), applied to the 15th Respondent for the operation of a
taxi service. This request was recommended by the 1st Respondent. The 14th
Respondent, by its letter of the same day (15 R6) informed the 7th Respondent
that the 15th Respondent had granted the necessary approval.  
  
Two of the police officers present, namely the 10th Respondent who is the
Senior Superintendent of Police, Negombo Division and the 13th

**56**

Respondent who is the Chief Inspector of Police, Katunayake Police Station,
have also filed affidavits supporting the version of the 1st to 7th
Respondents. They state that no information had been received by the police of
any plan to deprive the petitioners of engaging in their lawful occupation or
to permit other persons to operate taxis in their place or to chase away any
persons thereby preventing them from operating their taxi service. They
further state that they received P2 (dated 31.1.95) only on 7.2.95, but
received instructions from the Deputy Inspector-General of Police (Western
Province-Northern Range) that the 1st and 2nd Respondents and several other
members of Parlia­ment were to be present at the Airport on 31.1.95 in
connection with a new taxi company commencing operations from the Airport and
to pro­vide adequate security. Accordingly, steps were taken to deploy
addi­tional police officers and to provide adequate security to all persons
who would be present on this occasion. No information had been re­ceived by
the police of any anticipated violence against the petitioners; nor had
approval been sought or granted to any person to hold a public meeting at the
Airport on this day. They were present at the Airport for supervising the
security that was being provided and state that around 80 police officers from
the Negombo and Katunayake Police Stations had been deployed at the Airport
premises for this purpose.  
  
They state that an officer of the 14th Respondent addressed the taxi operators
of the new company (16th Respondent) as to the expected standards of conduct
and other operational matters. Thereafter the of­ficers of the 14th
Respondent commenced inspection of the vehicles of the new taxi operators. At
this time they saw the 1st and 2nd Respondents and the others speaking to the
crowd that had gathered around them a short distance away from the place where
the vehicles were being inspected. They specifically state that they did not
hear any of the persons asking any taxi operator to leave the Airport premises
or threatening that their vehicles would be smashed up. They deny that there
were masked or armed thugs present or that any incidents lead­ing to a breach
of the peace took place on that day. Nor did they observe a mass exodus of
taxi operators: no complaints of any such incidents were made to any officer
on that occasion. They however admit that the complaint marked P4A had been
made to the Katunayake Police on 1.2.95.

**57**

Several complaints corresponding to P6 (1) to P6 (49), made at the Katunayake
Police Station between 1.2.95 and 10.2.95, have been produced marked 13R1 to
13R49, but they deny that the police have not taken any action thereon. They
state that investigations have been conducted into all such complaints but
most of the complaints relate to acts done by unidentified persons;
investigations carried out so far had not revealed any evidence regarding the
occurrence of such inci­dents or the identity of any of the persons allegedly
responsible for such incidents.  
  
They state that subsequent to these complaints police patrols in the Airport
premises have been intensified but no such incidents as are alleged had been
detected; nor have any masked or armed per­sons been seen by the officers on
duty. In any event, all vehicles enter­ing the Airport premises are checked by
the police officers.  
  
The 13th Respondent further states that, prior to the making of these
complaints, two police officers were placed on duty at the Arrivals Ter­minal
of the Airport (where taxi operators generally operate from) dur­ing every 8
hour shift, round the clock. Subsequent to the said complaints, five police
constables and one Sub-Inspector of Police have now been placed on duty at the
Arrivals Terminal during every eight hour shift, but no incidents as alleged
have been detected.  
  
The Respondents have also submitted an affidavit from the Manager of the 14th
Respondent. He too denies that any public meeting was held at the Airport on
31.1.95 or that any incidents of the nature re­ferred to by the petitioners
took place on this day at the Airport premises.  
  
He states that on 31.1.95 the members of the 16th Respondent produced 38
vehicles for inspection and Turn Numbers 201 to 238 were issued to these
vehicles. At the outset, the Assistant Manager ad­dressed the prospective
operators and drivers and read out and ex­plained the instructions that have
to be adhered to by taxi operators at the Airport. He was present at this time
supervising the activities that were taking place. He noticed that the 1st,
2nd, 4th and 7th Respond­ents were present there. Around 10 a.m., the
Assistant Manager com­menced the inspection of vehicles under his supervision,
along the

**58**

traffic lanes adjoining the Airport taxi park. During this time, he noticed
the 1st, 2nd, 4th and 7th Respondents talking to the persons who were gathered
around them, a short distance away from the place where the inspection of
vehicles was being carried out. He did not notice any commotion of any masked
or armed persons. Nor did he notice any mass exodus of taxis of the three
companies which had subsisting agreements with the 14th Respondent. There was
no interruption or disturbance whatsoever to the inspection of vehicles that
was being carried out at the time. About one and a half hours later, he
noticed that the 1st, 2nd and 4th Respondents were not among the persons
present. The inspection of vehicles was continued after the lunch break and
thereafter the agreement was signed between the 14th and 16th Respondent
companies. He further states that no complaints of threats or harassment were
received by him or the Duty Manager at the Airport on 31.1.95. He adds that
the Turn Numbers issued to the members of the two petitioner societies are
still valid and their members are free to use their right to obtain their
turns in terms of the agreement entered into with the respective companies.  
  
Had the matter rested at that, it was arguable that there was no reason to
disbelieve the 1st and the 7th Respondents' version and that the petitioners
had failed to establish their allegations of instigation on a balance of
probability. However, what happened thereafter significantly changed the
position in regard to the reliance that could be placed on the 1st
respondent's affidavit.

There was a news item in the 'Divaina' newspaper of 6.2.95 headlined

  
Police turn a blind eye while masked (persons) go about in Pajeros", which
referred to acts of thuggery in the Katunayake area. This news item was
referred to in Parliament on 7.2.95. In reply to the 1st respondent's
affidavit denying the remarks attributed to him, the petitioners filed a
counter-affidavit dated 31.5.95 annexing extracts from the Hansard of 7.2.95
(P16) which records the following exchanges:-

**59**

**60**

The 1st Respondent did not deny or explain the statements attrib­uted to him,
by means of a counter affidavit; nor did his counsel seek to deny those
statements or take any objection to their admissibility in evidence. Learned
counsel's position was that such statements made in Parliament must not be
treated as if they were precise responses to questions; that when the matter
was raised, the 1st Responded gave a political response, rather than a factual
response; that his observa­tions were general and not intended to refer to the
facts of this particu­lar incident and that such statements made in the cut
and thrust of debate often contain over statements and inaccuracies. Hence,
coun­sel submitted that they cannot be treated in the same way as an aver­ment
in an affidavit filed in Court proceedings. He strenuously con­tended that the
1st Respondent's affidavit set out the correct position and that his
statements in Parliament should not be used to test the accuracy or
credibility of that affidavit.  
  
I am not at all attracted by this contention. An averment in an affida­vit, no
less than oral evidence, can be tested by reference to a prior inconsistent
statement. Just as a witness who gives oral evidence must have an opportunity
to explain a prior statement whilst still in the wit­ness box, a party who
submits an affidavit has a similar opportunity of doing so by means of a
counter affidavit. The 1st Respondent did not seek the permission of Court to
file an explanatory counter affidavit, although the hearing was about three
months after the Hansard extracts were produced.  
  
It is also relevant to note that the statements made by the 1st Re­spondent in
Parliament were within a week of 31st January.  
  
The Hansard extracts establish the following facts. One Member referred to the
'Divaina' news item, and then made a specific reference to the Airport taxi
drivers being chased away. He was interrupted at that stage. The 1st
Respondent then made a long statement, and, later, further observations on the
same subject, as to what happened and the reasons therefor. The following are
significant:

**61**

In the absence of any counter-affidavit from the 1st Respondent, his remarks
in Parliament cannot be interpreted, discounted or otherwise questioned as
being general statements about thuggery, or general political views about
political opponents or wrong doers, or otherwise. The Court must take the
Hansard as it is, as setting out certain facts, namely, that the 1st
Respondent made a series of remarks, without attempting to draw any inferences
from those facts or to come to any conclusion as to the truth or otherwise of
what he said.  
  
The 1st Respondent's affidavit is thus contradicted by the fact that he made
statements in Parliament which are quite inconsistent with his affidavit.
Those inconsistencies are so grave, that his affidavit cannot safely be acted
upon. The consequence is that, as between the petitioners' and the 1st
Respondent's versions, it is more probable that the 1st Respondent did (as
alleged by the petitioners) instigate those present, by labelling the members
of the petitioner-societies as UNP stooges and by uttering threats intended to
drive them away from the Airport.  
  
It is necessary to stress that I do not, in any way, regard the 1st
Respondent's statements in Parliament as amounting to admissions or
corroboration of the petitioners version, or as substantive evidence, but only
as facts (i.e. inconsistent statements) relevant to the credibility of his
affidavit.  
  
The resulting position is that we have, on the one hand, the petitioners
version, which is in no way internally inconsistent; and (as will appear later
in this judgment) their version of the events of 31.1.95 and the subsequent
months is intrinsically consistent. On the other hand, the 1st Respondent's
affidavit is unreliable because it is seriously contradicted by his own
previous statement, and that deficiency is so serious that it cannot be offset
by the other affidavits, tendered by the

**62**

Respondents, which directly or indirectly corroborate his version. It is not a
mere inconsistency but a fundamental contradiction. Corrobora­tion is
undoubtedly desirable and relevant, but where the principal evidence sought to
be corroborated is so seriously contradicted, corroboration cannot,
rehabilitate it.  
  
I must, however, state that the infirmities in the 1st Respondent's affidavit
do not help the petitioners to tilt the balance in so far as the 7th
Respondent is concerned; for his affidavit is not undermined by other
inconsistent statements. I therefore hold that the petitioners have failed to
establish instigation, participation or other involvement by the 7th
Respondent.  
  
It is appropriate at this stage to consider the alleged exclusion of the
members of the petitioner societies from the Airport. Their position is that
some members of their societies also joined the 16th Respond­ent and that,
apart from those persons, none of the other members were given hires after
9.30.a.m. on 31.1.95.  
  
The duty rosters were not produced by any party; learned Presi­dent's Counsel
for the petitioners claimed that the petitioners had not been given copies,
but learned State Counsel contended that there was no evidence of this. If the
duty rosters had shown that the peti­tioners were in fact given hires as
usual, there was no reason for the Manager (on 21.6.95) to refuse to discuss
matters relating to the im­plementation of the subsisting agreements, as
mentioned later in this judgment. What is more, the 14th Respondent should
have produced those duty rosters at the very outset to contradict the
averments in the petitions that only members of the 16th Respondent has been
allowed hires after 9.30.a.m.on 31.1.95. Instead, the Manager answered those
averments without producing or even referring to the relevant documents;
without stating anything about the position on and after 2.2.95, he merely set
out 12 numbers of members of AISCS whose drivers had obtained hires on
31.1.95, but with no indication whether those were before or after 9.30.a.m;
and seven numbers of AISCSL members who had obtained hires on 1.2.95.
Considering that the statistics furnished by the Manager showed an average of
3000 disembarking passengers per day, it seems probable that each of the
drivers would have got at least one hire every day. If so there is every
likelihood that the petitioners

**63**

obtained the hires on 31.1.95 during the first nine or ten hours of that day.  
  
According to their second affidavit dated 31.5.95, the petitioners had applied
to the 14th Respondent to furnish them with a statement reflecting the
allocation of duty turns to taxi operators and the monthly revenue reports of
Airport taxi services for the period 1.2.95 to date but they have been unable
to obtain this material. They claim that the duty rosters would establish that
none of their members have been able to obtain even a single duty turn after
1.2.95. The 14th Respondent's fail­ure to furnish the relevant information to
Court lends credence to the petitioners' claim.  
  
The petitioners have therefore established, on a balance of probabilities
that, with seven exceptions on 1.2.95, they did not receive any hires after
9.30.a.m. on 31.1.95: and beyond reasonable doubt, that on and after 2.2.95
they received no hires. Was this because of threats of violence or was it
quite voluntary? The petitioners have pro­duced the particulars furnished by
the 14th Respondent of their monthly income for the months of July and August,
1994, (P14 and P15) show­ing that most of them earned between Rs.30,000/- and
Rs.40,000/- per month. One cannot imagine that all of them suddenly decided to
forego this income voluntarily.  
  
Further, the 14th Respondent and its Manager had been of the view in January
that more taxis were required. On 31.1.95, 38 vehicles of the 16th Respondent
were inspected. This made a total of 238 vehicles available. But, by 1.2.95
over one hundred of the original 200 vehicles ceased to operate, so that there
remained only about 130. There is no suggestion that the 16th Respondent
increased the number of taxis. Disembarking passengers would have been
seriously inconvenienced thereby. Considering the speed with which the 14th
Respondent acted on 11.1.95, in order to increase the number of taxis
available, one would have expected equal concern when the number of taxis
dropped on and after 2.2.95. Unless they were aware that this was due to
reasons beyond the control of the taxi drivers concerned, the 14th and 15th
Respondents and the Manger would have inquired from the petitioner­-societies
why they were not fulfilling their obligations under the agreements.

**64**

The conclusion is inescapable. They made no such inquiries be­cause they knew
that the petitioners were not keeping away voluntar­ily; and they could not
have penalised the petitioner-societies in any way, considering the prevailing
circumstances.  
  
When these applications were called in Court on 2.6.95, counsel appearing for
the 14th and 15th Respondents informed Court that the said Respondents have no
objection and are always willing to permit the petitioners to operate their
taxis at the Airport.  
  
The petitioners state in their affidavit dated 11.7.95 that they made an
appointment to meet the General Manager of the 14th Respondent at 9.30.a.m. on
21.6.95 to discuss the arrangements to operate their taxis but on the morning
of that day, the General Manager informed them that he is unable to discuss
any matter connected with the is­sues relating to these applications as the
matter is pending before Court. He further stated that without an order from
this Court, he was unable to grant any facilities that are required for the
petitioners to operate their taxis at the Airport. The petitioners, therefore,
sought an order from this Court directing the 14th Respondent to grant all
facilities to enable them to operate their taxis at the Airport.  
  
On 18.7.95 the Court made order permitting the petitioners to meet the 14th
and 15th Respondents to discuss the necessary arrange­ments in regard to
operating their taxis at the Airport and State Coun­sel appearing on behalf of
the 14th and 15th Respondents had no ob­jection to this arrangement and
undertook to ensure that discussions are held.  
  
Despite solemn undertakings and pious hopes, the situation as re­gards the
petitioners has remained the same.  
  
No instigation, connivance or participation has been alleged against the 14th
and 15th Respondents and their officials. But the question is whether there
was any other involvement of the kind described in Faiz v. Attorney General
and Others.(1).  
  
In order that the members of the petitioner-societies could exercise their
rights and discharge their obligations, the 14th and 15th Respond-

**65**

ents had to take reasonable steps to enable them to enter and remain in the
Airport premises, without unusual danger to their person and property. If
these Respondents could not do so themselves, they had the right and the duty
to ask the law enforcement authorities for neces­sary assistance.  
  
Several complaints by and on behalf of the petitioners were made in respect of
their exclusion from the Airport premises, but these did not receive any
satisfactory response.  
  
A complaint dated 31.1.95 (P2), received by the 14th Respondent the same day,
referred to anticipated forcible exclusion from the Air­port and requested
protection. This was forwarded to the IGP, the 8th Respondent, on 3.2.95; the
letter was already copied inter alia to the IGP, Senior S.P. and O.I.C.
Katunayake Police. No further reply was sent.  
  
A letter dated 3.2.95 (P9) ,was sent to the 15th Respondent by an Attorney-at-
Law on behalf of the two petitioner-societies. This gave details of the
exclusion and obstruction, and requested protection. A reply dated 3.3.95
(14R.A), was sent only after the petitioners had filed this application and
obtained leave to proceed; it merely stated that the area in the Airport where
taxis operate comes under the supervi­sion of the police and that the police
have been instructed to maintain law and order in the area.  
  
Another letter dated 8.2.95 (P7), was sent by the Chairman of the respective
petitioner-societies to the Manager, referring to acts of intimidation by
members of the 16th Respondent, together with armed groups of thugs, thus
preventing the members of the petitioner-socie­ties from getting their duty
turns. The letter refers to two vehicles used for this purpose, by their
members and draws attention to the subsist­ing agreements which are valid till
31.12.96 under which their mem­bers are entitled to operate taxis at the
Airport; and requests that nec­essary protection be provided to enable them to
discharge their duties in a suitable atmosphere.  
  
The Manager replied, again, only after leave to proceed had been granted, on
24.3.95 (14R 1), stating that the matters raised were so important that the
societies should send a formal communication to the Chairman (15th Respondent)
direct.

**66**

But at no stage did the 14th or 15th Respondents or the Manager inform the
petitioners that police assistance would be forthcoming or that security had
been increased and that the petitioners could safely return to work. The 14th
and 15th Respondents failed to take any ac­tion even to enable the petitioners
safely to enter and to remain in the Airport premises, or to get the law
enforcement authorities to take necessary action. The manner in which they
responded to the repre­sentations made to them shows that they were aware of
what was happening, and acquiesced in it.  
  
So far as the police were concerned, the letter of 31.1.95 (P2) had been
copied to the IGP. Senior S.P. and O.I.C. Katunayake Police. The letter dated
8.2.95 (P7) had also been copied to the I.G.P. But, there were no replies.  
  
There were over 45 individual complaints made during the period 3.2.95 and
10.2.95. Learned State Counsel asserted that action had been taken; the
complaints had been investigated and since practi­cally all the complainants
were unable to identify the culprits, no fur­ther action was possible. It was
pointed out that the complainants were entitled to some measure of protection
to get back to work, to which learned State Counsel strenuously submitted that
the police had done their duty and had increased the security from two
officers to six at the Arrivals terminal of the Airport. The affidavits did
not indicate whether these officers were armed or how effective these
arrangements would be in relation to the complaints made and the protection
re­quested. Even if they were effective, State Counsel conceded that no
attempt had been made to inform the petitioners that arrangements had been
made for their protection and that they could go back to work.  
  
Section 92(3) of the Penal Code provides that there is no right of private
defence where there is time to have recourse "to the protecton of the public
authorities". The petitioners were justified in appealing to the police for
protection against threats and violence directed against them in regard to
their work. Considering the importance of security at the Airport, and the
efficient provision of services for passengers, the police were under a duty
to take reasonable steps to extend to the petitioners "the protection of the
law" : perhaps not the same high

**67**

degree as the protection extended when the 1st to 6th Respondents came to the
Airport on 31.1.95, but some reasonable protection. By failing to extend any
protection at all, in circumstances in which they were under a duty to do so,
the police denied the petitioners the equal protection of the law.  
  
As was said by _Fernando, J_. in _Faiz v. Attorney_ -General (supra),  
  
"Article 126 speaks of an infringement by executive or administra­tive action;
it does not impose a further requirement that such action must be by an
Executive officer. It follows that the act of a private individual would
render him liable, if in the circumstances that act is executive or
administrative. The act of a private individual would be executive if such act
is done with the authority of the Executive; such authority transforms an
otherwise purely private act into executive or administrative action; such
authority may be express, or implied from prior or concurrent acts manifesting
approval, instigation, connivance, acquiescence, participation, and the like
(including inaction in circum­stances where there is duty to act: and from
subsequent acts which manifest ratification or adoption.......in my view
responsibility under Article 126 would extend to all situations in which the
nexus between the individual and Executive makes it equitable to attribute
such responsibility. The Executive, and the Executive officers from whom such
authority flows would all be responsible for the infringement. Conversely,
when an infringement by an Executive officer, by executive or administrative
action, is directly and effectively the consequence of the act of a private
individual (whether by reason of instigation, conniv­ance, participation or
otherwise) such individual is also responsible for the executive or
administrative action and the infringement caused thereby. In any event, this
Court would have power under Article 126 (4) to make orders and directions
against such an individual in order to afford relief to the victim."  
  
These principles were adopted in _Upaliratne v. Tikiri Banda and Oth­ers_ ,(2)
too. Applying the said principles to the facts and circumstances of this case,
I am of the view that on 31.1.95 the 1st Respondent ren­dered himself liable,
in having instigated those who chased away the petitioners with threats of
violence; thereafter the police were guilty of inaction, in circumstances in
which they were under a duty to provide reasonable protection to the
petitioners; and the 14th and 15th Re

**68**

spondents, despite knowledge of what was taking place over a long period of
time, acquiesced in the treatment meted out to the petitioners. They are all
thus responsible for the violation of the petitioners funda­mental rights
under Article 12 (1), 12 (2) and 14 (1) (g), read with Arti­cle 14 (1) (c) of
the Constitution, which violations yet continue.  
  
I accordingly grant the petitioners the following reliefs:-  
  
(i) A declaration that the fundamental rights of the individual pe­titioners
under Articles 12 (1), 12 (2) and 14 (1) (g), read with 14 (1) (c), and the
fundamental rights of the petitioner societies un­der Article 12 (1), have
been infringed by the police and the 1st and 14th Respondents.  
  
(ii) The State is directed to pay each individual petitioner a sum of
Rs.10,000/- as compensation, as each such petitioner has been prevented during
a period of over nine months from engaging in his chosen occupation; this will
be without prejudice to the rights of the individual petitioners and/or the
petitioner societies to recover damages, if so advised, for breach of contract
or other­wise from the State and/or the 14th Respondent.  
  
(iii) The 14th Respondent is directed to pay each petitioner-soci­ety a sum of
Rs.50,000/- as compensation, as culpable inaction on the part of the 14th
Respondent prevented the two petitioner-­societies from exercing their rights
under the agreements.  
  
(iv) Since the violation resulted from the 1st respondent's instiga­tion, he
is directed to pay a sum of Rs.50,000/- as costs: Rs.25,000/ to the
petitioner-society in Application No. 66/95, and Rs. 25,000/- to the
petitioner-society in Application No.67/95.  
  
(v) The Inspector General of Police, the Deputy Inspector Gen­eral of Police,
Negombo Division, the Senior Superintendent of Police, Range 1, Negombo, and
the Officer-in-Charge of the Katunayake Police Station, are directed to take
immediate steps to provide necessary security and to ensure that the members
of the two petitioner-societies are able to operate their taxis at the
Airport, by themselves or through their duly authorized drivers, according to
the duty roster of the 14th Respondent.

**69**

(vi) The 14th and 15th Respondents are directed to immediately provide all
necessary facilities and ensure adequate security to the members of the two
petitioner-societies and/or their duly authorized drivers to operate their
taxis at the Airport in terms of the duty roster hitherto in existence, under
the respective agree­ments in force between the 14th Respondent and the
petitioner-societies.  
  
The Inspector-General of Police is directed to furnish a report to this Court
on or before 15.12.95 indicating the steps taken by the police to ensure that
the members of the petitioner-societies are able to operate their taxis
without any obstruction, in terms of the agreements with the 14th Respondent.  
  
The 14th and 15th Respondents are directed to furnish a report con­taining
particulars of duty turns given to the members of the petitioner-societies,
together with particulars of duty turns given to the other taxi operators, for
the month of December, 1995. This report should be submitted to this Court on
or before 8.1.96.  
  
The 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th Respondents in each application, in respect of
whom learned President's Counsel for the petitioners con­ceded at the stage of
hearing that there was no evidence, will be entitled, jointly, to a sum of
Rs.20,000/- as costs, payable equally by the petitioner-society in Application
No.66/95 (Rs.10,000) and the pe­titioner-society in Application No.67/95
(Rs.10,000)  
  
My brother Perera disagrees as to the liability of the 1st Respond­ent. As my
brother Fernando has dealt comprehensively with the ques­tion of Parliamentary
privilege raised by him, I have not adverted to that matter, because I
entirely agree with Fernando, J.  
  
_**Relief granted against 1st and 14th Respondents.  
  
Claim against 2nd to 7th Respondents rejected.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/32.html_  

