##  Upasena v. Richard Pathirana, Minister of Education and Higher Education
and Others - SLR - 321, Vol 1 of 2002 [2002] LKSC 32; (2002) 1 Sri LR 321 (31
May 2002)

**321**

**UPASENA  
v.  
RICHARD PATHIRANA,  
MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND HIGHER EDUCATION  
AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
ISMAIL, J.,  
WIGNESWARAN, J. AND  
J. A. N. DE SILVA, J.  
SC (FR) APPLICATION NO. 50/99  
MARCH 14, 2002  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Refusal of second extension of service - Whether a
Cabinet decision prohibiting extension of services beyond 55 years has
retroactive operation.  
_  
The possession of a postgraduate degree from a recognized University was a
condition of eligibility for appointment to the post of President, Hapitigarna
College of Education. The petitioner did not possess that qualification.
However, the Education Committee of the Public Service Commission appointed
the petitioner to that post with effect from 01. 06. 1993 subject to the
condition that he acquires such qualification within a period of three years.
Consequently, the petitioner obtained the degree of Master of Education from
the University of Colombo in 1994 and was confirmed in his post with effect
from 01. 06\. 1993. On reaching the 55th year on 17\. 10. 1997 the optional
age of retirement, he was granted his first extension of service for one year.  
  
The petitioner's application for a second extension of service from 17. 10.
1998 to 16. 10. 1999, recommended by the Chief Commissioner of the College of
Education (5th respondent) was submitted to the Secretary, Ministry of
Education (2nd respondent). Although there was no reply to that letter, the
petitioner continued to work till 31. 12. 1998 and was paid his salary. By
letter dated 15. 12\. 1998 the petitioner was informed that he could not be
granted an extension beyond 56 years.  
  
The defence urged on behalf of the respondents that by a Cabinet decision
dated 03\. 12. 1997 it was decided not to grant extension of services to
persons who

**322**

had been appointed outside the approved scheme of recruitment and that the
said decision applied to the petitioner as he did not possess a postgraduate
degree from a recognized University and fifteen years' experience at the time
of his appointment as President, Hapitigama College of Education.  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1) The petitioner had complied with the direction given to him to acquire a
postgraduate qualification. After confirmation in the post upon such
com­pliance, he was given an extension of services. The Cabinet decision
referred to should be applied prospectively and not retrospectively.  
  
(2) In the circumstances, the decision not to extend the petitioner's services
beyond 56 years was unreasonable and arbitrary and violative of his rights
under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.  
  
**APPLICATION   **for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_R. K. W. Goonasekara_ with _Upul Jayasooriya_ for petitioner.  
  
_Saleem Marsoof, PC Additional Solicitor-General_ with _I. Demuni de Silva,
Senior State Counsel_ for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 31, 2002  
  
**J. A. N. DE SILVA, J.  
**  
The petitioner's complaint is in respect of the refusal to grant him his
second extension of service as the President of the Hapitigama College of
Education at Mirigama, a college established under the College of Education
Act, No. 30 of 1986.  
  
The petitioner who is a Commerce Graduate from the Vidyodaya University was
appointed as a Graduate teacher at Deiyandara Maha Vidyalaya, Matara, with
effect from 26. 07. 1970. Subsequently, he was promoted as an Acting Principal
and a Teacher Trainee Instructor

**323**

attached to the Colombo South Education Office at Green Path. As evidenced by
document P1c he obtained a Postgraduate Diploma in Education from the
University of Colombo in 1979.

In 1986, when Colleges of Education were established under the Colleges of
Education Act, No. 30 of 1986, he was appointed as an Assistant Lecturer,
Grade 1, at the Mirigama Hapitigama College of Education with effect from 01.
01. 1985 with the approval of the Cabinet of Ministers. Thereafter, the
Education Service Committee of the Public Service Commission promoted him to
the post of Dean of the said College with effect from 01\. 11. 1986 (vide P4b
(1) and b (11) and as the Acting Vice-President on 01. 03\. 1990.  
  
In early 1993, the petitioner made an appeal to the former President of Sri
Lanka who was also the Minister of Education seeking con­firmation in the said
post. Although the said appeal had been forwarded to the Education Service
Committee of the Public Service Commission with an endorsement by the
President to confirm the petitioner along with two others similarly
circumstanced, viz Mrs. V. Marimutthu, Acting Principal of Sripada College of
Education and Mr. A. R. A. Aziz, Acting President of, Addalachchenai College
of Education, the Education Service Committee by letter dated 22. 06. 1993
informed the Secretary to the Ministry of Education of its inability to do so
as all three had not possessed the qualifications stipulated in the relevant
Scheme of  Recruitment. In this backdrop the Minister of Education submitted a
Cabinet Paper seeking approval to appoint Principals of Technical Colleges and
Presidents of Colleges of Education who have completed at least one year of
satisfactory service as at 01. 06. 1993 and this proposal was approved on 07.
07\. 1993. Thereafter, by letter marked P4 (D) the Education Service Committee
of the Public Service Commission appointed the petitioner to the post of
President, Hapitigama College of Education with effect from 01. 06. 1993,
subject to the condition that he should obtain a Postgraduate Degree from a

**324**

recognized University within a period of three years. As evidenced by document
marked P1 (b) the petitioner had obtained the degree of Master of Education
from the University of Colombo in 1994 and was confirmed in the said post with
effect from 01. 06. 1993 (P11). When the petitioner reached the fifty-fifth
year on 17. 10. 1997, the optional age of retirement from the public service,
he applied for an extension which was duly granted for one year in terms of
the Establishments Code. He submitted an application for the second extension
of service for the period 17. 10. 1998 to 16\. 10. 1999 to the Secretary to
the Ministry of Education through the Chief Commissioner of the Board (5th
respondent) who recommended it. Although there was no reply so to that letter
the petitioner continued to work till 31. 12. 1998 and was paid his salary. By
letter dated 15. 12. 1998 (P9) the petitioner was informed that an extension
could not be granted to him beyond 56 years.  
  
Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the refusal to grant the 2nd
extension was arbitrary and unreasonable and consti­tutes a violation of the
petitioner's fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution of the Democretic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.  
  
Mr. Marsoof, PC, Additional Solicitor-Genera! who appeared for the respondents
submitted that the refusal of the second extension by the Education Services
Committee of the Public Service Commission was justified in view of the
Cabinet decision dated 25. 11. 1998 (4R.1) which was based on an earlier
Cabinet decision. Mr. Marsoof, PC submitted that on or about 03. 12. 1997, the
Cabinet of Ministers decided that the services of persons who have been
appointed to any management or administrative post in the cadre of any
Educational Institute outside the approved scheme of recruitment should not be
extended beyond the age of 55 years. He drew the attention of Court to the
Cabinet Memorandum dated 28. 11\. 1997 and the Cabinet

**325**

decision dated 03. 12. 1997 and also to the circular letter dated 22. 06. 1998
issued to the Secretary to the Ministry in terms of the said Cabinet decision.
It was the contention of the respondents that at the time of the petitioner's
appointment to the post of President of Hapitigama College of Education, the
petitioner did not possess the requisite qualifications applicable to the post
namely, a postgradu­ate degree from a recognized University and fifteen years
experience. Therefore, the decision of the Cabinet not to allow such persons'
extensions beyond 55 years applied to the petitioner.  
  
It is observed that when the petitioner was appointed as the President of the
Hapitigama College on a Cabinet decision he was given three years time to
obtain a postgraduate qualification which he lacked at the time of the
appointment. The petitioner obtained this requisite qualification within the
stipulated period. The petitioner's first extension in service was duly
granted by the Secretary of the Ministry of Education (P 6). It is also to be
noted that the petitioner was made permanent in his post of President,
Hapitigama College of Education by the Secretary to the Education Committee,
after being satisfied that the petitioner was qualified to be made permanent
(vide P 11). The petitioner's 2nd extension too had been recommended by the
Chief Commissioner of the Colleges of Education Board, the 5th respondent in
this case. With this second extension the petitioner's case slipped outside
the purview of the Cabinet decision since the decision is to be interpreted as
prospective and not retrospective.  
  
In any event on the question of the requisite experience it is observed that
the Education Department had not found anything wanting in his administration
during the relevant period. In fact, the confirmation of the petitioner in the
post was an indication that he was an able administrative officer.  
  
It is also to be noted that the petitioner's case is different to that of Mrs.
Marimuththu and Mr. Aziz who were also appointed as Presidents

**326**

of Education Colleges. There is nothing to establish that the abovementioned
two were required to obtain the necessary educa­tional qualification with
their appointments. Even if their appointments were conditional it may be that
they were not confirmed in their posts due to their failure to fulfil the
conditions after the appointment.  
  
In the circumstance of this case I hold that the decision not to extend the
services of the petitioner beyond 56 years was unreason­able and arbitrary and
constitutes a violation of the petitioner's fundamental right guaranteed under
Article 12 (1) of the Constitution, I, therefore, direct that he be paid a sum
of Rs. 75,000 as compen­sation by the State. The petitioner is also entitled
to a sum of Rs. 5,000 as cost of this application.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. -** I agree.  
  
**WIGNESWARAN, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Relief granted.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/32.html_  

