##  Wijepala v. The Attorney General - SLR - 46, Vol 1 of 2001 [2000] LKSC 33;
(2001) 1 Sri LR 46 (5 December 2000)

**46**

**WIJEPALA  
v.  
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 104/99  
SC (SPL) LA NO. 238/99  
CA NO. 80/95  
HC PANADURA NO. 534/99  
3RD OCTOBER, 2000  
  
_Criminal Law - Conviction for culpable homicide not amounting to murder -
Credibility of the evidence of the sole eye witness - Reasonable doubt -
Failure to produce the first information - Denial of fair trial - Article
13(3) of the Constitution.  
  
_The appellant and his brother Carolis were indicted with the murder of the
deceased before the High Court. Carolis was acquitted and the appellant was
convicted of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The sole eye witness
was Senaratne the father of the deceased. He said that at about 7.30 p.m. on
the day of the incident he set out with the deceased to visit one Thomas
Singho to obtain some money to purchase fertilizer. On the way they met the
accused and five others. One of them inquired whether the witness and his son
had come to spy on the kassippu business the accused were carrying on. The
deceased replied in the negative. The appellant had a knife and Carobs had a
katty. In the course of the incident that ensued the appellant stabbed the
deceased which the witness observed with the aid of a torch light. The witness
escaped the scene through fear and remained in hiding until it was safe to
return. He then returned to the scene and removed the deceased to the hospital
with the assistance of the Gramasevaka, Jayapala. The witness said that he
made a statement to the hospital police at about 9.30 p.m.  
  
The stab injury caused the death of the deceased. The statement said to have
been made by witness Senaratne at 9.30 p.m. was not produced. But the witness
had in fact made a statement to the Anguruwatota Police at 11.30 p.m. in which
he had stated that both accused had pointed knives. The Gramasevaka testified
that he provided his car and accompanied witness Senaratne and the deceased to
the hospital. However, there was no evidence that Senaratne revealed the
identity of the assailant to him that night or even thereafter. Witness Thomas
Singho gave evidence but did not confirm having requested Senaratne to call
over

**47**

that night to obtain a loan. A witness named Siripala who claimed that he
visited the scene soon after the stabbing testified that Senaratne came a few
minutes later and lifted up the deceased saying "Son, who has done this to
you?"  
  
**Held :  
  
**1\. The evidence of the sole eye witness raised a strong doubt as to the
guilt of the appellant and the court should have given the benefit of that
doubt to the appellant.  
  
_Per_ Ismail, J.  
  
"The evidence of Senaratne who was the sole eye witness to the incident is
open to suspicion. The trial judge had failed to appreciate that his evidence
in regard to the identity of the appellant has not been supported by any other
item of evidence."  
  
2\. If Senaratne had made a statement at 9.30 p.m. that statement should have
been brought to the notice of the court and the defence and the failure to do
so impaired the right of the appellant to a fair trial which was his
fundamental right under Article 13(3) of the Constitution.  
  
_Per_ Fernando, J.  
  
"If indeed the 11.30 p.m. statement was the first information, then obviously
Senaratne had not made an earlier statement at the police post; if so, his
evidence on that point was not credible;  
  
On the other hand, if Senaratne was truthful in claiming that he had made a
statement at 9.30 p.m. then that statement would have been the first
information. Whether in that statement Senaratne had claimed that he had seen
the stabbing, and had identified the appellant as the assailant would have
been of very great importance"  
  
**Cases referred to :  
  
**1\. _Phato v. A. G_. (1994) 3 Law Reports of the Commonwealth 506  
  
2\. _R v. Stinchombe_ (1992) Law Reports of the Commonwealth (Crim) 68  
  
3\. _State v. Botha_ (1994) 4 SA 799  
  
4. _King v. Endoris_ 46 NLR 498  
  
5\. _Jagathsena_ and _Others v. G.D.D. Perera, Inspector - Criminal
Investigation Department _and _Mrs. Bandaranaike_ (1992) 1 SRI LR 371 at 380  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

**48**

_Ranjit Abeysuriya, P.C_. with _Ms. D. Mirihana_ for accused-appellant.  
  
_Dappula de Livera_ Senior State Counsel for Attorney - General.

_Cur. adv. vult._

December 05, 2000.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
  
**I entirely agree with the judgment and order of Ismail, J. and wish to draw
attention to a matter of fundamental importance, which is. another ground for
allowing this appeal.  
  
One of the questions which arose at the trial was whether Senaratne, the
father of the deceased, actually saw the deceased being stabbed. A witness
named Siripala, who claimed that he came to the scene soon after the stabbing,
testified that Senaratne came a few minutes later and lifted up the deceased,
saying "Son, who has done this to you?". The Gramasevaka took Senaratne and
his son to hospital in his car, but Senaratne did not disclose the identity of
the assailant to him. In his evidence, Senaratne claimed that at 9.30 p.m. he
made a statement at the police post at the hospital, and it is that statement
which gives rise to a serious question. Admittedly, Senaratne made a statement
to the Anguruwathota police at 11.30 p.m, and it was that statement which the
prosecution sought to produce as being the first information. That was
disallowed, for reasons which are not relevant to the question which now
arises.  
  
If indeed the 11.30 p.m. statement was the first information, then obviously
Senaratne had not made an earlier statement at the police post, if so, his
evidence on that point was not credible; and the finding of the Court of
Appeal that he did make such a statement was erroneous.  
  
On the other hand, if Senaratne was truthful in claiming that he had made a
statement at 9.30 p.m., then that statement would have been the first
information. Whether in that statement Senaratne had claimed that he had seen
the

**49**

stabbing, and had identified the Appellant as the assailant, would have been
of very great importance.  
  
An examination of the High Court record reveals, however, that such a
statement was neither among the documents listed in the indictment nor
included in the statements furnished in terms of sections 147 and 159 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979. Section 147 provides that the
officer in charge of the relevant police station shall at the commencement of
the non-summary inquiry furnish to the Magistrate two certified copies of the
notes of investigation and of all statements recorded in the course of the
investigation. When the Magistrate commits the accused for trial, section
159(2) requires him to send one of those copies to the High Court and the
other to the Attorney-General. The prosecution has throughout gone on the
basis that there had been no 9.30 p.m. statement.  
  
Either Senaratne made a statement at the police post, or he did not. If he did
not, his credibility was seriously in question. If, on the other hand, he had
made that statement, then a very serious irregularity had occurred at the
trial: the first information had neither been disclosed nor furnished to the
accused and to the Court. Quite apart from that being a failure to make such
disclosure as the statutory provisions require, the non-disclosure of that
statement to the defence and to the Court resulted - for the reasons I set out
below - in the impairment of the right of the Appellant to a fair trial which
was his fundamental right under Article 13(3). That Article not only entitles
an accused to a right to legal representation at a trial before a competent
Court, but also to a fair trial, and that includes anything and everything
necessary for a fair trial. That would include copies of statements made to
the police by material witnesses.  
  
In _Phato v. A.G_.(1) dealing with "the right to information **. . .**
required for the exercise or protection of [one's] rights", read with "the
right to a fair trial", the Supreme Court of South

**50**

Africa (Eastern Cape Division) held that an accused had the right to
information in the police docket, namely statements made by witnesses, in
order to prepare properly for trial. The fact that in South Africa there is an
independent right to information, makes little difference, because in my view
the right to a fair trial recognized by Article 13(3) necessarily includes,
inter alia, the ancillary right to information necessary for a fair trial
(subject, of course, to exceptions such as privilege).  
  
The judgment in _Phato referred to R. v. Stinchcombe_ (2) (a decision of the
Supreme Court of Canada) which is even more in point. There, at a preliminary
inquiry, a secretary employed by the accused gave evidence apparently
favourable to the accused. Thereafter, the police interviewed the secretary,
before the trial, and took a tape-recorded statement, and again, during the
trial, got a written statement from her. The prosecution informed the defence
of the existence but not of the contents of those statements. During the
course of the trial the prosecutor told defence counsel that he would not call
the secretary as a witness because he considered that she was not
creditworthy. Because defence counsel did not know what the witness had said
to the police, he was unwilling to call her for the defence. His application
that the court should order that the contents of the statements be disclosed
was refused. The accused was convicted. The Alberta Court of Appeal dismissed
his appeal. On appeal the Supreme Court of Canada ordered a new trial at which
the statements were to be produced.  
  
In _State v. Botha_ (3) Le Roux, J. analysed _Stinchcombe_ , and extracted six
principles, which have been summarized, thus in the judgment in Phato:  
  
The first of the six principles which Le Roux, J. extracts from Stinchcombe is
that the information in the police docket belongs not to the police or the
prosecution but to the public, not to secure a conviction but to see that
justice

**51**

is done. The second principle is that there is no duty on the accused to
assist the prosecutor, who as far as he is concerned is his adversary. The
third is that there is a general duty on the state to disclose to the defence
all information which it intends adducing and also all information which it
does not intend to use and which could assist the accused in his defence. This
is not an absolute duty, but one which is subject to the discretion by the
state to withhold privileged information and to delay disclosure if the
investigation is not yet complete. Fourthly, the exercise of the state's
discretion is reviewable by the trial court on application by the defence.
Fifthly, initial disclosure must take place before the accused is called upon
to plead. This is a continuing duty. If further facts come to light, the state
is obliged to furnish them to the defence as soon as possible. The sixth and
final principle is that the statements of all witnesses must be made available
to the defence, whether or not they are to be called. If there is no complete
statement but only notes, the notes must be made available and, if there was
an oral consultation, a summary of the evidence must be prepared and provided
to the defence." (at pg 529)  
  
These principles are, by and large, implicit in the right to a fair trial
recognized by Article 13(3). Not only is no derogation permitted, but the Code
of Criminal Procedure Act contains no inconsistent provision.  
  
The failure to disclose to an accused the existence and contents of the first
information - which might have cast serious doubt on the informant's
credibility \- may well result in a miscarriage of justice. Rule 52 of the
Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette for Attorneys-at-Law) Rules, 1988,
requires an Attorney-at-Law appearing for the prosecution to bring to the
notice of the Court "any matter which if withheld may lead to a miscarriage of
justice". That is a professional obligation founded on a constitutional right
to a fair trial.

**52**

I hold that if Senaratne had made a statement at 9.30 p.m., that statement
should have been brought to the notice of the Court and the defence, and the
failure to do so was a violation of Article 13(3), by which all Courts are
bound.  
  
**ISMAIL, J.  
  
**The appellant Wijeypala and his brother Carolis who were named as the 1st
and 2nd accused respectively were charged on indictment with the murder of Don
Sarath Srilal on 8th June 1988 at Batagoda. At the trial before the High Court
Judge, Panadura, sitting without a jury, N.D. Senaratne, the father of the
deceased, was the sole eyewitness who claimed to have seen the attack on his
son that night shortly after 7.30 p.m. with the aid of a torchlight. The
deceased had received a single penetrating 1 " long stab injury on the back of
the left side of the abdomen which had cut a major blood vessel resulting in
death due to shock and intense haemorrhage. The trial judge accepted the
evidence of N. D. Senaratne and at the conclusion of the trial on 20\. 06. 95,
the 1st accused - appellant was convicted of the lesser offence of culpable
homicide not amounting to murder and was sentenced to a term of 10 years
rigorous imprisonment. The 2nd accused was acquitted. The appeal of the 1st
accused - appellant to the Court of Appeal was dismissed by its judgment,
dated 16. 09. 99. This appeal is against the said judgment of the Court of
Appeal affirming the conviction and sentence.  
  
The Court of Appeal has in its judgment summarized the evidence of Senaratne
as follows: "The main eyewitness who gave incriminating evidence against the
accused - appellant was Nahalage Don Senaratne who was the father of the
deceased. In his testimony, he asserted that on 8th June 1988 at about 7.30
p.m. that he set out with the deceased, his son intending to proceed along
Pelpola Road to reach Galketiya to obtain some money from Uswatte Liyanage
Thomas Singho to purchase one hundred weight of fertilizer. When they were

**53**

proceeding along this road and when they were nearing the 1st accused's house,
he has stated that he had seen the 1st accused, Carolis and five others on the
road and these persons were standing beside a can of Kasippu which had been
placed on the road. At that stage these persons had addressed the deceased
thus in Sinhala "adath tho oththu balannada awe kiya mage puthagen ahuwa"
whereupon the deceased has stated "I have not come for any such purpose but I
am proceeding on a journey". Thereafter the deceased proceeded passing these
persons. Witness Senaratne who was following his son had heard footsteps
behind them and when he flashed his torch towards his rear, he has stated that
he saw Wijeypala and Carolis proceeding towards his son with knives in their
hands. According to the witness, the 1st accused Wijeypala passed him and
stabbed his son who was proceeding ahead of him and at that point, the
deceased Srilal had shouted out "Budu ammo, I have been stabbed" and had
proceeded after receiving the injury for a short distance. At that stage,
Carolis the 2nd accused had shouted out - "Do not let this fellow escape too"
and had approached witness Senaratne to stab him. Whereupon the witness had
changed his course and fled towards the rubber estate and had proceeded
towards the extremity of the rubber estate to a point 200 yards away and had
concealed himself. After hiding himself for about 20-25 minutes in the thicket
of the rubber estate, and on observing that there was no apprehension of
danger to himself at that stage he had proceeded towards the road and
thereafter approached the point at which his son lay fallen beside a pool of
blood near a drain close to the Co-operative sales outlet".  
  
The trial judge had arrived at a favourable finding in regard to the
testimonial trustworthiness and credibility of the witness Senaratne. The
Court of Appeal, while affirming the said judgment, has observed that it was
unable to conclude that the trial judge had misdirected himself in the
evaluation of the evidence of Senaratne.

**54**

Learned President's Counsel for the appellant submitted, however, that the
testimony of Senaratne was completely untrustworthy and of such poor quality
that a conviction against the appellant cannot possibly be sustained in law.
His testimonial trustworthiness on vital aspects relating to the incident was
assailed in an attempt to cast a doubt even in regard to his presence at the
time the deceased had received the fatal stab injury.  
  
Senaratne stated in his evidence that when his deceased son and himself were
proceeding along the road to reach Galketiya that he saw the appellant, his
brother Carolis and five others on the road beside a can of Kasippu. One of
them had addressed the deceased and asked him in Sinhala "Adath tho oththu
balannada awe?" to which the deceased had replied in the negative and said
that he was proceeding on a journey. Nevertheless, the High Court Judge had
noted down erroneously in his judgment that this question was asked by the
appellant. It was submitted that this misdirection by the trial judge on an
item of evidence relating to the same transaction wrongly imputing the
question as having been asked by the appellant could have largely contributed
to his conviction. The Court of Appeal has not dealt with this vital
misdirection on a crucial factual matter considering the possibility that any
one of the other six persons who posed the question could have inflicted the
fatal injury.  
  
Further, Senaratne appears to have sought to buttress his claim to having been
present at the scene with his son when he was fatally injured, by stating in
evidence that his son had exclaimed "Budu Thaathe mata pihiyen anna". It was
established at the trial that the witness had omitted to mention this fact in
his statement to the police, that he had omitted to state so at the inquest
proceedings and that he had not revealed this in his evidence even at the non-
summary proceedings in the Magistrate's Court. The trial judge has taken the
view that this omission did not affect the credibility

**55**

of the witness as these words have been uttered after the incident. It was
submitted that, on the other hand, the High Court Judge had erred in failing
to consider that as these words were allegedly uttered immediately after the
deceased was stabbed, this fact itself raised a grave doubt as to the actual
presence of the witness at the time of the incident. The Court of Appeal
having erroneously set out that the words uttered were "Budu amme, I have been
stabbed", has also failed to attach any significance to this omission as
raising a possible doubt as to the actual presence of Senaratne at the scene,
thus affecting his trustworthiness as a witness.  
  
Senaratne stated in his evidence that he took his injured son in a car to the
hospital. The Gramasevaka Jayapala testified that he provided his car for the
purpose and that he himself accompanied Senaratne and his injured son in the
car to the hospital. Although the Gramasevaka testified that Senaratne was
known to him, there is no evidence that Senaratne revealed the identity of the
assailant to him that night or even thereafter. The failure of Senaratne to
inform the Gramasevaka of the identity of the assailant therefore raises a
serious doubt in regard to the presence of Senaratne at the scene of the
incident and his claim to have identified the appellant as the assailant.
Applying the test of spontaneity, his belatedness reduces the weight of his
evidence and affects his credibility.  
  
Senaratne made a bare unsupported assertion that he made a statement to the
Horana hospital post at 9.30 p.m. that night although according to Jayapala,
they reached the hospital at about 9.45 or 10 p.m. There was no evidence that
the statement claimed to have been made at the hospital post was the first
information to the police regarding this incident or in regard to the identity
of any of the suspects. Although two police officers IP Dharmasena and PC
Jayaratne gave evidence at the trial, there was no evidence elicited from
either of them

**56**

that Senaratne had made a statement to the hospital post at any time that
night. It was submitted therefore that the Court of Appeal erred in its
finding that Senaratne had made a statement at the earliest opportunity that
presented itself. The Court of Appeal appears to have formed the impression
that Senaratne had been thereby prompt in revealing also the identity of the
suspects.  
  
Senaratne was cross-examined in a further attempt to assail his testimony that
he was eyewitness to the incident. He testified that he was on his way to the
house of one Thomas Singho together with his son that night to obtain a loan
from him for the purchase of some fertilizer. It was established that he had
made no reference in his complaint to the police to the fact that he was on
his way to the house of Thomas Singho or that he had sought a loan from him.
Thomas Singho himself gave evidence but he did not confirm either that he
requested Senaratne to call over at his house or to call over that particular
night to obtain the loan from him. While the Court of Appeal has erred in
stating that there was such evidence from Thomas Singho, both the trial judge
and the Court of Appeal did not attach any significance to this omission for
the reason that Senaratne had mentioned to the police that he was proceeding
to the village called Galketiya that night where it transpired that Thomas
Singho resided.  
  
Senaratne testified further that while he was proceeding with his deceased son
that night, he heard footsteps behind him and that when he flashed his torch
towards the rear he saw the appellant armed with a knife and his brother
Carolis with a sickle like katty. However, in his statement to the police he
had stated that both accused had pointed knives. The trial judge did not
attach any significance to this contradiction as the position of the witness
was that both accused were armed with weapons and the Court of Appeal too has
found that the contradiction has been sufficiently explained and that it did
not affect the credibility of the witness.

**57**

Senaratne who was the sole eyewitness has thus been cross-examined on vital
aspects relating to the incident and doubts have been raised in regard to his
presence at the scene. Section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance lays down a
specific rule that no particular number of witnesses shall in any case be
required for the proof of any fact, thus attaching more importance to the
quality of evidence rather than the quantity. The evidence of a single
witness, if cogent and impressive, can be acted upon by 'a Court, but,
whenever there are circumstances of suspicion in the testimony of such a
witness or is challenged by the cross-examination or otherwise, then
corroboration may be necessary. The established rule of practice in such
circumstances is to look for corroboration in material particulars by reliable
testimony, direct or circumstantial. In this instance the prosecution has not
led any other evidence, which even barely supported Senaratne in regard to the
infliction of the injury by the appellant.  
  
The Court of Appeal was, in these circumstances, not justified in holding that
the testimonial trustworthiness and credibility of the witness has been
established before the trial judge. The Court of Appeal has circumscribed its
jurisdiction and limited it to ascertaining if there was any vital
misdirection or non-direction and if there was admissible evidence to support
the finding of the trial judge. The Court of Appeal has declined to interfere
with the finding of the trial judge and has stated that it is not entitled to
indulge in a re-appraisal and re-trial on questions of fact, which came up
before the judge in his capacity as the "trier of facts". The Court of Appeal
has been guided in following such an approach by the principles set out by
_Soertsz, ACJ in King v. Endoris_ (4), that its function in hearing an appeal,
"as laid down by the Court of Criminal Appeal Ordinance, is to examine the
evidence in the case in order to satisfy ourselves with the assistance of
counsel that there is evidence upon which the jury could have reached the
verdict to which they came, and also, similarly, to examine

**58**

the charge of the trial judge to satisfy ourselves that there has not been any
substantial misdirection or non-direction". These guidelines are appropriate
for an appellate court considering a charge to a jury. However, in a trial
before a judge sitting alone, while his decision on questions of fact based on
the demeanour and credibility of witnesses carry great weight, an appellate
court has a duty to test the evidence by a careful and close scrutiny and if
it entertains a strong doubt as to the guilt of the accused, the Court must
give the benefit of that doubt to him. The Court of Appeal has erred in
failing to subject the evidence of Senaratne to a close scrutiny, but had it
done so, it would certainly have entertained a doubt as to the guilt of the
appellant on such weak and unsupported testimony. As Ranasinghe, J. as he then
was, after a review of the earlier authorities, in _Jagathsena_ and _others
v_. _G.D.D. Perera, Inspector, Criminal Investigation Department_ and _Mrs.
Bandaranaike_ (5), said " **. . .** although the findings of a Magistrate on
questions off act are entitled to great weight, yet, it is a duty of the
Appellate Court to test, both intrinsically and extrinsically the evidence led
at the trial- that, if after a close and careful examination of such evidence,
the Appellate Court entertains a strong doubt as to the guilt of the accused,
the Appellate Court must give the accused the benefit of such doubt".  
  
The evidence of Senaratne who was the sole eyewitness to the incident is open
to suspicion. The trial judge has failed to appreciate that his evidence in
regard to the identity of the appellant has not been supported by any other
item of evidence. There is therefore a strong doubt as to the guilt of the
appellant and, as such, the benefit of the doubt should have been given to the
appellant. The Court of Appeal has erred in affirming the conviction without
adequately testing the evidence of Senaratne. For these reasons, I allow the
appeal and set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal. The conviction and
sentence imposed on the appellant by the High Court are set aside and the
appellant is acquitted.

**59**

I agree with the reasons set out by Fernando, J. in his judgment allowing the
appeal on an additional ground.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree  
  
I agree with the reasons set out by Fernando, J. and Ismail, J. and allow the
appeal.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/33.html_  

