##  Jayasingham v. Arumugam - SLR - 350, Vol 1 of 1992 [1992] LKSC 33; (1992)
1 Sri LR 350 (11 May 1992)

**350**

**JAYASINGHAM** **  
v.** **  
ARUMUGAM**

SUPREME COURT  
M. D. H. FERNANDO,  
J. AMERASINGHE, J. AND  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 8/92  
11 MAY, 1992.

_     Landlord and tenant - Letter by tenant stating he will vacate the
premises - Does it amount to a termination of the tenancy? - Rent Act, Section
22._

**Held:**

As the issue was whether in terms of the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, a letter
given by the tenant that he would vacate the premises, the Roman Dutch law
would be

351

irrelevant. Section 22 does not set out as a ground for ejectment the giving
of a notice to quit by the tenant to his landlord. Hence the letter given by
the tenant will not terminate the tenancy in terms of the Rent Act.

**APPEAL** from order of the Court of Appeal.

_P. A. D. Samarasekera P.C. with K. de Alwis for defendant-appellant.  
_  
_A. K. Premadasa, P.C. with E. C. de Silva for plaintiff-respondent._

_Cur adv vult._

17th December, 1992.  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.**

The Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the
Respondent) instituted this action against the Defendant-Petitioner-Appellant
(hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) in the District Court of Mount-
Lavinia praying, inter alia, for the ejectment of the Appellant and all those
holding under him from the premises in suit, viz., the ground floor apartment
bearing Assessment No. 42, situated in 36th Lane, Colombo 6, and depicted as
Unit 1 in Condominium Plan No. 480 dated 9th September, 1986 and made by
Sinnetamby, Licensed Surveyor. The Respondent also prayed for damages in a sum
of Rs. 1,100/- from 1st July to 31st October, 1988, and for further damages at
Rs. 275/- per month from 1st November, 1988 until the Respondent is restored
to possession.

The plaint (marked P1 together with its translation marked P1A) recites that
the Appellant entered upon the premises on a monthly tenancy on a rental of
Rs. 275/- payable on or before the end of every month. The plaint next avers
that -

"On or about 25th of May, 1988, the Defendant (i.e. the Appellant) terminated
the said tenancy at the end of June, 1988. Notwithstanding such termination,
the Defendant continues in wrongful and unlawful occupation from 1st July,
1988, causing loss and damages to the Plaintiff (i.e. the Respondent) at Rs.
275/- per month."

The answer of the Appellant (marked P2 together with its translation marked
P2A) admits the monthly tenancy and avers that such tenancy commenced with
effect from 1.10.1985, but states that the Appellant has paid rent at the rate
of Rs. 4,250/- per month from 1.10.1985 upto 31.12.1988 and thereafter at the
rate of Rs. 275/- per month.

The Appellant specifically denies the averment in the plaint that he (the
Appellant) terminated the tenancy. He avers that

352

the contract of tenancy has not been lawfully terminated and that therefore
the Respondent cannot have and maintain the action without terminating the
tenancy.

The Appellant further pleads in his answer that the premises are residential
premises governed by the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, and that, accordingly, the
Respondent cannot maintain this action on the ground that the Appellant has
given notice to quit the said premises, and adds that he, the Appellant is, in
any event entitled to withdraw such notice. He avers that the plaint does not
set out the requisites necessary to entitle the Respondent to maintain this
action in ejectment. He also sets out a claim in reconvention in a sum of Rs.
155,756/- being overpayment of rent.

The Respondent filed replication (marked P3 together with its translation
marked P3A) denying the overpayment and stating that a tenant is, in law,
entitled to terminate his tenancy with a month's notice; that thereafter no
further notice is required from the landlord; that once tenancy has been
terminated either by the landlord or the tenant unilaterally, such notice
cannot be withdrawn, and that the provisions of the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972
have not affected the common law right of a tenant to terminate his tenancy.

At the trial, the parties admitted the fact of the tenancy; that the premises
were residential premises governed by the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, and that a
letter dated 25.5.1988 (marked P5) was sent by the Appellant (tenant) to the
Respondent (landlord).

Thereafter issues were framed by both parties and upon their being accepted by
Court, the Appellant moved that his issue No. 4 be taken up as a preliminary
issue of law in terms of section 147 of the Civil Procedure Code, to which
Court agreed.

353

Issue No. 4 runs as follows :

The English translation would be as follows:

"In terms of the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, does a cause of action accrue to the
Plaintiff (i.e. the Respondent) to eject the Defendant (i.e. the Appellant) on
the basis that the Defendant has given a letter stating that he will vacate
the premises ?"

This issue is founded on the averments contained in paragraph 8 (b) of the
Appellant's answer marked P2 (with its translation marked P2A), and reads as
follows:

"The Defendant (i.e. the Appellant) specifically pleads that the premises in
suit are governed by the provisions of the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972 and that
accordingly, the Plaintiff cannot, in any event, maintain this action on the
ground that the Defendant has given notice to quit the said premises."

After oral and written submissions by both the Respondent and the Appellant
(marked P6 and P7 respectively), the learned Additional District Judge made
order (marked P8) answering the said Issue No. 4 in the affirmative.

Being aggrieved by the said order, the Appellant moved the Court of Appeal by
way of revision in C.A. Revision Application No. 890/90, praying that the
above order be revised. However, on 12.9.91, the Court of Appeal dismissed the
Appellant's application with costs. Hence this appeal canvassing the order of
the Court of Appeal.

Before proceeding to consider the question whether the said Issue No. 4 has
been answered correctly, I must make the observation that it is only in
document P4, viz., the record of the proceedings of 17th July, 1990, (which
record has been kept in the Sinhala language), that the said Issue No. 4
(marked P4A) appears in its correct form in Sinhala. It is for this reason
that I have quoted the said issue in its original Sinhala.

354

Although the learned Additional District Judge, in his order dated 28.8.90
(marked P8), quotes the said Issue No. 4 correctly in Sinhala, he thereafter
proceeds to place an erroneous interpretation thereon, viz., that the said
issue speaks of the Defendant (i.e. the Appellant) having, by a letter, **"
terminated the tenancy" **whereas the Defendant admits only that he gave a
letter dated 25.5.88 to the Plaintiff (i.e. the Respondent) and nothing more.
The learned Additional District Judge thereafter proceeds to answer Issue No.
4 in the affirmative, having decided to apply the Roman Dutch Law; quite
unmindful of the fact that that issue specifically calls for an answer "in
terms of the Rent Act, No. 7 in 1972 . . .".

The Appellant's position has always been that he merely gave a letter (P5) to
the Respondent, and that the contract of tenancy was never terminated. This
position he has set out quite clearly in his answer (marked P2 together with
its translation P2A).

Paragraph 7 of the Appellant's answer sets out as follows :

"The Defendant (i.e. the Appellant) further pleads that the contract of
tenancy between the Plaintiff and the Defendant has not lawfully been
terminated and that consequently the Plaintiff cannot have and maintain this
action."

Paragraph 8 (a) of the said answer states :

"The Defendant (i.e. the Appellant) specifically denies the averments in
paragraph 3 of the plaint that he terminated the said tenancy, but further
pleads that, in any event the Plaintiff cannot have and maintain this action
without terminating the said tenancy."

It is all the more startling then, to find that in all the papers filed in
this case by the Appellant, the vital portion of Issue No. 4 has been
mistranslated to read, ".. . . on the basis that the Defendant (i.e. the
Appellant) has by letter **terminated the tenancy " **whereas the Sinhala
original clearly states:- . . . "

355

In this connection, it must be observed that even the Court of Appeal, in its
judgment dated 12.9.91 (marked P13), perpetuates the mistranslation by the use
of the words, "has by letter **terminated the tenancy.** "

It is thus seen that this mistranslation has pervaded the entire course of the
proceedings, and continued in that same uncorrected form even during the
argument before us.

In considering this matter, it must not be forgotten that this appeal is only
upon a single question, viz., how Issue No. 4 raised by the Appellant as a
preliminary issue of law, should be answered; and if I may reiterate, that
single question is merely whether, in terms of the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, a
cause of action has accrued to the Respondent (i.e. the Plaintiff) to eject
the Appellant (i.e. the Defendant) on the ground that the latter has given the
former a letter stating that he will vacate the premises.

The letter in question (marked P5) states laconically :

"Dear Mr. Arumugam,

We shall vacate your home end of June, 1988. We regret we could not vacate as
promised.

Thank you.

Yours sincerely,  
Signed/B. G. Jayasingham."

The simple question raised by Issue No. 4, therefore seems to be, whether the
mere fact of the tenant giving the above "notice" by his letter, P5, to his
landlord, gives rise to a cause of action, in terms of the Rent Act, No. 7 of
1972, to the landlord to eject the tenant from the premises in question. This
issue does not seek to go any further into other areas such as the validity of
the "notice" and/or whether the said "notice" did in fact have the effect of
lawfully terminating the contract of tenancy.

356

Learned President's Counsel for the Appellant argued that the said Issue No. 4
should be answered in the negative inasmuch as, both the learned Additional
District Judge and the Judges of the Court of Appeal had arrived at incorrect
conclusions in their attempts to answer it. He urged that the letter P5 did
not constitute a ground which gave rise to a cause of action to the landlord
to institute proceedings in the District Court for the ejectment of the
tenant, inasmuch as such a ground is not mentioned in section 22 of the Rent
Act, No. 7 of 1972. Instead, the Respondent should have pleaded a ground
mentioned in section 22. He traced the history of the Rent Acts and pointed
out that in the earlier enactments, viz., the Rent Restriction Ordinance, No.
60 of 1942 and the Rent Restriction Act, No. 29 of 1948, the fact that the
tenant had given notice to quit was mentioned as a specific ground, but the
current Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972 deliberately omitted any such ground. He
submitted further, that, inasmuch as section 22 of the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972
commences with the words, "Notwithstanding anything in any other law ......
recourse could not be had to the common law.

Learned President's Counsel for the Respondent, on the other hand, argued that
the Rent Acts never purported to repeal the common law, and that therefore it
was the common law, viz., the Roman Dutch Law, which applied in this case. He
submitted that the tenancy could under the common law, be terminated by the
tenant giving a notice to quit the premises and that a cause of action did
accrue to the Respondent to eject the Appellant. He urged therefore, that
Issue No. 4 should be answered in the affirmative.

Inasmuch as Issue No. 4 specifically states : "In terms of the Rent Act, No. 7
of 1972 . . .", it is clear that the answer to this issue must be confined
within the four corners of that Act. I therefore have no hesitation in stating
that any consideration of the applicability of the Roman Dutch Law is
irrelevant to the consideration of this issue. We are not here being called
upon to adjudicate on the entire question of the tenancy and the ejectment of
the tenant. On the contrary, we are called upon to adjudicate upon the limited
question couched in very specific terms in the form of a specific issue, viz,
Issue No. 4. This issue must be considered and answered in the form in which
it has been framed and accepted by the learned Additional District Judge,

357

and it is not competent for us to alter the wording of such issue, or enlarge
the scope of such issue in any way nor is it permissible for us to place any
interpretation upon its specific wording. We are therefore called upon,
strictly, to answer Issue No. 4 as it stands. It would be quite another matter
and other considerations would arise if the words, "in terms of the Rent Act,
No. 7 of 1972 . . ." were absent.

In considering Issue No. 4 in the context and within the framework of the Rent
Act, No. 7 of 1972, it may be mentioned that section 22 of the said Act, as
its marginal note indicates, deals with "Proceedings for ejectment", and sets
out the grounds for ejectment. However, nowhere does section 22 mention, as a
ground for ejectment, the giving of a notice to quit by the tenant to his
landlord. It is therefore clear that the giving of such a notice to quit the
premises, or, in the context of this case, the giving of the letter P5 by the
Appellant to the Respondent, stating that he (the Appellant) will vacate the
premises, will in no way give rise to a cause of action to the Respondent,
under the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, to eject the Appellant from the premises in
suit.

This being the only matter for consideration before us, I would answer Issue
No. 4 in the negative.

I therefore allow this appeal and set aside the order of the Court of Appeal
dated 12.9.91, and direct that the record in this case be sent back to enable
the trial in this case to be proceeded with in the District Court of Mount
Lavinia.

I also make order that the Appellant will be entitled to his costs both in
this Court and in the Court below.

**M. D. H. FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree.

  
**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Case sent back for trial to proceed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/33.html_  

