##  Ariyapala Gunaratne v. The People'S Bank - SLR - 338, Vol 1 of 1986 [1986]
LKSC 33; (1986) 1 Sri LR 338 (4 April 1986)

**

338

ARIYAPALA GUNARATNE  
v.  
THE PEOPLE'S BANK

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., WANASUNDERA, J., COLIN-THOME, J., RANASINGHE, J.  
AND TAMBIAH, J.  
S C. APPEAL No. 58/84.  
C.A No. 280/77 (F),  
D.C. COLOMBO No. A/87/Z.  
NOVEMBER 18, 19, 20 AND 21, 1985,

_

Fundamental rights -Freedom of association under Article 18(1) (f) of
Constitution of 1972-Violation by employers outside the State-Can requirement
to resign membership of Trade Union to qualify for promotion from Grade IV to
Grade III of service in People's Bank be included in contract of employment?
Article 126 of 1978 Constitution

_

The plaintiff was required to resign from membership of the Trade Union to
which he belonged to quality for promotion from Grade IV to Grade III in the
People's Bank, He refused and filed a declaratory suit in the District Court.

**

Held-

**

The right of all employees (except a few prescribed categories) to voluntarily
form unions is part of the law of this land. It exists both in the
Constitution and in statute form. No employer can take away this statutory
right by imposing a term to the contrary in a contract of employment. But of
course where the State considers a restriction of this right is necessary for
good cause it is enabled to do so by s. 18(2) of the 1972 Constitution Such
restriction can be imposed only by law and only for grounds set out in s.
18(2) and no other.

This right of association is of great value and has varied scope. it embraces
associations which are political, social, economic and includes even such
entities as clubs and societies. But trade unions enjoy pride of place. They
play a significant role as an integral part of the democratic structure of __
government, and are a part of __ the contemporary political and social
landscapes. When Article 18(l)( _f_ ) of the Constitution speaks of the
freedom of association, it means primarily the freedom of forming trade
unions, Restraints or limitations on it would be permitted only in the most
exceptional circumstances and that would only be done by law in the interests
of national security or in the interests of law and order etc.

The analysis of the law should be on the basis that the unpugned acts or
provisions constitute an invasion of fundamental rights and not on the basis
that they fall within the exclusive domain of the private law of employment.

**339**

The impugned clause in the proposed letter of employment is inconsistent with
the guarantee of freedom of association contained in section 18 (1) ( _f_ ) __
of the Constitution of 1972 and constitutes a matter of public law and not
merely private rights.

Although the guarantee contained in section 18(2) is only against State action
and not violations by individuals the concept of State has been extended today
to include almost any institution performing public functions. The People's
Bank represented the plaintiff here as part of the management. **** Within
this function the People's Bank would constitute the State or the Government
within the meaning of s. 18 of the 1972 Constitution for the purpose of
enabling the maintaining of a declaratory action for violation of fundamental
rights under that Constitution.

The argument that the imposition of the impugned condition was valid under the
Constitution of 1972 because existing law was kept alive by the Constitution
notwithstanding inconsistency with the provisions relating to fundamental
rights is untenable. This argument is based on the wrong assumption that the
law prior to the coming into operation of the 1972 Constitution permitted an
employer to include a condition of this nature in a letter of appointment. The
right of employees to join unions of their choice was there even before the
Trade Unions Ordinance.

**

Cases referred to :

**

(1) _Mc Auliffe v. New Bedford **** (1982) 155 Mass 216.

_

(2) _National Water Relations Board v. Laughlin Steel Corporation (1937) 301
U.S. 1133.

_

(3) _Thomas v. Collins (1944) 323 U.S. 516.

_

(4) _Adler v. Board of Education (l 952) 342 U. S. 589.

_

(5) _Keyishian v. Board of Regents (1967) 385 U.S. 589.

_

(6) _United Public Workers' Ltd. v. Mitchell (1946) 330 U.S. 75.

_

(7) _U.S. Civil Service Commission v. National Association of Letter Carriers
(1973) 413 U.S. 548.

_

(8) _Broodrick v. Iklahoma (1973) 413 U.S. 600, 601.

_

(9) _Ramakrishnaiah v. The President, District Court, Nellore A.I.R. 1952
Madras 253.

_

(10) _Balakotaiah v. Union of India A. I. R. 1958 S. C. 812._

(11) _Ghosh v. Joseph A. I. R. 1963 S. C. 812.

_

(12)  _State of Madras v. V. G. Row A.I.R. 1952 S.C. 196.

_

(13)  _Shamdesani v. Central Bank of India A. I. R. 1952 S. C. 59._

(14) ** _ **Electricity Board, Rajasthan v. Mohan **** LAl A.I.R. 1967 S. C.
1857._

(15) _Sukhobs Singh Bhagat Ram (1975) S.C.C. 421._

(16) _ Shetty v. International Airport Authority (1979) 1 S.C.C. 489._

(17) _ Son Prokesh Rekhi v. Union of India (1981) 1 S. C. C. 449.

_

(18) _ Ajay Hasin v. K.M. Sehravardi (1981) 2 S.C.C. 66.

_

(19) _ Wijeratne v. The People's Bank [1984] 1 S. L. R. 1.

_ **

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

Dr. Colvin R. de Silva_ with _Prins Ranasooriya, Mervyn Cassie Chetty, Miss
Saumya de Silva_ and _A. Samarajeewa_ for the plaintiff-respondent-appellant.

_

Dr. J. A. L. Cooray_ with _M.B. **** Peremune, K. Rampukpotha _and _Rohan
Sahabandu_ for defendant-appellant-respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**340**

April 4, 1986. **  
WANASUNDERA, J.**

The facts in this case are not in dispute. The Emergency Regulations were in
operation in this country from the beginning of 1971 due to the insurrection
and insurgency that threatened our country at that time. Under those Emergency
Regulations, service in the People's Bank (in which the appellant was employed
as a Grade III officer in the Bank Service) had been declared an "essential
service" and this had the effect of prohibiting strikes. Notwithstanding those
regulations, on 1st September 1972 the Ceylon Bank Employees' Union, a
registered trade union of which the appellant was a member, called out its
membership on strike.

On the next day, 2nd September 1972, the respondent Bank notified the strikers
that they would be regarded as having vacated their posts unless they returned
to work by the 6th September, which was __ the deadline fixed by the Bank The
strikers paid no heed to this notice. Sometime later, on 17th December, the
Bank Employees' Union called off the strike and directed its members to resume
work from the 18th December 1972.

When the appellant reported for __ work on the 18th, he was informed by the
Bank authorities that he could only come in as a new entrant, for which he
should make an application. The appellant had been in employment with the Bank
since 1961 and had been promoted to Grade III in 1964. On the __ appellant
making such an application, he was issued a letter of appointment (P3) to
Grade VI in the Bank Service. The letter of appointment contained, _inter
alia,_ the following conditions: -

"(3) _Probation:

_

You will be on probation for a period of three months from the date of your
taking up appointment in terms of this letter ....

(12) _Prospects of Promotion:

_

On confirmation in your appointment you will be eligible for promotion to
higher grades in the Bank's service under the terms and conditions laid down
by the Bank for such purposes from time to time and subject to the restriction
on trade union membership as stated in para. 21 of this letter."

**341**

Paragraph 21 is worded as follows:

"(21) _Trade Union Membership:

_

The Bank does not give permission to its officers in Grade III and above to be
members of any trade union the membership of which is open to employees in
Grade V and/or equivalent of lower grades. If you are or become a member of
such a trade union, in order to qualify for promotion to Grade III or any
higher grade, you are and will be required to resign your membership from such
union and also undertake not to rejoin or become a member of such Union while
being in the Bank's service in such higher Grade. However the Bank will have
no objection to your joining at that stage a trade union, the membership of
which is open only to Bank Officers in Grade IV and/or equivalent or higher
grades."

The appellant was confirmed in his appointment with effect from 18th May 1973.
Thereafter, by letter P4 dated 10th April 1973, the Bank informed the
appellant that it had decided to promote him to Grade III but subject, _inter
alia,_ **** to the following conditions:-

"2. As stated in your letter of appointment, the Bank will not permit the
employees in Grade III and above to be a member of any Trade Union the
membership of which is open to employees of Grade V and below.

If you are a member of such a Trade Union you should resign that membership
before you get the proposed promotion and you should give an undertaking that
you will not hold membership in any such Trade Union in the future as long as
you hold a post in Grade III or above.

If you accept this promotion on these conditions, please return the attached
letter to me duly signed."

The appellant after considerable delay, perhaps after much soul-searching and
after a reminder was sent to him, replied by D9 of 3rd August 1973 that he was
not prepared to resign his membership in the union of which he was a member.
He was thereby staking his future on his convictions. All the material events
relating to this matter took place during the existence of the 1972 Republican
Constitution and it is those provisions that govern this case.

**342**

The appellant then came into court challenging the objectionable conditions
restricting trade union membership referred to earlier, stating that they were
a contravention of his fundamental rights set out in section 18(1)( _f_ ) read
with section 14 of the Constitution of 1972 and were a negation and denial of
the said fundamental rights guaranteed to the appellant. In his plaint he
prayed for a declaration **** that clause 21 in P3 and clause 2 in P4 were
null and void and that **** the appellant's promotion to Grade III is not
subject to such conditions. The appellant claims the constitutional right of
freedom of association. This means the right of voluntary association, and not
to have that freedom subjected to the dictation, behest or control of anyone
else, particularly that of the employer. The proposed condition in the letter
of employment is clearly a negation of that right because it prevents the
appellant joining or forming a union of his choice and his freedom of
association is subjected to a measure of control by the employer.

In the lower Court the learned District Judge held with the appellant and
granted judgment in his favour in appeal the Court of Appeal has reversed this
judgment and dismissed the appellant's action without costs.

The parties to this action had been at issue on three matters. First, whether
the impugned clauses violate the appellant's fundamental right granted under
section 18(1)( _f_ ) of the Constitution? Second, whether the fundamental
right guaranteed by the Constitution was only against violations by State
action and not in respect of violations by individuals such as the respondent?
And third, whether in any event the existing law which prevailed immediately
prior to the corning into operation of the Constitution and which was
continued by it permits the inclusion of a clause of this nature in a contract
of employment?

The Court of Appeal disposed of the appeal on the first ground alone as it was
of the view that it went to the foundation of the appellant's action. The
Court held against the appellant on this issue. Dr. Colvin R. de Silva for the
appellant in his careful analysis of the judgment submitted that this judgment
is based on a number of misconceptions of the law on fundamental principles
relating to this branch of the law which were fatal to the judgment.

**343**

The Court of Appeal has taken the view, that properly understood the impugned
acts complained of do not attract the fundamental rights relied on but on the
contrary they fall within the domain of contractual relations and are a matter
of private law. The learned judge's reasoning is crystallised in the following
passage from the judgment:

"In my view it is necessary to draw a distinction between the exercise of the
fundamental right of association on the one hand and the right to employment
on the other. While the former falls within the purview of the constitutional
guarantees, there is no fundamental right to employment or to a promotion in
terms of a contract of employment. On an examination of the impugned clauses,
it seems to me that the true and real complaint of the plaintiff is that there
is a denial or a restriction of his right to a promotion as a Grade III ****
officer of the Bank. But the point is the plaintiff has no constitutional
right to a promotion. Where a person finds himself in a situation where he has
to restrict his freedom of association if he desires to obtain employment of a
particular kind, he cannot both assert his constitutional right of association
and at the same time seek employment on his own terms. He has to make his
choice."

This passage which was the crux of the judgment came in for serious adverse
comment from counsel for the appellant. Dr. Colvin R. de Silva stated that
this was a completely erroneous formulation of the basic issue involved and
the result of a complete misreading of the case law

The learned judge has sought to __ support his reasoning by reference to
decisions from the U.S. and India. Dr. Cooray for the respondent relied on
them to a great deal in supporting the judgment. Relying on these decisions,
Dr. Cooray submitted that the fundamental right of association invoked in this
case is not absolute. He submitted that a person who seeks employment cannot
insist on working on his own terms upon the supposed claim of a fundamental
right. On the contrary he has to abide by any reasonable terms laid down by
the employer in the interests of order and discipline and for the promotion of
efficiency and integrity in the discharge of his duties.

**344**

The learned judge has cited a judgment of Holmes, J. in _Mc Auliffe v. New
Bedford_ (1). __ This was a case where a policeman challenged a service rule
prohibiting the soliciting of monies for any political purpose. Holmes, J.
said:

"The petitioner may have a constitutional right to talk politics, but he has
no constitutional right to be a policeman. There are few employments for hire
in which the servant does not agree to suspend his constitutional right of
free speech, as well as of idleness, by the implied terms of his contract. The
servant cannot complain, as he takes the employment on the terms which are
offered him."

While this general statement of this distinguished judge may be perfectly
correct in so far as it states that there are many jobs which by their
inherent nature require the holder to act in a particular way that may result
in a limitation on his rights, including his fundamental rights. For example,
a Cabinet Minister has to abide by the conventions and practices relating to
the Cabinet and the Cabinet system of government and this may affect his
fundamental rights, like those of free speech. But this is not to say that
every employer is free to impose conditions in the contract of employment
inconsistent with the guarantees of fundamental rights contained in the
Constitution merely because he chooses to do so.

Dr. Colvin R. de Silva also remarked that the judgment of Holmes, J. - a State
Court judgment - is nearly a century old and there had been many developments
in this field since then. In fact, in the material submitted to us, we were
shown a comment made on the above quoted passage from Justice Holmes' judgment
in an article in the Harvard Law Review, (1968) 81 Harvard Law Review 1439.
The learned writer comments:

"That under appropriate circumstances one's interest in his government job,
his publicity financed home, his food stamp meals, or his state university
educational opportunities may indeed be **** constitutional rights in the
positive-law sense ought no longer be **** denied. Any, per se constitutional
distinction which would exclude governmental regulation of status in the
public sector from constitutional review would, to steal a phrase from Mr.
Justice Holmes, reflect neither logic nor experience in the law."

**345**

Further, the American courts stated that the right of employees to form
themselves into unions is a well recognised right in all civilized countries.
In the _National Labour Relations Board v. Laughlin Steel Corporation_ (2) _,_
it was observed that -

"employees have as clear a right to organise and select their representatives
for lawful purposes as a corporate employer has to organise its business and
select its own officers and agents."-See also _Thomas v. Collins_ (3).

_

Adler v. Board of Education_ (4) to some extent reflects Holmes' position in
the _Mc_ _Auliffe's case (supra)_ but the facts there indicate certain
exceptional circumstances. In _Adler's case (supra)_ the court upheld a
provision of the New York Civil Service Law disqualifying from the civil
service and the public school system any person who "advocates, advises or
teaches" the overthrow of the government by force or violence or who organises
or joins any group advocating such doctrine in any organisation prescribed
under the Feinberg Law of 1949. This law empowered the State Board of Regents
to list "subversive" organizations and membership therein was prima facie
evidence of __ disqualification.

"It is clear that (public school teachers) have the right to assemble, speak,
think and believe as they will but it is equally clear that they have no right
to work for the State in the school system on their own terms. They may work
for the school system upon the reasonable terms laid down by the proper State
authorities. If they do not choose to work on such terms, they are at liberty
to retain their beliefs and associations and go elsewhere. A teacher works in
a sensitive area in a schoolroom. That their superiors have the right and duty
to screen them as to their fitness to maintain the integrity of __ the schools
as a part of ordered society cannot be doubted. One's associates, past and
present, as well as one's conduct, may properly be considered in determining
fitness and loyalty."

But in 1967, in _Kayishian Board of Regents_ (5) _, the_ U.S. Supreme Court
disapproved of the width of the ruling in _Alder's case (supra)_ ,Justice
Brennan delivering the opinion of the court said, referring to the Feinberg
Law and _Alder's case (supra):_

" .............. Subsection (2) was before the Court in _Adler_ and its
constitutionality was sustained. But constitutional doctrine which has emerged
since that decision has rejected its major premise.

**346**

That premise was that public employment, including academic employment, may be
conditioned upon the surrender of constitutional rights which could not be
abridged by direct government action. That theory was expressly rejected in a
series of decisions following _Adler._ In _Sherbert v. Verner,_ we said : 'It
is too late in the day to doubt that the liberties of religion and expression
**** may be infringed by the denial of or placing of conditions upon a benefit
or privilege.'

We proceed then to the question of the validity of the provisions of
subsection ( _c_ ) of section 105 and subsection (2) of section 3022, barring
employment to members of listed organizations. Here again constitutional
doctrine has developed since _Adler._ Mere knowing membership without a
specific intent to further the unlawful aims of an organization is not a
constitutionally adequate basis for exclusion from such positions as those
held by appellants."

Justice __ Clark in the opening sentence of his dissenting judgment brings out
the change in direction and the radical nature of this ruling. He began as
follows:

"It is clear that the Feinberg Law, in which this Court found 'no
constitutional infirmity' in 1952, has been given its death blow today. "

Dr. Cooray also relied on _United Public Workers' Ltd. v. Mitchell_ (6), _U.S.
Civil Service Commission v. National Association of Letter Carriers_ (7) __
and _Broodrick v. Oklahoma_ (8) _._ This line of cases are based on _United
Public Workers' Ltd. v. Mitchell (supra).

_

They dealt with the interpretation of what is called the Hatch Political
Activity Act 1940. This Act prohibited officers and employees in the Executive
Branch of the Federal Government from taking any active part in political
management or in political campaigns under penalty of immediate removal.
Justice Reed speaking for the Court in the _Mitchell case (supra)_ said:

"The prohibitions now under discussion are directed at political contributions
of energy by Government employees. These contributions too have a long
background of disapproval. Congress and the President are responsible for an
efficient public service. If in

    **347**

their judgment efficiency may be best obtained by prohibiting active
participation by classified employees in politics as party officers or
workers, we see no constitutional objection ............. .We have said that
Congress may regulate the political conduct of Government employees within
reasonable limits,' even though the regulation trenches to some extent upon
unfettered political action. The determination of the extent to which
political activities of  governmental employees shall be regulated lies
primarily with Congress. Courts will interfere only when such regulation
passes beyond the general existing conception of governmental power. That
conception develops from practice, history, and changing educational, social
and economic conditions. The regulations of such activities as Poole carried
on has the approval of long practice by the Commission, court decisions upon
similar problems and a  large body of informed public opinion. Congress and
the  administrative agencies have authority over the discipline and efficiency
of the public service. When actions of civil servants in the Judgment of the
Congress damage the integrity and the competence of the service, legislation
to forestall such danger and adequate to maintain its usefulness is required.
The Hatch Act is the  answer of Congress to this need. We cannot say with such
a background that these restrictions are unconstitutional."

In _U.S. Civil Service_ _Commission v. National Association of Letter Carriers
(supra)_ the Supreme Court followed the above case and added that the Hatch
Act prohibitions were neither unconstitutionally vague nor fatally over-broad.
In _Broodrick v. Oklahoma (supra)_ the Supreme Court was called upon to
determine the validity of an Oklahoma Statute which contained provisions
similar to those in the Hatch Act. The court followed the earlier decisions.

These American authorities are in accordance with the principles enunciated
earlier. These cases, unlike the present case, deal with particular classes of
employees in sensitive positions in the Government where the very nature of
their work requires limitations on their fundamental rights. Fundamental
rights and freedoms we all know are not absolutes. When they operate in a
given context, they are affected by the context and may take colouration from
it. When fundamental rights undergo such restriction, it is not so much by the
imposition of a limitation on them, but this happens when those rights adjust
themselves to that particular setting and environment. Such

**348**

situations and context can differ from one category of job to another. It
would also be noted from the American cases and the Indian cases that follow
that the curtailment of the freedom of association arose in situations where
the action involved was either criminal, such as the advocacy of revolution,
rebellion or violence, or the incitement thereof so as to bring it within the
tests that the courts have formulated as constituting a danger to the State
and Society. It generally involved both sensitivity of job and a threat to the
State and Society.

Now let me turn to the Indian cases relied on by counsel. In _Ramakrishniah v.
The President, District Court, Nellore_ (9) __ the validity of a Government
order requiring Municipal teachers not to join unions other than teachers'
unions officially approved was challenged. The Madras High Court declared the
order void as it constituted an abridgement of the right of freedom of
association guaranteed by Art. 19 (1) ( _a_ ) of the Constitution. The court
observed:

It is well established that the exercise of any of the fundamental rights like
the right of free speech, right of freedom, of religion or the right of
freedom of association cannot be made subject to the discretionary control of
administrative or executive authority which can grant or withhold permission
to exercise such right at its  discretion. It is equally well established that
there cannot be any restriction on the exercise of such a right which consists
in a previous restraint on such exercise and which is in the nature of
administrative censorship. The guaranteed freedom cannot be or abrogated by
the exercise of official discretion."

Dr. Cooray however relied very strongly on the case of _Balakotaiah v. Union
of India_ (10) _._ In this case appellants were employees in the Railway
Department The Railway Services (Safeguard of National Security) Rules 1949 __
enabled the Government to terminate their services at its pleasure. The
Government terminated the services of the appellants under rule 3 of the said
Rules on the ground that they had engaged themselves in subversive activities.
Rule 3 was worded as follows:-

"A member of the Railway Services who in the opinion of the competent
authority is engaged in or is reasonably suspected to be engaged in subversive
activities or is associated with others in subversive activities in such a
manner as to raise doubts about his reliability may be compulsorily retired
from service or have his services terminated."

**

349

**

The validity of this rule was not challenged as such, but the appellants
submitted that the orders of termination were made because the appellants were
members of the Communist Party and trade unionists, and this was a
contravention of their fundamental right of association.

The Supreme Court rejected this submission. It said :

"The notice, it is true, refers to the appellant being a member of the
Communist Party or a trade unionist. But it is not the necessary attribute
either of a Communist or a trade unionist that he should indulge in subversive
activities, and when action was taken against the appellant under the rules,
it was not because he was a Communist or a trade unionist but because he was
engaged in subversive activities. We hold that the Security Rules are not
illegal as being repugnant to Art. 14."

The Court next proceeded to deal with the argument that the appellant's
freedom to form associations under Article 19(1) has been infringed. The Court
said :

"It is next contended that the impugned orders are in contravention of Art. 19
(1) ( _c_ ) and are therefore void. The argument is that action has been taken
against the appellants under the rules because they are Communists and trade
unionists, and the orders terminating their services under R. 3 amount in
substance to a denial to them of the freedom to form associations which is
guaranteed under Art. 19 (1) ( _c_ ). We have already observed that this is
not the true scope of the charges. But apart from that we do not see how any
right of the appellants under **** Art 19 (1) ( _c_ ) has been infringed."

Thereafter the Court proceeded to add that the orders do not prevent them from
continuing to be communists or trade unionists. Their rights in that behalf
remain after the impugned orders precisely what they were before. The Court
added:

"The real complaint of the appellants is that their services have been
terminated, but that involves, apart from Article 311, no infringement of any
of their constitutional rights. The __ appellants have no doubt a fundamental
right to form associations under Article 19(1)( _c_ ), but they have no
fundamental right to be continued in employment by the State, and when their
services are terminated by the State, they cannot complain of infringement of
any of their constitutional rights, when no question of violation of Article
311 arises."

**350**

The Court of Appeal misguided itself when it took the latter part of this
citation out of its context and thought that it contained the _ratio_
_decidendi._ This judgment, as I read it, does not carry the respondent's case
any further. The constitutional freedom of right of association does not stand
in the way of, for example, disciplinary action being taken against an
employee. The allegations against the appellants were that they were parties
to subversive activities. The reason the appellants chose to give themselves
for the dismissals was one of their own making and not the true one. But, on
the other hand, if a person is a member of a lawful trade union which is
engaged in lawful activity, a dismissal or disciplinary action solely on this
ground would certainly violate the constitutional guarantee. It was however
sought to interpret this case to mean that an employee can be dismissed for
exercising his fundamental right of joining or being in a union and that it
would be a sufficient answer to an action challenging the dismissal to say
that the order does not in fact interfere with the employee's right of ****
association as this right still remains with him. Applying this argument to
the facts of the present case, it is suggested at it would be legitimate to
have a condition in the contract of employment against the employee joining a
union and such a condition would not as such interfere with his right of
association because he will continue to have that right and if he insists on
it he must seek employment elsewhere. This appears to me to be a
misunderstanding of the language and a complete misreading of __ the case.
Such an interpretation which strangely enough had appealed in __ the Court of
Appeal would, if given effect to, result in nothing less than this guaranteed
right being wiped out altogether from the Constitution.

In 1963 the Indian Supreme Court in _Ghosh v. Joseph_ (11) __ gave a clearer
exposition of __ the law, which leaves the matter beyond any doubt. Rule 4.B
of the Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules (1955) laid down that no
Government servant shall join or continue to be a member of any service
association of government servants ( _a_ ) which has not, within a period of
six months from its formation obtained the recognition of the Government under
the rules prescribed in that behalf or ( _b_ ) recognition in respect of __
which has been refused or

**351**

withdrawn by the Government under the said rules. These provisions had to be
read with the Recognition of Service Associations Rules 1959\. Gajendragadkar,
J. said:

"It is not disputed that the fundamental rights guaranteed by Art. 19 can be
claimed by Government servants ... .... Thus, the validity of the impugned
rule has to be judged on the basis that the respondent and his co-employees
are entitled to form associations or unions. It is clear that R. 4-B imposes a
restriction on this right. It virtually compels a Government servant to
withdraw his membership of the Service Association of Government servants as
soon as recognition accorded to the said association is withdrawn or if, after
the association is formed, no recognition is accorded to it within six months.
In other words, the right to form an association is __ conditioned by the
existence of the recognition of the said association by the Government. If the
association obtains the recognition and continues to enjoy it, Government
servants can welcome members of the said association , if the association does
not secure recognition from the Government, or recognition granted to it is
withdrawn, Government servants must cease to be the members of the said
association. That is the plain effect of the impugned rule. Can this
restriction be said to be in the interests of public order and can it be said
to be a reasonable restriction? In our opinion, the only answer to these
questions would be in the negative. It is difficult to see any direct or
proximate or reasonable connection between the recognition by the Government
of the association and the discipline amongst, and the efficiency of, the
members of the said association. Similarly, it is difficult to see any
connection between recognition and public order." - (Vide also 1963 A.I.R.
Rajasthan 136.)

This case shows that this fundamental rights is subject to restraint in terms
of clause 4 of Article 19. Restrictions can be imposed in the interest of
public order or morality, but such interest must be proximate and direct.

It would be observed in both the American cases and in the Indian case, the
analysis of the law is on the basis that the impugned acts or provisions
constitute an invasion of fundamental rights and not as the Court of Appeal in
the present case has held that they fall within the exclusive domain of the
private law of employment.

**352**

The decision in _State of Madras v. V. G. Row_ (12) __ dealt with a situation
which was similar to that in the American **** cases. The State Government was
empowered by legislation to declare any association as unlawful if it
constitued a danger to public peace or interfered with the maintenance of
public order. The impugned law required the Government to state in the
notification the grounds for action and gave a right to the association to
make representations against the order. The law also provided for an Advisory
Board to hold an inquiry and report to the Government. The Supreme Court
struck down this legislation as being unfair mainly on the ground that the law
made **** no provision for judicial review. These decisions show how zealously
is the freedom of association protected by the courts.

The right of all employees (except a few prescribed categories) to voluntarily
form unions is part of the law of this land. It exists both in the
Constitution and in statute form. No employer can take away this statutory
right by imposing a term to the contrary in a contract of employment. But of
course where the State considers a restriction of this right is necessary for
good cause, it is enabled to do so by section 18(2) of the 1972 Constitution.
Such a restriction can be imposed only by law and only for grounds set out in
section 18(2) and no other.

This right of association is of great value and has varied scope. It embraces
associations which are political, social, economic and includes even such
entities **** as clubs **** and societies. But trade unions enjoy pride of
place. They play a significant role as an integral part of the democratic
structure of government, and are a part of the contemporary political and
social landscapes. When Article 18(1)( _f_ ) of our Constitution speaks of the
freedom of association, it means primarily the freedom of forming trade
unions. Restraints or limitations on it would be permitted only in the most
exceptional circumstances and that could only be done by law in the interests
of national security or in the interests of law and order etc. There may be
some employers even today who are against unionisation of labour. They may in
all sincerity think that their factories or work places would be run much
better and more effectively without union interference. If the law were to
permit it, they would be ever ready, in the name of order and discipline to
prohibit unionisation of the workers by imposing such a condition in the
letter of appointment. If the courts were to adopt the view of the Court of
Appeal, we would be erasing Article 18(1)( _f_ ) of the

**353**

Constitution and writing off trade unions and the trade union movement in this
country which had, after a long and protracted struggle fraught with great
hardship and suffering, succeeded in gaining this right and seeing it
enshrined in the Constitution.

I am therefore of the view that the impugned clause in the proposed letter of
employment is inconsistent with the guarantee of the freedom of association
contained in section 18(1)( _f_ ) of the Constitution and constitutes a matter
of public law and not merely private rights.

The second objection on behalf of the respondent was that violations of
individual right such as are alleged by the appellant in the instant case are
not within the purview of section 18(1) of the 1972 Constitution. While the
objection had been formulated in the above language, what it means as Dr.
Cooray explained in his submissions is that the guarantee contained in section
18(2) is only against State action and violations by individuals do not come
within its purview. He relied on the provisions of Article 19 of the Indian
Constitution.

Both Article 19 of the Indian Constitution and the corresponding provisions of
the present Constitution, particularly Article 126 (which has no equivalent in
the 1972 Constitution) has come in for interpretation numerous times. These
may be of some assistance in interpreting section 18 of the 1972 ****
Republican Constitution.

Article 126 of the present Constitution enables a person aggrieved by
executive or administrative action to come directly to the Court by way of
petition. Although there had been some doubt both among counsel and even
judges as to whether this was the sole and exclusive mode of approaching the
courts for a violation of the fundamental rights, it is now generally
understood that this is only a special and summary mode of relief in a
particular kind of situation, namely violation of fundamental rights by
executive or administrative action. Article 126 is therefore not exhaustive of
the manner that courts could be approached for the violation of fundamental
rights. Article 126 is confined to executive and administrative action. The
ambit of the fundamental rights has a much wider range.

It would be seen from Article 12(3) of the present Constitution that it
contemplates possible violations of fundamental rights even by private
individuals. So it is clear that fundamental rights are not infringed only by
executive or administrative action but go beyond the provisions of Article
126.

**354**

If we are to go by analogy with the Indian provisions on which Dr. Cooray
relied, we find that his statement that Article 19 is directed against the
State is correct. To compensate for any such limitations, the courts have been
progressively extending the concept of State and today it has come to include
almost any institution performing public functions.

Indian courts have held that Article 19 "provides protection for the freedoms
and rights mentioned therein against arbitrary invasion by the State"-
_Shamdasani v. Central Bank of India_ (13) _._ Article 12 in Chapter III
containing Fundamental Rights defines the expression "the State" as follows:

" .......... includes the Government, the Parliament of India and the
Governments and Legislature of each of the States and all local or  other
authorities within the territory of India or under the control of  the
Government of India."

The words "other authorities" have given rise to a great deal of case law.
Beginning with a somewhat restricted interpretation, the courts have now
discarded the _eiusdem generis_ rule in this context and given the expression
a much wider and extensive connotation. In _Electricity Board, Rajasthan v.
Mohan Lal_ (14) _,_ the Supreme Court held that the Rajasthan Electricity
Board would fall within the definition of "the State". The majority took the
view that it was not necessary that the statutory authority should be engaged
in performing government or sovereign functions and that "other authorities"
covered bodies created for the purpose of promoting the economic interests of
the people.

In _Sukhdos Singh v. Bhagat Ram_ (15) _,_ Mathew, J. was of the view that the
public corporation is a new type of institution which has grown up from the
new social and economic functions of Government. He pointed out that
institutions engaged in matters of high public interest or performing public
functions should be regarded by virtue of the nature of the functions
performed, as Government agencies and that activities which are too
fundamental to society are by definition too important not to be considered
Government functions. These views were approved in _Shetty v. International
Airport Authority_ (16) _._ In _Sonprakesh Rekhi v. Union of India_ (17) __ it
was held that the Bhavat Petroleum Corporation registered as a company under
the Companies Ordinance came within the definition of the word "State". In
_Ajay Hasin_

**355**

_v. K. M. Sehravardi_ (18) __ it was held that the Regional Engineering
College, Srinagar, administered and managed by a society registered under the
Jammu and Kashmir Registration of Societies Act was "the State" within the
meaning of the definition.

It will be seen from the above decisions that the concept of State action has
been interpreted to mean something much wider than the expression "executive
and administrative action" found in Article 126.

Turning to local cases, in _Wijeratne v. The People's Bank_ (19) _,_ the court
dealt with petitions under Article 126 of the present Constitution. Officers
of the Security Service of the People's Bank complained that due to a
reorganisation of the Service they had been discriminated against. It was held
that the People's Bank is a statutory corporation. Numerous provisions in the
Act indicated the close association of the Bank with the Government and
Government control of the Bank. For example, the Minister is empowered to
appoint the entire directorate of the Board of Directors. The Minister can
remove the Directors. Their remuneration is determined by the Government. The
Minister nominates the first Chairman of the Board. Of the 120,000 Rs. 50
shares, the Board has to allot 60,000 fully paid up shares to the Secretary to
the Treasury. Section 15 sets out the considerable amounts that have to be
granted or paid to the Bank by the Government. The Bank cannot commence
business until it is so authorised by the Minister and his Permanent Secretary
is vested with a number of powers to enable him to act until commencement of
business by the Bank. Section 21 provides for Government guarantees of loans
and overdrafts. The Bank is also vested with certain powers under the
Agricultural and Industrial Credit Corporation Ordinance.

In _Wijeratne's case (supra)_ we said -

"A public corporation can for certain purposes serve as an agent or surrogate
of the State. It all depends on the nature of its functions, whether it is
performing a governmental function or not, it may happen that certain of its
functions may be governmental, whilst the others may not. When a public
corporation is performing its non-governmental functions **** its actions do
not have the attributes of State action or 'executive or administrative
action'. When the Bank performs its functions of redemption or acquisition of
land, under Section 71 of the Finance Act No. 11 of 1963, it may be urged with
certain cogency that such action of the Bank **** constitutes 'executive or
administrative action'. But in this case, the

**356**

petitioners were not employed in the service of the Bank for the performance
of duties connected with the exercise by the bank of its powers under the said
section 71.

It is quite apparent from the material before us that the major role of the
1st respondent is in the commercial sphere and that its main role is that of a
commercial bank. Such commercial activities of the Bank cannot qualify as
State actions. Having regard to the duties performed by the petitioners it
appears that the petitioners are employed by the Bank in connection with their
commercial activities. In that perspective their employment in the Bank cannot
be stamped as State employment. There is no nexus between the State and the
banking activities of the 1st respondent for such action of the Bank to be
treated as that of the State. The State is not involved in the commercial
activities of the 1st respondent."

In the present case we are not dealing with persons like security officers who
may well be regarded as appendages to the normal administrative structure. We
are now concerned with an officer whom the Bank itself has represented here as
part of management. Such management would be pervasive of the entire work of
the Bank and if the Bank performs any governmental functions this would come
equally under such management. In my view even under the present Constitution
the concept of State or Government is a wider concept than the expression
"executive or administrative action".

_

Wijeratne's case (supra)_ can be distinguished from the present case. Here we
are dealing with a different provision and a different Constitution. In all
the circumstances of this case I am inclined to the view that the People's
Bank would constitute the State or the Government within the meaning of
section 18 of 1972 __ Constitution for the purpose of maintaining a
declaratory action for a violation of the fundamental rights under that
Constitution.

The third and last submission made by Dr. Cooray was that the imposition of
the impugned condition was valid under that Constitution. He submitted that
this was the prevailing state of the law immediately prior to the coming into
operation of the Constitution and such "existing law" was not only continued
and kept alive by the Constitution but section 18(3) goes on to say that it
would have validity notwithstanding inconsistency with the provisions relating
to fundamental rights.

**357**

This argument is based on the assumption that the law prior to the **** coming
into operation of the Constitution permitted an employer to include a
condition of this nature in a letter of appointment. As I understand it, the
whole thrust of the trade union movement has been towards freedom of
association and a recognition of unionisation as a matter of a right. This
pressure, which could not longer be resisted, brought in the trade union
legislation, which gave the workers a bargaining power equal to that of the
employers. As a corollary to this right, the workers demanded non-interference
by the employers in their trade union activities, particularly such unfair
practices like the setting up of unions sponsored or inspired by them and by
other **** devices and manipulation so as to obstruct, interfere with and sap
the strength of the working class movement.

Both S. R. de Silva in his book _The Legal Framework of Industrial Relations
in Ceylon_ and Abeysekera in _Industrial Law and Adjudication_ have collated
material on this point mainly from other countries. Mr. Silva's book contains
the following passage at page 45 :

"In Ceylon the right of persons to associate for trade union purposes existed
in fact prior to its legal recognition in the Trade Unions' Ordinance. Since
then, and subject to the limitations already noted, the liberty to form trade
unions is subject only to the requirement of compulsory registration of trade
unions. Although there have been no statutory provisions to protect employees
against acts of anti-union discrimination by employers, a measure of
protection has existed for some time in the form of industrial courts,
arbitrators and labour tribunals which are entitled to give relief to a
workman who is dismissed or otherwise discriminated against by reason of his
membership of a union. Further, a provision in a contract of employment that
an employee will not join a union does not bind these labour courts, which are
empowered to grant relief in appropriate cases notwithstanding such a
provision. The factual picture, however, is somewhat different. While the
better employers have recognised the right of employees to join unions of
their own choosing, there are employers who, even now, view unfavourably,
unions and employees who join them. In Britain the Industrial Relations Act
(1971) secures to every worker the right to be a member of a trade union of
his choice and makes it an unfair industrial practice for an employer to
prevent or deter a worker from exercising such right or to dismiss, penalise
or __ otherwise discriminate against a worker for exercising such right."

**358**

Abeysekera sums up the situation in the words that "an order to desist from
taking part in trade union actions is in excess of the employers' rights."

This argument too fails.

In the result I would allow this appeal and restore the judgment and decree of
the District Court. The appellant would be entitled to costs both here and
below.

**

SHARVANANDA, C. J.** \- I agree.

**

COLIN-THOME, J.** \- I agree.

**

RANASIHGHE, J.** \- I agree.

**

TAMBIAH, J.** \- I agree. _  
  
Appeal allowed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/33.html_  

