##  Asylin Perera v. Nicholas Perera and Others - SLR - 321, Vol 1 of 1981
[1981] LKSC 33; (1981) 1 Sri LR 321 (7 April 1981)

**321**

**ASYLIN PERERA  
 v.  
NICHOLAS PERERA AND OTHERS**

**SUPREME COURT  
SAMARAWICKREMA, J.  
WEERARATNE J AND WANASUNDERA J.  
S. C. NO. 14/80  
D. C. CHILAW NO. 18563/F  
JANUARY 20, 1981.  
**  
_Evidence - Expert evidence-Conflicting translations of deed-interpretation -
Construction of deed - Fidei commissum.  
_  
In the construction of deeds and documents, ordinary words should be given
their plain and ordinary meaning. What matters is the sense in which the words
are generally understood, which prima facie would be the meaning intended by
the parties. Often it may be unnecessary to go by the etymological or strict
dictionary sense:  
  
In interpreting the prohibition clause in a deed purporting to create a fidei
commissum in order to ascertain if the beneficiaries were designated with
certainty the trial court rightly preferred the construction giving the words
their commonly understood meaning rather than a strictly grammatical
construction.  
  
**Cases referred to:-  
**  
_(1) Jayatunga v. Ramasamy Chettiar 52 NLR 171  
  
(2) Mary v. Kurera 74 NLR 5  
  
**APPEAL** _from judgment of Court of Appeal.  
  
_Walter Jayewardene Q.C.. with M.S.M.   Nazeem_ for plaintiff-respondent.  
  
_T. B. Dissanayake with Bimal   Rajepakse_ for defendant-respondents.  
  
April 7, 1981.  
**WANASUNDERA, J.  
**  
The question for :decision in this case is whether or not the wording in deed
No. 15738 dated 23rd November 1907 is adequate to create a fidei commissum..
By this deed, Mariya Perera had gifted the land, which is now the subject-
matter of this partition action, to her six grand-children in equal shares,
namely, Hugo, Theresia, Engine, Ana, Silvestry and Mariya. It is unnecessary
for the purpose of this judgment to set out the further devolution of title
except to state that Silvestry, during his lifetime, purported to transfer all
his interests to the 6th and 7th defendants. This transfer has been challenged
on the ground that, since deed No. -15738 constituted a fidei commissum and
prohibited alienation, Silvestry was incapable of transferring title to the
6th and 7th defendants.

**322**

The deed which is in Sinhala imposes a prohibition against alienation on the
donee fiduciaries and contains the following statement, which is the subject
of controversy before: us -  
  
These words and language are common and have been used in many such documents.
Similar words have come to the courts for interpretation in numerous cases.
Since these decisions turned on the particular words used in the deeds
concerned, both parties in the case have sought to place expert opinion as to
the exact translation of the above passage. Mr. U. A. S. Perera, a
practitioner in these courts and a well-known scholar of Sinhala, was called
on behalf of the plaintiff. He graduated with honours from the London
University in Pali and Sanskrit and also holds a Master's degree. Although his
opinion was. not accepted, the Court of Appeal was constrained to say that
"this witness is learned not only in the law, but also in the Sinhala
language."  
  
The expert called by the defendants is Mr. Newton Pinto Moragoda. He is also
qualified as a lawyer, but at present holds the office of Superintendent of
Translation in. Law in the Department of Educational Publications. He has
graduated in Sinhala, Pali and History. As the trial Judge remarked, Mr. Pinto
Moragoda did not have the experience of Mr. Perera and he had given his
evidence "with some. degree of diffidence." Nevertheless, his opinion has been
accepted both by the trial Judge and the Court of Appeal.  
  
According to Mr. Perera, the words  (descending from them), qualify the word
(children) and the word  is an adjectival phrase. He translates the material
words as "that their children descending from them who are their heirs and
their executors, administrators and assigns can deal -with it in any way
whatsoever as they please." Mr. Pinto Moragoda on , the other hand stated that
the words qualify all the words.. According to Mr. Pinto Moragoda, the excerpt
means "their children, heirs, executors, administrators and assigns." One
reason he gave for this translation is that the expression  are two words and
mean children and heirs as against Mr. Perera's view that it was an adjectival
compound meaning "heirs who are children." In regard to the functionaries
referred to Mr. Perera has said that

**323**

they cannot- be said to descend from the donor or donee. Mr.` Pinto Moragoda
has. however stated that this collocation of words is incomplete since they
are stems and the word supplies the necessary case ending. That is why he is
'of the' view. that this statement refers to four classes of persons as
beneficiaries.  
  
The learned trial Judge has accepted Mr. Pinto Moragoda's opinion and held
that the words mean "that after the six grandchildren mentioned in the deed
the beneficiaries are children, heirs, executors, administrators and assigns
of the six donees." This the learned trial Judge states has created an
uncertainty as regards the beneficiaries, meaning the fidei commissarii. The
trial Judge purported to apply the decision of Nagalingam, J., in Jayatunga v.
Ramasamy Chettiar (52 N.L.R. 171) in coming to this conclusion. In Jayatunga's
case, the language in the relevant deed reads as follows -  
  
"Albina Hamy. . . . . . shall possess only the said properties . . . . . . and
on the death of her the said donee the children from her and their heirs,
executors, administrators and assigns shall have the right to possess the said
properties or to do whatever they please with the same."  
  
Justice Nagalingam held that the fidei-commissaries were clearly and
adequately designated and that the words "heirs, executors, administrators and
assigns" used in apposition to the fiduciary or fidei commissari can be
considered as a mere intention to vest the plena proprietas in the property in
such heirs and cannot cause uncertainty about the beneficiaries. He
accordingly held that the use of such words does not derogate from the valid
creation of a fidei commissum. On the other hand he accepted-the principle
that where the executors, administrators or assigns of the donee are indicated
as the fidei commissaries, an uncertain class of persons are referred to as
beneficiaries and due to this uncertainty the effect to create a fidei
commissum would be rendered nugatory.  
  
Mr. Jayewardene has referred us to certain authorities containing the main
principles governing the construction of deeds and documents of this nature.
Generally, in the construction of deeds and documents, ordinary words should
be given their plain arid ordinary meaning. What matters' is the sense in
which the words are generally understood, which prima facie would be the
meaning intended by the parties. Often it may be unnecessary to go by the
etymological or strict dictionary sense. He also referred to instances where
our courts, even when Sinhala was not the language of the courts, had examined
the document concerned and arrived at its true meaning.

**324**

The words in dispute are commonly used in documents of this nature and upon a
consideration of the document as a whole, their ordinary meaning appears to me
to approximate to the meaning Mr. U. A. S. Perera has assigned to them rather
than to the one suggested by Mr. Pinto Moragoda. As the learned trial Judge
himself states in the judgment, Mr. Perera admitted that he was seeking to
give these words their commonly understood meaning rather than give them a
strictly grammatical construction. Mr. Pinto Moragoda on the other hand chose
to do the latter and the meaning he has given to these words seems too
technical and grammatical. It is unlikely that in the context of a legal
document like the deed P2, the words  or "descending from them" would be used
with reference to executors, administrators and assigns. It is also improbable
that the donor who has, in the part of the provision immediately prior,
clearly stated that the donees would not be at liberty to sell or to alienate
their life interest or to alienate in any manner, would, in this part of the
provision which follows immediately after, refer to assigns of the donees. In
this view of the matter there is a considerable doubt about the correctness of
Mr. Pinto Moragoda's translation. If we accept Mr. U. A. S. Perera's
translation as the correct one, then on the basis of the reasoning in
Jayatunge v. Ramasamy Chettiar (supra) which has been followed by Tennekoon,
J., in Mary v. Kurera (74 N. L: R. 5), the objection that the fidei-
commissaries have not been designated with sufficient clarity fails.  
  
I would therefore set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and send the
case back for further proceedings on this basis. The plaintiff will be
entitled to costs both here and in the Court of Appeal. The plaintiff will
also be entitled to payment of Rs. 210/- from the 6th and 7th defendants
jointly as costs of contest in the trial court.  
  
**SAMARAWICKREME, J. - I** agree  
  
**WEERARATNE, J - I** agree  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/33.html_  

