##  Samarasinghe v. National Savings Bank and Others - SLR - 287, Vol 2 of
1999 [1999] LKSC 33; (1999) 2 Sri LR 287 (28 May 1999)

**287****

**SAMARASINGHE** ****** **  
v** **.** **  
NATIONAL SAVINGS BANK AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
GUNAWARDANA, J. AND  
GUNASEKARA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 392/96  
FEBRUARY 27, 1999

_Fundamental rights Appoinment of Chief Legal Officer Deviation from the
prevailing scheme of recruitment Failure to consider the claim of an eligible
candidate Article 12 (1) of the Constitution._ __

By an advertisement in the newspaper the 1st Hemasiri respondent Bank called
for applicants for the post of Chief Legal Officer. The candidate who was
placed first among the applicants declined the post and the post was
advertised a second time. On that occasion also the candidate who was placed
first declined appoinment and no appoinment was made. The advertisement was in
keeping with the prevailing scheme of recruitment. It called for applications
from persons who amongst other qualifications had to be Attorneys-at-Law and
Notaries Public with at least 15 years experience in Court and notarial work.
The petitioner applied on both occasions and was placed second in order of
merit. After the candidate placed first declined the post on each occasion,
the petitioner was not considered for appoinment. Instead the Board of
Directors decided "to appoint the most senior officer amongst the legal
officers in the Bank to act as Chief Legal Officer" without advertisement.
Consequently, the 6th Hemasiri respondent who had not applied for the post and
who did not possess the basic qualification of 15 years practice as an
Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public was appointed to act as Chief Legal Officer.

**Held :**

The decision of the Board to deviate from the prevailing scheme of recruitment
was ad hoc and arbitrary and the appointment of the 6th Hemasiri respondent
was bad in law. The petitioner's fundamental rights under Article 12 (1) were
infringed by the failure to consider her for appoinment.

**APPLI CATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

288

_R._ ___K._ ___W._ ___Goonasekera_ __ for the petitioner.

_Shibly_ ___Aziz_ _,_ PC and _S_. _Fernando_ _,_ SSC for the respondents.

_Cur.__ _adv. vult._

May 28, 1999.

**GUNASEKARA.** **J.**

The petitioner who had joined the 1st respondent Bank as an Assistant Legal
Officer (Grade IV) in 1985 had been promoted to a post of Assistant Legal
Officer (Grade III) in 1990 which designation had been subsequently altered to
Legal Officer (Grade II). According to the petitioner in terms of the scheme
of recruitment of the Bank's Legal Department the cadre of Legal Officers as
evidenced by 'P3' was as follows:

Chief Legal Officer |  - |  Grade I |  - | one post  
---|---|---|---|---  
Legal Officer |  - |  Grade II |  - | one post  
Legal Officer |  - |  Grade III |  - | five posts  
Assistant Legal Officer |  - |  Grade IV |  - | one post  
  
By an advertisement published in the "Sunday Observer" of 25th June, 1995
(134) the bank had called for applications for the post of Chief Legal Officer
(Grade I). According to the said advertisement amongst other qualifications
the applicants had to be Attorneys-at-Law and Notaries Public with at least 15
years experience in Court and notarial work. The petitioner had been the only
internal candidate amongst the nineteen applicants who had applied in response
to the said advertisement. At an interview that was held on 5.9.95 one  Mr. G.
M. Gunasekera had been placed first and the petitioner second. Although Mr.
Gunasekera who had come first at the interview was offered the post he had
declined to accept it. However, the petitioner who had been placed second at
the interview had not been offered the said post but instead the Bank had re-
advertised the post on 19.11.95 by the advertisement marked P9.

**289**

The petitioner had responded to the said advertisement and had submitted an
application (P10). On seeing the petitioner's application the petitioner
states that the 5th  Hemasiri respondent had advised the petitioner not to
apply for this post as "she was too young and was a female because the
preference of the Chairman was for a male". However, she had been called for
an interview in response to her application (P10) to be held on 10.1.96. 18
candidates had presented themselves at the said interview, amongst whom was
one other employee of the 1st Hemasiri respondent's Bank other than the
petitioner. The said officer, namely  Mr. K. M. P. Kulatunga, a Regional Legal
Officer attached to the Kurunegala branch of the 1st Hemasiri respondent Bank
lacked eligibility as he had not obtained a Notarial Licence as evidenced by
(P12). The petitioner states that after the said interview that the legal
branch had been informed that Mrs. C. Ellawala had scored the highest marks at
the said interview and Mr. Kulatunge and the petitioner had scored the second
and third highest marks, respectively. Mrs. Ellawala who was selected for
appoinment had declined to accept the post. By circular letter dated 1.4.96
marked (P14) the 3rd Hemasiri respondent had appointed the 6th Hemasiri
respondent who had not even applied in response to the 2nd Hemasiri
advertisement (P10), as acting Chief Legal Officer (Grade I) for a period of 6
months with effect from 1.4.96 subject to con­firmation in the said post after
a proper assessment of her performance during the said period together with a
payment of an acting allowance of Rs. 1,787.50 per month from 1.4.96.

The petitioner's contention is that the said appoinment of the 6th Hemasiri
respondent in the aforesaid manner is arbitrary, capricious discriminatory and
is in violation of Article 12 (1) of the Constitution and bad in law.

The position of the 2nd Hemasiri respondent (the Chairman of the 1st Hemasiri
respondent's Bank) is that the management of the Bank decided that the post of
Chief Legal Officer should be filled by a fairly senior person in the legal
profession and therefore the Bank decided to advertise the post to try and
recruit a senior experienced person from outside the Bank.

**290**

With this in mind the 1st Hemasiri respondent Bank advertised in the 'Sunday
Observer' of 25.6.95 (P4). Candidates who responded to the said advertisement
were called for an interview which was held on 25.9.95 by a panel consisting
himself, the 3rd Hemasiri respondent and Mr. Kolitha Dharmawardena, Senior
State Counsel. Subsequent to the said in­terview the panel recommended one Mr.
G. M. Gunasekera as the most suitable candidate to fill the post and that the
panel also decided that in order of merit the petitioner and Mr. R. C.
Karunakaran were placed second and third at the interview: however, no
recommenda­tions were made in regard to them. He also admits that since the
candidate recommended for selection did not agree to accept the appointment
that he had brought this fact to the notice of the Board of Directors who
decided that the Bank should readvertise the post of Chief Legal Officer. The
2nd Hemasiri respondent also admits that the post was readvertised on 19.11.95
by (P9) and at an interview held in response to that advertisement on 10.1.96
by a panel consisting of himself, the 5thHemasiri respondent and Mr. Kolitha
Dharmawardena that the panel's unanimous view was that Mrs. C. Ellawala was
the most suitable candidate to be selected to the said post, and that on this
occasion too that the panel did not express any view about any other candidate
but stated that Mr. K. M. P. Kulatunge and the petitioner were placed 2nd
Hemasiri and 3rd Hemasiri in the order of merit. It is the position of the 2nd
Hemasiri respondent that on this occasion too that Mrs. C. Ellawala the
candidate who was recommended for appointment declined to accept the
appointment and that the had informed the Board of this fact. The 2nd Hemasiri
respondent further states that at a Board meeting held on 13.2.96, the
Directors were informed that the selected candidates had refused to accept the
post of Chief Legal Officer on two occasions.

According to the original minutes of the Board meeting held on 30.1.96, after
discussion the Directors decided:

(1) not to call for applications for the post of Chief Legal Officer
immediately:

(2) _to_ _authorise the Chairman to select a suitable officer from among the
Legal officer in the Bank and appoint to act as Chief Legal officer._ This
officer may be given

**291**

a fair and reasonable time (about 6 months) to prove her skills/aptitudes
required for the post. Thereafter, if the bank is not satisfied with the
performance of the officer concerned, the Bank should readvertise the post of
Chief Legal Officer; and  
  
(3) to obtain the services of a Legal Consultant on an _ad hoc_ and piece meal
basis if and when required (2R3).  
  
That Board minute does not suggest that the Chairman informed his colleagues
that on both occasions the petitioner was the next most suitable and qualified
candidate. The Board was not invited to consider whether she should be
appointed as Chief Legal Officer.  
  
While the Board decision as originally recorded gave the petitioner a chance
of being considered for an acting appointment, at the next Board meeting on
27.2.96 the relevant part of paragraph 2 (underlined) was deleted and
replaced, without explanation, by the following:  
  
"To appoint the most senior officer amongst the legal officers in the Bank to
act as Chief Legal Officer."  
  
That denied the petitioner the chance of even an acting appointment.  
  
On a consideration of the submissions made and a perusal of the documents
filed, it is to be noted that the 2ndHemasiri respondent admits the contention
of the petitioner that there is a scheme of recruitment to the Bank in respect
of the legal department as evidenced by (P3). It is common ground that the
advertisements (P4) and (P9) calling applications for the post of Chief Legal
Officer, Grade 1, in the 1st Hemasiri respondent Bank had been made in keeping
with the scheme of recruitment (P3).  
  
In my view the Board decision (2R3) dated 13.2.96 to deviate from the
prevailing scheme of recruitment was _ad hoc_ and arbitrary, and sought to
achieve indirectly what it could not do directly.

**292**

Thus, the appointment of the 6th Hemasiri respondent who had not even applied
in response to the advertisements (P4 & P9) for the obvious reason that she
did not possess the basic required qualification of 15 years' practice as an
Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public as the Chief Legal Officer, Grade I (acting)
with the prospect of being confirmed after 6 months (whether or not she had
the minimum qualifications required by the scheme of recruitment) together
with an acting allowance of Rs. 1,787.50 per month by (P14) was violative of
the prevailing scheme of recruitment.  
  
Therefore, I hold that the said appointment of the 6th Hemasiri respondent by
(P14) is bad in law. Hence, I quash the appointment of the 6th Hemasiri
respondent as Chief Legal Officer, Grade I (acting) made by (P14) to take
effect one month from today. I further direct the 1st Hemasiri respondent Bank
to call for applications for the said post from candidates within the Bank who
are eligible for selection in accordance with the scheme of recruitment marked
(P3) within one month from today.  
  
The fact that the 6th Hemasiri respondent has functioned as acting Chief Legal
Officer since 1.4.96 should not be given any weightage in the selection
process.  
  
The petitioner's fundamental right under Article 12 (1) has been violated by
the failure to consider her for appointment, first as Chief Legal Officer,
and, subsequently, as acting Chief Legal Officer. Although I cannot assume
that she would have been appointed if duly considered, nevertheless she is
entitled to compensation for the failure to consider her.  
  
I direct the 1st Hemasiri respondent Bank to pay the petitioner a sum of
Rs.100,000 as compensation together with a further sum of Rs. 20,000 as costs.
**  
  
FERNANDO** **, J.** I agree. **  
  
GUNAWARDANA, **J. I agree. _  
  
Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/33.html_  

