##  Galapaththi v. Kudaligama, Chairman, Education Service Committee of the
Public Service Commission and Others - SLR - 218, Vol 2 of 1998 [1998] LKSC
33; (1998) 2 Sri LR 218 (3 February 1998)

**218**

**GALAPATHTHI  
v.  
KUDALIGAMA, CHAIRMAN, EDUCATION SERVICE  
COMMITTEE OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION  
AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 829/96 3RD  
FEBRUARY, 1998  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Termination of a teacher's appointment - Article 12 (1)
of the Constitution.  
_  
The petitioner who applied for a post of Assistant Teacher in response to a
Gazette Notification (P1) was appointed a Dancing teacher with effect from
1.1.1990. She was confirmed in that post with effect from 1.11.1994. On
13.9.96 the Education Authorities terminated her appointment with immediate
effect on the ground that she did not possess a pass in Arithmetic at the
National Certificate of General Education examination, which was a requirement
'according to the policy of the Education Department'.

**219**

**Held:  
**  
Having regard to the Gazette Notification P1 and the circulars relied upon by
the 2nd respondent, Secretary to the Education Service Committee to justify
the termination of the petitioner's services, the said termination was
untenable, arbitrary and violative of Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Mohan Peiris with Ms. Nuwanthi Dias and Miss L. Jayasinghe_ for petitioner.  
  
_N. Pulle_ , S.C for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

3rd February, 1998  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J.  
**  
The petitioner having completed her secondary education at the Hambantota
Balika Vidyalaya, Tangalla, had passed the National Certificate of General
Education (N.C.G.E) in 1976 and secured passes in seven subjects at one and
the same sitting. The details of her examination results are as follows:

Subjects  |

Grades  
---|---  
1\. Sinhala  |

B  
2\. English  |

C  
3\. Health Science  |

C  
4\. Buddhism  |

C  
5\. Aesthetic Studies (Dancing)  |

B  
6\. Home Science  |

B  
7\. Technical Studies  |

C  
  
In addition she had passed the G.C.E. (Advanced Level) examination in 1980
securing a pass in Economics and a Credit pass in Sinhala.  
  
Consequent upon a Gazette Notification published on 13.7.1989 (marked 'P1').
calling for applications for the appointment of Sinhala medium and Tamil
medium Assistant Teachers on a district basis published by the Secretary of
the Education Service Committee of the Public Service Commission (the 2nd
respondent) the petitioner

**220**

had applied for the post of an Assistant Teacher and had been appointed by
letter dated 23.10.1990 (marked 'P2') as a Dancing Teacher to the Hambantota
Seenimodara Junior School, Nakulugamuwa, with effect from 01.11.1990.
Thereafter by letter dated 25.11.1994 (marked 'P3') the petitioner had been
confirmed in her post with effect from 01.11.1994 subject to a probationary
period of three years by the 6th respondent. Whilst the petitioner was serving
as a confirmed Dancing Teacher in the aforesaid Seenimodara Junior School she
alleges that the 5th respondent had purported to terminate her services by
letter dated 13.9.1996 (marked 'P4') with immediate effect consequent upon a
decision taken by the 1st to 4th respondents on the basis that she had not
possessed the basic qualifications for appointment. An appeal made by the
petitioner to the 2nd respondent by P5 dated 3.10.1996 had been turned down by
the 2nd respondent by his letter dated 01.11.1996 (marked 'P6') on the ground
that the petitioner had failed in Arithmetic at the G.C.E. (0/L) examination,
which was a requirement according to the accepted policy of the Education
Department.  
  
Learned counsel for the petitioner at the hearing of this application
contended that nowhere was it specified in the Gazette P1 calling for
applications for appointment of Assistant Teachers on a district basis that a
pass in Arithmetic was a required qualification for appointment. He drew our
attention to column 3 of the said Gazette notification dealing with
educational qualifications. According to 3.1 an applicant should have passed
in any three subjects at the G.C.E (A/L) examination. This requirement was
dispensed with in cases where the applicant had specialised qualifications in
specified subjects such as Religion, Physical Education and Sports, Language
(Sinhala, Tamil or English) and Aesthetic Studies, Science, Mathematics or
Technical subjects. It was his contention that the petitioner had secured a B
grade pass in Aesthetic Studies (Dancing) at the N.C.G.E examination and it
was on the basis that such qualification complied with the requirements
specified in the Gazette notification that she applied and was selected for
appointment.  
  
It was further submitted by learned counsel that although the 2nd respondent
in the affidavit filed seeks to justify the termination of the petitioner's
services on the basis that the petitioner did not possess a pass in
Mathematics at the N.C.G.E. examination which was a requirement in terms of
the policy of the Ministry of Education in the

**221**

scheme of recruitment for uncertificated teachers that the so called policy of
the Ministry of Education is not reflected anywhere in P1 the Gazette
notification by which applications were called for appointment of Assistant
Teachers. In any event it was contended by learned counsel that the scheme of
recruitment for un certificated Sinhala and Tamil Assistant Teachers relied
upon by 2nd respondent to justify the termination of the petitioner's services
was not applicable as the petitioner had applied under the scheme provided for
by Gazette notification P1.  
  
Having examined the Gazette notification P1 and the circulars relied upon by
the 2nd respondent to justify the termination of the petitioner's services we
are of the view that the grounds relied upon by the respondents for the said
termination are untenable.  
  
For the reasons stated we hold that the termination of the petitioner's
services by P4 was arbitrary and was violative of Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution. Accordingly we quash the letter of termination dated 13.9.1996
(marked 'P4'). The application of the petitioner is allowed and we direct the
State to pay a sum of Rs. 15,000% as costs of this application to the
petitioner.  
  
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner continued to
be in service notwithstanding the confirmation of the termination of her
services by P6 consequent upon a Stay Order issued by this Court in this
application. In the circumstances, we note that there had been no break in
service of the petitioner. As such we direct the 1 st to 6th respondents to
permit the petitioner to continue in service' without interruption.  
  
**G.P.S.  DE SILVA CJ. - I agree.  
  
ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J. - I agree.  
  
**_**Relief granted.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/33.html_  

