##  Range Bandara v. Gen. Anuruddha Ratwatte and Another - SLR - 360, Vol 3 of
1997 [1997] LKSC 33; (1997) 3 Sri LR 360 (26 September 1997)

360

RANGE BANDARA  

**v.** ****

**GEN. ANURUDDHA RATWATTE AND ANOTHER  **

** **

SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, ACJ.,

WIJETUNGA, J. AND

GUNAWARDENA, J.

S.C. APPLICATION (FR.) NO. 128/96

AUGUST 21, 1997.



Fundamental Rights - Transfer of a Police Officer - Misuse of power -
Arbitrary decision -Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

_ _

The petitioner, a sub-inspector of Police who was attached to the
Weerambugedera Police Post in the Kurunegala District as Officer-in-Charge was
transferred by the 2nd respondent, Inspector-General of Police (IGP) to
Moratuwa. This was in consequence of a request by the 3rd respondent the
S.L.F.P. Chief Organiser for Polgahawela to appoint another officer as O.I.C.
Weerambugedera Police Post. However, the 3rd respondent issued a letter to the
1st respondent Deputy Minister of Defence stating that the petitioner was an
efficient and an honest officer and requesting him to transfer the petitioner
to a station close to Kurunegala. That request was forward by the 1st
respondent to the I.G.P. At the hearing of the application the I.G.P.'s
position was that the impugned transfer was a normal transfer. He also stated
that the transfer was effected additionally on disciplinary grounds.



**Held:**

** **

The summary transfer of the petitioner to a distant place was a misuse of
discretion. The decision to transfer was arbitrary, capricious, and
unreasonable and violative of the petitioner's rights under Article 12(1).



**Per Fernando, A C J.**

** **

"The evidence in this case shows that what happened was not the result of a
mistake or error of judgment, but of a misuse of ... powers, of a kind which
demoralises and demotivates the victim, and indirectly the entire service".



**Cases referred to:**

** **

1\. Leelaratne v. Herath, S.C. 145/86 S.C. Minutes 9 March 1987\.

_ _

2 _. Tennakoon v, de Silva,_ 1997 -1 SLR 16.

_ _

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

**361**



_Chula Bandara_ for the petitioner.

_ _

_S. Rajaratnam, P.C.,_ for the 1st, 2nd and 4th respondents.

_ _

_R. K. W. Goonasekera,_ for 3rd respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._





September 26, 1997.  


**FERNANDO, ACJ.**

** **

Having joined the Police service in 1983 as a constable, the petitioner was
appointed a sub-inspector in 1990. After completing his training he was posted
to Ampara and thereafter to Gokarella; and in August 1992 he was appointed
Officer-in-Charge, Weerambugedera Police Post, which was upgraded in 1994 as a
Police station. For administrative purposes, in the Police service the
Kurunegala district is sub-divided into three divisions - Kurunegala,
Kuliyapitiya, and Nikaweratiya - and Weerambugedera is in the Kurunegala
division. By a Police message received on 5.1.96, the petitioner was informed
that the 2nd respondent, the Inspector-General of Police, had ordered his
transfer to Moratuwa, as a sub-inspector (supernumerary) with effect from
5.1.96. He filed this application under Article 126 on 30.1.96 challenging
that transfer. This Court granted leave to proceed under Article 12(1) on
5.2.96, and made an interim order staying the transfer on 16.2.96, whereupon
he was sent to Kurunegala on 13.3.96.



All Counsel agreed that the power to transfer officers of the category to
which the petitioner belongs had been delegated to the Inspector-General of
Police by the Public Service Commission (PSC).



It is the petitioner's case that the transfer was not in terms of the
Establishments Code and the Departmental regulations, but had been made at the
request of the 3rd respondent, an Attorney-at-Law and the S.L.FP. Chief
Organiser for Polgahawela. He says that on 6.1.96 he met the 3rd respondent,
who admits that he then gave the petitioner a letter dated 6.1.96 (produced as
P7), addressed to the 1st respondent, the Deputy Minister of Defence, under
whom the Police service comes. In that letter the 3rd respondent stated that
**at**

**362**



**his request** one sub-inspector Ratnatilleke had been transferred from
Puttalarn to Weerambugedera (in the Polgahawela electorate) with effect from
6.1.96; that in consequence the petitioner had been transferred to Moratuwa;
that the petitioner was an efficient, good and honest Police officer; that he
had a host of personal difficulties; and he therefore requested that the
transfer to Moratuwa be cancelled, and that the petitioner be transferred to a
place like Kegalle, Kandy or Anuradhapura. The petitioner says that, along
with a covering letter (produced as P7A) addressed to the 1st respondent, he
posted that letter to the 1st respondent on 13.1.96. That covering letter
expressly stated that a letter from Mr. lhalagama, Attorney-at-Law, the
"Government Party" Chief Organiser for Polgahawela, was enclosed.



The 3rd respondent did not expressly say in P7 that his request for the
transfer of SI Ratnatilleke had been made to the 1st respondent. However, the
problem which had arisen was a consequence of that request, and it therefore
seems natural for the 3rd respondent to have asked the same person to whom he
had made that request (rather than a third person) to deal with the
consequential problem. On the other hand, if that request had been made to
someone other than the 1st respondent, the 3rd respondent would have had to
mention that fact in P7, in order to make the 1st respondent aware of the
background. I therefore understand the "request" mentioned in P7 to be a
request made to the 1st respondent to transfer SI Ratnatilleke.



In his affidavit dated 8.3.96 the 1st respondent said:



"5\. ... While I am unaware as to whether the petitioner has in his discussion
with the 3rd respondent, as set out in his affidavit, [sic] I state that I
cannot recall having received any request from the petitioner to [sic] the 3rd
respondent requesting transfer of the petitioner or Mr. Ratnatilleke, the Sub-
inspector of Police. I state further that I have given no instructions or
directions to the 2nd respondent for the transfer of the petitioner or any'
other officer of the police station."



"6\. ... **I am unaware as to whether the 3rd respondent issued a letter to
the petitioner** as stated therein. I state further that while I



**363**



have no personal recollection as to whether the said letter ... [P7] ... was
received by me. I verily believe that in terms of sections 5:4 and 6:2 of
Chapter XXVIII of the Establishments Code, the petitioner has no right or
authority to communicate directly with me and that I am [neither ?] required
nor authorised to reply any such communication sent contrary to the said
provisions."



"7\. ... I deny that I directed or instructed the 2nd respondent to transfer
the petitioner. I state that **upon receipt of copy of the petition and
affidavit** filed by the petitioner I made inquiries from the 2nd respondent
and was informed that the petitioner was transferred as **part of the year end
transfers** and the choice of district and place of transfer was based on
**exigency of service** and **reports made by the Senior Officers. "**



"9\. ... I am personally unaware as to whether the 3rd respondent is the Chief
Organiser for the time being of the Polgahawela Electorate Division of the Sri
Lanka Freedom Party." [emphasis added]



There can be no doubt that - before he gave instructions for the preparation
of his affidavit - the 1st respondent did have the petition and annexes, and
that he had made inquiries about the subject matter from the 2nd respondent.
If it was a rare occurrence to receive requests for the transfer of Police
officers, it would have been natural for the 1st respondent to have stated
more positively, one way or the other, that he **had** , or had **not** ,
received such a request from the 3rd respondent. Although it might have been
contended, therefore, that it was because he was receiving many such requests
that he had no personal recollection, I will nevertheless assume in his favour
that it was the heavy burden of his undoubtedly onerous responsibilities which
made it difficult to have a personal recollection of relatively less important
matters concerning the transfers of sub-inspectors. But in that event it would
have been an elementary precaution - of which his legal advisers could not
have failed to remind him - to have his files checked to see whether there had
been any such correspondence, and what steps had been taken, instead of
relying on his memory alone. Further, the 1st respondent made no mention of
P7A - although annexed to the petition - and in the absence of any

**364**



such reference paragraph 6 of his affidavit amounts to a denial of the receipt
of any letter whatever from the petitioner; a denial which he sought to
support by an assertion that the petitioner had no right to communicate
directly with him. He was therefore disclaiming any knowledge of P7 and P7A.



As for the 2nd respondent, in his affidavit dated 12.3.96 he said that he was
unaware of P7 and P7A. That necessarily meant that even if P7 and P7A had
reached the 1st respondent, the 2nd respondent had not received them (or
copies) from the 1st respondent. Although he expressly denied that the
petitioner had been transferred at the 3rd respondent's request, he did not
deal with or deny the 3rd respondent's assertion (in P7) that SI Ratnatilleke
had been transferred at the 3rd respondent's request. The 2nd respondent
explained the impugned transfer thus:



" 7\. ... I specifically deny that the transfer was made outside the normal
annual transfers of the Department of Police. I state that the transfer of the
petitioner was one of 69 transfers ordered by me on 03.01.1996 as **a
continuation of the end of the year transfers** for 1995. I annex hereto a
copy of the said transfer orders marked 2R2. The reasons for the decision to
transfer the petitioner **to a distant Police Station** are set out by me in
the following paragraph of this affidavit."



"8\. ... While specifically denying that the 1st respondent directed me to
transfer the petitioner or that the transfer is contrary to the transfer
procedure of the Police Department, I state as follows:



(a)     the decision to transfer the petitioner was taken **after considering
the reports** submitted by the Deputy Inspector General of Police (North
Western Range - Kurunegala (report dated 28.10.1994) and the Senior
Superintendent of Police (report dated 09.10.1994). **The material brought to
my notice in these two reports** clearly indicated that there were several
complaints against the petitioner from the members of the Public of the area
and that the petitioner was unsuitable to perform the functions of an Officer-
in-Charge of a station. I annex hereto. copies of the said two reports marked
2R3 & 2R4.

**365**



(b)     I also gave my conscious attention to the fact that many of the
complaints had to be dropped due to lack of evidence whilst some other
complaints had been withdrawn or settled on a later date before steps could be
taken to conduct a fuller inquiry or to prosecute the petitioner. I was also
made aware that some other complaints against the petitioner were pending at
the time I took the decision to transfer the petitioner. I state that it is
for these reasons that **I considered it necessary to transfer the petitioner
out of the North Western Province Range so that proper inquiries could be
conducted** and appropriate action could be taken at the conclusion of such
inquiries. All material regarding the complaints will be made available to
Your Lordship's Court for perusal since I am of the view that the petitioner
should not have access to this material at this stage as all the accusations
are against him." [emphasis added]



The petitioner filed a counter-affidavit dated 19.4.96, producing as P8 a
letter which he had received: this was dated 6.2.96 (bearing reference number
PS/P/2/79/96) and was signed by Major S. M. Wijeratne, as private secretary to
the 1st respondent. The subject-matter was stated to be the variation of the
transfer of the petitioner. That was an acknowledgement of the receipt of a
letter (date unspecified) addressed to the 1st respondent. P8 stated that on
the instructions of the 1st respondent that letter had been referred, for
suitable action, to the Inspector-General of Police, to whom all future
queries should be addressed, and P8 also indicated that, on the directions of
the 1st respondent, a copy of P8 was being sent to the Inspector-General of
Police for suitable action and reply, together with the letter in question
(presumably, the original).



The respondents made no effort to contradict that affidavit, either by a
counter-affidavit or by producing documents.



Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that P8 was proof that - long
before the date of the 1st respondent's affidavit - the 1st respondent had
received P7, and that his denial could not be accepted; and that P7 and P7A
had been referred to the 2nd respondent, so that these documents had been in
the 2nd

**366**



respondent's possession at the time he signed his affidavit, in which event it
could not be correct that he was "unaware" of them. Learned State Counsel
submitted, however, that P8 was only proof of the receipt of a letter from the
petitioner, and not of P7 which was a letter from the 3rd respondent; but he
could not tell us what that letter was, if it was not P7A.





In view of the 3rd respondent's statement in P7 that he had requested the
transfer of SI Ratnatilleke to Weerambugedera, it becomes important to decide
three questions: Did the 1st respondent receive P7A, enclosing P7? And, if so,
did his private secretary (by P8) - acting on his instructions - refer P7 and
P7A to the 2nd respondent for suitable action and reply? And did the 2nd
respondent receive P7 and P7A?



The petitioner's version is intrinsically probable. He received a sudden
transfer order; he went to meet the 3rd respondent, who explained that SI
Ratnatilleke had been transferred at the 3rd respondent's request; the 3rd
respondent confirmed that the petitioner was a good and efficient officer, and
therefore gave him P7, addressed to the 1st respondent, to help him get a
closer station than Moratuwa. What else was the petitioner to do with P7
except to send it to the 1st respondent, with a covering letter? P8 affords
conclusive proof that the 1st respondent did receive **some** letter from the
petitioner. If the 1st respondent's position is that he received P7A, but not
P7, then - because P7A stated that P7 was enclosed - P8 would have pointed out
that nothing was enclosed. On the other hand, if his position was that he
received neither P7 nor P7A, nevertheless P8 amounted to an admission that he
had received **some** letter from the petitioner, and the only acceptable way
to prove that what he had received was not P7 or P7A was to produce the
document which he had actually received. In the absence of any such document,
the petitioner asks the Court to infer that the 1st respondent did receive P7
and P7A. Further P8 shows that the 1st respondent referred P7 and P7A to the
2nd respondent, which means that either the originals or copies of P7 and P7A
were received by the 2nd respondent. Those two respondents had a common legal
adviser, and if P8 had been brought to his notice, in the normal course these
matters should

**367**



have been probed and the relevant documents should have been produced; and if
the copy of P8 (and enclosures) intended for the 2nd respondent had not
reached him, that also would have been stated. In the absence of that
clarification the petitioner asks the Court to hold that the 1st respondent
did receive P7 and P7A; and that the 2nd respondent received P7 and P7A (or
copies) from the 1st respondent.  


At the hearing on 21.8.97 learned State Counsel, faced with these
difficulties, asked for permission to produce the letter or letters which P8
acknowledged. That was shortly afternoon that day, and we gave him permission
to do so. However, we felt that if additional material was being produced at
that late stage to clarify one matter, then in the interests of justice other
matters, including the question whether the 3rd respondent had communicated
with the 1st respondent in regard to Sl Ratnatilleke's transfer, should also
be probed. For that reason, we allowed production, provided the entire file
was produced, and produced immediately - to leave no room for insinuations of
tampering - by 2 o'clock that afternoon, after the lunch adjournment. When we
resumed in the afternoon State Counsel informed us that the file had not been
traced. This might have been due to the short notice.



In those circumstances, the failure to produce the document which P8
acknowledged attracts the presumption under section 114(f) of the Evidence
Ordinance. On the available evidence, I hold that the petitioner has
established, on a balance of probability, that the 1st respondent did receive
P7A with P7 annexed; that he did refer those letters, by means of a copy of
P8, to the 2nd respondent, for action and reply; and that the 2nd respondent
did receive P8 with its enclosures. Neither the 1st nor the 2nd respondent has
suggested any reason why the 3rd respondent should have falsely said that he
had made a request for the transfer of SI Ratnatilleke, and I hold that that
was probably true. The petitioner's transfer was thus the consequence of the
3rd respondent's request.



I will nevertheless examine the reasons given by the 1st and 2nd respondents
for the petitioner's transfer, independently of P7 and P8.

**368**



The 2nd respondent stated that it was "a continuation of the end of the year
transfers from 1995", and that 68 others were transferred at the same time.
Although he did not make any reference to the "exigencies of service", the 1st
respondent claimed that the 2nd respondent had told him it was on account of
the exigencies of service. At the hearing, learned State Counsel stated that
officers are not normally transferred from a station until they have served
four to five years, and that a "supernumerary" appointment to a station meant
that the cadre at that station was already full. If that were so, it was very
relevant that the petitioner had served only three years and five months at
Weerambugedera, and had been transferred as a "supernumerary" indicating that
in all probability he was not really needed at Moratuwa.



The 2nd respondent also said that his decision was to transfer the petitioner
"to a **distant** Police Station" for the reasons set out in paragraph 8 of
the 2nd respondent's affidavit. Why "distant"? Paragraph 8 of the 2nd
respondent's affidavit refers to complaints against the petitioner, and thus
suggests that there was a punitive or disciplinary element to the transfer.



Prima facie, therefore, the transfer was neither a normal annual transfer nor
on account of the exigencies of service.



Was there any material justifying such a transfer to a distant place? And in
any event, if that was the real reason, was it proper to withhold that reason
from the petitioner?



Let me recall the 1st respondent's version that on inquiring from the 2nd
respondent he learned that the transfer was based "on exigency of service and
**reports** made by Senior Officers". The 2nd respondent referred to, and
relied on, only two reports both made in October 1994 ("the material brought
to my notice **in these two reports** "). Although in paragraph 8(b) he
referred to complaints made even after October 1994, he did not produce or
mention any **reports** about such subsequent complaints; instead, he simply
said that "[he] was also made aware . . ." The only reasonable inference is
that there had been **no** reports after October 1994.

**369**



Did the 2nd respondent really act on those two reports? The reports contained
specific recommendations that the petitioner be interdicted and transferred,
and disciplinary proceedings taken. That was not done. If indeed it had been
considered necessary to transfer him on the basis of those reports, the 2nd
respondent should have explained why that was not done at once or as part of
the end of the year transfers for 1994 (effective January 1995).



As for alleged complaints after October 1994, since the 2nd respondent did not
refer to any reports relating to such complaints, it is quite unsafe to act on
the 2nd respondent's bare assertion that he was "made aware" of complaints,
particularly because these were not disclosed to the petitioner so that he
could have been heard in his defence. It is true that the 2nd respondent said
that the relevant material would be placed before the Court at the hearing,
but neither natural justice nor the rules of procedure applicable to
fundamental rights application permit any party the unilateral privilege of
deciding that he will furnish evidence in support of his case for the perusal
of the Judges alone. This Court has recognised that considerations of national
security may permit an exception (see Leelaratne v. Herath,(1) but even then
the material relied on must be furnished to the Court before the hearing. Here
national security is not involved, and the material was not tendered before
the hearing. We therefore refused to allow the production of any new material.



But there is a more serious objection to allowing that material to be
tendered. Not having given the petitioner even an inkling that his transfer
was on account of such complaints, and having pretended that the transfer was
a normal annual transfer - with 68 other transfers - can the 2nd respondent
now be allowed to say that it was on disciplinary grounds, "so that proper
inquiries could be conducted", in respect of the complaints against him? All
the complaints referred to in the October 1994 reports were not proceeded
with, either because they were withdrawn or because there was insufficient
evidence. Even if there were subsequent complaints (i.e. between October 1994
and December 1995), why was no action taken in 1995? If it was difficult to
take action while the petitioner was at Weerambugedera, why was no charge
sheet at

**370**



least served during the 18 months that elapsed between then and the hearing of
this application? Surely fairness demanded that the petitioner be informed
early of the allegations made against him? One must remember also that there
are complaints and complaints. There are genuine complaints from responsible
members of the public against dishonest Police officers who misuse their
powers, but on the other hand there are false complaints by wrong-doers when
they are adversely affected by the conscientious discharge of their duties by
honest Police officers. Likewise, complaints are withdrawn, settled, or not
pursued, for good reasons as well as for bad. Vague assertions of "complaints"
against a Police officer can hardly justify a transfer.



In this connection, I must refer to Tennakoon v. de Silva.(2) There the
petitioner, an Assistant Superintendent of Police, had inquired into four
complaints against a sub-inspector - involving rape, bribery, assault of a
Grama Seva Niladhari, and assault of a RPC - and had recommended his transfer.
But it was the petitioner who was transferred! And what is more, the then
Inspector-General of Police sought to justify that transfer on the ground,
inter alia, that "if any officer is unable to work in harmony with the elected
members of Parliament it would not be desirable for such officer to be
retained in that Division".



The 2nd respondent's version is also contradicted by the two reports which the
Senior Superintendent of Police, Kurunegala, submitted after inspecting the
Weerambugedera Police station in 1995. In his report dated 20.5.95 he
concluded.



"Standard of parade in satisfactory. Buildings, premises and vehicles are
maintained well. Standard of books and registers were in fair order except few
mistakes pointed out by me. OIC Crimes should concentrate more on
investigation into property cases and must have a better grip and control over
them. OIC Range Bandara is in charge of this station . . . He has a good
control over the station and the area as well. He is spoken well among the
public in the area and Citizen Rights Watch Committee system is very well
organized here"

**371**



And in his second report dated 18.12.95 - just three weeks before the impugned
transfer - he said:



"Vehicles, buildings, and premises are being maintained well. Registers
pertaining to crime matters are in order, except for the few mistakes pointed
out by me. I am glad to note that OIC has motivated the men to organize Civil
Defence Force System and Neighbourhood Watch Committee system in the area.
These two systems are successfully activated in this area and the public are
very happy about the commitments of the Police in organizing the Service
Funerals in the area. OIC is working well. The other SI, and the men are
assisting the OIC to control the station as well as the area effectively."



The 2nd respondent neither explains why these reports make no mention of any
complaints against the petitioner nor whether they were taken into account in
deciding to transfer the petitioner.



The 2nd respondent also annexed to his affidavit dated 12.3.96 a computer
printout of the petitioner's "Personnel Details", showing all the stations at
which he had worked. It is quite clear that this was not out of date, because
the last three entries were for 1996 - indeed, even extending to one day after
the date of his affidavit:



WEERAMBUGEDERA 94.07.29 96.01.04 SI OIC

MORATUWA 96.01.05 96.03.12 SI SN

KURUNEGALA 96.03.13  SI SN



At the hearing, we observed that, tucked away among a host of others, were the
following entries:



Transfer on dis. grud. [sic]?: **N** Reference:

Any inquiries peed. ?: **N** Reference:

Any Adverse Remarks. ?: **N** Reference:



Learned State Counsel stated that "dis. grud." meant "disciplinary grounds",
and that **"N " **meant Nil or None. It would follow that there would be an
entry under "Reference" only if there was no negative

**372**



answer. These entries cannot easily be reconciled with the 2nd respondent's
assertion that there were complaints or pending inquiries against the
petitioner.



In my view, the summary transfer of the petitioner to a distant place was
unreasonable, on the material available to the 2nd respondent, and it was also
a misuse of discretion to withhold from him the true reason for the transfer,
because it deprived him of the opportunity to rebut it.



I hold that the 2nd respondent's decision to transfer the petitioner was
arbitrary, capricious, and unreasonable, and in violation of the petitioner's
fundamental rights under Article 12(1). I quash that transfer. Nothing in this
order will preclude disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner for any
past misconduct, or his transfer, in accordance with the applicable rules and
regulations.



The impugned transfer was effective from 6.1.96, and the petitioner was re-
assigned to Kurunegala only on 13.3.96. I award him a sum of Rs. 25,000 as
compensation and Rs. 15,000 as costs. In making the impugned transfer order,
the 2nd respondent was acting as a public officer exercising powers delegated
to him by PSC. Those powers are held in trust by him, and should have been
exercised, with due care, for the purpose for which they were entrusted to him
by the PSC; and with the same independence which the public have the right to
expect, which Article 60 of the constitution protects on pain of punishment:



"Any person who, otherwise than in the course of his duty, directly or
indirectly, by himself or by any other person, in any manner whatsoever,
influences or attempts to influence any decision of the Public Service
Commission, or of any Committee thereof, or of any member of such Commission,
or of **any public officer exercising any powers delegated by such
Commission** or Committee, shall be guilty of an offence ... provided that
nothing in this Article shall prohibit any person from giving a certificate or
testimonial to any applicant or candidate for any public office."

**373**



The evidence in this case shows that what happened was not the result of a
mistake or an error of judgment, but of a misuse of those powers, of a kind
which demoralises and demotivates the victim, and indirectly the entire
service. The 2nd respondent does not claim that he acted on material furnished
by his subordinates; his affidavit suggests that he gave his "conscious
attention" to the relevant facts. I therefore direct that the compensation be
paid by the State and that costs be paid by the 2nd respondent personally.



**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.



**GUNAWARDENA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/33.html_  

