##  Rupasinghe v. Madatti - SLR - 161, Vol 2 of 1994 [1994] LKSC 33; (1994) 2
Sri LR 161 (14 October 1994)

###  161

### RUPASINGHE

**v.**

**MADATTI**

SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J.

DHEERARATNE, J. AND

PERERA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 62/94

C.A. N0. 550/88 F

D.C. KALUTARA NO. 3316/L

SEPTEMBER 12, 1994.



_Emergency (Rehabilitation of Affected Property, Business or Industries)
Regulations No. 2 of 1984 (the REPIA Regulations) made under section 5 of the
Public Security Ordinance ‑ REPIA Regulations 9(1), 9(2), 10(1), 12, 13(1), 14
(1), 14(2) (a) and (b), and 19._



The defendant purchased the premises in suit on 15.7.82 for Rs.13,000/‑; on
6.12.82 he sold the premises to one Jane Nona for the same amount subject to
the condition that she would re‑transfer it to him if he repaid that sum
within one year. The defendant remained in occupation but was compelled to
leave the premises because of the July 1983 riots. He did not tender the
agreed sum to Jane Nona within the year or at any time thereafter. On 29.12.83
Jane Nona sold the premises for Rs. 20,000/‑ to the plaintiff‑appellant who
entered into

**162**  

possession. The defendant submitted an undated declaration to REPIA stating,
_inter alia_ , that he had been the sole owner of the premises since 1982. The
conditional transfer to Jane Nona and his failure to fulfil the condition were
not disclosed. He thereby obtained from REPIA an authorisation dated 2.3.84
issued under Regulation 13(1) of the REPIA regulations, which entitled him to
enter, remain in and occupy "the aforementioned affected property".



With this authorisation and Police assistance, the plaintiff was remanded and
the defendant took possession of the premises.



The plaintiff thereafter sued the defendant for declaration of title. The
defendant died pending action and his widow was substituted in his place. The
substituted defendant's contention was that the premises vested in the State
and continued to be so vested until divested on 12.3.84 and the divesting did
not revalidate the December 1983 alienation. The plaintiff's case was that the
premises were not affected property and therefore never vested in the State.
There was no divesting on 12.3.84, but only a binding statutory declaration.



**Held:**



(1)        There was no admission that the premises were affected property.



(2)        The authorisation of 2.3.84 under regulation 13(1) was issued on
the basis that the premises were affected property but this did not give it
the effect of a declaration under regulation 9(2). The authorisation was
issued upon a deliberate and material misrepresentation and the _audi alteram
partem_ rule was applicable. This authorisation under Regulation 13 was not
also a declaration under regulation 9(2). The mere statement that "the
aforementioned affected property vests absolutely in the State" does not show
that a serious question was being decided. Only a fact was being assumed. The
authorization was not issued upon a decision made under regulation 9(2).



On an affidavit submitted by Jane Nona to REPIA that authority issued a
document to her which amounts to a decision that the premises were not
affected property and does not purport to divest property. Hence it is
unnecessary to decide, whether the effect of divesting was to revalidate the
alienation to which regulation 12 applies.



**Appeal** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_Champaka Ladduwahetty_ for plaintiff‑appellant.



_Rohana Jayawardene_ for substituted defendant‑respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

  **163**

October 14, 1994.

**M. D. H. FERNANDO, J.**



The right decision of this appeal depends entirely upon the interpretation and
application of the Emergency (Rehabilitation of Affected Property, Business or
Industries) Regulations, No. 2 of 1984 ("the REPIA Regulations"), made under
section 5 of the Public Security Ordinance (Cap. 40). The following are the
relevant regulations:



"9(1) Every affected property, industry or business shall, with effect from
the date these regulations come into force, vest absolutely in the State free
from all encumbrances.



9(2) Where any question arises as to whether any property, industry or
business is an affected property, industry or business, such question shall be
decided by REPIA by a declaration in writing, and such declaration shall be
final and conclusive and shall not be called in question in any court in any
proceedings whatsoever.



10(1) Any person authorised in that behalf by REPIA may take possession of any
affected property, industry or business vested in the State under regulation
9.



12\. No person shall, after the date of coming into force of these
regulations, alienate any affected property, industry or business, and
accordingly any alienation made in contravention of this regulation shall be
deemed for all purposes to be null and void.



13.(1) No person shall, unless he has been authorised in writing by REPIA,
enter, remain in, or occupy any affected property.



14(1) Notwithstanding that any affected property, or industry or business has
vested in the State by reason of the operation of these regulations, REPIA may
at any time by Order published in the Gazette divest such property, industry
or business.



14(2) The following provisions shall apply to a divesting Order made under
paragraph (1):

**164**  

(a)        the property, industry or business shall be deemed never to have
vested in the State by reason of the operation of these regulations, and any
question which may arise as to any right, title or interest in or over such
property, industry or business shall be determined accordingly.



(b)        the divesting Order shall have the effect of reviving any
arrangement, agreement or other notarially executed instrument in and over
that property, industry or business subsisting on the date on which such
property, industry or business vested in the State.



19\.       In these regulations, "affected property" means any immovable
property damaged or destroyed on or after July 24, 1983, by riot or civil
commotion, and includes any immovable property used for the purposes of an
affected business or industry."



(I have quoted from the REPIA Regulations, No. 1 of 1983, which was produced
at the trial, and both Counsel have assured us that the relevant provisions in
the 1984 Regulations are identical.)



The Defendant purchased the premises in suit on 15.7.82 for Rs.13,000/; on
6.12.82 he sold the premises to one Jane Nona for the same amount, subject to
the condition that she would retransfer it to him if he repaid that sum within
one year. The Defendant remained in occupation, but was compelled to leave the
premises because of the July 1983 riots. He did not tender the agreed sum to
Jane Nona within the year (or even at any time thereafter). On 29.12.83, Jane
Nona sold the premises for Rs. 20,000/‑ to the Plaintiff‑Respondent­Appellant
("the Plaintiff"), who entered into possession. The Defendant submitted an
undated declaration to the Rehabilitation of Property and Industries Authority
("REPIA"), which was established by the REPIA Regulations, stating, _inter
alia,_ that he had been the sole owner of the premises since 1982; the
conditional transfer to Jane Nona, and his failure to fulfil the condition,
were not disclosed. He thereby obtained from REPIA an authorisation (D2) dated
2.3.84, issued under regulation 13(1) of the REPIA regulations, which entitled
him to enter, remain in, and occupy "the aforementioned affected property";
this also stated:

**165**  

"It is to be noted that in accordance with regulation 9(1) ... the
aforementioned affected property vests absolutely in the State, free from all
encumbrances."



With this authorisation and Police assistance, the Plaintiff was remanded, and
the Defendant took possession of the premises.



Defence Counsel elicited in cross‑examination, from a REPIA witness called by
the Plaintiff, that Jane Nona had submitted an affidavit to REPIA; this was
not produced. However, the Plaintiff produced a document (P1) dated 12.3.84,
issued to Jane Nona by the Chairman of REPIA, declaring "in terms of" the
REPIA regulations (but without reference to a specific regulation) that:



"the above property is not an affected property for the purpose of these
regulations."



Later, a similar document (D3) dated 14.9.84 was issued to the Defendant.



By letter dated 16.5.84 the Plaintiff's Attorney‑at‑law called upon the
Defendant to deliver vacant possession to the Plaintiff, stating that REPIA
had declared that the premises were not an affected property, that the
conditional transfer to Jane Nona had become absolute, and that Jane Nona had
transferred the premises to the Plaintiff. The Defendant's Attorney‑at‑law
replied on 7.6.84, claiming that REPIA had decided that the premises were
affected property; but it was not suggested that the Defendant had tendered,
or attempted to tender, the sum due to Jane Nona for a re‑transfer.



On 4.9.85, the Plaintiff instituted this action for a declaration of title
relying on the conveyance from Jane Nona, and pleading that the Defendant had
wrongfully entered into, and remained in, possession of the premises upon the
REPIA authorisation dated 2.3.84. The Defendant having died thereafter, his
widow was substituted in his place. The substituted
Defendant‑Appellant‑Respondent (the substituted Defendant") filed answer on
17.12.86 admitting the



**166**  

conditional transfer to Jane Nona, and claiming that the Defendant had written
to her giving notice of his intention to repay the money and obtain a
re‑transfer; but no attempt was made at the trial to produce any such
document. It was further pleaded that the premises had been damaged during the
July 1983 riots; that it had been decided under the REPIA regulations that the
premises were affected property; that accordingly the transfer of the premises
by Jane Nona on 29.12.83 was unlawful; that the Plaintiff's possession of
affected property, without an authorisation from REPIA, was therefore
unlawful; that accordingly she had been kept in remand until possession was
delivered to the Defendant (and released on bail only thereafter); that the
Defendant and his family had been in lawful possession of the premises since
2.3.84; **** and that the Plaintiff was not entitled to question the REPIA
order and decision dated 2.3.84.



No issues were raised at the trial as to whether (a) the premises had in fact
been damaged, (b) the premises were "affected property" within the meaning of
regulation 19, (c) REPIA had made a declaration in terms of regulation 9(2)
that the premises were "affected property", and (d) such declaration was
immune from challenge as provided in regulation 9(2). The only issues relating
to the REPIA regulations were answered as follows:



4\. Have the premises been divested by REPIA?
Yes  
  
6\. Are the premises subject to the REPIA  regulations?
No, according toP1  
  
11\. In terms of the REPIA regulations could the
Yes  
Plaintiff or her predecessor in title Jane Nona  
acquire any right to the premises?  


The learned trial Judge's answer to issue (6) might have been construed as
meaning that P1 was a declaration under regulation 9(2), that the premises
were not affected property; however, scrutiny of the judgment reveals beyond
any doubt that the real reason for his decision was his view that the property
had been divested by P1. It

**167**

was on that basis that he gave judgment for the Plaintiff; in so doing, he
failed to consider the effect of regulation 12.



On appeal by the substituted Defendant, the Court of Appeal held that every
affected property (including the premises in suit) vested absolutely in the
State; that the premises alienated by Jane Nona on 29.12.83 being affected
property, that alienation was void because of regulation 12; that P1 dated
12.3.84 was a divesting order under regulation 14, and that such divesting did
not revalidate the alienation to the Plaintiff, because regulation 14 only
revived agreements and instruments which were subsisting at the time of
vesting, and not those invalidated by regulation 12. Accordingly, the Court of
Appeal held that the Plaintiff did not acquire title on 29.12.83, or on
12.3.84. The appeal was allowed, and the Plaintiff's action was dismissed with
costs, whereupon the Plaintiff appealed to this Court with special leave.



The substituted Defendant contends that the premises vested in the State; that
they continued to be so vested until divested by P1 on 12.3.84, and that such
divesting did not revalidate the December 1983 alienation. Since it was her
case that Jane Nona had no title to convey to the Plaintiff, because the
premises had vested in the State, in order to succeed she had to discharge the
burden of proving that the premises were affected property. If she failed to
do so, her attack on the Plaintiff's title necessarily failed.



The Plaintiff's case is that the premises were not affected property, and
therefore never vested in the State, P1 not being a divesting order but only a
binding statutory declaration to that effect that the premises were not
affected property; and, alternatively, that the premises were divested by P1,
and that consequently the December 1983 alienation was revived.



There are thus two matters for consideration:



(1)        Did the Court of Appeal err in holding that the premises were
affected property within the meaning of regulation 19, because‑

**168** _ _

            (a) the issues and the evidence led at the trial did not warrant

            such a finding, or



            (b) there was a binding decision, under and in terms of the

            REPIA Regulations, **** to the contrary?    



(2)        If the Court of Appeal was right in concluding that the premises
were affected property (in which event, admittedly, the premises vested in the
State under regulation 9(1), and the December 1983 alienation was void), yet
nevertheless‑



(a) were the premises divested by P1 of 12.3.84, and



(b) did such divesting revalidate or revive the December 1983 alienation?



** "AFFECTED PROPERTY"**



Despite reference in the answer to damage to the premises, the substituted
Defendant framed no issue and led no evidence in regard to such damage.
Learned Counsel seized on an averment in the plaint that she had spent Rs.
22,000/‑ on repairs as being an admission of damage during the riots. However,
that is not a clear and unambiguous admission of damage covered by regulation
19: that averment may well have referred to repairs necessitated by normal
wear and tear. In any event, if that was how Counsel for the substituted
Defendant understood the Plaintiff's pleadings, he should have insisted upon
an admission being formally recorded at the commencement of the trial. I hold
that upon the pleadings, issues and evidence, there was no admission that the
premises were affected property, and a finding of fact to that effect was not
possible.



It is true that the authorisation (D2) under regulation 13(1) could only have
been issued on the basis that the premises were affected property; and, in
fact, the authorisation so stated. However, this did not give it the effect of
a declaration under regulation 9(2). For one thing, it was issued upon a
deliberate and material misrepresentation by the Defendant that he was the
owner at the relevant time: he had

**169**  

no excuse for concealing the tact that he had not been the owner when the
premises became affected property (if indeed they ever did), and that it was
Jane Nona who had been the owner since 6.12.82. More important, the _audi
alteram partem_ rule was applicable: even assuming that the Plaintiff's
possession could have been temporarily disturbed by means of an _ex parte_
order, yet if that authorisation was to be regarded as being also a
declaration under regulation 9(2) it would affect the title of a third party,
and hence it could not have been made without prior notice to that party. The
purported restriction of the right of challenge makes this position even
clearer. Finally, I cannot treat this authorisation under regulation 13 as
being also a declaration under regulation 9(9). Not only is there no express
reference to regulation 9(2), but there is not even an indication of a
conscious intention to exercise the powers vested by that regulation, by
deciding a question which had arisen. The mere statement that "the
aforementioned affected property vests absolutely in the State" does not show
that a serious question was being decided: only that a fact was being assumed.
I therefore hold that D2 was only an authorisation issued under regulation 13
upon an **assumption** resulting from the Defendant's _ex parte_
representations, and was not consequent upon a **decision** made under
regulation 9(2) in respect of a question which arose for consideration.



This conclusion is perfectly consistent with the scheme of the REPIA
regulations. Although an authorisation under regulation 13 affects possession,
an aggrieved person was allowed an opportunity to question such authorisation.
There was evidence that after the authorisation dated 2.3.84 was issued, Jane
Nona submitted an affidavit to REPIA, whereupon P1 was issued to her. Although
P1 made no reference to regulation 9(2), it was clearly referable to that
regulation, and to no other. It is not clear whether the Defendant was heard
before P1 was issued, but no complaint has been made on that score; and
obviously he suffered no prejudice as he himself obtained a similar document
(D3) on 14.9.84. I hold that, by P1 REPIA decided that the premises were not
affected property, and since there was no evidence whatever to the contrary,
the only possible conclusion was that the premises were not affected property.
It is necessary to decide whether that declaration was immune from challenge
in legal proceedings.

**170**  

**DIVESTING**



The Court of Appeal, the learned trial Judge, and learned Counsel for the
substituted Defendant, were clearly in error in regarding P1 and D3 as
divesting orders under regulation 14. They are _ex facie_ **declarations,**
and do not purport to be **orders;** they declare that certain property is not
"affected property", and do not purport to **divest** property; and they have
not been gazetted, which was essential had they been divesting orders. It is
true that issue (4), raised by the Plaintiff, contributed to the confusion, by
suggesting that the premises had been divested, but it was for the substituted
Defendant to establish that the premises had vested in the state, and it was
for her to obtain the necessary admissions, and to suggest the appropriate
issues, upon which the success of her case depended.



I hold that P1 and D3 were not divesting orders. It is therefore unnecessary
to decide whether the effect of divesting was to revalidate an alienation to
which regulation 12 applied.



I allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal, and affirm
the judgment of the District Court, for the reasons I have set out. The
Plaintiff will be entitled to a sum of Rs. 15,000/‑ as costs in this Court and
in the Court of Appeal.



**DHEERARATNE, J.** ‑ I agree.



**PERERA, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/33.html_  

