##  W.D.B.L.M. Fernando v. Ranaweera, Secretary, Ministry of Cultural and
Religious Affairs and Others - SLR - 327, Vol 1 of 2002 [2002] LKSC 33; (2002)
1 Sri LR 327 (24 May 2002)

**327**

**W. D. B. L. M. FERNANDO  
v.  
RANAWEERA, SECRETARY,  
 MINISTRY OF CULTURAL AND RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS  
AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
ISMAIL, J.,  
EDUSSURIYA, J. AND  
YAPA, J.  
SC APPLICATION NO. 46/99  
MARCH 06 AND APRIL 05, 2002  
  
Fundamental Rights - Eligibility of public officer to purchase official
vehicle on retirement - Whether right to purchase such vehicle may be
postponed until the termination of continued service on contract after
retirement - Uberrima fides.  
  
The petitioner was a Senior Superintendent of Police who reached his age of
compulsory retirement on 14. 05.1992. However, in terms of a Cabinet decision,
he assumed duties as a Senior Assistant Secretary (Christian Affairs) in the
Ministry of Cultural and Religious Affairs with effect from 06. 05.1992 eight
days prior to the date of compulsory retirement.  
  
By a further Cabinet decision dated 19. 08. 1998, he was appointed Additional
Secretary in the same Ministry until 31. 12. 1998 on which date that
appointment terminated. At or about the time of such termination, the
petitioner applied to purchase his official car in terms of circular No. 24/93
dated 01. 10.1993 (P6) which permitted an officer to purchase his official
vehicle on retirement. In terms of that circular the application for purchase
had to be made at the time of submitting papers for retirement.  
  
The 1st respondent (Secretary, Ministry of Cultural and Religious Affairs) by
his letter dated 29. 12. 1998 (XI) sought clarification from the 3rd
respondent (The Director of Establishments) whether the petitioner was
eligible to purchase the vehicle. The 3rd respondent by his reply dated 04.
01. 1999 (X2) replied that the petitioner being a person who had been re-
employed after retirement was not eligible to purchase the vehicle in the
absence of Cabinet approval for such purchase. The Ministry by letters dated
04.01.1999 and 06.01.1999 (P8 and P10) required the petitioner to return the
vehicle.

**328**

The petitioner filed an application on 18. 01. 1999 alleging infringement of
his rights under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution and obtained leave to
proceed and interim relief to defer the recall of the vehicle having
suppressed the information contained in (X2) which he was in all probability
aware of.  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1) In terms of Circular P6 that came into operation on 01.10.1993 (after 16
months from the petitioner's retirement on 14. 05.1992) which required an
application for purchase of an official vehicle on retirement, the petitioner
was not eligible to purchase the official vehicle used by him on the
termination of his continued employment on contract.  
  
(2) The petitioner's conduct in particular, in obtaining interim relief showed
lack of uberrima fides. This too disentitled him to redress from court.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
1\. _Blanca Diamonds (Pvt) Limited v. Wilfred Van Els and Two Others (_ 1997)
1 Sri LR360.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Mohan Peiris with Nuwanthi Dias_ for petitioner.  
  
_N. Pulle, State Counsel_ for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 24, 2002  
  
**HECTOR YAPA, J.  
**  
The petitioner in his application has averred that while he was holding  the
post of Senior Superintendent of Police, in terms of a cabinet decision he was
appointed as a Senior Assistant Secretary (Christian Affairs) of the Ministry
of Cultural Affairs with effect from 06. 05. 1992 and that he assumed duties
in that capacity 8 days prior to his reaching the age of 60 years. Thereafter,
by a further cabinet decision dated 19. 08. 1998 he was appointed as
Additional Secretary in the same ministry and he retired from that post on 31.
12. 1998.

**329**

The petitioner claims that he was eligible to purchase his official vehicle
Mazda car bearing No. 15-9892 in terms of the Public  Administration Circular
No. 24/93. The 1st respondent had sought clarification from the 3rd respondent
as to whether the petitioner was in fact qualified to purchase the said
vehicle in terms of the said circular. The petitioner was so informed by a
letter dated 04\. 01. 1999 and had also requested the return of the vehicle
(P8). The petitioner was again requested by the 2nd respondent to return the
vehicle forthwith by letter dated 06. 01. 1999 (P10).  
  
The petitioner fearing that respondents would refuse his application to
purchase the vehicle alleged that there was an imminent infringe­ment of his
fundamental right guaranteed under Article 12 (1) and sought a direction on
the respondents to transfer the ownership of the said vehicle to the
petitioner. In addition he sought interim relief to direct the respondents to
defer the recall of the vehicle until the final determination of this
application. The application was supported on 26. 01. 1999. The petitioner was
granted leave to proceed in respect of the alleged infringement of Article 12
(1) of the Constitution and was granted interim relief as prayed for.  
  
According to the material furnished by the petitioner, he had joined the
Police Department as a probationary Sub Inspector on 20.06.1957. In the year
1992, while the petitioner was holding the post of Senior Superintendent of
Police, he was appointed to the post of Senior Assistant Secretary (Non SLAS)
of the Ministry of Cultural Affairs and Information on 06. 05. 1992. This
appointment was made consequent to a cabinet decision dated 29. 04. 1992 on
the basis of secondment. A copy of the extract of the draft minutes of the
said meeting of the cabinet of ministers held on 29.04.1992, has been marked
P1. The Gazette notification dated 11. 06. 1992 in regard to the said
appoint­ment of the petitioner has been marked P2 and the letter of his

**330**

appointment as Senior Assistant Secretary has been marked F3. As referred to
above, the petitioner has assumed duties in the said post of Senior Assistant
Secretary just eight (8) days prior to the date of retirement, ie 14. 05. 1992
from the Police Department on reaching the age of 60 years. The petitioner
functioned in that capacity until 19. 08. 1998. Thereafter, by a cabinet
decision dated 19. 08. 1998, the petitioner was appointed to the post of
Additional Secretary (Christian Affairs) of the Ministry of Cultural and
Religious Affairs by the sup­pression of the existing post of Senior Assistant
Secretary (Christian Affairs) held by him. This appointment was effective till
the end of December, 1998. The copy of the said cabinet decision has been
marked P4, and the letter of appointment to the post of Additional Secretary
which was on a contract basis has been marked P5. It would appear therefore
that the petitioner's contract of employment as Additional Secretary in the
Ministry of Cultural and Religious Affairs ended on 31\. 12. 1998.  
  
At the hearing of this application learned counsel for the petitioner
submitted that for all practical purposes the petitioner's date of retirement
from the Public Service should be reckoned as from 31. 12. 1998. Counsel
contended that Public Administration Circular No. 24/93 (P6) Part III (1)
provided that an officer who is entitled to an official vehicle, and had been
assigned a vehicle, may on retirement be permitted to purchase the vehicle he
has been using. Further, Part III (3) of the said Circular provided that
officers with continuous, uninterrupted service up to the date of retirement
or on extension after reaching the age of 55 years are eligible to apply.
Hence, counsel submitted that the petitioner was eligible to purchase the
official

**331**

vehicle assigned to him in his capacity as Senior Assistant Secretary and
Additional Secretary (Christian Affairs). It was further submitted that
according to the circular, it was the 1st respondent who was the authority to
whom an application to purchase the vehicle had to be made and once such an
application was made, 1st re­spondent was required to take necessary action in
terms of the circular. Accordingly, the petitioner had submitted to the 1st
respondent an application to purchase the vehicle in question, and the 1st
respondent by his letter dated 16\. 12. 1998 marked P7, had recommended and
forwarded the said application to the 3rd respondent. The 1st respond­ent
after having recommended the petitioner's application, informed the petitioner
by his letter P8 that he had sought clarification from the 3rd respondent, as
to the petitioner's eligibility to purchase the vehicle in terms of the
aforesaid circular and requested him to return the vehicle until the receipt
of a reply from the 3rd respondent. Thereafter, when the petitioner by his
letter dated 04. 01. 1999 marked P9, requested the 1st respondent to expedite
action so that he could purchase the vehicle in terms of the circular, the'
2nd respondent by P10 informed the petitioner that action had been taken
regarding his application and requested the petitioner to return the vehicle
forthwith, since it was State property.  
  
Learned counsel for the petitioner therefore argued that the action on the
part of the respondents to deprive the petitioner of the facility to purchase
the vehicle in question would be unfair, arbitrary, malicious and tantamount
to an imminent infringement of the petitioner's fun­damental right guaranteed
under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.  
  
Learned State Counsel for the respondents on the other hand submitted that the
Public Administration Circular No. 24/93 dated 01. 10\. 1993 (P6) had provided
the criteria with regard to the transfer of ownership of an official vehicle.
According to part III (1) of the circular, it is provided that an officer who
is entitled to an official vehicle and had been assigned a vehicle, may on
retirement be permitted to purchase the vehicle he had been using. State
Counsel contended that according to the circular such an officer who wishes to
purchase

**332**

a vehicle should submit his application on retirement. This position was made
clear by Part III 2 (d) of the circular which provided as follows :  
  
"Application can be made only in respect of the vehicle assigned to the
officer at the time of submitting his papers for retirement."  
  
Learned State Counsel submitted that in the present case, the petitioner had
retired on 14. 05. 1992, and not on 31. 12. 1998, so that he should have
submitted his application to purchase the vehicle in terms of the circular
(P6) at the time of submitting his retirement papers which should have been on
some date close to 14. 05. 1992. Learned counsel further argued that the
petitioner could not have submitted such an application to purchase the
vehicle at that time, since the circular (P6) was not operative then. In fact,
the circular came into operation only on 01. 10. 1993, ie about sixteen months
after the date of the petitioner's retirement.  
  
The submission of learned State Counsel made on the basis that the petitioner
retired on 14. 05. 1992, should be considered in the light of the position
taken up by the counsel for the petitioner that the date of retirement of the
petitioner was 31. 12. 1998. Under normal circumstances the date of retirement
of a public servant is 60 years. In fact, it was admitted in the petition and
in the written submissions of the petitioner that he assumed duties in the
post of Senior Assistant Secretary 8 days prior to the date of retirement from
the Police Department at the age of 60 years. Hence, it is not possible to
accept the submission of the petitioner's counsel that his (petitioner's) date
of retirement from the Public Service should be reckoned as from 31. 12. 1998
and not from 14. 05. 1992. Further, if counsel's contention is accepted, it
would appear that the petitioner had retired after reaching the age of 66
years and seven months. Such a conclusion

**333**

would create an absurd situation in the public service. Besides, it is to be
noted that petitioner's appointment to the post of Additional Secretary
(Christian Affairs) was on a contract basis as seen from his letter of
appointment marked P5. Therefore, the submission of the learned petitioner's
counsel that he (petitioner) retired on 31. 12. 1998 has to be rejected and
the contention of learned State Counsel that the petitioner retired on 14. 05.
1992 should be accepted.  
  
The position that the petitioner had retired at the age of 60 years and
therefore not entitled to the relief he is claiming in this application finds
further support from the letter written by the 3rd respondent to the 1st
respondent. This letter dated 04. 01. 1999 marked X2 had been sent to the 1st
respondent by the 3rd respondent in response to the 2nd respondent's letter of
29\. 12. 1998 marked X1. Both these letters (X1 and X2) had been annexed to
the objections filed by the 2nd respondent to this application. The 3rd
respondent's letter (X2) very clearly stated that the petitioner was not
eligible to purchase the official vehicle in terms of part III of the Public
Administration Circular No. 24/93 (P6). Letter X2, further stated that if the
ministry was of the view that the petitioner who was re-employed after
retirement should be granted the facility to purchase the vehicle the
petitioner had been using in his capacity as Senior Assistant Secretary and
Additional Secretary, it was desirable for the ministry to take action to
obtain cabinet approval. In these circumstances, it would appear that the
petitioner has failed to establish that there has been and  infringement of a
fundamental right.  
  
There is another serious matter that has been observed in this application
namely, that the petitioner had withheld from Court the contents of X2. The
petitioner filed this application on 18. 01. 1999, and it was supported and
leave to proceed obtained on 26. 01\. 1999. On the same date, counsel for the
petitioner had obtained interim relief

**334**

by seeking a direction on the 1st and 2nd respondents to defer the recall of
the vehicle bearing No. 15-9892 until the final hearing and determination of
this application. It would appear therefore, that the petitioner had obtained
leave to proceed and interim relief by suppressing the contents of X2, which
very clearly stated that the petitioner was not eligible to purchase the
vehicle he was using in terms of the circular P6. Under normal circumstances
X2 would have reached the 1st respondent by about 06\. 01. 1999\. The
petitioner who was anxiously waiting for the approval from the 3rd respondent
to purchase the vehicle in question under the circular would have known the
decision conveyed by the 3rd respondent to the 1st respondent by X2. Hence,
the petitioner cannot be heard to say that he had no knowledge of the contents
of X2. Besides, the timing of the petitioner's application to this Court which
was on 18. 01. 1999, suggests that the petitioner had decided to file this
application soon after the 3rd respondent's letter X2, which stated that the
petitioner was not eligible to purchase the vehicle in terms of the circular.
It should be mentioned here that, had the contents of X2 been made known to
the Court, it was very unlikely that the Court would have given the interim
relief that was granted to the petitioner. Therefore, it would appear that the
petitioner had been guilty of suppressing a material fact from Court. In doing
so, the petitioner had misled Court and obtained an interim order which this
Court would not have made, had the contents of X2, been made known to the
Court. Further, it is to be noted that  the petitioner had obtained the said
interim relief from Court in the absence of the respondents. On the other
hand, if the respondents had timely notice of this application, it was very
likely that they would have brought to the notice of Court the contents of X2.  
  
The petitioner by withholding from Court the material contained in X2, clearly
showed a lack of uberrima fides on his part. When a litigant makes an
application to Court seeking relief, he enters into a contractual

**335**

obligation with the Court. This contractual relationship requires the
petitioner to disclose all material facts correctly and frankly. This is a
duty cast on any litigant seeking relief from Court. It was highlighted in the
case of Blanca Diamonds (Pvt) Limited v. Wilfred Van Els and Two
Others,(1)that the contractual obligation which a party enters into with the
Court, requires the need to disclose uberrima fides and disclose all material
facts fully and frankly to Court. Any party who misleads Court, misrepresents
facts to Court or utters a falsehood in Court will not be entitled to obtain
redress from Court. This is a well-established proposition of law, since
Courts expect a party seeking relief to be frank and open with the Court.  
  
In this case, it is very clear that the petitioner is not entitled to purchase
the vehicle he was using in terms of the Public Administration Circular No.
24/93 (P6). Further, the petitioner by suppressing a material fact from Court
had brought about a situation whereby he had continued to use the vehicle in
question although he was not entitled to do so. The vehicle No. 15-9892 is
government property and under normal circumstances, the petitioner as a law-
abiding citizen should have returned the vehicle to the Ministry of Cultural
and Religious Affairs no sooner the 1st respondent requested him to return the
vehicle immediately by P8.  
  
For the aforesaid reasons, the petitioner's application is dismissed with
costs fixed at Rs. 15,000.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. -** I agree.  
  
**EDUSSURIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Application dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/33.html_  

