##  Jayasinghe and Others v. Jothiwardana and Others - SLR - 304, Vol 1 of
2000 [2000] LKSC 34; (2000) 1 Sri LR 304 (1 June 2000)

**304**

**JAYASINGHE AND OTHERS  
 v.  
JOTHIWARDANA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO,  J. WIJETUNGA. J. AND  
GUNASEKARA. J.  
S. C. (S. L. A.) No. 81/99  
C. A. NOS. 496/93 & 497/'93  
D. C. RATNAPURA No. 7175/L.  
26TH OCTOBER, AND  
18TH NOVEMBER, 1999  
  
_Vindicatory action - Purchase of land with notice of an existing agreement
with another person for the sale of that property - Constructive trust -
Section 93 of the Trusts Ordinance.  
_  
One Wadood was the owner of an undivided one sixth share of Razeena Estate
about 60 acres in extent. His share vested in the Land Reform Commission (LRC)
under the Land Reform Law No. 1 of 1972. Wadood desired to transfer a portion
of the land to his three children by way of an inter family transfer under
section 14 of the Law and to own the balance himself. According to a Plan No.
211 made in 1976 and amended in 1981 the extent which he wished to own
eventually on a statutory determination under the Law was four acres whilst
the extent which he proposed to transfer to his children was seven acres. The
statutory determination of the four acres was made only in 1982 leaving out
seven acres which the LRC allowed Wadood to transfer to his three children by
way of an inter family transfer.  
  
Pending the statutory determination by the LRC and the inter family transfer,
Wadood and his children executed an agreement No. 19880 in 1976 to sell a
defined eleven acre portion of Razeena Estate indicated in Plan No. 211 for
the sum of Rs. 30,000/-. That agreement was duly registered. The full
consideration was paid and the defendants were placed in possession. The
agreement recited that the LRC had not made its determination indicating that
Wadood and his children had no title to the corpus but that they were
expecting to obtain title from the LRC. The agreement also provided that if
within a month after Wadood and his children obtaining full title and powers
of alienation, they failed to execute deeds of transfer of the property or if
the said parties failed

**305**

to receive rights and powers from the LRC in respect of the said property,
then they shall pay the defendants Rs. 30,000/- and a further sum of Rs.
10,000/- as penalty.  
  
After they received necessary title and powers in virtue of the statutory
determination and the. permission to make the inter family transfer, Wadood
and his children by Deed No. 7289 dated 25.4.1985 sold the property in dispute
to the plaintiffs for a sum of Rs. 75.000/-.Thereafter, the plaintiffs
instituted an action against the defendants for a declaration of title to the
land and ejectment and possession.  
  
**Held:**  
  
(1) The Court of Appeal had upheld the defendants' plea that agreement No.
19880 was an existing contract of which specific performance could have been
enforced, and that therefore the plaintiffs held the land in trust for the
defendants in terms of section 93 of the Trust Ordinance; and no substantial
question of law arose in respect of that conclusion.  
  
(2) Per Fernando, J.  
  
................ it cannot be said that the obligation to repay the
consideration, together with a penalty of Rs. 10,000/-. was a stipulation for
the benefit of the vendors - to allow them an alternative to specific
performance. On the contrary, it was intended to provide relief to the
purchasers in the event that the LRC refused to release the land; and to give
them the right to elect if the vendors defaulted in executing conveyances."  
  
**Case referred to:**  
  
1\. De Silva v. Senaratne (1949) 50 NLR 313.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_Ms. Maureen Seneviratne, P. C. with Eardley Seneviratne, J. B. L. Peiris
and Gamini Senanayake _for the plaintiffs - respondents - petitioners.  
  
_L. C. Seneviratne, P. C. with S. Mahenthiran_ for the defendants - appellants
- respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**306**

June 01, 2000  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
The land which is the subject-matter of this action was transferred to the
five Plaintiffs-Respondents-Petitioners ("Plaintiffs") by Deed No. 7289 dated
25.4.85. It is admitted that the Plaintiffs then had actual (and not merely
constructive) knowledge that their vendors had previously entered into a duly
registered Agreement No. 19880 dated 2.6.76 to sell the same land to the three
Defendants-Appellants-Respondents ("Defendants"). On 10.7.85 the Plaintiffs
instituted this action for a declaration of title to that land, and for
ejectment, possession, and damages. Although they succeeded in the District
Court, that judgment was set aside by the Court of Appeal, which upheld the
Defendants plea that Agreement No. 19880 was an existing contract of which
specific performance could have been enforced, and that therefore the
Plaintiffs held the land in trust for the Defendants in terms of section 93 of
the Trusts Ordinance.  
  
What we have now to decide in this application is whether a substantial
question of law arises as to the correctness of the conclusion of the Court of
Appeal that Agreement No. 19880 was indeed one of which specific performance
could have been enforced. This application was supported last year, and the
delay in the preparation of this judgment was because Counsel desired time
till March this year to file written submissions.  
  
The facts are not in dispute. One Wadood was the owner of an undivided one-
sixth share of Razeena (or Assina) Estate about 60 acres in extent. His share
vested in the Land Reform Commission ("LRC") under the Land Reform Law, No. 1
of 1972.  
  
Wadood applied. for permission to make transfers to his three children under
section 14 of the Law. By letter dated 13.9.74 the LRC informed Wadood that
his application for transfers within the family in respect of eight acres had

**307**

been approved. That was subject to numerous conditions. (Although the Law
refers to such transfers as inter-family transfers, they are in fact intro-
family transfers. However, Wadood did not fulfil the stipulated conditions,
and execute such transfers, at that time.)  
  
Plan No. 211 dated 7.3.76 was made by D. W. Ranatunga, Licensed Surveyor, in
respect of an eleven-acre block of Razeena Estate. Lot 1 was three acres in
extent, and was described as "Statutory Determination", while Lot 2 was eight
acres in extent, and was described as "I. F. T: area".  
  
It was thereafter that Wadood and his three children ("the vendors") entered
into Agreement No. 19880 dated 2.6.76 to sell a defined eleven-acre portion of
Razeena Estate (namely, Lots 1 and 2 in Plan No. 211 dated 7.3.76) to the
three Defendants for a sum of Rs. 30,000/-; that Agreement was duly
registered; the full consideration was paid; the Defendants were placed in
possession; and, in terms of the Agreement, the Defendants took over the
entire labour force as their employees, and took responsibility for the
payment of wages and EPF benefits.  
  
That Agreement recited that althought the LRC had in its final determination
recommended divesting that land (and other lands elsewhere) to the parties of
the first part ("the vendors"), the statutory Gazette notification had not yet
been published. Thus it was quite clear that the vendors had then no title to
the corpus, and were expecting to obtain title from the LRC - but the
Agreement did not specify how: whether by means of a Statutory Determination
under section 19 of the Law, or intro-family transfers under section 14, or
otherwise.  
  
That Agreement is in Sinhala, and clauses 7 and 8 may be translated as
follows:  
  
"7\. Further, if the parties of the first part did not, within one full month
after receiving from the aforesaid LRC full title

**308**

and powers of alienation, cause to be executed in favour of the parties of the
second part transfer deeds of the said property at the agreed price, or
defaulted in so doing, or  
  
if the parties of the first part fail to receive from the LRC the rights and
powers which ought to be received in respect of the said property,  
  
then there shall be paid by the four persons bound as parties of the first
part to the persons bound as parties of the second part jointly and severally
the sum of Rs. 30,000 paid by the parties of the second part together with a
further sum of Rs. 10,000 as penalty, and the income derived from the said
property during the said period shall be renounced in favour of the parties of
the second part, and  
  
further the parties of the first part shall not sell, mortgage, etc, to any
outsider the property subject to this agreement to sell, or do any other act
which will diminish the value of the said property.  
  
8\. Further, that all expenses of the deed of transfer to be executed during
the said period, after the receipt from the LRC by the parties of the first
part as aforesaid of approval and rights in respect of the said land, shall be
borne by the parties of the second part.  
  
I must observe that the vendors obligation to transfer arose only after they
acquired "full title and powers of alienation".  
  
Nothing happened for over five years. There was neither a Statutory
Determination nor an intra-family transfer. On 9.9.81 Plan No. 211 was
amended, by another surveyor, and the same eleven-acre corpus was sub-divided
into Lot IA, four acres in extent (consisting of Lot 1 and a portion of Lot
2), and Lot 2A seven acres in extent (being the remaining portion of Lot 2).
Lots IA and 2A were described as "Statutory determination" and I. F. T. area",
respectively.

**309**

Thereafter Wadood obtained title to a four-acre extent of "Assina" Estate,
described as Lots 1106 and 1108 in the Surveyor-General's FVP Plan No 39, by
virtue of the Statutory Determination dated 23.6.82 made under section 19
published in the Gazette of 23.6.82. Both Counsel have proceeded on the basis
that this corresponded to Lot 1A in Plan No 21 1.

**ERRATA**

1\. (2000) 1 Sri L. R., Part 5, Page 128, line 8, substitute for the words and
figures "SC APPLICATION NO. 188/97", the following :  
  
"SC APPEAL NO. 188/97"  
  
2\. (2000) 1 Sri L. R., Part 8, Page 209, line 1, substitute for the word
"officer" the following words :  
  
"officer. The learned D. S. G. stated"  
  
to transfer to his three children an undivided one-sixth share of Razeena
Estate, sixty acres in extent. That transfer was not described as an intra-
family transfer, and Wadood made no claim to a right to transfer by virtue of
section 14 of the Law or any authority from the LRC. The corpus was not
described as Lot 2A in Plan No 211. Accordingly, the transferees acquired no
title to Lot 2A.  
  
Although the relevant document was not produced, it is not disputed that in
1983 the LRC had granted approval for intra-family transfers in respect of Lot
2A.  
  
That did not validate Deed No 7139. Wadood then executed a Deed of Declaration
No 1284 dated 26.9.84, which recited that by letter dated 20.7.83 the LRC had
granted

**310**

permission to transfer Lot 2A, by way of gift, to his children. By that Deed
Wadood declared that the undivided one-sixth share of Razeena Estate gifted by
Deed No 7139 was "presently described as a divided portion as fully described
in the second schedule" (i. e. Lot 2A), and that the "covenants and conditions
in the said Deed of Gift No 7139 contained shall be applicable in respect of
[Lot 2A]". Deed No 1284, read with Deed No 7139, amounts in my view to an
intra-family transfer by Wadood to his three children.  
  
Thus it was only on 26.9.84 that the vendors had ''full title and powers of
alienation", and were entitled to execute conveyances of the entirety of the
eleven acres covered by Agreement No 19880.  
  
There is no evidence that the vendors either informed the Defendants that they
had obtained title to the entire corpus or called upon them to tender draft
conveyances.  
  
By Deed No 7289 dated 25.4.85, the vendors sold the corpus to the Plaintiffs
for a sum of Rs. 75,000/-. The Plaintiffs then instituted this action on 10.
7.85. The Defendants pleaded that the Plaintiffs had purchased the corpus with
notice of an existing contract of which specific performance could have been
enforced, and that therefore the Plaintiffs held the corpus in trust for the
Defendants in terms of section 93 of the Trusts Ordinance.  
  
I must digress at this stage to mention a matter which first arose only during
the hearing. Although eleven acres had vested in the LRC, our attention was
drawn only to the Statutory Determination which divested four acres. Further,
the 1974 approval for intra-family transfers appeared to have lapsed. Was
title to the remaining seven acres still vested in the LRC? If that was the
position, two questions arose which I put to Counsel. First, the vendors had
not acquired full title and powers of alienation", and therefore the time for
transfer in terms of Agreement No 19880 had not yet arrived, and the

**311**

period of one month specified in clause 7 had not expired, when Deed No 7289
was executed. Second, in any event, Deed No 7289 could not have transferred
title in respect of the seven-acre Lot 2A.  
  
However, it is now clear, upon a scrutiny of Deeds Nos 7139 and 1284, that the
LRC did approve an intra-family transfer in 1983; and that Deed No 1284 was an
intra-family transfer. '  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the Plaintiffs has dealt extensively in her
written submissions with the question of title to the seven acres, maintaining
that only four acres had been divested by the LRC; that the Plaintiffs now
confine their claim to a declaration of title only to those four acres; and
that the balance seven acres remain vested in the LRC. These submissions are
mistaken. Either they assume that approval for an intra-family transfer is not
enough, and must be followed up by a divesting of the land, or they fail to
take note of the fact that Deed No 1284 (read with Deed No 7139) amounts to a
valid intra-family transfer.)  
  
Learned President's Counsel's contentions during the oral hearing were that
special leave to appeal should be granted because (a) Agreement No 19880
provided for an alternative or substituted obligation in the event of default
in performance, and thereby excluded specific performance; and (b) clauses 7
and 8 cast obligations on the Defendants to tender draft conveyances, etc,
within one month after the vendors obtained title, which the Defendants had
failed to do, and accordingly, in any event, they were no longer entitled to
specific performance of the Agreement.  
  
I entirely agree with the judgment of the Court of Appeal that Agreement No
19880 does not provide for an alternative or substituted obligation. The
purchasers had done everything they possibly could: nothing more remained to
be done by

**312**

them except to tender the draft conveyances when the vendors had acquired full
title. In regard to the vendors, however, there was a total and absolute
prohibition on alienating the property, and that was not restricted to the
period of one month after acquiring full title. Taken in the context of the
entire clause 7 (and the whole Agreement) it cannot be said that the
obligation to repay the consideration, together with a penalty of Rs. 10,000,
was a stipulation for the benefit of the vendors - to allow them an
alternative to specific performance. On the contrary, it was intended to
provide relief for the purchasers in the event that the LRC refused to release
the land; and to give the purchasers the right to elect if the vendors
defaulted in executing conveyances. De Silva v. Senaratne(1) is on all fours.  
  
As for the second contention, clearly Agreement No 19880 made it the
purchasers' responsibility to tender draft conveyances. However, they could do
so only after they became aware that the vendors had acquired full title. In
that context, was it the vendors' duty to inform the purchasers when they had
acquired full title or did the purchasers have to find that out for
themselves?  
  
Agreement No 19880 is silent on that matter. The fact that they had acquired
full title was a matter especially within the knowledge of the vendors.
Indeed, it, would be fair to say that it was exclusively within their
knowledge, because there was no way in which the purchasers could be certain
of finding that out within a month. The grant of approval for an intra-family
transfer was a matter between the LRC and the vendors; and even when the
vendors executed the conveyances the purchasers would not know. It is true
that the purchasers could search the Land Registry at frequent intervals, but
even monthly searches would not have ensured discovery within one month, as
there was no obligation to submit the conveyances for registration, within one
month or otherwise. It was suggested that the purchasers might have filed a

**313**

caveat - but although that might have delayed or prevented a transfer, that
would nevertheless not have ensured them timely information as to the
acquisition of title by the vendors.  
  
I hold that it was an implied term of the Agreement that the vendors should
notify the purchasers when they had acquired full title, and that the period
of one month must be reckoned only from the date of such notice.  
  
In accordance with the usual principles governing the burden of proof, the
burden was not on the Defendants to prove that the vendors had not informed
them; if the Plaintiffs desired to prove that the vendors had given notice to
the Defendants, the burden of proving that was on the Plaintiffs. That they
have failed to do.  
  
On none of the above questions is there any doubt or difficulty. Special leave
to appeal is therefore refused without costs.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J**. - I agree.  
  
_Special leave to appeal refused._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/34.html_  

