##  Faiz v. Attorney General and Others - SLR - 372, Vol 1 of 1995 [1991] LKSC
34; (1995) 1 Sri LR 372 (27 April 1991)

**372**

**FAIZ** **  
v.** **  
ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
GOONEWARDENA, J. AND  
PERERA, J.  
SC APPLICATION NO. 89/91  
AUGUST 23,24 AND SEPTEMBER 06, 1993.

_Fundamental Rights - Refusal to release persons arrested for illicit felling
of timber - Executive and administrative action - Instigation or participation
of persons not agents of the executive or administration- illegal arrest and
unlawful detention -Cruel and degrading treatment - Deprivation of equal
protection of the law - Failure to record complaint-Section 109 (1) to (5) of
Criminal Procedure Code-Articles 11, 12, 13(1) and (2) of the Constitution._

On 26 April 1991 about 9.30 a.m. the petitioner along with 4 game guards had
arrested several persons who had been detected illicitly felling timber in the
Minneriya Giritale Native Reserve and taken into custody, a hand tractor and
some carts loaded with logged timber and was bringing them along when the 6th
respondent C. S. Sooriyaratchi, a Member of Parliament for the Polonnaruwa
District came travelling in a jeep and intercepted the petitioner at a place
called Deke Ela and wanted the men released. The petitioner said he was only
doing his duty and suggested that the 6th respondent speak to the Assistant
Director. The 6th respondent left the place in a huff. In the jeep the
petitioner identified the 7th respondent Keerthiratne who was a Provincial
Councillor of the North Central Provincial Council and several others. The
petitioner proceeded a little further and when he was approaching the water
tank at Deke Ela, he saw the same jeep halted at a distance and several
persons standing on the road, When the hand tractor which was at the vanguard
of the procession reached this spot the persons standing near the 6th
respondent's jeep, surrounded the tractor and stopped it. The petitioner had
his official knife issued to him by his Department tucked in his belt and an
iron rod for his protection. The 6th respondent grabbed the iron rod and hit
the petitioner with it several times. The petitioner suffered incised injuries
in the region of his left eyebrow and on the left shoulder. The 7th respondent
also attacked him joined by the other persons in the crowd. The 6th respondent
then ordered the suspects whom petitioner had arrested to take the hand
tractor and carts and escape. Some of the suspects were being brought by the
petitioner in his jeep and they escaped. The game guard who had been entrusted
with the hand tractor brought the tractor with its load of timber to the
office of the

Assistant Director. In the meantime the petitioner too reached the office of
the Assistant Director who however was not in the office. The petitioner
instructed a game guard to keep the tractor with its timber load at the office
of the Assistant Director and to inform the Assistant Director of the incident
when he returned. The petitioner proceeded to the Polonnaruwa Police Station
with the rest of his staff. Still bleeding from his injuries he arrived at the
Police Station and saw the 6th and 7th respondents and several others already
there. The petitioner wanted his statement recorded but the Police Officer on
duty said this would be done after the 6th respondent's statement was
recorded. About 6.30 p.m. the 3rd respondent (Police Constable 18000) directed
the petitioner to sit inside the charge room and not to leave. At this point
of time the 3rd respondent arrested him giving no reasons or the charge.
Thereafter the 5th respondent H. G. P. Nelson also an MP for Polonnaruwa
District and a State Minister came to the Police Station and along with the
6th and 7th respondents entered the charge room where the petitioner was
seated. The 5th respondent using the iron rod which the 6th respondent had
taken from the petitioner, assaulted the petitioner with it while the 6th and
7th respondents and the 6th respondent's brother assaulted the petitioner
using their hands and feet. The petitioner began to bleed afresh from the
injuries on the left eyebrow and shoulder. The 3rd and 4th respondents
(Reserve Police Constable 16640) were present and did not intervene.

Thereafter the 5th, 6th and 7th respondents with the brother of the 6th
respondent entered the office room of the 2nd respondent A. C. Jayasekera HQI
Polonnaruwa. Within a few minutes the 5th and 6th respondents came back to the
charge room and directed the 4th respondent to remove the belt and knife of
the petitioner and the 4th respondent complied. The 4th respondent produced
the petitioner before the 2nd respondent. Several others were present in the
room. The 5th respondent asked the petitioner whether he was drunk. The
petitioner said he did not consume liquor as he was a Muslim. The 5th, 6th and
7th respondents and their companions left the Police Station. The petitioner
wanted his complaint recorded but was told it would be recorded later. About
8.30 p.m. the petitioner was taken to the medical officer at Welikanda
Hospital. He was examined by the Doctor, and brought back to the. Polonnaruwa
Police Station about 10.30 p.m. The Doctor, noted the injuries and did not
find him smelling of liquor. The petitioner requested the 2nd respondent to
record his statement. The 2nd respondent replied he was leaving station and
would record the statement on his return. The petitioner spent the night of
the 26th April at the Police Station. On, the next day 27th, April his
statement was recorded with reference to 6th respondent's complaint but it was
backdated to 26th April. On the evening of 27.04.91 the petitioner was
produced by Polonnaruwa Police before the Acting, Magistrate with an
application for remand for two weeks but the Magistrate remanded him till 3
May 1991. He spent the night of 27,April 1991 in the Polonnaruwa lockup. Up to
this he received no treatment for his injuries. On 29 April 1991 on an
application by the Assistant Director of Wild Life the petitioner was bailed
out to appear in Polonnaruwa Courts on 03 May 1991. After he was released he
made a detailed complaint on 30.04.1991 at the Police Headquarters relating to
the incident of the assault on him.

374

On 17, May, 1991 he filed plaints against the suspects he had taken into
custody on 26.04.1994 under the provisions of the Fauna and Flora Ordinance
and all the accused pleaded guilty to the charges in the Magistrate's Court of
Polonnaruwa.

The 6th respondent complained that when he asked the petitioner to release the
men as they had only collected firewood, the petitioner had attempted to
strike him with the iron rod and later tried to stab him when the crowd
wrenched iron rod. A melee ensued. The petitioner was drunk and fell in the
melee and the injuries were attributable to the fall.

The Court however accepted the petitioner's version.

**Held:**

(Goonewardene J. dissenting on the question of detention under Article 13(2)
of the Constitution)

(1) Section 109 of the Criminal Procedure Code makes it mandatory for a police
officer to record any information relating to the commission of an offence in
the Information Book. Subsection 4 of this section requires a police officer
who receives such information, if he is not the officer-in-charge of the
police station to forthwith report such facts to the officer-in-charge of the
station. Further in terms of section 109(5) if from the information received
the officer-in-charge of the police station has reason to believe the
commission of a cognizable offence he is required forthwith to send a report
to the Magistrate's Court having jurisdiction and to proceed in person or to
delegate one of his subordinate officers to proceed to the spot to investigate
the facts and circumstances of the case and to take such measures as would be
necessary for the discovery and arrest of the offenders.

The second respondent admits that he arrived at the police station by 6.15
p.m. that is within a few minutes of the arrival of the 6th respondent and the
petitioner at the police station that day. If the 2nd respondent had on his
arrival complied with the imperative provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code
set out above it would have been very clear to him that the arrest and
detention of the petitioner was absolutely unwarranted.

(2) The arrest and the subsequent detention of the petitioner from 26.04.91 to
27.04.91 by the 2nd and 3rd respondents were unwarranted in law and are
violative of Articles 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution by executive or
administrative action.

(3) Having regard to all the pleadings filed in this case the 3rd and 4th
respondents by their strange and inexplicable inaction permitted the 5th, 6th
and 7th respondents to subject the petitioner who was at that stage in the
custody of the police to cruel and degrading treatment and thereby infringed
the Fundamental Right of the petitioner guaranteed by Article 11 of the
Constitution by executive or administrative action.

375

(4) There is substance in the complaint of the petitioner that on the day in
question he was deprived of the equal protection of the law by executive or
administrative action; No meaningful action whatsoever was taken against the
5th, 6th and 7th respondents who had committed such a serious offence inside
the police station itself up to date. The petitioner has established beyond
doubt that his Fundamental Right guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the
Constitution has been infringed by the 2nd and 3rd respondents by executive or
administrative action.

(5) It is true that a denial of equal protection has hitherto been largely
confined to affirmative acts of discrimination. The denial of equal protection
has now been recognized by the United States Supreme Court as well. It is
clear that Article 126(4) gives this Court very wide powers in this regard.
The responsibility under Article 126 would extend to any respondent who has no
executive status but is proved to be guilty of impropriety, connivance or any
such similar conduct with the executive in wrongful acts violative of
fundamental rights.

(6) In the present case the 5th, 6th and 7th respondents were guilty of
impropriety or connivance with the executive in wrongful acts or omissions
violative of the petitioner's Fundamental Rights under Articles 11, 12(1) and
13(2) of the Constitution.

(7) Petitioner's fundamental rights under Article 11 have been violated by the
5th- 7th respondents. Although not per se executive or administrative action;
that violation was made possible by executive or administrative action by the
3rd and 4th respondents. Therefore, the violation was by "executive or
administrative` action" within the meaning of Article 126 and the 3rd to 7th
respondents are responsible.

(8) Petitioner's fundamental rights under Article 13(1) and (2) have been
violated by the 3rd respondent by executive or administrative action. The 3rd
respondent also violated the petitioner's fundamental rights under Article
12(1), by denying him equal, treatment, vis a-vis the 5th to 7th respondents
and their associates who were neither arrested nor detained

(9) The 2nd respondent failed to release the petitioner and there by
deliberately acquiesced in and condoned the arrest and detention of the
petitioner in violation of Articles 12(1), 13(1) and 13(2) he is also
responsible for the violation.

(10) The violation was induced or instigated by the 5th to 7th respondents who
are therefore also responsible for the violation.

376

**Per Fernando, J: Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â
Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â**

1\. It is not possible to treat the assault as being a transaction entirely
distinct and separate from the arrest and detention; it was inextricably
linked to the previous and subsequent events. There is no doubt that
immediately after the assault, the 2nd to 4th respondents acted in a manner
plainly partial to the 5th to 7th respondents, and inexcusably hostile to the
petitioner.

2\. The acts of the 5th to 7th respondents considered in isolation cannot
considered to be "executive or administrative action"; the question is whether
the nexus between those acts, and the acts and omissions of the 2nd to 4th
respondents was sufficient to alter what would otherwise have been purely
private action into "executive or administrative action.". That phrase does
not seek to draw a distinction between the acts of "high" officials (as being
"executive"), and other officials (as being "administrative"). "Executive" is
appropriate in a Constitution, and sufficient, to include the (official) acts
of all public officers, high and low, and to exclude acts which are plainly
legislative or judicial (and of course purely private acts not done under
colour of office). The need for including "administrative" is because there
are residual acts which do not fit neatly into this three-fold
classification."

3\. "Article 126 speaks of an infringement by executive or administrative
action: it does not impose a further requirement that such action must be by
an executive officer. It follows that the act of a private individual would
render him liable, if in the circumstances that act is "executive or
administrative". The act of a private individual would be executive if such
act is done with the authority of the executive; such authority, transforms an
otherwise purely private act into executive or administrative action;
authority may be express, or implied from prior or concurrent acts manifesting
approval, instigation, connivance, acquiescence, participation, and the like
(including inaction in circumstances where there is a duty to act); and from
subsequent acts which manifest ratification or adoption. While fuse concepts
and terminology of the law relating to agency, and vicarious liability in
delict, in my view responsibility under Article 126 would extend to all
situations in which the nexus between the individual and the executive makes
it equitable to attribute such responsibility. The executive, and the
executive officers from whom such authority flows would all be responsible for
the infringement. Conversely, when an infringement by an executive officer, by
executive or administrative action, is directly and effectively the
consequence of the act of a private individual (whether by reason of
instigation, connivance, participation or otherwise) such individual is also
responsible for the executive or administrative action and the infringement
caused thereby. In any event this court would have power under Article 126(4)
to make orders and directions against such an individual in order to afford
relief to the victim."

377

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Ramupillai v. Perera (1991) 1 Sri LR 11,. 74 - 75._  
_2\. Jayathevan v. A.G. S.C. application 192/91- S.C.M. of 17.09.92._  
_3\. R v. Liyanage (1962) 64 NLR 313._  
_4\. Alwis v. Raymond S.C. Application No. 145/87 S.C. Mns. of 21.07.89._  
_5\. Shaul Hameed v. Ranasinghe (1990) 1 Sri LR 104._  
_6\. Wimalaguna v. Widanegama S.C. Application No. 11/90 -S.C. Mns. of
5.2.1991._  
_7\. Somawathie v. Weerasinghe (1990) 2 Sri LR 121, 128 -129._  
_8\. Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation
(1948) 1 KB 223, 229._  
_9\. Christy v. Leachinsky (1947) AC 573, 588._  
_10\. Dumbell v. Roberts (1944) 1 All ER 326, 329._  
_11\. Muthusamy v. Kannangara (1951) 52 NLR 324, 330._  
_12\. Burton v. Wilmington Parking Authority et al (1961) 345 US 715._  
_13\. Lynch v. USA 189 F 2nd 476 (5th CIR 1951)_

**APPLICATION** for violation of Fundamental Rights under Articles 11, 12,
13(1) and (2) of the Constitution.

_R. K. W. Goonasekera with Lalanath de Silva and J. Gunawardena for the
petitioner._  
  
_Upawansa Yapa, P.C. Additional Solicitor General for the 1-4 Respondents._  
  
_L. C. Seneviratne, P.C. with Ronald Perera for the 5 and 6 Respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 19, 1993.  
**FERNANDO, J.**

I entirely agree with the findings and order of my brother Perera, J., whose
judgment I have had the advantage of reading. In view of the importance of'
the questions of-law-involved I wish to set down my reasons in some' detail.

We are faced with two contradictor versions. The petitioner's version is that
after he had done h s duty by arresting persons engaged in illicit felling,
the 6th respondent attempted to intimidate him into releasing them; when he
refused, quite properly the 6th and 7th respondents returned, with
reinforcements and again sought the release of the suspects; when the
petitioner refused even to wait till the 5th respondent arrived, the 6th
respondent assaulted him With 6th iron rod. The 5th and 6th respondents
version (the 7th respondent

378

did not file any objections or affidavit) is that the petitioner unjustly
arrested innocent villagers engaged in gathering firewood; when they
intervened, the petitioner attempted to assault and stab the 6th respondent,
who, however, sustained no injuries. The respondents do not deny that when the
6th respondent first confronted the petitioner, there was timber and not
firewood in the tractor and the carts; there is no suggestion that the tractor
carts and timber had not been seized from the suspects, or that the timber had
been substituted for the firewood which they had collected there is no
affidavit from any of the suspects to that effect. What is more, the suspects
subsequently pleaded guilty to charges of illicit felling of trees and escape
from lawful custody. This tends to support, the petitioner's version, that the
6th respondent angry, that the petitioner had resisted his improper efforts to
secure the release of the suspects, resorted to violence. On the other hand,
had there been firewood, instead of timber, in the tractor and carts, I could
readily have accepted the respondents version that the petitioner resentful at
being found out attempted to use force to dissuade the 6th respondent.
Further, the 6th respondent gives inconsistent explanations for the
petitioner's injuries. In his affidavit he suggests that these may have been
the result of an altercation, near the office of the Assistant Director,
between the petitioner and some of the persons in the crowd, but in his
statement to the Police he had previously suggested that the injuries might
have been sustained when the petitioner fell, due to intoxication. Again, the
5th and 6th respondents deny that the petitioner was assaulted at the police
station, indeed, their affidavits make no mention of any incident whatsoever,
but the 2nd and 3rd respondents substantially confirm the petitioner's
version. They suggest that the 5th respondent came to the police station
**before** their complaints were recorded, but the 3rd and 4th respondents
confirm that the 5th respondent came and with a crowd **while** the 6th
respondent's complaint was being recorded. While the 5th and 6th respondents
try to make out that, immediately after their complaints had been recorded,
they left the police station, the 2nd respondent corroborates the petitioner's
statement that the 5th, 6th and 7th respondents went into the 2nd respondent's
room, and that later he too was taken there. I have therefore no hesitation in
holding that the petitioner's version is more probable than that of the 5th
and 6th respondents.

379

It is clear that the 5th to 7th respondents assaulted the petit and thereby
subjected him to inhuman and degrading treatment in violation of Article 11;
this was done openly; in the presence of the 3rd and 4th respondents. Even if
I were to accept their version that the petitioner was not in Police custody
and had not been subjected to any restraint upon his freedom to leave the
Police station, he Petitioner was lawfully in the Police station for a purpose
connected with the discharge of his public duties; these respondents owed him
a duty of care greater than that owed to members of the public in general in
other circumstances. That duty became even more onerous after they permitted
the 5th respondent and an obviously unfriendly crowd (which had no legitimate
business to transact at the police station) to come inside. In view of the
mood of the 5th - 7th respondents and the crowd, I cannot accept their version
that the assault was quite unexpected.

Surprisingly, the 3rd and 4th respondents did not arrest the 5th to 7th
respondents or any of the other assailants (using the "minimum force" which
the law permits); nor did the 2nd respondent when he came to the Police
station shortly thereafter. This unprovoked assault was a blatant violation of
the law committed within the precincts of the police station itself, and
witnessed by Police officers, who took no action. However, according to the
2nd to 4th respondents; immediately after this cowardly assault by a crowd
upon a lone individual, the petitioner (who was bleeding because his old
wounds had reopened) was arrested allegedly upon a charge of attempting to
cause hurt, without requesting any statement or explanation from him. By
depriving the petitioner of his liberty for far less serious reasons, arising
from an incident provoked by the improper intervention by the 6th and 7th
respondents, while permitting the 5th to 7th respondents and their associates
to go free despite clear evidence the 3rd and 4th respondents denied the
petitioner the equal protection of the law. The 2nd respondent, by failing to
order the release of the petitioner, acquiesced in and condoned this arrest
and detention, in denial of equal protection. Detention was unnecessarily
prolonged no attempt was made to contact the petitioner's superiors, or to
offer to release him on bail; thus the 3rd respondent arrested and detained
the petitioner in violation of Article 13(1) and (2), and the 2nd respondent
acquiesced in and condoned

380

these violations; in the circumstances, all this was also in violation of
Article 12(1).

Two important questions arise in this case; whether under Article 126 the 3rd
and 4th respondents had such responsibility for the assault as to make them
and/or the 5th to 7th respondents liable in these proceedings, and whether the
5th to 7th respondents had such responsibility for the arrest and detention of
the petitioner as to make them liable in addition to the 2nd and 3rd
respondents.

It is necessary first to ascertain the precise relationship between these two
groups of respondents in regard to the assault, arrest and detention of the
petitioner. It is of possible to treat the assault as being a transaction
entirely distinct and separate from the arrest and detention; it was
inextricably linked to the previous and subsequent events. There is no doubt
that immediately after the assault, the 2nd to 4th Respondents acted in a
manner plainly partial to the 5th to 7th Respondents, and inexcusably hostile
to the petitioner. That this attitude suddenly came into existence, on the
spur of the moment, as it were, immediately after the assault; is only a
theoretical possibility; an unprovoked assault by a crowd on a single
individual would normally evoke feelings of sympathy for and hot of hostility
to the victim and the Police officers would hot react, differently The
decision to arrest and detain the petitioner without taking com parable action
in respect of far more serious offence, is therefore referable to a state of
mind which must necessarily have existed even before the assault. There was
partiality going far beyond the courtesy, respect and deference a public
officer may legitimately show to persons holding political office. Further,
while it is possible that the 2nd to 4th respondents might have been motivated
by a desire to curry favour with the 5th to 7th respondents because of their
political offices and influence, the evidence here does suggest that any such
partiality was self-induced. The 5th to 7th respondents came to the police
station in order to induce action unfavorable o the petitioner the 6th and 7th
responds dents undoubtedly knew that their supporters had been arrested for
illegally felling trees, and hot for gathering firewood, because they would
have seen the cats loaded with timber they knew they were not intervening on
behalf of innocent suspects being unlawfully harassed. Even if the 5th
respondent did not have such

381

knowledge, it was his duty to have made some attempt to verify the facts and
in any event he had no justification for bringing a crowd of followers into
the police station In these circumstances it is a reasonable inference that
the 5th to 7th respondents came to the Police station in order to influence
the Police and the denial of equal treatment to the petitioner shows that they
succeeded. is it likely that the 5th to 7th respondents would have dared, to
attack a public officer, at the Polonnaruwa Police Station with several other
officers close at hand, with ready access to weapons of various kinds unless
they had reason to believe that the Police would be approvingly acquiescent? I
therefore have no hesitation in concluding that the 2nd to 4th Respondents
acted under the influence of the 5th to 7th respondents throughout the
transaction - the assault, arrest and detention of the petitioner.

Does that mean that these two questions should be answered in the affirmative?
This requires an analysis of the scope of the phrase "executive or
administrative action" in Article 126. The acts of the 5th to 7th respondents
considered in isolation cannot be considered to be "executive or
administrative action"; the question is whether the nexus between those acts,
and the acts and omissions of the 2nd to 4th respondents was sufficient to
after what would otherwise have been purely private action into "executive or
administrative action". That phrase does not seek to draw a distinction
between the acts of "high" officials (as being "executive"), and other
officials (as being "administrative"). "Executive" is appropriate in a
Constitution, and sufficient, to include the (official) acts of all public
officers, high and low, and to exclude acts which are plainly legislative or
judicial (and of course purely private acts not done under colour of office).
The need for including "administrative" is because there are residual acts
which do not fit neatly into this three-fold classification. Thus it may be
uncertain whether delegated legislation is "legislative" and therefore outside
the scope of Article 126, however, delegated legislation is appropriately
termed administrative, although it has both legislative and executive features
(cf _Ramupillai v. Perera_ (1), and Jayathevan v. AG (2).) Thus
"administrative" is intended to enlarge the category of acts within the scope
of Article 126; it serves to emphasise that what is excluded from Article 126
are only acts which are legislative or judicial, either intrinsically or upon
the application of

382

a historical test (as in _R v. Liyanage_ ) (3); it may well be that the act of
a court or a legislative body in denying a language right guaranteed by
Article 20 or 24 is "administrative" for the purpose of Article 126 even
though it is done in the course of a judicial or legislative proceeding.
"Executive or administrative action" includes, but is wider than "the acts of
a public [i.e executive or administrative ] officer"; it includes not only
acts done under authority flowing from an employer - employee relationship
with the State, but also acts done by virtue of authority conferred in any
other manner - in writing or orally, expressly or impliedly: see the examples
suggested in _Alwis v. Raymond_ (4) and see also _Shaul Hameed v. Ranasinghe_
(5) and _Wimalaguna v. Widanegama_ (6).

Especially in the background of the Constitution mandate to this Court to
respect, secure and advance fundamental rights, I do not see in the
Constitution an express provision or an implied intention that this Court
should either permit the executive to do indirectly what it is forbidden to do
directly, or penalise the humble tool used to hand which directed it. Does the
jurisdiction under Article 126 to deal with an infringement by "executive or
administrative action" enable this Court to reach all those responsible for
such infringement, at least by means of just and equitable orders and
directions under Article 126(4)? That jurisdiction cannot be expanded by
twisting , stretching or perverting the Constitution provisions through a
populist process of activist usurpation of the legislative function thus
creating a judicial despotism under which the courts assume sovereignty over
the Constitution, (see _Somawathie v. Weerasinghe_ (7)) for the Rule of Law
binds the Judiciary as well as the other organs of the government. The ambit
of that jurisdiction can only be determined by carefully and patiently
underlying the Constitution, as well as the specific provisions taken in their
context, and by applying tried and tested principles of interpretation. The
invitation to probe the matter in this way, guided by principle and not
passion or prejudice, was extended in Alwis v. Raymond, but was inexplicably
declined; that it was accepted only four years later tends to suggest
inadequacy in the appreciation of Constitutional provision, rather than in the
provisions themselves.

383

Article 126, speaks of an infringement by executive of administrative action;
it does not impose a further requirement this action must be by an executive
officer. It follows at the act of a private individual would render him
liable, if in t e circumstances that act is "executive or administrative". The
act of a private individual would be executive if such act is done with the
authority of the executive such authority; transforms an otherwise purely
private act into executive or administrative action; such authority may be
express, or implied from prior or concurrent acts manifesting approval,
instigation, connivance, acquiescence, participation and the like (including
inaction in circumstances where there is a duty to act); and from subsequent
acts which manifest ratification or adoption. While I use concepts and
terminology of the law relating to agency, and vicarious liability in delict,
in my view responsibility under Article 126 would extend to all situations in
which the nexus between the individual and the executive makes it equitable to
attribute such responsibility. The executive, and the executive officers from
whom such authority flows would all be responsible for the infringement.
Conversely, when an infringement by an executive officer, by executive or
administrative action, is directly and effectively the consequence of the act
of a private individual (whether by reason of instigation, connivance,
participation or otherwise) such individual is also responsible for the
executive or administrative action and the infringement caused thereby. In any
event this Court would have power under Article 126(4) to make orders and
directions against such an individual in order to afford relief to the victim.

It is for these reasons that I agree that the 3rd - 7th respondents are liable
for the assault on the petitioner, and the 5th to 7th respondents for his
arrest and detention.

I trust that the Inspector General of Police will give appropriate
instructions to Officers-in-Charge of Police stations as to the care and
courtesy which public officers and private persons having legitimate business
in Police stations are entitled to receive, even without a specific direction
from this Court.

384

**S. B. Goonewardena, J.**

I do not see it as a necessary legal consequence, that every' time there is a
violation of Article 13(1) of the Constitution by an arrest that is not in
conformity with its requirements, the detention following upon such arrest
becomes a violation of Article 13(2). The two provisions, to my mind, deal
with two different situations and there is not, as of necessity, a link
between them. They read thus:-

13(1) No person shall be arrested except according to procedure established by
law. Any person arrested shall be informed of the reason for his arrest.

13(2) Every person held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of personal
liberty shall be brought before the judge; of the nearest competent court
according to procedure established bylaw, and shall not be further held i n
,custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty except upon and in terms of
the order of such judge made in accordance with procedure established by law.

Article 13(1) states that no person shall be arrested except according to
procedure established by law. It also states that any person arrested (which
would in the context contemplate an "arrest according to procedure established
by law) shall be informed of the reason for his arrest. These two statements
occurring one after the other in his manner in Article 13(1), may well lead
one to think that since for the purposes of the Article the person arrested is
required to do two things, namely, first to arrest according to procedure
established by law and next to inform the person arrested of the reason for
this arrest that there could therefore be an arrest according to procedure
established by law, even if the arrest be not followed by the person arrested
being informed of the reason for such arrest Indeed the sequence of events
contemplated, namely, the arrest first according to procedure established by
law and then informing of the reason or the arrest, could as the language of
the Article itself suggests, well justify such a view. For myself , I do not
think that these two provisions are used in this Article tautologically so as
to cover the same ground. It is therefore, as I see it, an unnecessary
exercise to characterize any action that does not

385

conform to the provisions of Article 13(1) as an "illegal arrest". Rather the
appropriate and indeed cautious thing to do, as it commends itself to me,
would be to merely declare the Court's finding that there has been no
compliance with a provision of Article 13(1) and a consequent violation
thereof and in what respect there has been such non-compliance.

In like fashion, I venture to think that it is unnecessary and indeed perhaps
hazardous, to attempt to characterize a particular action as an "illegal
detention" an expression which carries certain overtones which may tend to
colour and confuse and carry one away from an objective, appraisal of a
situation, when what we are, concerned with is only an exercise of a special
jurisdiction relating to violation of fundamental rights, and in the instant
application it is the allegation of an infringement of Article 13(2) that
brings about the need to say something here, after having read in draft the
judgment of Perera, J.

Upon a simple reading of its language uncomplicated by reference to the
concept of "illegal detention", what do the provisions of Article 13(2)
mandate or require to be done? It demands that any person held in custody,
detained or otherwise deprived of personal liberty shall be brought before the
judge of the nearest competent court according to procedure established by
law. What is intended by the expression shall be brought before the judge
according to procedure established by law? In my view it is primarily, if not
wholly, that such person should be brought before such judge before the
expiration of the period of time allowed by law, which according to the Code
of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, would be a period of 24 hours from
the time of arrest. The further words in this Article "and shall not be
further held in custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty except upon
and in terms of the order of such judge" supports such a view, the word
"further" here assuming a significance strengthening that view. To my mind the
object of Article 13(2) is mainly though perhaps not wholly, to secure a
transfer of control of custody, detention etc., from non-judicial authority to
judicial authority before the expiration of the period of time permitted by
law. The corollary would then be that when the period of time allowed by law
is exceeded before such person is brought before a

386

judge, there would be a violation of Article 13(2) whereas if such period has
not been exceeded, there would be no such violation and whether or not there
has been an infringement of Article 13(1) is irrelevant to the question, and I
would so hold. Stated in somewhat different terms, a violation of Article
13(2) can commence only after the expiration of the period of time allowed by
law, in circumstances where there being a failure to bring such person before
a judge before the expiration of that period.

There is no material in the present application upon which to hold that the
petitioner had been detained in police custody beyond the period allowed by
law prior to his being produced before the Magistrate. I would therefore hold
that there has been no violation of Article 13(2) of the Constitution.

While so holding in regard to Article 13(2), I would go along with the
conclusions reached by Perera, J. as to the violation of the other Article
referred to by him. As respects the relief granted to the petitioner, would
concur with Perera, J. and order as he has ordered, despite there being no
violation of Article 13(2).

387

**PERERA, J.**

The petitioner who holds office as a Department of Wild Life Conservation has
in the, present application invoked the jurisdiction Vested in this court by
Article 126 of the Constitution to hear and determine a question relating to
the alleged infringement of his Fundamental Rights guaranteed by Articles 11,
12, 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution by the 2nd to 7th respondents by
executive or administrative action. The 2nd to 4th respondents to the present
application are police officers attached to the Polonnaruwa Police station.
The 5th and 6th respondents are Members of Parliament for the Polonnaruwa
District respondent is a Provincial Councillor of the North Central Province
Provincial Council. The 5th respondent also holds office as a State Minister.

I shall first narrate the facts as set out by the petitioner. On the 26th of
April 1991 around 8.00 a.m. in pursuance of the performance of his official
duties as a Wild Life Officer he proceeded m the official jeep with four game
guards from Angamedilla in the Polonnaruwa District to the Minneriya Giritale
Nature Reserve as he had received prior instructions from the Director of Wild
Life Conservation that much devastation and environmental damage was being
caused by organised logging and felling operations within the said reserve.
[Vide copy of instructions P1 and P1A].

They reached the reserve around 9.30 a.m. and having parked the jeep in an
open area the petitioner with the other officers proceeded into the jungle by
a footpath. Shortly thereafter the petitioner had arrested a person engaged in
felling trees-within the reserve. He had also taken into custody certain
implements and bullock carts loaded with timber. The petitioner thereafter
arrested four other persons who were felling trees within the reserve. Here
again the petitioner had taken charge of three bullock carts loaded with
timber. The petitioner had escorted these suspects together with the
productions up to-the parked jeep and having entrusted the suspects to a game
guard and the driver of the jeep had set off once again towards the Sudukanda
area of the reserve. In this area he had arrested four persons who were
felling trees and had taken into his custody a hand tractor loaded with
timber. Having brought the three suspects to the place

388

where the jeep was parked the petitioner had instructed two of the Wild Life
officials to lead the way to the office of the Assistant Director of Wild Life
in the hand tractor followed by the bullock carts, and the petitioner followed
in the jeep together with 5 of the suspects who had been arrested. While they
were so proceeding at a place called Deke Ela he observed a jeep approaching
the front of this procession. This jeep came to a halt and a person who
alighted from this vehicle walked up to the petitioner's jeep and stated that
the 6th respondent wished to speak to the petitioner. The petitioner had then
walked up to the jeep in which the 6th respondent travelled. At this stage the
6th respondent had got off the jeep and asked the petitioner thus "where are
you taking my innocent people? Release them. What is this crime you are
committing? Release my men". The petitioner had then observed the 7th
respondent and several other persons inside the 6th respondent's jeep. The
petitioner-had responded saying "I am doing my duty. Why don't you speak to
the Assistant Director at his office". Then the 6th respondent 'had got into
his jeep saying "Ehemada?" (is that so) in a threatening manner and had driven
away.

The petitioner's procession had then proceeded a little further towards the
Assistant Director's office and as they were approaching the water tank at
Deke Ela the petitioner had observed the same jeep halted at a distance with
several persons standing on the road. When the hand tractor which was at the
head of the procession reached the place where the jeep was stopped these
persons had surrounded the hand tractor and stopped it. The petitioner had
then alighted from jeep and walked up to the hand tractor. The petitioner
states that at this time he had on his belt the official knife issued to him
by the Department of Wild Life He also carried 6 short iron rod which he
usually carried in his hand for his protection.

When the petitioner approached the tractor, the 6th respondent had grabbed the
iron rod which he had and hit the petitioner several times with it. As a
result the petitioner had suffered incised injuries in the region of the left
eyebrow and on the left shoulder. The petitioner stat hat in addition to the
6th respondent he was also attacked by the 7th respondent and some other
persons who were in the crowd. , Having attacked him thus the 6th respondent
had ordered the suspects who were in the petitioner's custody to take the hand
tractor

389

and the carts and The petitioner had then returned to his jeep to find that
the suspects who were in his jeep had also escaped.

The petitioner had then proceeded in his jeep to the office of the Assistant
Director of Wild Life. By this time the hand tractor which was loaded with
timber was brought to this, office by the game guard who was entrusted with it
As the Assistant Director of Wild Life was not available in the office at that
time the petitioner had instructed the game guard to be in charge of the
tractor with the load of timber and to inform the Assistant Director of this
incident and had proceeded to the Polonnaruwa police station with the rest of
his staff.

When he arrived at the Polonnaruwa Police Station with bleeding injuries the
6th and 7th respondents and several others were already there. The petitioner
requested the Police officer on duty to record his complaint but that officer
had replied that his complaint will be recorded after the 6th respondent's
statement was recorded. A short while later around 6:30 p.m. the 3rd
respondent had instructed he petitioner "to sit inside the 'charge room' and
not to leave". The petitioner states that at this point of time the 3rd
respondent arrested him and that he was not informed of the reason or the
charge upon which he was arrested.

There after the 5th respondent arrived at the Police station and a short while
later the 5th, 6th and 7th respondents together with the 6th respondent's
brother had entered the charge room where the petitioner was seated. The 5th
respondent who was armed with the petitioner's iron rod which had been taken
by the 6th respondent earlier in the day, had assaulted the petitioner with
the iron rod while the 6th and 7th respondents and the 6th respondent's
brother assaulted the petitioner with hands and feet.

As a result of this assault the injuries on the petitioner's left eyebrow and
shoulder began to bleed once again. The 3rd and 4th respondents were present
in the charge room throughout this assault and the petitioner appealed to them
to stop the assault. The 3rd and 4th respondents failed to intervene. Then the
5th, 6th and 7th respondents together with the brother of the 6th respondent
entered the 2nd respondent's office room and within a few minutes the 5th

390

and 6th respondents returned to the charge room and directed the 4th
respondent to remove the belt and knife issued to the petitioner, by the
Department of Wild Life and the 4th respondent complied with this request.
Thereafter the 5th and 6th respondents had once again moved into the 2nd
respondent's office room and the 4th respondent produced the petitioner before
the 2nd respondent who was then in his office. The 5th, 6th and 7th
respondents and several others were also present in the 2nd respondent's
office at this time. At this stage the 5th respondent had questioned the
petitioner whether he was drunk to which the petitioner had replied that he
did not consume liquor as he was a Muslim. The petitioner had then sought
permission to meet the other officers who had come with him to the police
station. He was allowed to do so and the petitioner having given certain
instructions to the driver of the jeep had returned to the charge room and
remained there. The 5th, 6th and 7th respondents and the others who
accompanied them had then left the Police station. The, petitioner had once
again requested the 3rd respondent to record his complaint and had been told
that his complaint would be recorded later.

Around 8:30 p.m. that night the petitioner had been taken to the medical
officer of the Welikanda Government Hospital. The medical officer had examined
the petitioner and the petitioner was brought back to the Polonnaruwa Police
station.

Around 10:30 p.m. the petitioner once again requested the 2nd respondent to
record his complaint. The 2nd respondent had informed him that he was leaving
the station and that he would record the petitioner's complaint on his return.
The petitioner had spent the rest of the night at the Polonnaruwa Police
station.

On the next day (27.04.91) a police officer had recorded his statement on the
complaint made by the 6th respondent. The states that although this statement
is dated 26.04.91 it was recorded on 27.04.91.

Some time in the evening of 27.04.91 the petitioner was produced by the Police
before the Acting Magistrate of Polonnaruwa with a

391

 request that he be remanded for a period of two weeks. The Magistrate however
made an order for remand up to the 3rd of May 1991\. He had spent the night of
the 27th of April 1991 in Prisons Department lockup at Polonnaruwa. The
petitioner states that up to that time he had received no treatment for his
injuries.

On the 29th of April 1991 on an application made by the Assistant Director of
Wild Life the petitioner, was released on bail, with instructions to appear in
the Polonnaruwa Magistrate's Court on 03.05.91.

The petitioner states that he made a detailed complaint on 30.04.91 relating
to the incident of assault on him at Police Headquarters after he was released
on bail. (P-6)

The petitioner avers further that on the 17th of May 1991 he had filed plaints
against the suspects he had taken into custody on 26.04.91 under the
provisions of the Protection of the Fauna and Flora Ordinance and all the
accused had pleaded guilty to the charges in the Magistrate Court of
Polonnaruwa. (Vide P - 7 to p - 12)

The issues which arise for determination on the pleadings filed by the
petitioner are whether the 2nd, 3rd and 4th respondents by Executive or
Administrative action,

[a] arrested the petitioner on 26.04.91 in violation of Article 13(1) of the
constitution;

[b] unlawfully detained the petitioner in custody from 26.04.91 to 27.04.91 in
violation of Article 13(2);

[c] subjected the petitioner to cruel and degrading treatment on 26.04.91 in
violation of Article 11 of the Constitution;

[d] deprived the petitioner of the equal protection of the law in violation of
Article 12 of the Constitution and

[e] whether this court has the power to declare that the 5th, 6th and 7th
respondents were also responsible for such infringement by reason of
instigation, participation or otherwise and to grant relief to the petitioner
as against the 5th, 6th and 7th respondents.

392

It would be relevant at this stage to set out the respective positions taken
up by the respondents to the application. The 2nd respondent who was the Head
Quarters Inspector attached to the Polonnaruwa Police Station has stated in
his affidavit that on the day in question while he was at the Royal College,
Polonnaruwa he received information that two Members of Parliament had come to
the Police station. He had therefore returned to the Police station around
6.15 p.m. and found the 5th, 6th and 7th respondents seated in his office. He
observed two knives and an iron rod on his able and as the 7th respondent had
identified these weapons as those used by the Petitioner to attack the 6th
respondent he had taken them in to his custoday as productions. He had also
instructed SI Wijekoon to take the petitioner to a Medical officer as he had
observed an injury on his left eyebrow. He had taken over the investigations
at that stage. The petitioner by then had been, arrested by the 3rd
respondent. When the petitioner was brought back to the Police station after,
the medical examination at 21.35 hours 9.35 p.m. he recorded the statement of
the petitioner having explained the charge against him namely that he had
attempted to cause hurt to the 6th respondent and ensured that investigations
into the complaint made against the petitioner were done as expeditiously as
possible. He has admitted that the petitioner was produced before the acting
Magistrate on the next day and that the police moved for the remand of the
petitioner as the investigations had not been concluded.

According to the 3rd respondent on the 26th of April 1991 that is the day in
question, he was on reserve duty at the Polonnaruwa Police Station with the
4th respondent. Around 5.50 p.m. the 6th respondent had arrived at the police
station and made a complaint of assault. While he was recording this complaint
the petitioner had walked into the Police station and the 6th respondent had
identified the petitioner as the person who attempted to stab him. The 2nd
respondent was not present at the Police station at that time. He had arrested
the petitioner on the Complaint made by the 6th respondent having explained
the charge to him. While he was so recording the 6th respondent statement the
5th respondent together with a few other persons had arrived at the Police
station and had proceeded up to the petitioner who was seated in the charge
room. The 6th respondent had also joined them. According to the 3rd respondent
there had been an exchange of words and a few blows had been dealt on the
petitioner by these persons.

393

This had been an unexpected incident and he together with the 4th respondent
had "sent the 5th, 6th and 7th respondents out of that place". He did not
allow any one to inflict any harm on the petitioner thereafter. Having sent
the crowd away he had completed the recording of the 6th respondent's
complaint. The 3rd respondent states that the petitioner made no request to
record his complaint up to the time he went off duty at 10.00 p.m. The
affidavit filed by the 4th respondent is substantially on the same lines as
that filed by the 3rd respondent.

According to the 6th respondent on the day in question some of his
constituents had informed him that certain persons had been taken into custody
for allegedly felling trees in the Sudkbanda area of the Minneriya - Giritale
Nature Reserve. His information was that these persons had been collecting
firewood in this reserve and he was requested to intervene with the
authorities on their behalf. He had then met the Wild Life Ranger whom he now
knows to be the petitioner at Deke Ela and told him that the persons in
custody had only been collecting firewood in the reserve and requested him to
release them if there was a possibility. The petitioner had declined to accede
to this request and had informed him that they should seek their relief from
the court. The 6th respondent had then returned home where he found a large
number of constituents had gathered at his residence who complained to him
about the petitioner's conduct in taking such persons into custody. He
therefore sought the assistance of the 7th respondent who was requested to
intercede with the petitioner at the office of the Assistant Director of Wild
Life Conservation on behalf of the, persons in custody. The 6th respondent
himself proceeded to the Assistant Director's office around 5.00 p.m. When he
arrived at this office he saw about 15 persons at the entrance to the office.

The petitioner also had reached the office of the Assistant Director together
with the persons whom he had taken into, custody, the vehicles and the
productions. According to the 6th respondent the petitioner having seen him
had approached him armed with a pointed iron rod in his hand saying "I have
already told you that I

394

cannot do anything about this matter," to which the 6th respondent had replied
"wait we can discuss this matter after Mr. Nelson the Minister of State
arrives. The petitioner had then said "Even if Nelson or anyone comes I will
not change my mind" and lunged at him with the iron rod. The 6th respondent
had jumped back to avoid the blow and in the process had fallen. Some of the
persons in the crowd had then grabbed the petitioner and wrestled from him the
iron rod. Then the petitioner had taken a knife and attempted to stab the 6th
respondent who lay fallen on the ground. Some of the persons had intervened
and prevented the petitioner from causing injury to the 6th respondent.
Thereafter there had been an altercation between the petitioner and some of
the persons in the crowd which may have resulted in the petitioner sustaining
injuries. The 6th respondent states further that the petitioner's speech and
conduct revealed that he was severely under the influence of liquor.
Thereafter he together with the 7th respondent had proceeded to the
Polonnaruwa Police station to make a complaint relating to the conduct of the
petitioner. While the 6th respondent was at the police station the petitioner
had also arrived there. A short while later the 5th respondent had also called
at the police station. The 6th and 7th respondents after their complaints were
recorded by the police had left the police station in the company of the 5th
respondent. It must be observed however that the 6th respondent in the
complaint made to the police a few minutes after the incident had sought to
attribute the injuries sustained by the petitioner to a fall as the petitioner
had been in such an advanced state of intoxication at that time. The 6th
respondent has specifically denied that the 5th respondent or any one else
abused, threatened or assaulted the petitioner while he was at the police
station.

The 5th respondent in his affidavit has averred that having received a
telephone call from the 6th respondent around 5.00 p.m. regarding certain
incidents which happened near the Minneriya - Giritale Nature Reserve, he had
arrived at the office of the Assistant Director of Wild Life in Polonnaruwa.
He had reached this office around 5.00 p.m. and on being informed that the 6th
and 7th respondents had gone to the police station he had proceeded to the

police station himself. There he had met the 6th and 7th respondents who had
informed him of the incidents that had occurred in the earlier part of the
day. The petitioner was also at the police station. He had not seen the
petitioner prior to that day. After the 6th and 7th respondents complaints
were recorded by the police he had left the police station in the company of
the 6th and 7th respondents. The 5th respondent has specifically denied that
he abused, threatened or participated in the assault on the petitioner at the
police station.

Mr. R. K .W. Goonasekara, Counsel for the petitioner conceded that the alleged
assault on the petitioner by the 6th and 7th respondents in the vicinity of
the water tank at Deke Ela was not attributable to executive or administrative
action and that this assault could not form the basis of an allegation of the
violation of the petitioner's Fundamental Rights. The actual complaint related
to the incidents which occurred after the petitioner arrived at the
Polonnaruwa police station to complain of an assault on him that day.

It was Counsel's submission that the complicity of the 2nd and 7th respondents
was such that they have together and in concert with one another illegally
arrested the petitioner, detained him, and inflicted cruel and degrading
treatment on him at the police station. Counsel complained that the 2 to 4th
respondents manifestly abused their office in order to facilitate the 5th to
the 7th respondents who were admittedly not agents of the executive or
administrative to inflict cruel and degrading treatment on the petitioner
while he was in the custody of the 3rd and 4th respondents who were under a
legal duty to ensure the petitioner's "safe custody". The 3rd and 4th
respondents by deliberate inaction had permitted-such treatment to be meted
out to the petitioner.

Additional Solicitor-General, Mr. Yapa submitted that the petitioner was
arrested on the day in question and detained lawfully on a complaint made by
the 6th respondent. It was his contention therefore that the 2nd,3rd and 4th
respondents have not acted in violation of any of the petitioner's fundamental
rights guaranteed by the Constitution. As regards the assault on the
petitioner while he was

396

in the custody of the police by the 5th, 6th and 7th respondents, Mr. Yapa
urged that it was an unexpected and unforeseen, incident and the 3rd and 4th
respondents had immediately taken preventive action. Further the 2nd
respondent has recorded the statements of all the witnesses in regard to this
assault on the petitioner and forwarded the papers to the Attorney General for
his advice. Therefore the 2nd respondent has merely complied with the law. In
the circumstances it was his submission that the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th respondents
have not acted in violation of the petitioner's fundamental rights guaranteed
by Articles 11,12,13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution. For the reasons given
in this judgment I regret that I am unable to accept this submission.

Mr. Seneviratne, President's Counsel on behalf of the 5th and 6th respondents
strongly commended the version given by his clients in the affidavits filed in
this case. Counsel submitted that after his release from custody there has
been a deliberate endeavour on the part of the petitioner to implicate the
5th, 6th and 7th respondents. That in point of fact the petitioner does not
claim that he sustained any further injuries as a result of the attack on him
at the police station with an iron rod. Counsel dismissed this story of an
attack on the petitioner while he was in the charge room as "a mere skirmish
and nothing more". There was no evidence to connect the 5th, 6th and 7th
respondents with the acts of commission or omission on the part of the police.
Therefore the 5th, 6th and 7th respondents could not be held liable for police
action or inaction. Counsel, contended further that there was no evidence that
the conduct of the police towards the petitioner was due to anything said or
done by the 5th, 6th, or the 7th respondents. I have carefully considered
these submissions of Mr. Seneviratne but having regard to the totality of the
evidence in this case, with this submission of Counsel I am unable to agree.

I am however in agreement with the submissions of Mr. Goonasekara which are
amply borne out by the evidence in the present case. It is manifestly clear
that the 2nd to the 4th respondents have unreasonably and for some extraneous
reason

397

failed to take any meaningful steps to safeguard the rights of the petitioner
and had therefore acted mala fide. This is in accord with the view expressed
by Lord Greene M R in _Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury
Corporation_ (8) where his Lordship observed that mala fide is interchangeable
with unreasonableness and extraneous consideration. The conduct of the 2nd to
the 4th respondents in the present case appears to have necessarily been
motivated by some extraneous consideration although they may not be guilty of
intentional dishonesty.

It is clear from the events that transpired at the Polonnaruwa police station
on 26.04.91 that the 2nd to the 4th respondents have from the outset adopted
an indifferent if not a hostile attitude towards the petitioner. There is no
reason whatsoever to doubt the statement made by the petitioner that he had
come to the Polonnaruwa police station with bleeding injuries on the day in
question for the purpose of lodging a complaint of an alleged assault on him.
The fact that up to the time the petitioner was produced by the Police before
the Acting Magistrate in the evening of the next day, that is on 27.04.91 his
complaint had not been recorded is also not in dispute. Admittedly the
petitioner arrived at the police station on that day voluntarily and not on a
request made by any police officer to do so. Having regard to the
circumstances of this case I am therefore unable to accept the version given
by the 2nd to the 4th respondents that the petitioner did not make a request
to the police on that day to record his complaint.

Section 109 of the Criminal Procedure Code makes it mandatory for a police
officer to record any information relating to the commission of an offence in
the Information Book. Subsection 4 of this section requires a police officer
who receives such information if he is not the Officer in charge of the police
station to forthwith-report such facts to the officer in charge of the
station. Further in terms of Sections 109 (5) if from the information received
the officer, in charge of the police station has reason to believe the
commission of a cognisable offence he is required forthwith to send a report
to the Magistrate's Court having jurisdiction and to proceed in person or to
delegate one of his subordinate officers to proceed to the spot to investigate
the facts and circumstances of the case and to take such

398

measures as would be necessary for the discovery and arrest of the offenders.

The second respondent admits that he arrived at the police station by 6.15
p.m. that is within a few minutes of the arrival of the 6th respondent and the
petitioner at the police station that day. If the 2nd respondent had on his
arrival complied with the imperative provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code
set out above it would have been very clear to him that the arrest and
detention of the petitioner was absolutely unwarranted.

Besides having regard to the material that has been placed before this court
and the nonchalant manner in which the 2nd and 4th respondents on their own
admission have reacted to the assault on the petitioner while he was in the
charge room, I prefer to accept the statement of the petitioner that no
charges were explained to him before he was arrested by the police on this
day. If the 3rd respondent who affected his arrest explained the charge upon
which the petitioner was arrested, I have no doubt whatsoever that the
petitioner would have taken that opportunity to give an explanation as to the
correct state of facts which would have enabled the police to conduct further
inquiries and save the petitioner from the indignity of being arrested on a
false accusation.

The fact that the petitioner was merely discharging his duties as a public
officer on the day in question is amply borne out by the fact that the
suspects whom the petitioner had taken into custody for contravening certain
provisions of the Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance had been subsequently
charged in the Magistrate's Court of Polonnaruwa and had pleaded guilty to the
charges. The charges related to -

[a] entering a nature reserve without a permit;

[b] felling trees;

[c] escaping from custody.

399

The Magistrate in these cases has warned and discharged the accused having
directed them to pay state costs.

Thus had the 2nd respondent complied with the provisions of Section 109 of the
Criminal Procedure Code and recorded the complaint of the petitioner it would
have been clear to him that there was no necessity to effect the arrest of the
petitioner who was a responsible public officer. I must also observe that the
conduct of the 2nd respondent in producing the petitioner before the
Magistrate and moving for his remand can in no way be justified. It is also
significant that up to date no plaint has been filed by the Polonnaruwa police
in this connection against the petitioner, a period of over two and a half
years after the alleged incident. I am satisfied having regard to the evidence
in this case that the arrest of the petitioner by the 3rd respondent on
26.04.91 was unlawful. Although according to the affidavits filed by the 2nd,
3rd and 4th respondents the 2nd respondent was not at the police station at
the time of the alleged arrest, it is common ground that the 2nd respondent
returned to the station within a very short time. The fact that he had riot
forthwith taken steps to release the petitioner supports the view that he
himself had deliberately acquiesced and condoned the illegal arrest and
detention of the petitioner.

It would be relevant at this stage to reiterate the observations of Viscount
Simon Lord Chancellor in _Christy v. Leachinsky_ (9).

"If the charge or suspicion upon which the man is arrested is then and there
made known to, him, he has the opportunity of giving an explanation of any
misunderstanding or of calling attention to other persons for whom he may have
been mistaken with the result that further inquiries may save him from the
consequences of false accusations "

Further it would also be appropriate to refer to the observations of Scott, L
,J in _Dumbell v. Roberts_ (10) cited with approval by Gratiaen, J in
_Muththusamy v. Kannangara_ (11) as follows:

400

"The principle of personal freedom, that every man should be presumed innocent
until, he is found guilty applies also to the police function of arrest ...for
that reason it is of importance that no one should be arrested by the police
except on grounds which the particular circumstances of the arrest really
justified the entertainment of a reasonable suspicion."

It is imperative therefore for a police officer before he affects the arrest
of any person without a warrant to be satisfied that the complaint or the
suspicion, upon which he acts as the case may be must be reasonable or that
the information is credible. Because in the words of Lord Simonds in
Leachinsky's case (Supra) "It is the right of every citizen to be free from
arrest; unless there is in some other person, whether a constable or not, the
right to arrest him."

I therefore hold that the, arrest and the subsequent detention of the
petitioner from 26.04.91 to 27.04.91 by the 2nd and 3rd respondents was
unwarranted in law and is violation of Articles 13(1) and 13(2) of the
Constitution by, executive or administrative action.

The allegation of the petitioner that on that day he was subjected to an
assault (cruel and degrading treatment) by the 5th, 6th and 7th respondents
and certain other persons while he was in police custody inside the charge
room has also in my view been established. The 3rd and 4th respondents in
their affidavits have admitted the fact that the 5th, 6th and 7th respondents
with certain others had assaulted the petitioner while he was seated in the
charge room. Having regard to this admission which supports the petitioner's
allegation on this matter the specific denial of this assault by the 5th and
6th respondents has necessarily to be rejected. I am also unable to accept the
submission that the Polonnaruwa Police Station was in such a hopelessly
helpless state that they did not have the necessary manpower and were not
geared to prevent such an eventuality. The conduct of the 2nd, 3rd and 4th
respondents in failing to apprehend the offenders who had committed such
serious offences inside the police station under their very eyes and to bring
them to book up to date is to any the least most reprehensible. Moreso because
when

401

the 2nd respondent arrived at the police station shortly after the assault on
the petitioner the 5th, 6th and 7th respondents on his own admission were
seated in his office.

Having regard to all the pleadings filed in this case I hold that the 3rd and
4th respondents by their strange and inexplicable inaction permitted the 5th,
6th and 7th respondents to subject the petitioner who was at that stage in the
custody of the police to cruel and degrading treatment and thereby infringed
the fundamental right of the petitioner guaranteed by Article 11 of the
Constitution by executive or administrative action.

I shall now deal with the complaint of the petitioner that his fundamental
right guaranteed by Article 12(1) has been infringed. He complains that on the
day in question he was deprived of the equal protection of the law by
executive or administrative action. I am satisfied that there is substance in
this complaint as well.

As I observed before the material placed before this court demonstrates that
from the time the petitioner arrived at the police station to make a complaint
of an assault on him by certain persons while he was performing his official
duties the police officers have acted. with some degree of indifference if not
hostility towards him. His complaint had not been recorded at the Polonnaruwa
Police Station. It is in evidence that the petitioner's complaint had only
been recorded at Police Headquarters on the 30th of April 1991 [vide p-6]
after he was released on bail, by the Magistrate.

The second respondent states however that he recorded the Petitioner's
statement having explained the charge to him on the complaint made by the 6th
respondent. This statement was also recorded only at 21:35 hours [9:35 p.m.].
On the directions of the 2nd respondent the petitioner had been examined by
the medical officer in charge of the Welikanda hospital to ascertain whether
the petitioner had consumed liquor or was under the influence of liquor and in
regard to the injuries he had sustained. According to the medical officer the
petitioner was, not even smelling of liquor. It is

402

relevant to note that in the complaint made by the 6th respondent at 5.35 p.m.
that day [3R1] the petitioner was described as, having been in a severe state
of intoxication." Admittedly the petitioner arrived at the police station a
few minutes after the 6th respondent but there is no material to show that he
was in such a state of drunkeness at that stage. Acting on this complaint of
the 6th respondent the petitioner was arrested, detained and produced before
the Magistrate on the next day with a request by, the police that he be
remanded for a period of two weeks

However the action taken by the 2nd and 3rd respondents in regard to the
offences committed by the 5th, 6th and 7th respondents inside the police
station is quite in contrast. As I have stated earlier the, 2nd respondent
admits that when he returned to the police station at 6.15 p.m. the 5th, 6th
and 7th respondents were seated in his office room. This was only a few
minutes after the alleged assault on the petitioner who was seated in the
charge room in the custody of the police. Admittedly neither the 2nd
respondent nor the 3rd and 4th respondents who were eye witnesses to this
assault had made any endeavour to apprehend the suspects or to take any
further steps under the law. According to the 3rd and 4th respondents the only
action taken by them in this connection was "to intervene and take the 5th,
6th and 7th respondents out of that place". In this instance it is clear that
the 2nd and 3rd respondents deliberately refrained from apprehending the
suspects as they were entitled to do in law. It was conceded by the Additional
Solicitor-General that up to date no plaint had been filed by the police
against the 5th, 6th and 7th respondents. While the respondent police officers
had taken action with such astounding promptitude against the petitioner on
the complaint of the 6th respondent of an attempt to cause hurt to him and had
ensured that the petitioner was remanded, no meaningful action whatsoever has
been taken against the 5th, 6th and 7th respondent who had committed such
serious offences inside the police station itself up to date. I hold therefore
that the petitioner has established beyond doubt that his fundamental right
guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution has been infringed by the 2nd
and 3rd respondents be executive or administrative action.

403

It is true that a denial of equal protection has hitherto been largely
confined to affirmative acts of discrimination. The view that culpable,
official state inaction may also constitute a denial of equal protection has
now been recognized by the United States Supreme Court as well. In Burton v.
Wilmington Parking Authority et al (12) Justice Clark delivering the opinion
of the Court, observed thus "by its inaction the Authority and through it the
state, has not only made itself a party to the refusal of service but has
elected to place its power property and prestige behind the admitted
discrimination." In Lynch v. USA (13) the Federal Court of Appeal stated the
opinion thus, "there was a time when the denial of equal protection of the law
was confined to affirmative acts, but the law now is that culpable official
inaction may also constitute a denial of equal protection."

Mr. Goonasekera also invited the court to hold that the 5th to the 7th
respondents although they were not agents of he executive or administrative
had also infringed the fundamental rights of the petitioner as the 2nd to 7th
respondents had acted together and in concert with one another in illegally
arresting the petitioner, detaining him and inflicting cruel and degrading
treatment on him. Having regard to the evidence in this case l am of the view
that there s merit in this submission of counsel.

Although there is no direct evidence of the complicity between the 2nd, 3rd
and 4th respondents and the 5th, 6th and 7th respondents in the action which
resulted in the violation of the petitioner's fundamental rights, it is clear
from the established facts and circumstances that the reprehensible and
inexplicable conduct of the 2nd, 3rd and 4th respondents on this date was
heavily influenced by the overbearing presence and participation of the 5th,
6th and 7th respondents who were powerful political personalities involved in
this entire transaction.

In _Shahul Hameed's case_ (5) it was held that this court has the power to
make an appropriate order even against a respondent who has no executive
status where such respondent is proved to be guilty of impropriety or
connivance with the executive in the wrongful acts violative of fundamental
rights.

404

It is clear that Article 126(4) gives this Court very wide powers in this
regard I am of the view that responsibility under Article 126 would extend to
any respondent who has no executive status but is proved to be guilty of
impropriety, connivance or any such similar conduct with the executive in the
wrongful acts violative of fundamental rights.

In the present case, I am satisfied that the 5th, 6th and 7th respondents were
guilty of impropriety or connivance with the executive in the wrongful acts or
omissions violative of the petitioner's Fundamental Rights under Articles 11,
12(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution.

In the circumstances, I hold that -

1\. petitioner's fundamental right under Article 11 has been violated by the
5th - 7th respondents. Although not per se executive or administrative action,
that violation was made possible by executive or administrative action by the
3rd and 4th respondents. Therefore, the violation was by "executive or
administrative action within the meaning of Article 126 and the 3rd - 7th
respondents are responsible.

2\. petitioner's fundamental rights under Article 13(1) and (2) have been
violated by the 3rd respondent; by "executive or administrative action. The
3rd respondent also violated the petitioner's fundamental rights under Article
12(1), by denying him, equal treatment, vis-a-vis the 5th to 7th respondents
and their associates who were neither arrested nor detained.

The 2nd respondent failed to release the petitioner, and thereby deliberately
acquiesced in and condoned the arrest and detention of the petitioner in
violation of Articles 12(1), 13(1) and 13(2); he is also responsible for the
violation.

The violation was induced or instigated by the 5th to 7th respondents, who are
therefore also responsible for the violation.

405

In considering the relief to be granted in this case one has necessarily to be
mindful of the fact that the petitioner's predicament on this day was entirely
attributable to his endeavour to perform his official functions without fear
or favour. This Court would be failing in its duty if public servants are not
given every possible encouragement to perform their functions in an impartial
manner without any inhibitions. We also take into account the fact that the
violations did not occur under conditions of war, insurrection or emergency.

I would accordingly grant the petitioner the following reliefs:

1\. In respect of the violation of the petitioner's rights under Articles 11,
12(1), 13(1) and 13(2):

(a) the State is ordered to pay compensation in a sum of Rs. 10,000/- and
costs in a sum of Rs. 5,000/-;

(b) the 5th - 7th respondents are each ordered to pay compensation in a sum of
Rs. 10,000/-.

2\. In respect of the violation of the petitioner's right under Article 11,
the 3rd and 4th respondents are each ordered to pay compensation in a sum of
Rs. 2,000/-;

3\. In respect of the violation of the petitioner's right under Articles
12(1), 13(1), and 13(2), the 2nd respondent is ordered to pay compensation in
a sum of Rs. 4,000/-; and the 3rd respondent is ordered to pay compensation in
a sum of Rs. 2,000/-.

The petitioner will thus receive a sum of Rs. 50,000/- as compensation and Rs.
5,000/- as costs.

_Relief granted.  
_  
_Compensation Ordered._

406





**FERNANDO, J.**

I entirely agree with the findings and order of my brother Perera J, whose
judgment I have had the advantage of: reading. In view of the importance of
the questions of law involved I wish to set down my reasons in some detail.

I trust that the IGP will give appropriate instructions to officers in charge
of police stations as to the care and courtesy which public officers and
private persons having legitimate business in police stations are entitled to
receive, even without a specific direction from this court.

**GOONAWARDANA, J.**

There is no material in the present application upon which to hold that the
petitioner had been detained in police custody beyond the period allowed by
law prior to his being produced before the Magistrate. I would therefore hold
that there has been no violation of Article 13(2) of the Constitution.

While so holding in regard to Article 13(2) I would go along with the
conclusions reached by Perera, J as to the violation of the other Articles
referred to by him. As respects the relief granted to the petitioner, I would
concur with Perera, J and order as he has ordered, despite there being no
violation of Article 13(2).

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/34.html_  

