##  Hewamallika v. Soma Munasinghe - SLR - 339, Vol 1 of 1982 [1982] LKSC 34;
(1982) 1 Sri LR 339 (1 January 1982)

# 339

**  SUPREME COURT**



#### Hewamallika

#### V.

**Soma Munasinghe**

** **

###  S. C. 29/81 ‑ CA 325/73 (F) ‑ DC Colombo No. 12609/L

_  _

### Section 18 Rent Restriction Act‑ Spouse deemed to be tenant on husband's
death



One Janderis Kodithuwakku Hewamallika gifted premises No. 17 Hyde Park Corner,
Slave Island to the plaintiff his son in 1955. But after the gift was made
Janderis Kodithuwakku rented out the premises to H.B. Wilson. In 1968 Janderis
Kodithuwakku terminated the tenancy and instituted action in the Court of
Request for ejectment. But before the trial the tenant H.B. Wilson died and
the case was abandoned. The widow of Wilson informed Janderis Kodithuwakku
under Section 18 of Rent Restriction Act that she was continuing as tenant.



The Plaintiff instituted this action for declaration of title, recovery of
possession and damages.



Held that Defendant (Wilson's widow) must be deemed to be a statutory tenant
succeeding to her husband's tenancy on his death, and a vindicatory suit does
not lie.



**APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.



Before:                        Wanasundera J., Wimalaratne J., and Soza J.

**  **

Counsel: **                        **H. L. de Silva, Senior Attorney‑at‑Law
with

_Peter Jayasekera_ for Defendant‑Appellant.

_D. R. P. Gunatilake_ for Plaintiff‑Respondent.

**  **

Argued on:                   4.3.1982

_Cur. adv. vult._



Decided on:                  8.4.1982

**  **

**SOZA J.**



The suit before us has been constituted as a vindicatory action filed by the
plaintiff against the defendant for a declaration of title to premises No. 17,
Hyde Park Corner, Slave Island, Colombo and for recovery of possession of them
along with damages at Rs.55.48 Per mensem.



# 340



The plaint proceeds on the footing that to begin with the defendant's husband
H.B. Wilson Silva (also known as H.B Wilson) was a tenant of these premises
under the plaintiff s father Jandiris Kodituwakku Hewamallika who was acting
for and on behalf of the plaintiff. The plaintiff's claim that his father was
acting for him was made for the first time in the plaint filed in this case.
Indeed this claim is not supported by any of the circumstances that have come
to light in this case and the learned District Judge rightly rejected it.
Learned Counsel who appeared for the plaintiff described this claim of agency
as a gift in the case to the defendant. Obviously the defendant fears the
plaintiff even when he is bringing gifts. Giving no hint whatsoever that he is
acting for his son, the plaintiffs father terminated the tenancy of Wilson by
notice dated 13.11.1968 and thereafter sued him for arrears of rent and
ejectment, in case No. 270 of the Court of Requests of Colombo. After summons
was served but before answer was filed, Wilson died on 28.6.1969 and that
action was not proceeded with. At this time the Rent Restriction Act No 29 of
1948 was in force and Wilson's widow the present defendant on 24.10.1969 gave
notice under section 18 of that Act to the plaintiff's father that she
proposed to continue in occupation of the premises as tenant thereof but he
refused to acknowledge her as his tenant by his letter D5.



The plaintiff took up the position that as Wilson at the time of his death was
a statutory tenant whose contractual tenancy had been already terminated, his
widow was not entitled to take advantage of the provisions of section 18 of
the Rent Restriction Act. But this question has been now settled by the
decision in _Karunaratne v Fernando_ _1_ where a bench of two Judges held that
an heir of a statutory tenant could avail himself of the provisions of section
18 provided he had the stipulated qualifications. The contrary view laid down
in _Hensman v Stephen_ 2 decided by a single Judge was held to be wrong.
Indeed the decision in _Hensman v Stephen_ if allowed to stand will defeat the
very object of the rent laws. As Sirimane J said in _Karunaratne's case_ _(p.
461)._



"The key note of the legislation introduced by section 18 is the protection of
the home after the death of the tenant who was protected by the Act."



The expression tenant must be given a broad construction which will carry out
the intention of Parliament. So far as continuance of



**341**



the tenancy after the death of the tenant goes it is only reasonable that a
statutory tenancy is endowed with qualities of tenacity and perdurability not
less than those of the contractual tenancy out of which it arose. Indeed
section 36(l) of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 has adopted the interpretation
laid down in _Karunaratne's_ case and enacted that "a person shall be deemed
to be the tenant of any premises notwithstanding that his tenancy of such
premises has been terminated by the expiry of the notice of the termination of
the tenancy given by the landlord thereof, if at the time of his death he was
in occupation of such premises". I have no difficulty in agreeing with the
purposive interpretation adopted by Sirimane J in _Karunaratne's_ case.



Accordingly the present defendant must be deemed to be a tenant of the
premises with effect from 1.11.1969 by operation of section 18(2) of the Rent
Restriction Act under the plaintiff's father despite the latter's refusal to
acknowledge her as such by his letter D5.



It is in this background that we must examine the plaintiff's rights. Jandiris
Kodituwakku Hewamallika had gifted the premises in suit to his son the
plaintiff in 1955. So that at the time Jandiris Kodituwakku Hewarnallika let
out the premises to defendant's husband Wilson, the plaintiff was the real
owner of the premises. At no time did the plaintiff himself request Wilson or
the defendant to attorn to him. Hence no blame can attach to the defendant for
any failure on her part to attorn to the plaintiff. The question of Jandiris
Kodituwakku Hewarnallika being the agent of the plaintiff is irrelevant to the
question before us. In fact at the time the plaintiff filed the present suit
the defendant was well within her rights to regard the plaintiff's father who
was living at the time as her landlord.



As it would appear, the plaintiff filed the present action without any prior
demand. Hence the defendant's pleading that she is not aware of the
plaintiff's title is justified. The plaintiff really stands in the shoes of
his father as landlord and is therefore not entitled to bring a suit to
vindicate title. Presently the defendant has acknowledged Plaintiff's title.
It is not denied that rents due in respect of these premises are being paid in
plaintiff's name to the Colombo Municipality. The defendant's contention that
she is the tenant of these premises



# 342



under the plaintiff is entitled to succeed. She is entitled to the protection
of the Rent laws. In any event her tenancy has not been terminated. In these
circumstances a vindicatory suit is misconceived and does not lie.



I therefore allow this appeal and set aside the judgment of the court of
Appeal and District Court. Let decree be entered dismissing plaintiff's action
with costs here as well as in the Court of Appeal and in the District Court.



**WANASUNDERA J.** ‑ I agree.



**WIMALARATNE   J.** ‑ I agree.



### **Appeal allowed**



**References:**

1\. (1970) 73 NLR 457

2\. (1953) 55 NLR 89.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/34.html_  

