##  Saranapala v. Solanga Arachchi, Senior Superintendent of Police and Others
- SLR - 166, Vol 2 of 1999 [1997] LKSC 34; (1999) 2 Sri LR 166 (17 July 1997)

**166**

**SARANAPALA  
v.  
SOLANGA ARACHCHI, SENIOR SUPERINTENDENT OF  
POLICE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
GUNAWARDANA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 470/96 (FR)  
JUNE 18, 1997

_Fundamental Rights - Freedom of speech, expression and peaceful assembly -
Right to equality - May Day processions and meetings - Articles 12 (1), 12
(2), 14 (1) (a) and 14 (1) (b) of the Constitution - Permitted restriction of
rights - National security and public order - Article 15 (7) of the
Constitution - Section 77 (3) of the Police Ordinance._

On 25. 4. 1996 Deputy Inspector-General of Police (Colombo Range) the 4th
respondent approved the application of the Navalanka Sama Samaja Party (NSSP)
for a May Day procession and a meeting. However, on 29.4.1996, the 4th
respondent informed the Secretary of the NSSP in writing that due to security
reasons processions within the city of Colombo had been prohibited and that
therefore the permission granted earlier stood revoked. An attempt by some
supporters of the NSSP on the May Day to proceed in procession to their
meeting place was stopped by the Police. Consequently, the NSSP could only
hold a meeting. The matter before the Court was whether the restrictions on
the NSSP were permitted by s. 77 (3) of the Police Ordinance in the interest
of public order or by emergency regulations made by the President prohibiting
all processions for a period of 24 hours from 30th April, 1996, in the
interest of national security.

**Held :**

1\. Article 15 (7) of the Constitution permits restrictions on the rights
declared and recognized by Article 14. Such restrictions must be (i)
prescribed by Law (including regulations made under the law relating to public
security) and (i) in the interest of national security, public order, etc.
Thus, section 77 (3) of the Police Ordinance empowers the Police to prohibit a
procession

167

in the interest of public order. This power is subject to the Constitution;
and measures taken to further the maintenance of public order must be
unrelated to the suppression of free expression and the incidental restriction
on the exercise of free expression must be no greater than is essential to the
furtherance of public order.

2\. The evidence before the Court did not show a security threat at May Day
processions as claimed by the respondents. On the other hand other political
parties including the Lanka Sama Samaja Party (LSSP) had been permitted, not
only to hold meetings in public places but also to march on the streets on
that day. Hence, the concern of the Police in prohibiting the NSSP procession
was not the furtherance of the interest of national security or public order
but the suppression of free expression by the petitioner and other members of
the NSSP. In the circumstances the prohibition of the holding of a procession
by the NSSP was a transgression of the petitioner's rights under Articles 14
(1) (a) and 14 (1) (b) of the Constitution.

3\. In permitting other political parties to conduct processions, the
respondents failed to act even-handedly in applying the provisions of section
77 (3) of the Police Ordinance and the emergency regulations and thereby
violated the petitioner's fundamental rights declared by Articles 12 (1) and
12 (2) of the Constitution.

**Cases referred to :**

1. _Hague v. CIO_ 307 US 496, 515-516, 59 S. Ct. 954, 964, 83L Ed 1423 (1939).  
  
2. _United States v. O Brien_ 391 US 367, 88 S. Ct. 1673, 20 L Ed 2d 672 (1968).  
  
3. _Cox v. State of New Hampshire_ 312 US 569,'61 Ct. 762, 85L Ed 1049.  
  
4. _Kovacs v. Cooper,_ 336, US 77, 69 S. Ct. 448, 93L ED 513.  
  
5. _Poulos v. State of New Hampshire_ 345, US 395, 73 S. Ct. 760, 97L Ed 1105.  
  
6. _Adderly v. State of Florida_ 385 US 39, 97 S. Ct. 242, 171 Ed 2d 149.

7. _Cox v. Louisiana_ 379 U. S. 536, 555, 85 S. Ct. 453, 464 13L, Ed 2d 471.  
  
8. _Walker v. City of Birmingham_ 388, US 307, 87 S. Ct. 1824, 18L, Ed 2d 1210 (1967).  
  
9. _Shuttlesworth v. City of Birmingham_ 394 US 147, 89 S. Ct. 935 221 Ed. 2d 162 (1969).  
  
10. _Goonewardena v. Perera_ (1983) 1 Sri LR 305, 317-318.  
  
11. _Joseph Perera v. The Attorney-General_ (1992) 1 Sri LR 199, 214, 218.

**168**

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_D. W. Abeykoon,_ PC with _Nimal Ranawaka_ and _Chandrika Morawaka_ for the
petitioner.

_Nihal Jayasinghe,_ Deputy Solicitor-General with _N. Pulle,_ SC for the
respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

July 17, 1997.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.**

On 21.06.1996, the Court granted the petitioner leave to proceed on the basis
of the alleged infringements of Article, 12 (1), 12 (2), 14 (1) (a) and 14 (1)
(b) of the Constitution.

The petitioner is the General Secretary of the Government United Federation of
Labour and a Politburo member of the Nava Sama Samaja Party. On 15 February,
1996, the Secretary of the Nava Sama Samaja Party (NSSP) applied to the Police
with regard to the holding of the 1996 May Day celebrations. On the 25th of
April, 1996, the fourth respondent, who was the Deputy Inspector-General of
Police (Colombo Range), respondent to the application of the Secretary of the
NSSP giving the approved assembly point, the route for the procession and the
meeting place :

"Assembly Point - In front of Hope House, Slave Island.

Route - Union Place - Dawson Street - Park Road - Baybrooke Street -
Dharmapala Mawatha - Turn right at colour lights to Sir James Peiris Mawatha.

Meeting Place - De Mel Park."

169

However, in his letter dated 29th April, 1996, the fourth respondent wrote to
the Secretary of the NSSP stating that, due to security reasons, processions
within the city of Colombo had been prohibited and that therefore the
permission granted earlier stood revoked.

Notwithstanding the revocation, on May Day, 1996, some supporters of NSSP set
off at about 1.15 pm from an assembly point in front of Hope House, Slave
Island, and proceeded along Union Place to Dawson Street where they were
stopped by the Police. The first respondent, Senior Superintendent, Solanga
Arachchi, after consulting the fourth respondent - Deputy Inspector-General of
Police Dissanayake \- on his radio transmitter, permitted the leader of the
NSSP, Dr. Wickramabahu Karunaratne, and three other persons (not including the
petitioner) to proceed along the route approved earlier, accompanied by the
first respondent. Dr. Karunaratne and the other accompanying persons
eventually reached De Mel Park at about 2 p.m. and proceeded to hold a public
meeting of the NSSP.

In his written submissions, learned counsel for the respondents supported the
assertion in the affidavit of the first respondent that "there is no
fundamental right to use a public highway for a demonstration". Accordingly,
the Police seem to have assumed that section 77 (3) of the Police Ordinance
gives the Police unlimited power to prohibit the taking out of processions or
to impose conditions upon the holding of processions. Section 77 (3) states :
"Notwithstanding anything in any other law, an officer of police of a rank not
below the grade of Assistant Superintendent, if he considers it expedient so
to do in the interests of the preservation of public order, may give
directions (whether orally or in writing) prohibiting the taking out of any
procession, or imposing upon the person or persons organizing or taking part
in the procession such conditions as appear to him to be necessary, including
conditions prohibiting or restricting the display of flags, banners or
emblems".

170

There appears to be a misunderstanding : The Constitution is the supreme law
and the powers conferred by section 77 (3) of the Police Ordinance are subject
to the provisions of the Constitution. Article 14 (1) (a) of the Constitution
declares that every citizen is entitled to the freedom of speech and
expression including publication. Article 14 (1) (b) declares that every
citizen is entitled to the freedom of peaceful assembly. The petitioner
complains that his fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 14 (1) (a) and
(b) had been violated by the refusal of the police to allow him and the
members of his political party to march on the streets on May Day. While I do
not accept the view that an apparently limitless variety of conduct can be
labelled "speech" whenever the person engaging in the conduct intends thereby
to express an idea, I do, however, accept the fact that marching, parading and
picketing on the streets and holding meetings in parks and other public places
may constitute methods of expression entitled to the protection of the
freedoms declared and recognized in Articles 14 (1) (a) and (b) of the
Constitution. Streets and parks and public places are held in trust for the
use of the public and have been customarily used for purposes of assembly,
communicating thoughts between citizens, and discussing public questions. Such
use of the streets, parks and public places is a part of the privileges,
immunities, rights and liberties of citizens : See _Hague v. CIO_ (1). In Sri
Lanka it is customary for mass meetings known as 'May Day rallies, to be held
on the 1st day of the month of May each year in parks and other public places
: These meetings are usually preceded by persons belonging to or supporting
trade unions or political groups assembling at various pre-arranged points and
marching along the streets on the way to their meetings. Such activities are
protected by Articles 14 (1) (a) and (b) of the Constitution.

The complaint before us relates to denial of the use of public streets to
conduct such a May Day procession. It is a matter of common knowledge that
when there is such a procession there is a communication of ideas by slogan-
shouting marchers bearing flags, banners, emblems and so on. There is speech
as well as other forms of expression when such a procession takes place.

171

When "pure speech" and "non-speech" elements are combined in the same course
of conduct, a sufficiently important governmental interest in regulating the
non-speech element could, in my view, justify incidental limitations on the
exercise and operation of the fundamental rights declared and recognized by
Articles 14 (1) (a) and (b). To characterize the quality of governmental
interest that must appear, Courts have employed a variety of descriptive
terms: 'compelling'; 'substantial'; 'subordinating'; 'paramount'; 'cogent'";
'strong'. Admittedly, the terms are not exact. However, as Chief Justice
Warren, delivering the opinion of the Court, said in _United States v.
O'Brien_ (2) : "Whatever imprecision inheres in these terms, we think it clear
that a government regulation is sufficiently justified if it is within the
constitutional power of the government; if it furthers an important or
substantial interest; if the government interest is unrelated to the
suppression of free expression; and if the incidental restriction on alleged
First Amendment Freedoms is no greater than is essential to the furtherance of
that interest".

The constitutional power of the government to impose restrictions on the
exercise and operation of the rights declared and recognized by Article 14 of
the Constitution is conferred by Article 15 (7) of the Constitution. Article
15 (7) limits the manner and the circumstances in which restrictions may be
imposed : A restriction must (1) be prescribed by law (including regulations
made under the law for the time being relating to public security); and (2)
such restrictions must be "in the interests of national security, public order
and the protection of public health or morality, or for the purpose of
securing due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others, or
meeting the just requirements of the general welfare of a democratic society".
Article 15 (7) makes it clear that the right to speech or other methods of
expression is not absolute, but relative, and must be exercised in
subordination to laws that may impose restrictions permitted by Article 15 (7)
of the Constitution for the sake of achieving certain ends. The privilege of a
citizen to use the streets, parks and public places for communication of views
on public questions may be regulated by the government in certain
circumstances.

172

In the matter before us, the restriction on the NSSP procession was imposed by
law, namely (1) section 77 (3) of the Police Ordinance \- which permitted the
fourth respondent in the interests of public order to prohibit the taking out
of a procession; and (2) the Emergency Regulation made by the President under
section 5 of the Public Security Ordinance prohibiting all processions for a
period of twenty-four hours from midnight on the 30th of April, 1996. The
restrictions were said to be in the interests of national security and public
order and were, therefore, ex facie, constitutionally within the power of the
government to impose.

Did the restriction on the NSSP procession further an important or substantial
interest of the government? In general, it must be recognized that a
government has a strong interest in regulating the use of streets and other
public places : _Cox v. State of New Hampshire_ (3); _Kovacs v. Cooper_ (4);
_Poulos v. State of New Hampshire_ (5); _Adderly v. State of Florida_ (6).
Governmental authorities have the duty and responsibility to keep their
streets open and available for movement and they must exercise a great deal of
control in the interest of traffic regulation and public safety : _Cox v.
Louisiana_ (7). When protests take the form of mass demonstrations, parades,
or picketing on public streets and pavements, the free passage of traffic and
the prevention of public disorder and violence become important objects of
legitimate state concern: _Walker v. City of Birmingham_ (8). When the matter
of public safety is complicated by other exceptional facts, such as acts of
terrorism, government interest in intervention must . necessarily be increased
in a commensurable manner. I hold that, ex facie, the prohibition on the NSSP
procession did further an important or substantial interest of government.

However, government interest must be unrelated to the suppression of free
expression : The right of free speech and expression cannot be abridged or
denied in the guise of regulation for the pretended purpose of furthering
legitimate government interests : Cf. Hague v. CIO (supra). In _Shuttlesworth
v. City of Birmingham_ (9); a statute gave

173

the City Commission absolute power to refuse a parade permit whenever they
thought "the public welfare, peace, safety, health, decency, good order,
morals or convenience require that it be refused". The United States Supreme
Court emphasized the need to strictly and narrowly construe the powers
conferred on public authorities to restrict the use of public places, such as
streets and parks, which have been customarily used for purposes of assembly,
communicating thoughts between citizens, and discussing public questions.
Justice Stewart, who delivered the opinion of the Court, said : "Although the
Court has recognized that a statute may be enacted which prevents serious
interference with normal usage of streets and parks **. . .** we have
consistently condemned licensing systems which vest in an administrative
official discretion to grant or withhold upon broad criteria unrelated to
proper regulation of public places. Even when the use of its public streets
and sidewalks is involved, therefore, a municipality may not empower its
licensing officials to roam essentially at will, dispensing or withholding
permission to speak, assemble, picket or parade, according to their own
opinions regarding the potential effect of the activity in question on the
'welfare', 'decency' or 'morals' of the community." The Court said that in the
matter before it, it was "evident that the ordinance was administered so as in
the words of Chief Justice Hughes, 'to deny or unwarrantedly abridge the right
of assembly and the opportunities for the communication of thought **. . .**
immemorially associated with resort to public places' ".

There is no doubt in terms of section 77 (3) of the Police Ordinance an
officer of Police of a rank not below the grade of Assistant Superintendent -
the officer in the matter before us was a Deputy inspector-General - if he
considers it expedient to do so in the interests of the preservation of public
order, may give directions prohibiting the taking out of any procession or
impose upon the person organizing or taking part in the procession such
conditions as appear to him necessary : _Goonewardena v. Perera_ (10).
Undoubtedly it is within the constitutional power of the government to
preserve public order; and measures taken to further the maintenance of public
order could be

174

justified even if they incidentally limit the freedoms guaranteed by Articles
14 (1) (a) and (b) of the Constitution. Such measures, however, must be
unrelated to the suppression of free expression, and the incidental
restriction on the exercise of the free expression must be no greater than is
essential to the furtherance of the interest in maintaining public order. In
other words, section 77 (3) of the Police Ordinance, does not, in my view,
empower Police officers to 'roam at will' in giving directions prohibiting the
taking out of any procession or imposing conditions on persons taking part in
a procession.

The position of the respondents is that the National Intelligence Bureau had
information of a "possibility of Northern Terrorists striking Colombo in the
guise of participating in demonstrations to be held on the 1st of May, 1996".
In the circumstances, acting under the provisions of section 77 (3) of the
Police Ordinance, the NSSP was informed by the fourth respondent - a Deputy
Inspector-General of Police - that the earlier decision granting permission to
hold a 'procession' had been revoked for security reasons. The fourth
respondent in his affidavit states that 'the withdrawal of permission granted
to the Nava Sama Samaja Party to take out a procession, was consequent to the
information I received in regard to the security threat apprehended at such
processions".

According to Mr. M. R. Latiff, Assistant Superintendent of Police, he was "in
charge of the Northern Terrorism desk of the National Intelligence Bureau
collecting intelligence pertaining to Northern Terrorism which has spread to
other parts of the country". It was Mr. Latiff's views that were supposed to
have guided the respondents. There was no other evidence on the matter
submitted by the respondents. Mr. Latiff in his affidavit states as follows :

8\. I state that I received intelligence reports of probable terrorist attacks
in the city of Colombo on May Day.

9\. I state that I was further informed that the said terrorist attacks were
to be launched at places where there would be minimum

175

security in order to disrupt normalcy and the security in Colombo. I state
that it is almost impossible to enforce a strict security arrangement at a
demostration.

10\. I state that I accordingly informed the Director of the National
Intelligence Bureau about the aforesaid information received by me.

11\. I state that I am aware that the said information received by me was
accordingly communicated to the DIG Colombo the 4th respondent in SC
Application No. 470/96 [the matter before this Court] in order that necessary
precautions would be taken to avoid the security threat to the city."

Although the fourth respondent, supported by the first respondent, states that
the procession of the NSSP was prohibited because there was information with
regard to "the security threat apprehended at such processions", (the emphasis
is mine) there is nothing in Mr. Latiff's affidavit to show that there was
such a security threat : If the information supplied by Mr. Latiff was the
basis for action, namely, that "terrorist attacks were to be launched at
places where there would be minimum security **. . .** it is almost impossible
to enforce a strict security arrangement at a demonstration", it is difficult
to understand why public meetings, including a meeting of the NSSP at De Mel
Park and a joint meeting of the LSSP and the People's Alliance, were permitted
in the city of Colombo. I have no hesitation in rejecting the respondents'
explanation that the NSSP procession was prohibited for security reasons. In
my view the prohibition of the NSSP procession was for the purpose of the
suppression of the free expression by members of that party.

The petitioner in fact adduced evidence by way of photographs published in
newspapers and an affidavit from a reporter for "Yukthiya" supporting his
allegation that members of other political parties, including the Lanka Sama
Samaja Party (LSSP), had been permitted, not only to hold meetings in public
places, but also to march on the streets on that day. The respondents do not
state that other political parties had also been informed that their
processions had been cancelled under the terms of section 77 (3) of the Police
Ordinance.

176

The fact that the members of the LSSP had gathered together at their assembly
point is evidence of the fact that they had not been informed that their
procession had been cancelled. In fact, the position of the respondents is
that the other processions were prohibited by an Emergency Regulation made on
the 30th of April, 1996, banning all processions throughout the country for
twenty-four hours commencing at midnight on the 30th of April, 1996. The NSSP
procession had been prohibited by the fourth respondent's letter dated the
29th of April. Why were steps not taken to prohibit the processions of other
political parties if security considerations prompted the prohibition of the
NSSP procession?

Mr. Henry Perera, Senior Superintendent of Police, in his affidavit stated
that the members of the LSSP had assembled at Campbell Park in order to
proceed in procession to their meeting place at the Town Hall. He informed the
leaders of the LSSP that "in terms of the Emergency Regulations in force at
the time, all public processions had been now prohibited and accordingly
produced a copy of the Emergency Regulations to the said leaders of the Lanka
Sama Samaja Party". When the leaders of the LSSP informed him that they wished
to proceed to the Town Hall for their meeting, he informed them that "they
would have to do so in scattered groups and not a procession". The leaders and
their followers, he says, having "Co-operated" with him, proceeded "in
scattered groups" and held their "joint meeting at the Town Hall with the
People's Alliance **. . .** "

What was a "scattered group"? The photographs show a large number of persons
following a banner held aloft with the words "Lanka Sama Samaja Party". It
looks like any ordinary May Day procession. "Scattered groups" obviously did
not mean that some went one way and the others went some other way. They all
followed the same route. Assuming that, as learned counsel for the respondents
endeavored to explain, the Lanka Sama Samaja Party members followed each other
on the same route but in groups, as directed by the Police, were they then not
marching along in orderly succession when they were walking behind each other
in groups specified either by the Police or by the leaders of the political
party? Surely, that is the way in which 'procession' is ordinarily understood?
And so, how does the

177

Police differentiate between the NSSP and the LSSP except for political
reasons? The respondents admit that in the case of the NSSP only Dr.
Karunaratne and three others were allowed to proceed from their assembly point
to their place of meeting. If the members of the LSSP were allowed to proceed
in "scattered groups" of the sort depicted in the photographs, why were the
members of the NSSP differently treated? The concern of the Police in
prohibiting the NSSP procession was, in my view, not the furtherance of the
government interest in national security or public order, but the suppression
of free expression by the petitioner and other members of his political party.

In the circumstances, I am of the view that the prohibition of the holding of
a procession by the NSSP by the invocation of the powers conferred by section
77 (3) of the Police Ordinance, thereby preventing the petitioner from
marching with members of his political party on May Day was a transgression of
his fundamental rights of freedom of speech and expression declared and
recognized by Article 14 (1) of the Constitution. The prohibition was not for
the purpose of maintaining public order but for the suppression of free
expression by the members of the NSSP, including the petitioner. Section 77
(3) of the Police Ordinance and the Emergency Regulation dated the 30th of
April, 1996, were used by the Police to deny the petitioner the right of
peaceful assembly declared and recognized by Article 14 (1) (b) of the
Constitution and the opportunities for communication traditionally associated
in Sri Lanka with resort to the streets by political parties on May Day,
thereby denying him the right to freedom of speech and expression declared and
recognized by Article 14 (1) (a) of the Constitution. By permitting members of
other political parties to march while denying or seriously abridging the
petitioner's right to march, the respondents failed to act even handedly in
applying the provisions of section 77 (3) of the Police Ordinance and the
Emergency Regulations and thereby violated the petitioner's fundamental right
to equality before the law and equal protection of the law declared by Article
12 (1) of the Constitution, and the petitioner's fundamental right declared
and recognized by Article 12 (2) not to be discriminated against on the ground
of political opinion :

178

Acting under the powers conferred by section 5 of the Public Security
Ordinance, the President on 30 April, 1996, by notification in the Gazette
prohibited all public processions in every region of the country during a
period of twenty-four hours from midnight on 30th April, 1996. Mr. Abeykoon
submitted that restrictions on the exercise and operation of fundamental
rights, if they are to be regarded as permissible, legitimate and valid, must
be based on one or more of the grounds set out in Article 15 of the
Constitution and must be strictly referable to it : The burden of proving that
a restriction was in the interests of national security or public order lies
on the respondents : Per Sharvananda, CJ. in _Joseph Perera v. The
AttorneyGeneral_ (11). Mr. Abeykoon submitted that the respondents had failed
to discharge the burden of showing that the total ban on all processions of
every kind, including funeral and religious processions, throughout the
country was required for the purposes of national security or public order. I
am in agreement with the principle that incidental restrictions of free speech
and expression must be no greater than is necessary for the furtherance of a
government interest as prescribed by Article 15 (7) of the Constitution.
However, in the view of the conclusions I have come to on the application of
the Emergency Regulation on the assumption that it was valid, it is not
necessary for me to consider whether the regulation should have been more
narrowly drawn and was invalid on account of being over-broad.

For the reasons set out in my judgment, I declare that the State violated the
fundamental rights of the petitioner declared by Articles 12 (1), 12 (2), 14
(1) (a) and 14 (1) (b) of the Constitution.

The State shall pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 15,000 as costs.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNAWARDANA, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/34.html_  

