##  Atapattu and Others v. People'S Bank and Others - SLR - 208, Vol 1 of 1997
[1996] LKSC 34; (1997) 1 Sri LR 208 (19 December 1996)

208

ATAPATTU AND OTHERS

v.

PEOPLE'S BANK AND OTHERS



SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO. J.,

DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NOS. 20/96 AND 76/96

C.A. APPLICATIONS NOS. 539 AND 814/94  
SEPTEMBER 23, 1996.



Redemption of Land - Finance Act No. 11 of 1963 as amended by Act No. 33 of
1968 and Law No. 16 of 1973 - Substitution of successor for a deceased
applicant - Section 71 of the Finance Act.



**Held:**

** **

Upon the death of an applicant for the acquisition of a land under section 71
of the Finance Act No. 11 of 1963 as amended, there can be substitution of a
"Specified heir" viz. a person mentioned in Section 71(2)(a) - in the
prescribed order of priority \- as well as of a testate heir. Whether the
application was duly constituted, or whether the Bank ought to exercise its
discretion to vest the premises in favour of the substitute, should not be
considered at the stage of substitution but only after a substitute has
stepped into the shoes of the deceased and has acquired the necessary status
to present his case.



**Quaere** , whether a testate heir who is entitled to apply for substitution
has a preferent right over the "specified heirs".



**Cases referred to:**

_ _

1 _. Emaliyana Perera v. People's Bank_ (1985) 1 Sri L.R. 43 (C.A.), (1987) 1
Sri L.R. 181 (S.C.)

_ _

2 _. Kanagasabapathy v People's Bank S.C. Appeal_ No. 124/75 S.C. Minutes 27
August 1976.

_ _

3 _.Wickramasinghe v Sri Lanka State Trading Corporation_ (1994) 3 Sri L.R.
41.

_ _

4 _. Ceylon Estates Staffs Union v. Land Reform Commission_ (1987) 2 Sri L.R.
203,207-8.

_ _

5 _. Amarajeewa v. University of Colombo_ (1993) 2 Sri L. R. 327.

_ _

6 _. Muhandiram v. Salam_ (1947) 49 N.L.R. 80.

_ _

7 _.Hevavitharane v De Silva_ (1961) 63 N.L.R. 68, 72.



**209**



8 _. Narasingh Das v. Mangal Dubey_ (1983) 5 Allahabad 163, 172.

_ _

9 _. Setha v. Weerakoon_ (1948) 49 N.L.R. 225.

_ _

10. _Saravanamuttu v Solamuttu_ (1924) 26 N.L.R. 385,390. 

_ _

11. _Wickremabandu v. Herat_ (1990) 2 Sri L.R. 348, 361.

_ _

12. _Shanmugam v. Commissioner for Registration of Indian and Pakistani Residents_ (1962) 64 N.L.R. 29, 33.

_ _

13. _Jailabdeen v. Danina Umma_ (1962) 64 N.L.R. 419, 422.

_ _

14. _Wijewardene v. People's Bank,_ S.C. Appeal No. 3/80 S.C. Minutes 20 May, 1981.

_ _

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.'



In S.C. Appeal No. 20/96

_  
Walter Perera_ with _Nimal Ranmukhaarachchi_ for appellants.

_ _

_Anil Obeysekera, P.C._ with _Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ for 1st and 2nd
Respondents

_  
W D. Weeraratne_ for 3rd respondent.

_ _

In S.C. Appeal No. 76/96.  


_P. A. D. Samarasekara, P.C._ with _Jayantha de Almeida Gunaratne_ and _Kirthi
Sri Gunawardene_ for Appellant _._

_ _

_S. Fernando, S.C._ for 1st respondent.  


_Bimal Rajapakse_ for 2nd respondent.



_Cur adv. vult._

  
December 19, 1996.

  
**FERNANDO, J.**



An important question of law arises in these appeals: whether there is a right
to substitution, in the place of a deceased applicants in proceedings for the
redemption of land under section 71 of the Finance Act, No. 11 of 1963, as
amended by Act No. 33 of 1968 and Law No. 16 of 1973.

**210**



Section 71 authorises the People's Bank to acquire the whole or any part of
any agricultural, residential or business premises if the conditions specified
in subsection (1) are satisfied. Section 71 provides further:



"(2) No premises shall be acquired under subsection (1) -



(a) Unless an application in that behalf has been made to the Bank by the
original owner of such premises or, where such original owner is dead or is of
unsound mind or otherwise incapable of acting, by the spouse or any descendant
of such person, or if there is no surviving spouse or descendant of such
person, by a parent, brother or sister of such person; or ...



(c) Unless the Bank is satisfied that the average statutory income of the
person making the application and of the other members of the family of which
he is the head, computed under the provisions of the written law relating to
the imposition of income tax, for the three years, of assessment immediately
preceding the date on which such application was made by him, does not exceed
a sum of ten thousand rupees; or ...



(3) The question whether any premises which the Bank is authorised to acquire
under this part of this Act should or should not be acquired shall be
determined by the Bank and every such determination of the Bank shall be final
and conclusive and shall not be called in question in any court."



Section 91 provides:



"Any premises vested in the Bank in consequence of an application made to the
Bank for the acquisition of such premises by any person entitled to make such
application under the preceding provisions of this part of this Act may be let
by the Bank to such person or where such person is dead, to the surviving
spouse, if any, or any descendant of such person upon such terms as will
enable the person to whom such premises are

**211**



let to become the owner thereof after making a certain number of half-yearly
payments as rent."



**FACTS**



**SC APPEAL No.20/96**

  
The material facts are these. In 1972 three persons conditionally transferred
their interests in the land which is the subject-matter of the proceedings. On
30.6.83 the transferee conveyed her rights to the 3rd respondent. One of the
transferors had died in the meantime, and her husband (the 1st appellant) and
the other two transferors applied on 30.6.83 to the People's Bank, the 1st
respondent, for the redemption of that land under section 71. While that
application was pending those two transferors also died, and the Attorney-at-
law who had been appearing for the applicants asked that "their heirs" \- it
does not appear from the record whether those heirs were named or identified
in any way - be substituted in their place. He did not claim to be acting on
behalf of those heirs. The 3rd respondent objected. On 24.6.92 the 2nd
respondent, who was the Bank's inquiry officer, refused substitution. She
reasoned that, although under the law of succession upon the death of a person
all his heirs succeeded to his rights, yet under section 71(2) (a) all the
heirs need not apply for redemption: under that section it was enough if one
of the heirs specified therein made the application; and accordingly, that
provision disclosed no intention that the law of succession should apply.
Further, in the event of death after an application was filed, the section
itself did not provide for substitution, of any or all the heirs of a deceased
applicant; and since the law of succession was inapplicable, there was no
basis on which substitution could be allowed. In that way the 2nd respondent
refused substitution, but without giving the heirs or the legal
representatives of the deceased applicants an opportunity of being heard. Upon
substitution being disallowed, what was left was only the surviving
applicant's claim to an undivided one-third share. The policy of the Bank was
not to vest undivided shares; that had been upheld in Emaliyana Perera v.
People's Bank (1), and so she therefore recommended to the Board of Directors
of the Bank that the application be dismissed.

**212**



The 1st appellant, together with the 2nd and 3rd appellants (alleging that
they were heirs of the two deceased applicants and that the applicants
Attorney-at-law had moved for their substitution) applied to the Court of
Appeal for Certiorari to quash the 2nd respondent's order and Mandamus to
allow substitution. Learned President's Counsel who then appeared for the Bank
tendered written submissions, stressing that the right to apply for redemption
is personal to an applicant, because section 71(2)(b) refers to his statutory
income; and also that there was' no provision, express or implied, for
substitution. However, in what he termed an "Afterthought" to those
submissions, he suggested that section 71 gave the Bank power to acquire
property, subject to certain pre-conditions; one was that "an application must
be made to the Bank by a person named in section 71(2)"; "an application is
merely a starter of acquisition proceedings"; once the application is made,
the presence of the applicant is no longer necessary, because he is not
equated to a plaintiff or petitioner; and upon the conclusion of the
proceedings, even if the applicant is dead, section 91 enables the Bank to let
the vested premises to the surviving spouse or a descendant. His conclusion
was that the Act sought to introduce a "welfare measure", to remedy a
particular mischief, and its purpose would be achieved if an interpretation
was adopted which would permit an application to proceed notwithstanding the
death of the applicant.



The Court of appeal held, however, the Bank could only entertain an
application made by the original owner or a person specified in the section;
that in Kanagasabapathy v. People's Bank (2), it had been held that an
application could not be made by a transferee or assignee; that in the absence
of any provision enabling substitution, the refusal to substitute was
justified. The Court also upheld the rejection of the 1st appellant's
application (citing Emaliyana Perera v. People's Bank) (supra) on the ground
that the policy decision not to acquire undivided interests was within
jurisdiction, and could not be challenged because of the ouster clause in
section 71(3), read with section 22 of the Interpretation Ordinance.

213



SC Appeal 76/96  


The position in this appeal is somewhat different. The original transfer in
1958 was by two persons, mother and son, of an undivided three-fourths share
in five lands; thereafter the mother died; and in 1969 the son applied for the
redemption of all five lands. That application was made to the State Mortgage
Bank (in terms of the Act as it stood then), and was transferred to the
People's Bank in terms of Law No. 16 of 1973\. The proceedings in respect of
four lands resulted in vesting orders, but there was a delay in respect of the
fifth. The original transferees instituted a partition action in respect of
that land; the son died in 1991, leaving a Last Will under which the sole
beneficiary was the appellant, his sister's son; the partition decree allotted
a one-fourth share to the appellant, and the remaining three-fourths to the
original transferees or their heirs, expressly subject to the pending
application made to the Bank for redemption. The appellant then asked the Bank
to re-open that application, but was told that the matter had been laid by
because of certain cases pending in the Court of Appeal. Later the Bank
informed the appellant that since the partition decree made the three-fourths
share subject to the pending application for redemption, that application
could be proceeded with. But on 9.8.94 the Bank told the appellant that,
following the decision of the Court of Appeal in a similar matter (CA
Application No. 927/85, CAM 10.6.94) that substitution cannot be effected, the
Bank had dismissed the application for redemption.



The appellant applied to the Court of Appeal for Certiorari to quash the
decision of 9.8.1994 and Mandamus to direct substitution. The Court of Appeal
dismissed that application holding that upon the death of an applicant, the
spouse or descendant could not automatically be substituted, but must make a
further application; and that the appellant being neither the spouse nor a
descendant, but only the heir under a Last Will, had no right to make an
application for redemption under section 71.



Since both appeals involved the interpretation of the same provisions, they
were heard together.

**214**



**Submissions**  



Mr. Walter Perera and Mr P. A. D. Samarasekera, PC, on behalf of the
respective appellant submitted that the right to make an application for
redemption was not purely personal, that section 71 (2)(a) recognised that if
the transferor had died before making the application, certain other persons -
namely, the surviving spouse, and failing a surviving spouse, any descendant,
and failing a surviving spouse or descendants, a parent, brother or sister
(whom I will refer to as the "specified heirs") - could make that application;
and that if the transferor died after he made the application, one of the
"specified heirs" could be substituted. If they had the greater right of
making the application itself, they must necessarily have - so it was argued -
the lesser right of being substituted. Mr. Samarasekera went one step further,
that a testate heir was also entitled to substitution.



Mr. Sanjeewa Jayawardena, on behalf of the 1st and 2nd respondents in SC
Appeal 20196 submitted that although the specified heirs were entitled to make
an application for redemption, where the original transferor was already dead,
the Legislature had intentionally refrained from making similar provision in
the event of death **pendente lite**. He contended that section 71(2)(c) made
the financial circumstances of the applicant and the members of his family a
condition precedent to the exercise of the jurisdiction to vest the premises,
and that that provision could not be applied to the person substituted \-
because it could result in difficulties and anomalies; thus even where that
condition was satisfied in relation to the original (deceased) applicant, it
might happen that the substitute was a wealthy person with an income exceeding
the specified amount. The Legislature never intended that premises should be
vested for the benefit of such persons. He contended also that the Court of
Appeal had no jurisdiction to review orders made in redemption proceedings,
because of the ouster clause.



He also submitted that the original transferees had sold the property to a
**bona fide** purchaser, that therefore the original application was not
properly constituted, and that accordingly there

**215**



could be no substitution. We indicated to him, however, that the questions for
determination in appeal related to substitution and the jurisdiction of the
Court of Appeal; and not the merits of the application for redemption, which
would have to be determined by the Bank only if substitution was allowed, and
only after hearing the person substituted.



Mr. S. Fernando, SC, and Mr. Bimal Rajapakse, for the respondents in SC Appeal
76196 also contended that in the absence of any enabling provision in the
statute, the presumption is that substitution is not permissible. They also
urged that in any event there could be no substitution of the appellant, who
did not fall into the class of "specified heirs".



**SUBSTITUTION**

** **

** **

Section 71 creates a (contingent) right of redemption in favour of a
transferor of land. Such a right seriously derogates from the

contractual and proprietary right of the transferee. However, such statutory
interference with common law rights is by no means unique. Sometimes the law
allows one person to enjoy a right in derogation of the legal rights of
another. Thus a beneficiary under an express or constructive trust has rights
in respect of property vested in another because the statute considers it
equitable. Our Rent laws confer on a tenant the right to continue in
occupation of the rented premises, despite the termination of the contract of
tenancy, and sometimes even contrary to its terms; and to that right certain
of the tenant's heirs may succeed on his death (see section 36 of the Rent
Act). Under the Industrial Disputes Act, a Labour Tribunal is empowered to re-
instate an employee in his employment, even though his services had been
lawfully terminated by the employer in strict compliance with the contract of
employment and the common law. (I must mention in passing that although there
is no express provision in the Industrial Disputes Act, permitting
substitution upon the death of a party, the precedents favour substitution:
see Wickremesinghe v Sri Lanka State Trading Corporation (3), Ceylon Estates
Staffs Union v Land Reform Commission (4), Amarajeewa v University of Colombo
(5).



216



Section 71 is thus just one more instance in which the Legislature has
empowered a statutory Tribunal create rights in derogation of the express
terms of a contract and the common law. The decision of that Tribunal
recognises, or perhaps creates, a statutory, as distinct from a contractual,
right to a re-transfer (compare the "equity of redemption" which a mortgagor
has in English law despite express contrary provision in the mortgage: see
Halsbury, Laws of England's, 4th ed, vol. 32, para 407).



There is no doubt that the right to make an application for redemption is not
"personal" to the original transferor in the sense that he alone can apply,
and that it terminates upon his death: section 71(2) empowers a successor to
make an application if he fell within the category of the "specified heirs",
and thus demonstrates at least to that extent it survives. Section 71
therefore manifests undeniable legislative intention not to make the right of
redemption personal to the transferor. That right is of the same nature as a
right to claim a re-transfer, which has been held not to be personal:
Muhandirarn v. Salam (6), Further, the fact that section 91 empowers the Bank
to let (on rent-purchase terms) the vested premises to the surviving spouse,
if any, or a descendant, where the applicant is dead also tends to exclude a
legislative intent to make the right personal.



If then section 71(2) is to be interpreted as not permitting substitution, the
result would be that upon the death of the applicant application would abate.
However, since that was without an adjudication on the merits, a "specified
heir" would be entitled to make a fresh application; and if that applicant
were then to die, yet another "specified heir" could make a third application;
and so on. In other words, that interpretation would mean that although a
"specified heir" could not be substituted, yet an indefinite number of further
applications could be made by "specified heirs", one after the other. I doubt
whether the Legislature intended that land redemption should involve such
technicality. Since the right to apply is not personal, I would hesitate to
hold that the right of an applicant, just because he took an extra step on the
road to getting back the land which he had

**217**



transferred, suddenly deteriorated in quality, and became exclusively personal
to him, no sooner he made his application. If at all his right did change in
any way, it only became stronger or greater. In the absence of express
contrary provision therefore, "specified heirs" continue to enjoy at least the
same right of succession upon death after an application was filed, as they
did before it was filed.



What happened in SC Appeal 20/96 illustrates the anomalies that the contrary
view would perpetuate. Because two applicants died, the 2nd respondent held
that the third could not proceed, because his application, considered in
isolation became one in respect of an undivided interest; thereafter, even if
"specified heirs" of the two deceased applicants made fresh applications, they
too would fail for the same reason. However, if all three applicants had died,
their "specified heirs" could collectively have made a fresh application. And,
arguably, if the surviving applicant withdrew his application and joined the
"specified heirs" of the other two in making a fresh application, that too
might have been entertained. I do not think section 71 was intended to be a
minefield through which applicants could emerge unscathed only through such
tactical manoeuvres.



The absence of statutory provision expressly permitting substitution has been
stressed. But to give undue weight to that is to ignore fundamental
assumptions which underlie legislation conferring judicial and administrative
remedies: that the Legislature intended that disputes should be determined,
rather than avoided or postponed, that they should be decided after hearing
both sides, rather than with one side unrepresented and therefore unheard, and
that fair procedures should be respected. In relation to procedural issues of
this kind, in choosing between two interpretations - one which would allow the
dispute to be heard and determined **inter** **partes** , and the other which
would either prevent it being decided, or result. In effect, in a decision
being made **ex parte** \- Courts and Tribunals must not:



"... act upon the principle that every procedure is to be taken as prohibited
unless it is expressly provided for by the Code, but on the converse principle
that every procedure is to be understood as

218



permissible till it is shown to be prohibited by the law. As a matter of
general principle prohibitions cannot be presumed" (Hewavitharane v. de Silva
(7); citing Narasingh Das v. Mangal Dubey (8).



Although those observations were made in reference to the Civil Procedure
Code, the principle is one of the fundamentals of fair procedure which all
Tribunals should respect.



There is another aspect of the matter which is crucial to SC Appeal 76/96.
Even a right which is purely personal often changes its character after
litigation for its enforcement has commenced. there may then arise a right in
respect of the subject-matter of the litigation itself, which can, in the
event of the death of a party, devolve on his legal representative. An example
from the law of delict is illustrative:



"Although the Aquilian action passes to the executor, it is to be noted that
he can recover only for actual loss suffered by the estate. In an action for
personal injuries, therefore, although he can claim for the deceased's medical
and hospital expenses, he has no claim in respect of the pain and suffering
caused to the deceased by his injuries. And if the deceased dies from his
injuries, although he can claim for the deceased's funeral expenses as well as
for his medical and hospital expenses, he has no claim in-respect of future
loss to the estate by reason of the death ...............



It should be observed that the above mentioned- rules are subject to the
qualification that there has not been **litis contestatio** before the death.
For the effect of litis contestatio, which in the modern law is deemed to take
place at the moment the pleadings are closed, is to freeze the plaintiff's
rights as at that moment, and thus, in the event of his dying before the
action is heard, to confer upon his executor all the rights which he himself
would have had if he had lived." (McKerron, Law of Delict, 6th ed, p.132)

**219**



As for when **litis contestatio** takes place in our law, see Setha v.
Weerakoon(9). In the law of contract, Weeramantry (Law of Contracts, vol. 2,
p.871) observes:



"In certain limited classes of contracts death brings about a termination of
contractual rights by operation of law. These are contracts involving rights
and duties of a purely personal character ... in all other cases, all
contractual rights and duties pass upon death to the representative of the
deceased person, and the obligation is therefore not extinguished, but
survives in favour of or against the representative of the estate of the
deceased."



The subject-matter of the litigation, the **res litigiosa,** is even capable
of being ceded or assigned (Lee, Roman-Dutch Law, 5th ed, p.



As I have noted earlier, under the Industrial Disputes Act too substitution is
possible.



In that background, it cannot be said that the rights which a deceased
applicant had in respect of pending redemption proceedings were not capable of
devolving upon his legal representatives.



I must now turn to the submission that section 71(2)(c) stipulates a condition
precedent, that an applicant's family income should not exceed a prescribed
maximum; that this applies to a "specified heir" who makes the application;
and that therefore substitution should not be allowed, because then a person
who does not satisfy that condition may nevertheless obtain the benefits of
redemption. There is some justification for this contention, as the
Legislature intended that that the benefits of redemption should accrue to
poor people who had lost their property. Why then should a person who was not
entitled, in the first instance, to make an application himself, be allowed to
come in as a substitute? This is certainly a relevant consideration. However,
even if substitution is not permitted, a similar anomaly can occur at a later
stage: if an impoverished applicant dies after the property is vested in the
Bank, it may be disposed of, under

**220**



section 91, to an heir who did not satisfy that condition. Further, that
anomaly cannot be taken in isolation: the converse case must also be
considered. If a desperately poor transferor, the sole breadwinner of a family
consisting of an invalid spouse and several minor children, dies after
application was filed, was it the legislative intent that his family, now
benefit of its sole support, be denied the benefits of redemption? Why should
an interpretation be adopted which would deny both the undeserving and the
deserving? Of course, in the latter case it can be urged that an heir could
make a fresh application. But that would not be possible if prescriptive
period of ten years (section 71(2) (aa)) had elapsed. In these circumstances,
I do not think that fundamental principles which make substitution just and
equitable should give way to the possibility of such anomalies, particularly
because there is another factor which reconciles all these conflicting
considerations - which is consistent with the fundamental principles involved,
whilst advancing the remedy and suppressing the mischief, and dispensing with
the need for successive applications. Section 71 does not compel the Bank to
acquire premises simply because the pre-conditions in subsection (2) are
satisfied, and the fact that the Bank has a discretion has been recognised in
Emaliyana Perera v. People's Bank. (supra) One matter which the Bank may
legitimately take into account is the relative financial position of the
parties: thus if during the pendency of the proceedings, a destitute applicant
becomes wealthy, and a once-affluent transferee becomes poor, the Bank may -
having regard to the purpose of the statute - decline to vest the premises,
thus excluding redemption for the benefit of the "Undeserving". That same
discretion will apply to a substituted applicant (see also section 71(2)(e)).



I therefore hold that upon the death of an applicant, there can be
substitution of a "specified heir"\- in the prescribed order of priority - as
well as of a testate heir. Whether the application was duly constituted, or
whether the Bank ought to exercise its discretion, to vest the premises, in
favour of the substitute, should not be considered at the stage of
substitution, but only after a substitute has stepped into the shoes of the
deceased and has acquired the necessary status to present his case. I must add
that I do not express

**221**



any opinion as to whether the 2nd and 3rd appellants in SC Appeal 20/96 and
the appellant in SC Appeal 76/96, are the proper persons to be substituted,
because that is a matter to be determined after notice to all those who may
have the right to succeed to the interests of the deceased. All that I do
decide is that the Bank and the Court of Appeal erred in law in holding that
there could not be substitution of "specified heirs" and testate heirs.



**OUSTER CLAUSE**



Since section 71(3) enacts that every determination of the Bank shall be final
and conclusive and shall not be called in question in any court, it was
contended that the effect of section 22 of the Interpretation Ordinance, as
amended by Act No. 18 of 1972, was that a decision by the Bank refusing
substitution could not be reviewed by the Court of Appeal in the exercise of
its writ jurisdiction under Article 140.



There is an apparent conflict between the ouster clause (which is pre-
Constitution legislation), and Article 140\. While generally a Constitutional
provision, being the higher norm, must prevail over statutory provision, there
are some constitutional provisions which enable pre-Constitution written law
to continue to apply. The first is Article 16(1), which is inapplicable here,
because that deals only with inconsistency with fundamental rights. The second
is Article 168(1), which provides:



"Unless Parliament otherwise provides, all laws, written laws and unwritten
laws, in force immediately before the Constitution, shall, **mutatis
mutandis** , and except as otherwise expressly provided in the Constitution,
continue in force."



However, this would make the ouster clause operative only "except as otherwise
expressly provided" in Article 140. The meaning of that phrase was considered
by a bench of five Judges in Wickremabandu v Herath(11), in relation to a
similar question, whether the ouster clause in section. 8 of the Public
Security Ordinance

**222**



derogated from the Jurisdiction of this Court under Article 17 and 126. H. A.
G. de Silva, J, and I held that the conferment of jurisdiction of this Court
by those Articles was express contrary provision, with the result that Article
168(1) did not make the ouster clause operative vis-a-vis the fundamental
rights jurisdiction. The Privy Council held in Shanmugam v Commissioner for
Registration of Indian and Pakistani Residents (12), that  
  
"to be express provision with regard to something it is not necessary that
that thing should be specially mentioned; it is sufficient that it is directly
covered by the language however broad the language may be which covers it so
long as the applicability arises directly from the language used and not by
inference from it."



Articles 17 and 126 constitute "express provision", because they directly
confer jurisdiction; although they make no specific mention of the ouster
clause in section 8, the language used is broad enough to confer an unfettered
jurisdiction. The position is the same in regard to Article 140: the language
used is broad enough to give the Court of Appeal authority to review, even on
grounds excluded by the ouster clause.



But there is one difference between those Articles and Article 140. Article
140 (unlike Article 126) is "subject to the provisions of the Constitution".
Is that enough to reverse the position, so as to make article 140 subject to
the written laws which Article 168(1) keeps in force? Apart from any other
consideration, if it became necessary to decide which was to prevail - an
ouster clause in an ordinary law or a Constitutional provision conferring writ
jurisdiction on a Superior Court, "subject to the provisions of the
Constitution" \- I would unhesitatingly hold that the latter prevails, because
the presumption must always be in favour of a jurisdiction which enhances the
protection of the Rule of Law, and against an ouster clause which tends to
undermine it (see also Jailabdeen v. Danina Umma (13)). But no such
presumption is needed, because it is clear that the phrase "subject to the
provisions of the Constitution" was necessary to avoid

**223**



conflicts between Article 140 and other Constitutional provisions - such as
Article 80(3), 120, 124, 125, and 126(3). That phrase refers only to contrary
provisions in the Constitution itself, and does not extend to provisions of
other written laws, which are kept alive by Article 168(1). Where the
Constitution contemplated that its provisions may be restricted by the
provisions of Article 138 which is subject to "any law".



There is another reason why this particular ouster clause is of no avail in
these appeals. It purports to protect from review only a **determination** by
the Bank whether any premises should or should not be acquired; it does not
purport to apply to distinct preliminary or incidental matters, such as the
substitution of parties.



**UNDIVIDED INTERESTS**



Since the policy decision of the Bank, upheld in Emaliyana Perera v People's
Bank, has been referred to by the Court of Appeal, I must add that no policy
decision of that kind can be inflexible. As held in Wijewardene v. People's
Bank (14), cited in Emaliyana Perera v. People's Bank (supra), the power
conferred on the Bank, by section 71(1), to acquire property includes the
power to acquire undivided interests. While it is true that practical
difficulties may often justify a decision not to acquire undivided interests,
that policy cannot be applied when there are no such difficulties. Thus the
Bank may be justified in refusing to vest an undivided half-share, where the
other half-share remains vested in the original transferee, because of the
practical difficulty of giving possession. But that same justification would
not exist where the balance share is vested in, say, the applicant for
redemption himself, or a member of his family; or where during the pendency of
the redemption proceedings a partition decree transforms the undivided share
of the original transferee, to which the application relates, into a divided
lot, so what the Bank is asked to vest is no longer an undivided share. In the
circumstances, the dismissal (in SC Appeal 20/96) of the 1st Appellant's
application was wrong in law.

224



**CONCLUSION**



I therefore set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal in both appeals, and
quash the orders dated 24.6.92 and 9.8.94 made by the Bank, and its inquiring
officer, refusing substitution and dismissing the application for redemption.
However I do not direct the Bank to effect substitution for the respective
applicants, but only to consider the applications for substitution giving
notice to the "specified heirs" of the deceased applicants. Further, in SC
Appeal 76/96, while holding that the testate heir was entitled to apply for
substitution, I refrain from expressing any opinion as to whether he had a
preferent right over the "specified heirs", as the latter were neither noticed
nor heard.



In each appeal I direct the Bank to pay appellants sum of . 5,000/- as costs
in both Courts.



**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.

** **

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.



_Appeals allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/34.html_  

