##  Madurapperuma and Others v. M. N. Junaid and Others - SLR - 365, Vol 1 of
1997 [1995] LKSC 34; (1997) 1 Sri LR 365 (9 November 1995)

365

**MADURAPPERUMA AND OTHERS**

**v.**

**M. N. JUNAID AND OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J.,

WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND

DR. GUNAWARDANA, J.

S.C. APPLICATION NO. 437/96

FEBRUARY 06, 1997.



_Fundamental Rights ‑ Article 12(1) of the Constitution ‑ Development Lottery
Trust ‑ Transfer of officers of the Ministry of Finance to the staff of the
Development Lottery Trust ‑ Establishments Code ‑ Release for service
‑Exercise of option ‑ Status of the Trust ‑ Was the Trust a legal entity?_



In 1982 the Development Lottery was established and run as a unit of the
Ministry of Finance. The net proceeds of the Lottery were paid to the
President's Fund established by Act No. 7 of 1978. On 25.5.93 the Government
of Sri Lanka acting by R. Paskaralingam, as Secretary to the Treasury as
"settlor" purported to establish the Development Lottery Trust which was to be
Trust to run the Development Lottery for the purpose of raising funds for the
President's Fund. H. A. Abhayagunawardhana as Deputy Secretary to the Treasury
was described as the Trustee in the Deed. Both settlor and trustee were
defined to include successors in the said office for the time being. The
Trustee had power to appoint staff. The Deed also provided for a six member
Board of Management and the 1st respondent was the Chairman and 2 to 5
respondents were four of the members of the said Board. The trustee was
empowered to delegate any of his functions, powers and duties to the said
Board.



**Held:**



The Trust was not a legal entity. The petitioners who were already public
officers continued to be public officers even when they purported to be
temporarily released to the Trust. They were not therefore exempt from
transfer to the Ministry of Finance.



Further since they failed to change their status by a proper exercise of their
option under the Establishment Code Section 2.5.1. Their _status quo_
continued and they remained as public officers. The Establishment Code did not
permit any release temporary or permanent to the Trust. The Trust cannot be
treated as being a public corporation or board or analogous thereto.



**APPLICATION** for relief for alleged violation of fundamental rights.  


366

_Elmore Perera_ for petitioner.



_D. P. Kumarasinghe, A.S.G._ for respondents.



_R. K. W Goonasekera_ with _J. C_. _Weliamuna_ for intervenient‑respondents.

_ _

_Cur. adv. vult._



March 26, 1997\.  


**FERNANDO, J**.



The 25 petitioners allege actual and imminent infringements of their
fundamental rights under Article 12(1) by reason of their transfers ‑ some
actual, some anticipated ‑ contrary to the Establishments Code.



In 1982 the Development Lottery was established and run as a unit of the
Ministry of Finance. The petitioners had been working in that unit, as public
officers, some from the inception itself. The net proceeds of that Lottery
have throughout been paid to the President's Fund established by Act No. 7 of
1978.



The problem that arises in this case resulted from a "Deed of Trust" entered
into, on 25.5.93, between the Government of Sri Lanka, acting by R.
Paskaralingam, "as Secretary to the Treasury", as "settlor", and H. A.
Abhayagunawardhana, "as Deputy Secretary to the Treasury", as "trustee". Both
"settlor" and "trustee" were defined to include "successors in the said office
for the time being". The 6th and 7th respondents are the present Secretary and
Deputy Secretary to the Treasury.



That Deed purported to establish the "Development Lottery Trust" ("the
Trust"), the object of which was to take over and continue the administration,
control and functions of the said Development Lottery for the purpose of
raising funds for the President's Fund. The trustee had, _inter alia,_ the
power "to appoint such officers and servants as are considered necessary for
the conducting of lotteries and the achievement of the objectives of the
Trust".



That Deed also provided for a six‑member "Board of Management" of the Trust
("the Board"), and the 1st to 5th  


**367  
 **

respondents are the Chairman and four of the members of that Board. The
trustee was empowered "to delegate any functions, powers and duties of the
office of trustee to the said Board of Management", and it is not disputed
that the 7th respondent as trustee did delegate his powers of appointment to
the Board. The services of all the petitioners were utilised to run the
Development Lottery under the Trust, and the question which we have now to
decide is whether they are entitled to continue with the Trust, as permanent
employees, or are liable to be transferred or reverted back to the Ministry of
Finance.



It is the Establishments Code which provides in chapter V for the release of
public officers to other posts in the public service (section 1), as well as
for service outside the public service (section 2).



**2.** **Release for Service outside the Public Service**



2.1 An officer may be released for service outside the Public Service (as for
instance in a Public Corporation, only with the sanction of the Appointing
Authority and any other authority whose concurrence is required by the law
under which the Corporation or Board is constituted.



2.2 Every such release requires the concurrence of the Director of
Establishments as well, to ensure the preservation of pension rights of a
public officer during a period of temporary release to a Public Corporation
and, in the case of permanent release, the conferment of benefits under the
Minutes on Pensions in respect of services under the Government.



2.3 An application for release (Temporary or Permanent) should be made on a
form as in specimen given at Appendix 6 by the Appointing Authority of the
officer's substantive post through the Secretary to his Ministry and the
Secretary to the Ministry under which [comes ?] the Public Corporation to
which it is proposed to release the officer.



.............



2.5 If the officer is released temporarily, the terms of his release will be
as follows:‑

368  


2.5.1 The period of release should not exceed 2 years. Before the expiry of
the period of temporary release he should opt either to revert to his former
post or (if the Public Corporation desires to retain his services permanently)
to be permanently released to that Public Corporation.



...........



2.6 If an officer is permanently released for service in a Public Corporation,
the terms and conditions of his release will be governed by the law under
which that Public Corporation is constituted and by the relevant provisions of
the Minutes on Pensions.



It is not disputed that until 1993 the petitioners were public officers
serving in the public service. Their case is that they were temporarily
released (under section 2.1) from 25.5.93 for service in the Trust for two
years; that the 1st respondent called the petitioners to exercise, on or
before 1.9.93, this option to join the Trust on a permanent basis on the
expiration of the period of temporary release, and that they did so; that on
28.7.94 the Board decided "to issue letters to all members of the staff who
requested that they be absorbed into the permanent cadre and to inform the
Director/Combined Services accordingly"; that by letters date 8.8.94,
addressed to the Director/Combined Services through the 1st respondent, they
expressed their desire to join the staff of the Trust permanently and asked
for permanent release; that the whole matter was reviewed by the new Board
appointed after the General Elections, and it was found that some of the
petitioners would not complete 10 years service even by 24.5.95; that the
petitioners appealed to the 1st respondent for a further two-­year extension;
that the 1st respondent recommended a one‑year extension; and that by letter
dated 16.11.95 he informed the petitioners that Cabinet approval had been
obtained for such extension. That decision was not produced. In the meantime,
on 11.10.95, the Board had decided to absorb staff members who wished to join
the permanent cadre of the Trust, and on 12.10.95 issued fresh option forms,
which the petitioners duly completed. By letter dated 16.10.95, addressed to
the Director/Combined Services (the 9th respondent) through the 7th
respondent, the 1st respondent requested the release of 25 employees
(including 24 petitioners) for permanent employment in the Trust; the 7th
respondent replied on

369  


9.11.95 requesting some particulars as to their period of service, and the
reasons for recommending their absorption; and this information was furnished
by the 1st respondent on 16.11.95.



In or about December 1995 the Cabinet decided to establish a Development
Lottery Board to replace the Trust. By letters dated 27.12.95 and 28.12.95 the
7th respondent informed the 1st respondent and ten of the petitioners that
those ten petitioners were transferred to the Ministry of Finance with effect
from 1.1.96, and that ten other officers were transferred to the Trust;
however, the petitioners were permitted to remain with the Trust. (Those ten
officers were permitted to intervene as intervenient‑respondents.) Thereafter,
ten of the petitioners received letters dated 9.5.96 purporting to transfer
them to the Ministry on 25/5/96 on the expiration of their period of release.



The petitioners' case is that upon being called upon by the Trust (through the
Board) to exercise their option under section 2.5.1, not only did they opt to
remain with the Trust, but the Trust also decided to retain them in service
permanently. Consequently they ceased to be public officers, and became
permanent employees of the Trust.



Mr. Kumarasinghe, PC, ASG, on behalf of the 1st to 10th respondents contended
that the purported exercise by the petitioners of their option, under section
2.5.1, not to revert to the public service **** was not effective to make them
permanent employees of the Trust for two reasons. First, the exercise of that
option by a temporarily released public officer (even if his present employer
concurs) becomes effective only if and when the appointing authority of his
substantive post consents. He submitted that if this Court held otherwise,
that would result in the State losing the services of useful public officers
without its consent. Second, the petitioners had not complied with the
requirements for a permanent release, in that they had not used the form
prescribed by section 2.3. In that connection, it must be noted that in his
affidavit the 7th respondent has pointed out that under the Establishments
Code the period of temporary release should not exceed two years, and that
there is no provision to extend that period in order to enable employees to
earn pension rights.

370  


Section 2.5.1 permits a temporary release for a period not exceeding two
years. An authority which makes a rule is bound by it unless and until duly
amended, because _legem patere quem ipse fecisti._ While the enactment of a
rule inconsistent with an existing rule would operate as an implied amendment,
a decision contrary to the existing rule, even though it is by the authority
which made it in the first place, is not a valid amendment of that rule, and
would inevitably result in unequal treatment. Accordingly, the petitioners
should have exercised their option within that period of two years. Sections
2.2 and 2.3 specify the manner in which that option should be exercised. If
section 2.2 is not observed, benefits under the Minutes on Pension may be
affected. Section 2.5.1 grants a public officer an option ‑either to revert to
the public service or to become a permanent employee of his new employer ‑ and
for the first alternative, no pre­condition is stipulated; and at first sight
it seems that the only pre­-condition for the second is the concurrence of his
new employer. _Expressio unius, exclusio alteris,_ and so this suggests that
the concurrence of his substantive employer, the State, is unnecessary.
However, the context prevents such an interpretation: the requirement in
section 2.3, that the application for permanent release should be made "by the
appointing authority of the officer's substantive post" through the
Secretaries to the two Ministries concerned, indicates that the option which
section 2.5.1 gives an officer is not entirely unfettered. Here no such
application was made, and while the failure to use the prescribed form may not
have been fatal by itself, yet here there has been substantial non‑compliance
with section 2.2. and 2.3.



Thus at the end of the maximum permissible period of temporary release, the
petitioners had not duly exercised their option under section 2.5.1. Did they
continue as public officers, or did they become employees of the Trust? Quite
apart from the submission which I have to consider in the succeeding part of
this judgment, I hold that since they failed to change their status by a
proper exercise of their option, the _status quo_ continued, and they remained
as public officers.



However, a more fundamental question was raised by Mr. Goonasekera, on behalf
of the intervenient‑respondents, who  


371  


submitted that in any event the Establishments Code did not permit any
release, temporary or permanent, to the Trust.



Although section 2 is captioned "Release for service outside the Public
Service", an examination of its provisions shows that it is applicable only to
service in public corporations and boards established by or under statute. It
is true that section 2.1 says _" as for instance _in a public corporation",
and thereby suggests that a variety of other employments is permissible.
However that section goes on to refer to concurrence "required by the law
under which the corporation or board is established", and thus shows an
intention to permit release to such bodies only (see also sections 2.2, 2.3,
2.5.1 and 2.6, and Appendix 6). None of those provisions would be applicable,
for instance, to release for service in the private sector. The context
therefore requires me to consider whether the Trust could be treated as being
a public corporation or board, or analogous thereto.



Learned Counsel for the Petitioners submitted that the Trust was a "public
institution" which came within the Constitutional definition of a "public
corporation":



"Any corporation, board or other body which was or is established by or under
any written law other than the Companies Ordinance, with funds or capital
wholly or partly provided by the Government by way of grant, loan or
otherwise."



This includes not only any "other body" but even a body established _under_
any written law, while sections 2.1 and 2.6 refer only to corporations and
boards _constituted "by" law, _and accordingly I am of the view that chapter V
contemplates release only to corporations and boards constituted by statute.
One characteristic of such corporations and boards is that they have a legal
personality, distinct from the State.



I will assume that the Trust deed created a valid trust, for a public purpose.
The definition of a trust in our Trusts Ordinance is that it is an obligation
annexed to the ownership of property, and arising out of

**372  
 **

a confidence reposed in the trustee and in this instance, not in the trustee
in his personal capacity, but _nomine officii_. Thus the Trust deed did not
create a legal entity, and the trustee was not incorporated under section 114
of the Trusts Ordinance, and hence neither the Trust nor the trustee has legal
personality. Further, the Trust was set up by the Government acting through
the Secretary to the Treasury (and his successors in office), and the Trustee
was the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury (and his successors in office), and
thus cannot be regarded as distinct from the Government.



If the Trustee had recruited persons from outside, they would have become his
employees, in his capacity as trustee; whether such persons became "public
officers", we do not have to decide. I hold, however, that the petitioners who
were already public officers, when they purported to be temporarily released
to the Trust, continued to be public officers. They were not thereby exempted
from transfer to the Ministry of Finance.



For these reasons the petitioners' application is dismissed. It is the conduct
of the officials of the Trust which induced the petitioners to believe that
they had a right to permanent release, and compelled the Intervenient
respondents to intervene. In these circumstances we direct the Trust to pay
two sets of costs, of Rs. 5,000 each, one to the petitioners (although
unsuccessful) and other to the Intervenient respondents.



**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**DR.** **GUNAWARDANA, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/34.html_  

