##  Mendis v. Abeysinghe and Another - SLR - 29, Vol 2 of 1994 [1994] LKSC 34;
(1994) 2 Sri LR 29 (7 November 1994)

**29**

  **MENDIS**

**v.**

**ABEYSINGHE AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J., AMERASINGHE, J. AND

GOONEWARDENA, J.

S.C. APPEAL N0. 49/88; C.A. N0. 329/79(F);

D.C. COLOMBO N0. A/33/M

SEPTEMBER 15 AND 20, 1994.



Agreements to sell land ‑ Renunciation of right to obtain valid transfer in
favour of two others ‑ Failure to complete transaction ‑ Possession ‑
Prescription Ordinance s. 7‑ "Encumbrance."



Abeysinghe (defendant‑respondent) by a notarial deed, agreed on 02.08.1967 to
sell 18A OR 20P out of Galla Estate to one Wickremaratne. On the same day by
another notarial deed Wickremaratne renounced his rights and privileges
including the right to obtain a valid transfer in favour of Mendis (1st
plaintiff appellant) and one Speldewinde in consideration of Mendis and
Speldewinde paying ‑



i.          Wickremaratne Rs. 25,000/‑ in equal shares at execution of deed

ii.          Wickremaratne Rs. 30,000/‑ on or before 02.02.1968.

iii.         Abeysinghe Rs. 170,000/- on or before 02.02.1968.



On failure to fulfil (ii) and (iii), the Rs. 25,000/- paid to Wickramaratne at
execution was to be forfeited.



On 04.04.1968 by notarial agreement P1/X50, Abeysinghe agreed to sell the same
land for Rs. 350,000/‑ to Mendis and Speldewinde. A sum of Rs. 30,000/‑ had
been paid as an advance and a further sum of Rs. 10,000/‑ was paid at the time
of the execution of P1. The purchase was to be completed on or before 31 July,
1968 and on failure, Mendis and Speldewinde would pay damages at the rate of
Rs. 150/‑ a day to Abeysinghe till possession which had been given to Mendis
and Speldewinde from about 02 August 1967, was handed back to Abeysinghe. The
date for completion of purchase was extended by three months on payment of Rs.
25,000/‑ on 02 August 1968 to Abeysinghe. The transaction was not completed
within that time or thereafter but Mendis and Speldewinde continued to be in
possession till August 1972 when, in terms of the Land Reform Law, they were
compelled to vacate the land. Speldewinde died in 1972. On­29.07.1974 Mendis
filed plaint praying for judgment in the aggregate sum of RS. 163,296/‑ with
legal interest based on four alleged causes of action against Abeysinghe.
Speldewinde's sister Pearl Grace Anesthesia Abeyratne, was made a
party‑defendant to give her notice of the action but later she was added as
the 2nd plaintiff. The basis of the action was breach of the written agreement
P1 but on 16 June 1975 the plaint was amended to include an alternative cause
of action based on an alleged oral agreement made on 09 March 1970 as
described in a letter P22/X43 addressed by Proctor N. Balasundaram to
Abeysinghe. By this oral agreement Abeysinghe was alleged to have agreed to‑



(1)        pay Mendis (a) Rs. 52,500/‑ being the amount paid by him on
02.08.1967 on the two agreements entered into on that day.,







            (b) Rs. 6,686.50 being stamp fees and legal expenses incurred by Mendis.



(c) Rs. 9,109.50 being expenditure incurred by Mendis in the preparation of
the                 property for auction sale  



(2)        allow Mendis to continue in possession as his licencee, free of
rent until the aforesaid sums aggregating to Rs. 68,296/‑ were paid as
follows:

##### 30



i.          Rs. 15,000/‑ on or before 31.12.1970.

ii.          Rs. 25,000/‑ on or before 31.12.1971.

iii.         Rs. 28,296/‑ on or before 31.12.1972.



Abeysinghe denied liability and pleaded that on the basis of P1, Mendis and
Speldewinde had to make payment on or before 31.7.1968. They had failed to do
so and therefore the agreement was to be cancelled and of no effect and the
deposits were forfeited. The plaintiffs' claims were prescribed.



Mendis took up the position that Abeysinghe had to sell the land free of
encumbrances but this land being part of Abeysinghe's deceased father's
estate, Estate Duty was outstanding during the whole of the relevant period
and therefore Abeysinghe was not in a position to transfer the land free of
encumbrances. Hence, the blame for the failure of the transaction was on
Abeysinghe. Further the plaintiff claimed compensation in respect of the sums
expended by them in the preparation of the land for resale.



The District Judge held with the plaintiff including the alternative cause of
action and awarded Rs. 163,296/‑ to the 1st plaintiff and Rs. 107,000/‑ with
costs to the 2nd plaintiff. The Court of Appeal entered judgment for the 1st
plaintiff (Mendis) in a sum of Rs. 28,296 with legal interest from date of
action and dismissed the action of the 2nd plaintiff. Both were awarded costs
below but no costs in appeal.



**Held:**



(1)        The vendor (Abeysinghe) was the sole heir of his deceased father
who was the owner of Galla Estate. Ex facie, there was no defect in title. And
there was no evidence to the contrary.



(2)        The vendor had not deliberately concealed the fact that the
property was the subject‑matter of testamentary proceedings. The purchaser's
notaries, in terms of Clause 11 of P1 had the custody of the deeds. From a
perusal of the documents, it should have been evident that Abeysinghe's title
was derived as the sole heir of his father. They ought to have found out the
position with regard to the testamentary proceedings and if letters of
administration were granted, whether it was conditional. However. this had not
been done.



(3)        The intending purchasers were negotiating a sale to Ceylon Paints
Ltd., but this fell through; however this was not on account of the absence of
the permission of the Court to sell the property. The signing of an agreement
as far as the purchasers were concerned, ceased to be relevant. Admittedly,
the permission of the Court to sell the property had not been obtained on 31
st July or 31 st October. However, that was not a reason for the purchasers'
failure to tender the deeds and the purchase price. It was not even an
acceptable excuse, for, as the purchasers themselves later suggested, an
appropriately worded condition in the draft deed could have eliminated any
difficulties in that regard.



(4)        If estate duty was an "encumbrance", it was one which, as the
purchasers demonstrated, could have been removed by an appropriate clause
embodied in the deed which should have been tendered on or before 31st July.
The fact that estate duty was payable was no impediment to the transaction at
any time. Nor was it a cause for the failure of the deal with Colombo Paints
Ltd.



(5)        Reference the alternative cause of action, the purchasers enjoyed
the fruits of the property until dispossession by the Land Reform Commission
in August 1972. However prescription did not begin to run from the date of
dispossession. The enjoyment of the fruits of the land was not based on any
enforceable obligation on the vendor's part to permit it for there was no
notarially executed document in that regard. There was no usufructuary
mortgage as the appellant suggests. There was no lien as the District Judge
had supposed. Possession and the enjoyment of the produce was not in lieu of
interest. Possession was merely security for the payment of the amount
promised. The debt was payable in 3 instalments‑the first on or before
31.12.1970, the second on or before 31.12.1971 and the third on or before
31.12.1972. The first and second

##### 31

instalment fell outside the 3 year period of limitation in respect of oral
agreements and were therefore barred by s. 7 of the Prescription Ordinance.



**Cases referred to:**



1\.         _Silva v. Silva_ 10 NLR 234.

2\.         _Misso v. Hadjear_ (1916) 19 NLR 277 at 280.

3\.         _Mudianse v Mudianse_ (1875) 2 NLR 86.



**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_P. A. D. Samarasekera P.C._ with _Saumya Amarasekera_ for Appellant.

_H. L. De Silva P.C._ with _Harsha Amarasekera_ for the 1st Respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 7, 1994.

**AMERASINGHE, J.**



# AN OUTLINE OF THE CASE



_             _On 2 August 1967, Alexander Edmund Rajapaksa Abeysinghe, by a
notarially executed document, 2P2X49, agreed to sell a portion of Galla Estate
in extent eighteen acres and twenty perches described in schedule B" to Joseph
de Wansa Wickremaratna.



On the same day on which 2 P 2, X49 was entered into, another notarial
agreement, 2 P 3, X99A, was also executed. After referring to the transaction
in X49, Wickremaratne renounced "all the rights and privileges accruing and
deriving from" the agreement X49 including the right to obtain a valid
transfer of the land, in favour of Denzil Mendis and Germaine Speldewinde in
consideration of (1) Mendis and Speldewinde paying Wickremaratne a sum of Rs.
25,000 in equal shares upon the execution of 2 P 3, X99A; (2) Mendis and
Speldewinde paying Wickremaratne a sum of Rs. 30,000 on or before 2nd February
1968; and (3) Mendis and Speldewinde paying Abeysinghe a sum of Rs.170,000 on
or before 2nd February 1968. If Mendis and Speldewinde failed to honour their
obligations, the sum of Rs. 25,000 was to be forfeited to Wickremaratne. With
regard to these two transactions, the learned District Judge observed that
"Wickremaratna was merely a broker and he was paid off his fee on those two
deeds."



On 4th April 1968, by a notarially executed agreement, P1, X50, Alexander
Edmund Rajapaksa Abeysinghe agreed to sell the same land referred to in X49
and X49A for a sum of Rs. 350,000 to Denzil Mendis and Germaine Harris
Speldewinde.

##### 32

 A sum of Rs. 30,000 had been paid as an advance and a further sum of Rs.
10,000 was paid at the time of the execution of P1. It was agreed that the
purchase was to be completed on or before 31st July 1968 and that if the sale
was not concluded by that date, Mendis and Speldewinde would pay damages at
the rate of Rs. 150 a day to Abeysinghe till possession, which Mendis and
Speldewinde had enjoyed from or about the time of the execution of X99A, was
restored to him.



In consideration of a sum of Rs. 25,000 being paid to Abeysinghe on 2nd August
1968, the date for the completion of the transaction was extended by three
months. However, the transaction was not completed within that time or
thereafter. The plaintiffs continued to be in possession of the land till
August 1972 when, in terms of the Land Reform Law, they were compelled to
vacate the land.



**THE ACTION IN THE DISTRICT COURT**



On 29th  July 1974, Denzil Mendis filed plaint in the District Court of
Colombo praying for judgment in the aggregate sum of Rs. 163,296 with legal
interest based on four alleged causes of action. Speldewinde had died in 1972
and therefore his sister, Pearl Grace Anesthesia Abeyratne, was made a
Party‑Defendant in the case to give her notice of the action, and later, on
her application, she was made the 2nd plaintiff as she made claims on a basis
similar to that of Denzil Mendis, the Plaintiff.



Although the basis of the plaintiffs' cause of action was an alleged breach of
the written agreement P1, the plaint was amended on 16th June 1975 to include
an alternative cause of action based on an alleged oral agreement made on 9th
March 1970, as described in a letter, P 22, X 43, addressed by Mr. N.
Balasunderam, Proctor S.C., to Abeysinghe.



In terms of the oral agreement, as set out in Proctor Balasunderam's letter,
P22, X43, Abeysinghe had agreed to pay Denzil Mendis the sums of Rs. 52,500/‑,
being the amount paid by him on 2nd  August 1967 on the basis of two
agreements entered upon on that day; Rs. 6,686/50 being stamp fees and legal
expenses incurred by Mendis; and a sum of Rs. 9,109/50 expended by Mendis in
the preparation of the property for auction sale. In terms of the oral
agreement, it was further agreed that Denzil Mendis would continue to be in
possession of the property with Abeysinghe's leave and licence, free of rent,
until the aforesaid sums aggregating to Rs. 68,296 were paid as follows: Rs.
15,000 on or before 31st December 1970; Rs. 25,000 on or before 31st December
1971 and Rs. 28,296 on or before 31st  December 1972.

##### 33

In his answer, Abeysinghe denied liability on the basis that, in terms of the
agreement P1, Mendis and Speldewinde were obliged to tender the purchase price
on or before 31 July 1968. They had failed to do so, and consequently, in
terms of the agreement, it was deemed to be cancelled and of no effect, the
deposits paid to him being forfeited. The position of the plaintiffs was that,
in terms of the agreement, P1, the defendant had agreed to sell the land "free
of encumbrances," and since the property in question was a part of the Estate
of Abeysinghe's deceased father, A. N. D. R. Abeysinghe, in respect of which
Estate Duty remained payable not only as at 31 July 1968 and within the
extended time of three months from 31 July 1968, but even during a reasonable
time thereafter, the Defendant was therefore not in a position to honour his
obligation of transferring the property free of encumbrances and the blame for
the failure of the transaction lay on the defendant. The plaintiffs maintained
that in addition to the deposits made, stamp fees paid and legal expenses
incurred, they had also expended sums of money in the preparation of the land
for purposes of resale for which they should be compensated.



The learned District Judge in his judgment said:



"Agreement P1 was executed on the basis that the vendor had perfect title to
the property and had the capacity to make a valid transfer free of all
encumbrances. Therefore ... the purchasers accepted the title of the vendor to
the land and premises. It would appear that on the date on which the agreement
was signed the vendor had failed to disclose that this was his father's
property and that there was a Testamentary case pending in respect of it and
that Estate Duty was payable. However, he had the capacity to make the
transfer whenever he pleased, but the sale would be subject to Estate Duty . .
.



Mr. Eric Amerasinghe for the defendant put the blame of the failure of this
transaction on the plaintiffs. He stated that the purchasers had refused to
complete the contract although the vendor had been ready and willing to sell
as agreed upon. The breach therefore, says counsel, is on the part of the
plaintiffs. There could be nothing further from the truth. The evidence and

##### 34

all the documents clearly indicate the anxiety of the Plaintiffs to conclude
what they considered was a profitable deal. The Defendant on the other hand is
shown to be deceptive and lackadaisical. Therefore, I cannot accept this
argument. Mr. Navaratnarajah has rightly pointed out that the Defendant had in
his written submissions ignored the vital terms in the agreement P1 namely
that "the sale of the said land and premises was to be free of encumbrances."
At the time the Agreement P1 was entered into the Defendant conveniently hid
from the plaintiff the fact that this property was still the subject of a
Testamentary action (D.C. Negombo 4214) and that Estate Duty was still
payable. If so the land and premises were subject to an encumbrance in favour
of the Commissioner of Estate Duty who has the right to have the property sold
for payments of Estate Duty. The Defendant therefore is guilty of the cardinal
sin of having hid this all important fact from the purchasers and having
dishonestly pocketed their monies. It is hardly likely that the Plaintiffs
whose business was dealing in Real Estate, would have entered into this
transaction if they knew the true state of affairs. These same encumbrances,
however, could have been removed by obtaining a certificate to release under
section 53 of the Estate Duty Ordinance. Sale should have been completed
before 31 July, 1968, and it is clear on the evidence that the Defendant was
not in a position to sell the property "free of all encumbrances." The fact
that this property was subject to administration proceedings became known to
the Plaintiffs only much later. The Defendant by hiding this fact has cheated
the Plaintiffs in to parting with their money and thereafter being very tardy
in resolving the difficulty created by his deception. One cannot imagine any
buyer purchasing property subject to an encumbrance on the said property in
favour of the Commissioner of Estate Duty, which will attach to the property
in spite of the sale. This is particularly true regarding persons dealing in
Real Estate. It was the duty of the Defendant to see that the difficulty
created by him was removed before the 31 July, 1968 which the Defendant had
neglected to do. As the transaction had already commenced the Plaintiffs
offered their good offices and an additional sum of Rs. 25,000/‑ for an
extension of P1 by a further three months. The Defendant

##### 35

shamelessly pocketed this money also, but obviously did not make any
determined move in that direction or obtain permission from Court till
12.10.1968 (Vide P9). Whatever steps he took were taken so tardily that they
were of absolutely no help whatsoever to the purchasers. (Vide P9B dated
9.1.1969). In the meantime, according to the Plaintiff there had been several
offers for this land: He has proved one of them ... an offer by Colombo Paints
Limited ... In letter P13 Colombo Paints Ltd . ... said that they are prepared
to buy the property at Rs. 540,000/- subject to the title being passed by
their lawyers. By P15 dated 6 December 1968, the Plaintiff has been informed
that the lawyers for Colombo Paints have rejected the sale as "they find it
difficult to recommend title." What this "difficulty" is, is evident. It is
therefore clear as to who was responsible for the failure of this transaction.
If the Defendant had been open and frank with the Plaintiffs in the first
instance and stated at the very beginning that the property was subject to a
Testamentary case and that Estate Duty in a large sum was payable, shrewd
businessmen like Mr. Mendis and Mr. Speldewinde would not have touched it with
a barge pole..."



The following issues, among others, had been raised by the Defendant:



26\. By Agreement No. 692 marked 'A' did the parties agree to the terms and
conditions pleaded in paragraph (A) column 1 in 1st Defendant's answer?



27\. Did the Plaintiff and the said Speldewinde observe the obligations and/or
complete purchase as pleaded in paragraph (E) column 1 in the 1st Defendant's
answer or within 3 months from 31 July 1968 or within a reasonable time?



The learned District Judge answered those issues as follows:



26\. Yes, but the Defendant did not disclose that there was a Testamentary
case regarding his father's estate in which this land was inventorized (sic.),
regards which Estate Duty was payable. The failure of this Agreement was due
solely to the failure of the Defendant to take quick and appropriate action to

##### 36

release the land for sale, after his non‑disclosure was brought to his notice
by the Plaintiffs.



27\. The agreement could not be implemented nor the purchase finalized, solely
due to the lethargy of the Defendant.



After answering these and the several other issues in the case, the learned
District Judge stated as follows in his judgment:



To my mind agreement P1 was a perfectly clear, straightforward ransaction,
which if not for the land being liable to Estate Duty, would have been an
extremely profitable venture from which both Plaintiffs and Defendant would
have derived immense profit. Unfortunately for some unknown and inexplicable
reason, Defendant decided not to disclose the pendency of the Testamentary
Action in D.C. Negombo. If this fact had not been discovered in time by the
purchasers, they would have found themselves in an awful soup. If the
Defendant had been frank and explained his difficulties, the combined agile
brains of both Mendis and Speldewinde would have perhaps found an easy
solution for him. The blame for the breakdown of the Agreement must be placed
squarely on the shoulders of the Defendant. However, he was able to survive so
long mainly due to the brilliance of Counsel ... who appeared on his behalf.
They have used every legal objection and legal tactic known to the law on
behalf of the Defendant, but were countered successfully by the legal luminary
who spoke on behalf of the 1st Plaintiff."



With regard to the alternative cause of action, the learned District Judge
held that the arrangements in the oral agreement as set out in Proctor
Balasunderam's letter P22, X43, had been established, the Defendant having
failed to give evidence in that regard. The learned District Judge states that
the Defendant failed to



"pay the amounts he had undertaken to pay on the dates specified. Therefore
the Plaintiff would be entitled to continue in possession and the amounts
agreed upon would still be due. In August 1972, the Land Reform Law came into
force, and the Plaintiff was deprived of the possession. Prescription ...
would

##### 37

commence to run therefore only from August 1972, when the Plaintiff's
possession came to an abrupt end and his lien on the property was lost ...
Period of prescription would be three years from August 1972. Plaint was filed
on 29 July 1974, well within the prescriptive period. Therefore I hold that
the Plaintiff succeeds on the amounts prayed for in the alternative cause of
action also."



On 30 November 1979, the learned District Judge gave judgment for the first
Plaintiff in a sum of Rs. 163,296/‑ and for the second plaintiff in a sum of
Rs. 107,500 with costs.



**THE ACTION IN THE COURT OF APPEAL**



The defendant appealed from the decision of the learned District Judge and the
matter was argued before the Court of Appeal on 25, 26 and 27 May and 6 and 8
June 1988. Judgment was delivered on 5 August 1988.



With regard to the question of who was to blame for the failure of the
transaction contemplated by the agreement (P1), the Court of Appeal observed
that, although the learned District Judge had taken the view that, the
"failure of agreement P1 was solely due to the Defendant's non‑disclosure of
the fact that a Testamentary action was pending in respect of his father's
estate in which the land in dispute was inventorized (sic.) and which land was
liable for estate duty," yet, "The title deeds of the land were right through
with the Plaintiffs' lawyers from sometime prior to the execution of P1, and
those deeds would have certainly revealed that the ownership of the land had
been with the Defendant's deceased father. It is probably on the basis that
the Defendant is the sole heir of his father that the Plaintiffs had accepted
the title of the Defendant to the land."



After referring to the offer made on 29 August 1968 (P13) on behalf of Colombo
Paints to purchase the land for Rs. 540,000, subject to title being passed by
their lawyers, the Court of Appeal observed as follows:



"The offer being Rs. 190,000 in excess of what the purchasers had agreed to
pay the vendor, naturally, the purchasers were

##### 38

anxious to get the agreement P1 expeditiously extended by another notarial
agreement and their anxiety is reflected in a series of letters exchanged
between the purchasers and their Lawyers.



It is only at this stage of attempting to get the agreement P1 extended, that
for the first time in the voluminous correspondence produced in this case that
any reference is made to the testamentary proceedings of R. N. D. A.
Abeysinghe's estate. By letter dated 23.09.1968 (P2) sent by M/s D. L. & F de
Saram (the purchasers' lawyers) to D. F de Silva (the vendor's lawyer) with
copies to the purchasers, it is impressed (upon them), that a specific
application must be made by the vendor in his father's testamentary action
seeking sanction of Court to sell the land and a release be obtained from the
Commissioner of Inland Revenue regarding estate duty. On 25.09.1968, by P3 the
first purchaser, Denzil Mendis wrote to M/s D. L. & F de Saram on the contents
of P2. From the contents of P3 it would appear that the existence of the
testamentary action, the advisability to get the Court's sanction for the sale
and the necessity to obtain a release from the Department of Inland Revenue,
do not appear to have come as sudden revelations to Denzil Mendis. He wrote to
say that on 31.01.1968 the Department of Inland Revenue has issued the final
assessment in the testamentary case and he proceeded to give the charge number
and the amount of estate duty payable. He added that as soon as the dues are
paid from the proceeds of the sale, the release will be granted and he
requested M/s D. L. & F de Saram to draft a specific application to obtain the
sanction of the District Court, Negombo, to sell the property. On 26.09.1968
by P4 Denzil Mendis wrote again to M/s D. L. & F de Saram to say that he had
contacted the vendor and that the matter could now be finalized.



Steps were being taken to get the sanction of the District Court of Negombo to
sell the land. On 7.10.1968 the purchasers wrote letter P6 to M/s D. L. & F de
Saram indicating their anxiety to get the period of P1 extended till
31.12.1968, as prospective

##### 39

purchasers from them 'cannot be held in suspense any longer.' The purchasers
insisted that the proposed agreement extending the validity of P1 should
embody conditions stipulating the vendor to obtain Court's permission and
ensuring the payment of dues to the Inland Revenue Department, to which the
purchasers stated, that the vendor was agreeable. The statement in the letter
P6 "We exonerate you from any responsibility which may arise as a result of
our prevailing on you to go ahead with the agreement," reveals that M/s D. L.
& F. de Saram had expressed their cautious disapproval in executing any fresh
agreement **before** obtaining the sanction of court to sell the land and the
payment of dues to the Inland Revenue Department. On the same date i.e.
7.10.1968, the first purchaser sent another letter to M/s D. L. & F de Saram
(X33) expressing the view that since obtaining the sanction of Court for the
sale of land would take time, an agreement should be drafted immediately
"making provision for such contingencies."



On 8.10.1968 by letter X20 De Sarams wrote to the purchasers in which the
following passages appear.



"Mr. D. F de Silva subsequently sent us certain papers filed in the
testamentary case and it becomes apparent that Mr. Abeysinghe as administrator
of the estate did not have authority of Court to sell you the land."



"We have pointed out to you that you have in an earlier agreement accepted
title. Ordinarily the sale agreement should have been conditioned on Mr.
Abeysinghe obtaining the sanction of Court to sell the land and also obtaining
an undertaking from the Commissioner of Inland Revenue to release the land
from liability to estate duty upon payment to him, such a sum as may be fixed
by him. It is no longer possible to make the sale conditional upon the
happening of these events." The letter added:‑



"We would point out that if Mr. Abeysinghe fails for any reason to obtain the
sanction of Court to sell the land, you might find yourself in difficulties."



##### 40

On 17.10.1968, the first purchaser wrote to the Commissioner Inland Revenue
inquiring whether on payment of Rs. 91,264, the property will be released and
a reply was received by him in the affirmative. Whereupon on 25.10.1968 by
letter P19, the first purchaser wrote to M/s D. L. & F. de Saram urging that
an agreement extending the validity of P1 be immediately drawn up, as the
District Court had now sanctioned the sale and that the Department of Inland
Revenue has confirmed that on payment of Rs. 91,264 with interest, the
property could be released.



However, since it was discovered that the Court's permission had been obtained
for the sale of 18 acres of land and not for an extent of 18 Acres 0 Roods 20
Perches as mentioned in P1,­on 29.10.1968, by X23, M/s D. L. & F. de Saram
requested D. F de Silva to get the order of Court rectified and to ascertain
whether the estate duty should be paid out of the amount payable to the estate
of the deceased. On 6.12.1968 de Sarams wrote to the vendor's Proctor handling
the testamentary case, to get the order of Court amended showing the extent of
land as given in P1. On the same day, de Sarams by letter P15 informed the
purchasers that M/s Murugesu and Kularatne had informed them of
their,inability to recommend title of the land to their clients M/s Colombo
Paints Limited. A copy of the letter sent by them to the vendor's Proctor
handling the testamentary case, was also sent along with P15. All sanguine
expectations of the purchasers in making a handsome profit appear to have been
dashed to the ground.



On 7.12.1968, the first purchaser wrote to the vendor letter P20 through his
new lawyer, Proctor N. Balasundaram, stating that he is no longer interested
in the purchase of the land "due to various encumbrances affecting the land
which the vendor has taken the least trouble to remedy." Among other
allegations levelled against the vendor in that letter were, that at the time
P1 was executed the vendor had failed to disclose that the property was being
administered in the testamentary case No. 4214 of District Court Negombo, that
he accepted deposits

####  41

fraudulently when he could not have transferred the property without getting
it released from the Court and the Department of Inland Revenue, that the
application to Court seeking release was made as late as 12.10.1968 only after
this was revealed on 11.09.1968, the day the fresh agreement was to have been
signed; that on 18.10.1968 the District Court Negombo had agreed to release
only 18 Acres and up to that date no application had been made to get it
rectified; that the sale of the land to M/s Ceylon Paint Company Ltd., fell
through because their lawyers found it difficult to recommend title, "probably
due to various encumbrances affecting the land;" and that no attempt has been
made by the vendor to get the property released on payment of estate duty,
which fact was concealed when agreement P1 was written and deposits obtained.
The letter proceeded to demand the payment of a sum of Rs. 52,500 paid as
deposits; a sum of Rs. 6,686.50 incurred as legal expenses; a sum of Rs.
9,109.50 as expenses incurred on development of land, and a sum of Rs. 95,000
as half share of the amount of damages suffered by both purchasers. No reply
was received from the vendor to this letter.



With regard to the contention of the purchasers that the vendor had no
authority to sell the land, the Court of Appeal observed as follows:



In terms of section 55 of the Estate Duty Ordinance, no letters of
administration shall be granted by Court in respect of the estate of a
deceased person until the Commissioner of Estate Duty has issued a certificate
that the Estate Duty has been paid or secured and that certificate is filed in
Court. Section 539 B of the Civil Procedure Code, permits the Court to grant
letters of administration upon the production of a provisional certificate
issued by the Commissioner of Estate Duty. Apparently no letters of
administration had been issued to the defendant as at 31.07.1968, but an
application had been made to Court seeking sanction for the sale of the land
in dispute prior to obtaining letters of administration, in terms of section
539 B of the Civil Procedure Code. As this application had been made and

**42**  

granted only after 31.07.1968, Mr. Samarasekera contends that the defendant
had no authority to sell the land as at 31.07.1968.



However, it would appear to us that incapacity to sell the land would be
attached to the defendant, as Dr. Jayewardene points out, qua administrator.
The defendant had title to the land as the sole heir of A. N. D. A.
Abeysinghe, and he could have lawfully conveyed his title to the property.
This position appears to be covered by judicial authority, vide _Silva v.
Silva_ (1).



On the question whether the vendor could not have transferred the land 'free
of encumbrances', the Court of Appeal observed as follows:



It is submitted that unless a certificate of payment in terms of section 52(1)
of the Estate Duty Ordinance or a certificate of release in terms of section
53(1) was issued by the Commissioner of Estate Duty, the property would be
burdened with Estate Duty. It appears to me that the defendant could have
secured for the plaintiffs either of these certificates by paying part of the
consideration on P1, to the Commissioner of Estate Duty. The correspondence
produced in this case although referring to a period subsequent to 31.07.1968,
amply demonstrates that this course available to the defendant, was well
within the contemplation of the plaintiffs who were experienced 'developers.'
Therefore, I am of the view, that the defendant could have lawfully
transferred the land as at 31.07.1968, free from any encumbrances.



With regard to the obligations under the oral agreement, after agreeing with
the learned District Judge's finding that they had been established, the Court
of Appeal considered the question whether the claims were prescribed and
observed as follows:



In terms of section 7 of the Prescription Ordinance, no action shall be
maintainable for the recovery of money due on any unwritten promise, unless
such action shall be commenced

##### 43

within three years from the time after the cause of action shall have arisen.
This cause of action was brought in by the amended plaint filed on 15.06.1975,
but, it would relate back to the date of original plaint dated 29.07.1974.



The oral promise stipulated that the first plaintiff should continue in
possession of the land till such time that the sum of Rs. 68,296 is paid to
him. The first plaintiff was in possession of the land till August 1972 when
the Land Reform Commission dispossessed him. Therefore, it is submitted that
the cause of action arose on 31.12.1970 on the defendant defaulting in the
payment of the first instalment and therefore the cause of action is
prescribed. The learned trial judge has held that prescription runs from
August 1972 when the 1st plaintiff's possession came to an abrupt end "and his
lien on the property was lost." It is manifest that the 1st plaintiff could
not have had a lien on the property. Besides, by an oral agreement no interest
in the immovable property could have been created in violation of section 2 of
the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance.



According to the parol agreement, it has not been agreed that the whole debt
is to become due upon failure to pay any instalments. In these circumstances
when does the cause of action commence? Wessels ‑ The Law of Contracts in
South Africa ‑ Roberts, Second Edition, at page 754 states:‑ "If a debt is
payable in instalments, action can as a rule only be brought for the amount of
each instalments as it becomes due, and therefore prescription of the first
instalment begins to run from the date it became payable, of the second from
its due date and similarly in the case of others (Pothier, Obligations section
645.)".



Applying the above principle, recovery of the first two instalments is clearly
prescribed and the defendant will be liable to pay the first plaintiff a sum
of Rs. 28,296 due on the last instalment.



On 5 August 1988, the Court of Appeal set aside the judgment of the learned
District Judge and entered judgment in favour of the first

##### 44

plaintiff in a sum of Rs. 28,296 with legal interest from the date of the
action and costs of the action below. The action of the second plaintiff was
declared to stand dismissed with costs below. No order was made with regard to
costs in the Court of Appeal.



**THE ACTION IN THE SUPREME COURT**



On 7 October 1988 the Court of Appeal granted leave to appeal to the Supreme
Court, and the matter was argued on the 15 and 20th of September, 1994.



**ALLEGED DEFECT IN THE VENDOR'S TITLE**



The purchasers had maintained that the transaction could not be completed
because the vendor had no title. However, the purchasers were not troubled by
the title of the vendor until the failure, in December 1968, of their attempt
to clinch the deal they were negotiating with Colombo Paints Ltd. The
transaction in question really commenced with the execution of documents 2P 2,
X 49 and 2P 3, X 99A on 2 August 1967\. It would appear from the cross-
examination of Denzil Mendis in the District Court (see p. 212 (247) and p.
213 (248) C. A. Brief) that an attempt to sell the property by auction on the
strength of rights derived from 2P 3, X 99A had failed. He attributed the
failure to the fact that the lawyers of persons from whom money had been
collected had "refused to accept title. He had no title to sell."



Q.        He had no title because your lawyers told you so, is that what

            your lawyers told you?

A.        Yes.

Q.        You said that because the title was not acceptable to the

            purchasers that attempted sale in 1967 failed?

A.        Yes.

Q.        And yet in February (sic.) 1968 you entered into the agreement

            P1?

A.        We did. He said if you have accepted title for the first you have to

            accept title for the second.

Q.        And you did pay for eminent counsel for legal opinion, Mr. H. V.

            Perera?

A.        Yes.

##### 45

Q.        It was after that you asked for an extension?

A.        We met Mr. H. V. Perera in order to find out that the particular

            agreement was in order.

Q.        And he approved it and you signed?

A.        Yes.



It might be observed that Mendis and Speldewinde were not acting blindly
without a sufficient understanding of their rights and duties. They had not
only before the signing of P1, but afterwards consulted Mr. H. V. Perera, Q.C.
and Mr. H. Wanigatunga, Advocate. (See P10).



It would appear that Union Carbide Ltd. evinced an interest, but by their
letter of December 11th 1967, X3, (page 391 (446) C. A. Brief) indicated that
they did not wish to proceed with the matter pending instructions from their
Hong Kong and U.S.A. associates. No question of title was raised. As for
others, there is nothing I can find in the record which supports Mendis!
assertion that the lawyers of purchasers had rejected title.



Although in clause 2 of agreement P1 it is stated that "The purchasers accept
the title of the vendor to the said land and premises", no such clause appears
in 2P 2, X 49 entered into between Abeysinghe, the vendor and Wickramaratne.
The "owner" having been said in the recital to be "seized and possessed of or
otherwise well and sufficiently entitled to all that land called Ekala Estate,
now called Galla Estate", it is merely declared in clause 9 that the land "is
free from all encumbrances" and that the owner "agrees to warrant and defend
title at the request of the purchaser or his nominee or nominees" In agreement
2P 3, X 99A between Abeysinghe and Mendis and Speldewinde, the recital
declares Abeysinghe to be the "owner" who was "seized and possessed of or
otherwise well and sufficiently entitled to the land called Ekala, now called
Galla Estate." There is no clause corresponding to clause 2 of P1 nor any
clause corresponding to clause 9 of 2P 2, X49. And so, Mendis' explanation
during cross‑examination: "He said if you have accepted title for the first
you have to accept title for the second" makes, no sense. Despite the failure
of the previous efforts to sell attributed to a lack of title, the purchasers
entered into yet another agreement, P1, on 4th  April 1968, in which they, in
a draft approved

##### 46

 by Mr. H. V. Perera, Q.C., who no doubt would have been instructed, _inter
alia_ , with regard to the alleged reasons for the previous failures,
expressly accepted the title of the vendors. Moreover, in clause 5 of the
agreement P1, it is stated as follows: "The sale of the land and premises
shall be free of all encumbrances and the vendor will warrant and defend the
title to the said land and premises or portions thereof **but the vendor will
not give any express warranties of title. " **(The emphasis is mine). If title
had been a problem, why was such a provision introduced and approved?



In terms of clause II of P1, the title deeds and documents of the land were to
be with the purchasers' notaries, Messrs, D. L. & F. De Saram. They did not
advise the purchasers of any defect in title, for there was none and would not
have said so. However, the day after information was received of the failure
of the Colombo Paints deal, on 7 December 1968 the purchasers, through another
Proctor and Notary, Mr. Balasunderam, for the first time suggested in letter
P20, X 41, that they were unable to complete the transaction because of a
defect in title.



The vendor was the sole heir of his deceased father who was the owner of Galla
Estate. _Ex facie_ , there was no defect in title. And there was no evidence
to the contrary. When Messrs. Murugesu and Kularatne on behalf of Colombo
Paints Ltd. had called for the documents relating to title, in his letter
dated 2 November 1968 to his notaries (X 36) Mendis himself confidently, and
quite honestly and correctly, asserts that "in view of the fact that the title
to the land is **flawless,** it will not be possible for Messrs. Murugesu and
Kularatne to report adverse (sic.) on the title without assigning sufficient
reasons, therefor." In the letter dated 6 December 1968 (page 365 (417) C.A.
Brief), the purchasers' notaries said: "We confirm our telephone conversation
with you today when we informed you that Messrs. Murugesu and Kularatne had
informed us that their clients are now no longer interested in the purchase of
the property, as they find it difficult to recommend title." Proctor
Balasunderam in X 41 says that Murugesu & Kularatne had "difficulty to
recommend title **probably due to various encumbrances affecting the property.
" **(The emphasis is mine). His position was not that the transaction had

##### 47

fallen through because the vendor was not the owner and, therefore, had no
**title.** There was no problem ever raised by Messrs. Murugesu & Kularatne
with regard to Abeysinghe's **ownership.**



They had other difficulties which were contorted and misinterpreted to mean
that there was a defect in title: Murugesu & Kularatne had initially, but
erroneously, assumed that **Mendis and Speldewinde,** owned the land. (See the
letter of Messrs. Murugesu & Kularatne to the purchasers' notaries, P13, dated
29 August 1968). By that date, P1 having expired on 31 July 1968, Mendis and
Speldewinde had no right to convey title to the property in question. Later,
however, Murugesu and Kularatne raised the question in their letter X 31 dated
29th October 1968 seeking an extension of time from the purchasers' notaries.
They said: "Meanwhile we shall be glad if you will consider the practical
point we raised with you over the telephone as to how the deed is to be
executed when all that your clients now have is a sale agreement." Indeed, an
informal sale agreement is all that Mendis and Speldewinde had after the
expiration of P1. It was a problem which the purchasers' notaries themselves
had referred to in their letter X 35 dated 2 November 1968 addressed to
Mendis. They stated: "You and Mr. Speldewinde have no title at the moment to
enter into a sale agreement. You can enter into a sale agreement only after
the agreement with Mr. Abeysinghe has been signed". Responding to that, Mendis
in his letter to his notaries, X 37, said: "Actually speaking, we have an
agreement, but all that we require is an extension of time to complete the
sale." And in his letter to his notaries dated 25 October 1968, P19, X 22,
Mendis states that since "the implied extension expires on 31.10.68 and in
order to avoid any misunderstanding with Mr. Abeysinghe after the date it is
imperative that the agreement granting us extension of time be signed
forthwith." There was much more to the fresh agreement than the avoidance of
misunderstanding. Even the so‑called "implied extension" of P1 had lapsed by
31 October, and Mendis was well aware that unless he was empowered by a fresh
notarial agreement, he would not benefit from the sale to Colombo Paints Ltd.
Naturally, as the owner, Abeysinghe could have conveyed the land to Colombo
Paints Ltd. But that was something Mendis wanted to prevent in his own
interests. When on August 13 1968 Murugesu and Kularatne by their letter P13

##### 48

called for the title deeds, stressing that their clients wished to enter into
a sale agreement "without delay", Murugesu and Kularatne calling for the deeds
through a messenger to "avoid delay", Mendis wrote a letter on 28 August 1968,
P16, to his notaries requiring that the agreement between Abeysinghe, Mendis
and Speldewinde be signed "within the next three days", and adding as follows:
"Please make arrangements to forward the title deeds to Mr. Velupillai
Murugesu ... only after the agreement referred to above has been duly signed.
Mr. Murugesu we understand will be calling for the title deeds today." On the
following day, Mendis and Speldewinde wrote the following letter, X 9, to
their notaries:



Further to our visit to you this morning, we write to request you to please
withhold forwarding title deeds to Mr. Murugesu, Proctor & Notary, until such
time we sign the agreement embodying the extension of time which we trust you
will please expedite. Forwarding of title deeds prior to signing of the
aforesaid agreement, is in our opinion suicidal to the transaction and hence
this request.



Why it was deemed to be "suicidal" was no doubt the plain possibility that
Abeysinghe might directly transfer the property to Colombo Paints Ltd. And so,
in letter X 36 of 2nd November 1968, Mendis instructs his notaries as follows:



In view of the difference in the purchase price and the selling price, it is
advisable that the transfer of the property should be executed in our favour
in the first instance, and immediately thereafter any transfer [of] the land
to the clients of Messrs. Murugesu and Kularatne. Although the expenditure of
such a move is enormous, yet in the interest of the transaction it is
inevitable.



The title deeds and documents were forwarded to Murugesu & Kularatne on 22
October 1968 (see X 32), although the proposed agreement between Abeysinghe,
Mendis and Speldewinde had not been concluded.



From the point of view of Murugesu and Kularatne, there was a more important
problem than the absence of an agreement ‑ the

##### 49

 question of the extent of the land. In response to an advertisement of 20
acres of land in close proximity to the Industrial Estate of Ekala announced
by an advertiser whose address was stated to be c/o The Dental Chamber, 292,
Havelock Road, Colombo 5, the General Manager of Colombo Paints Ltd., on 7
March 1968, wrote a letter, P11, requesting "full particulars" and for
arrangements for the Director/General Manager to inspect the land at the
advertiser's "earliest convenience". There being no response, a reminder, P12,
was sent by the Director/General Manager on 15 March 1968. On 29 August 1968
in their letter, P13, Messrs. Murugesu & Kularatne wrote to the notaries of
Mendis and Speldewinde stating that their clients, Colombo Paints Ltd., were
willing to buy the property "belonging to your clients Messrs. Denzil Mendis
and Speldewinde". They were willing to purchase "the property covered by Plan
No. 1303 dated 3 December 1967 ... in extent 18 acres 2 roods and 38.5 perches
at Rs. 540,000/- subject to the title being passed by us." The purchasers'
notaries in their letter X28, dated 31st  October 1968 referred to the terms
of the offer in the letter of 29th August from Murugesu & Kularatne and
advised their clients as follows:



By their letter to us of 29 August 1968, Messrs, Murugesu & Kularatne informed
us that their clients offered you a sum of Rs. 540,000 for a land in extent
18A ‑ 2R ‑ 38.5P according to plan No. 1303 dated 13 December 1967 made by D.
J. Nanayakkara. According to the Sale Agreement the extent of the land you
have [purchased] is 18A OR 20P according to Plan No. 532 dated 19th September
1910 made by H. M. Fernando, Licensed Surveyor. A problem might well arise in
regard to the differences in extent between the two plans ... The purchasers
might well seek to have the price reduced in view of the lesser extent ... You
might consider reducing the purchase price ... Kindly negotiate this with the
intending purchasers.



Admittedly, all that P1 had conveyed to Mendis and Speldewinde was 18 acres
and 20 perches, and all that was informally agreed later to be sold to them
was the same extent of land. The land advertised for sale by them had been 20
acres. In terms of the survey plan submitted by the purchasers to Murugesu &
Kularatne, namely the

##### 50 ** **

plan made in December 1967, showed an area of 18 acres 2 roods and 38.5
perches. Mendis, writing to his notaries on 2 November 1968, X 36, took up the
position that the offer of Rs. 540,000 was on the basis of Rs. 30,000 per acre
and that "Any difference in extent over 18 acres is not our responsibility."



It is clear from the letter of the purchasers' notaries to Mendis, P8, dated
22 November 1968 that they had been informed by Murugesu & Kularatne of the
difficulties they were having in reporting on title on account of the absence
of two plans of 1892 and 1931 and the need to have the block of 18 acres and
20 perches referred to in P1 superimposed on a plan of 29 September 1943 and
the reconciliation of the discrepancy between the plan made in 1967 and
submitted to Murugesu & Kularatne which gave an extent of 18 acres 2 roods and
38.5 perches when P1 referred to 18 acres and 20 perches. The purchasers'
notaries advised their clients that a fresh application should be made to
court for permission to sell setting out the exact extent. They reported that
that was also the view of Murugesu & Kularatne. However, there was no response
to that, the purchasers probably holding on to the view that the discrepancy
was not their responsibility.



And so, the deal with Colombo Paints Ltd., fell through and the purchasers'
notaries informed their clients by their letter P15, X 30, dated 6 December
1968 that Murugesu & Kularatne had informed them that their clients "were now
no longer interested in the purchase of the property as they find it difficult
to recommend title." The difficulty, however, as we have seen, had nothing to
do with Abeysinghe's ownership and right to sell the property.



But once the Colombo Paints deal fell through, the purchasers were no longer
interested in getting an agreement. They had one deal in mind and when that
did not materialize that was the end of the matter. They had very plainly said
in their letter dated 7 October 1968 to their notaries (P6, X 18): "In fact it
would be of no use signing this agreement in the event of our buyers changing
their minds." Although the purchasers' notaries in their letter P7 A dated 29
October 1968 to the vendor's notaries suggested an extension of three months
from.

##### 51

the date of the signing of the agreement, which would have extended the date
well beyond the 6 of December, they were no longer interested. The purchasers
had suggested an extension up to the end of December 31 (See P6, X 18). But
when the one transaction they were interested in failed on 6 December, the
agreement did not matter to them. What they became immediately interested in
after the 6 of December was a search for ways and means of drawing back from
their obligations. Just a day after being informed of the fact that Colombo
Paints Ltd., were no longer interested, the purchasers abandoned Messrs. D. L.
& F. De Saram who had acted for them from the time of the execution of P1 and
knew all about what had transpired. They engaged the services of a new lawyer,
Proctor Balasunderam, and instructed him to write a letter, P20, X 41, _inter_
alia, attributing the failure of the transaction in P1 to fraud and deception
and negligence on the part of the vendor.



On the question of the failure of the Colombo Paints deal, Mr. Balasunderam
said that Murugesu and Kularatne had "difficulty to recommend title probably
due to various encumbrances affecting the property ... which you have not
taken the least trouble to remedy." Admittedly, Murugesu & Kularatne had
raised the question of estate duty: but they did not confuse that matter with
the question of title. In fact, Murugesu, Kularatne were well aware of what
could be done in that connection, for they had informed the purchasers'
notaries, and this in turn was conveyed to Mendis, that they would advise
their clients "to pay a portion of the purchase consideration in full
settlement of the claim on estate duty." (See P8 dated 22nd  November 1968).



**THE SUPPOSED ABSENCE OF LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION**



Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the view of the Court of
Appeal that the defendant could have lawfully conveyed his title on the basis
of the decision in _Silva v, Silva_ (1) and that any incapacity to sell the
property imposed by the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code relating to
testamentary actions applied only to administrators as such, was erroneous,
being "in the teeth of section 547 and section 539 B of the Code."

52

**SECTION 539B PROVIDES AS FOLLOWS:**



(1)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 33 of the Estate Duty Ordinance
or of section 42 of the Estate Duty Act, as the case may be, where for the
purpose of paying estate duty or for any other sufficient cause it becomes
necessary to sell any property of the estate of a deceased person prior to the
issue of probate or letters of administration the court may grant letters
limited for the purpose of selling such property.



(2)  Such property shall be specified in the grant and such grant shall
expressly state that the letters are issued subject to the following
conditions:‑



(a)  that the sale shall be, if by private treaty, at the price fixed by
court, or if by public  

                  auction, either at an upset price or otherwise;

(b)  that the net proceeds of sale shall be deposited in court within such
time as the court may

                  prescribe;





(c)  that the administrator to whom the letters are issued is not empowered to
execute any       deed of conveyance of immovable property prior to the
confirmation of sale by the court;  

                   and



(d)  any other stipulation the court may in the circumstances deem fit to
impose.



(3)  Before making an order for grant of letters under this section the
Commissioner‑General of Inland Revenue and the respondents to the original
petition for probate or letters of administration shall be given notice of the
application and they or any other person interested in the estate shall be
heard in opposition unless they or any of them shall have signified their
assent to such sale.



In terms of section 547, among other things, where the estate or effects of a
deceased person amounted to or exceeded the specified amount, and property
forming a part of that estate is transferred without probate or letters of
administration being first

##### 53

taken out, "every transferor and transferee of such property shall be guilty
of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand rupees; and in
addition to any fine imposed under the provisions of this section it shall be
lawful for the Crown to recover from such transferor and transferee, or either
of them, such sum as would by law have been necessary to be affixed to any
such probate or letters of administration. And the amount so recoverable shall
be a first charge on the estate or effects of such testator or intestate in
Ceylon, or any part of such estate or effects, and may be recovered by action
accordingly."



Both the Court of Appeal, and learned counsel who based his submissions on the
finding of the Court of Appeal, were mistaken in supposing that no letters of
administration had been taken out: Paragraph 1 of the Petition to the District
Court of Negombo in case No. 4214/T dated 12 October 1968 (page 454 (536) of
the C. A. Brief) states that the petitioner was "the administrator" of the
intestate estate of the late Mr. Abeysinghe. In paragraph 1 of the supporting
affidavit of the petitioner (page 455 (538) of the C. A. Brief) he describes
himself as "the administrator ... as well as the sole heir of the deceased."
Letters of Administration had been granted by the District Court in case No.
4214/T on 16 September 1965. The nett value of the estate had been determined
as Rs. 231,292 and the Provisional Estate Duty payable had, on the basis of a
certificate granted by the Commissioner of Stamps (sic.) dated 7 June 1965,
been determined as Rs. 23,956/‑. (See pp. 619‑620 of the C. A. Brief).



**THE SUPPOSED INABILITY TO PROCURE A DRAFT DEED FOR TENDER**



Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the purchasers were unable to
comply with the requirement in clause 7 (a) of tendering a deed or deeds of
conveyance on or before 31 July 1968 or 31 October 1968, because, "as the
Court of Appeal had found," the property in question was a part of the estate
of the deceased father of the vendor and no Probate or Letters of
Administration had

##### 54

been issued to the vendor or to anyone else at the relevant date. It would, he
said, have been a difficult matter to persuade a notary to prepare a deed of
conveyance which if executed might expose the parties to penalties for the
commission of an offence. However, X 49, X99A, drawn by Ivor Herat, and P1
drawn by D. F. de Silva were all notarially executed documents prepared by
experienced notaries. P1 was drawn by the purchasers' notaries, Messrs D. L. &
F. De Saram, one of the oldest firms of Proctor‑Notaries in the country.
Moreover, according to Denzil Mendis, P1 was approved by Mr. H. V. Perera,
Q.C., and understandably so, for there was no difficulty either with regard to
title or with regard to the question whether letters of administration had
been taken out. The excuse for the evasion of the purchasers' responsibilities
to tender a draft deed in compliance with clause 7(a) of the agreement P1, is,
in the circumstances, unacceptable.



**THE ABSENCE OF THE DISTRICT COURT'S PERMISSION TO SELL**



It was not that the purchasers' notaries were unwilling to prepare a deed.
They were quite willing to do so, but in doing so they were anxious to protect
their clients by making future agreements conditional, _inter alia,_ upon the
vendor obtaining the permission of court. In a letter dated 8th  October 1968,
X 20, the purchasers' notaries state, _inter alia,_ as follows:



We have pointed out to you that you have in an earlier sale agreement accepted
title. Ordinarily, the sale agreement should have been conditional on Mr.
Abeysinghe obtaining the sanction of Court to sell the land and also obtaining
an undertaking from the Commissioner of Inland Revenue to release the land
from liability to estate duty upon payment to him of such sum as may be fixed
by him. It is no longer possible to make the sale conditional upon the
happening of these events ... We would point out that if Mr. Abeysinghe fails
for any reason to obtain the sanction of Court to sell the land, you might
find yourselves in difficulties ... We shall draft another agreement in which
Mr. Abeysinghe will undertake to apply to court and to

**55**  

obtain the necessary undertaking from the Commissioner of Inland Revenue. We
shall send you a copy of the draft in due course.



The vendor had not, as it was supposed by the learned District Judge,
deliberately concealed the fact that the property was the subject matter of
testamentary proceedings. The purchasers' notaries, in terms of clause 11 of
P1, had the custody of the deeds. From a perusal of the documents, it should
have been evident that Abeysinghe's title was derived as the sole heir of his
father. They ought to have found out the position with regard to the
testamentary proceedings and if letters of administration were granted,
whether it was conditional. However, this had not been done. It would seem
from the letter of the purchasers' notaries to their clients dated 8th
October 1968, X 20 that they realized that the permission of the court to sell
had become "apparent" only when they had received some additional papers from
the vendor's notary. When a draft agreement extending the date of sale had
been prepared by the purchasers and submitted, it had not been signed because
the _vendor's notary_ had asked him not to do so without the incorporation of
certain terms. The purchasers' notaries writing to the vendor's notary on 29th
October 1968, X 23, states:



You will recollect that when we met you at your office on 11th September 1968
to sign the agreement extending the date for three months you advised your
client that this agreement should not be signed because: (a) He had not
obtained the sanction of the Court to sell the property, and (b) the
Commissioner of Inland Revenue has not undertaken to release the property ...





            The learned District Judge's assumption that had the purchasers known of these things, they  would not have touched the transaction "with a barge pole," is not supported by the evidence. Having learnt of the two problems, they did not abandon the transaction as being violative of the terms of the agreement. On the contrary, they wanted the terms of P I extended with the inclusion of safeguards with regard to the permission of the court to sell and with regard to the payment of estate duty. As far as Mendis and Speldewinde were concerned, they saw no insurmountable difficulty, although they appear in their 

**56**  

impatience to get the agreement extended to have regarded the obtaining of the
permission of the court proposed by the notaries on both sides as an irksome
and irritating formality. Their anxiety was to have a new notarial agreement
which would empower them to transfer the land to Colombo Paints Ltd. The
absence of permission was not in the way of the transaction, for a conditional
agreement providing for the approval of the court, as far as they were
concerned, would have satisfactorily solved the problem. In a letter dated 7th
October 1968, X 33 (page 423 (484) C.A. Brief) Mendis wrote to his notaries
stating that he had ascertained that it might take six weeks to two months to
obtain court approval. He concludes as follows:



"As we are unable to wait till the order is made by court _which is only
ancillary to this agreement, " _ (the emphasis is mine) we request you to
draft the said agreement immediately making provision for such contingencies."



Following the failure to have the draft agreement signed on 11 September, the
purchasers' notaries wrote to the vendor's notary on 23 September with regard
to the arrangements to be made for obtaining court approval and for having the
property released in respect of estate duty. (P3). A copy of the letter was
sent to Mendis. (P2). In response, in their letter dated 7th  October 1968
(P6, X18), the purchasers state as follows to their notaries:



As you would appreciate that our prospective purchasers cannot be held in
suspense any longer, we have decided to go ahead with the agreement making
provision for the two months set out in our letter of the 5th instant
addressed to Mr. Abeysinghe and approved by Mr. De Silva (the vendor's notary)
which was handed over to you that day ... We suggest that the agreement should
be extended till 31 December 1968 ... We trust you will embody the two matters
set out in our letters of the 5th  instant and have the agreement ready for
signature on the 10th instant.



The letter of 5 October from Mendis to Abeysinghe (P5) sought approval of a
draft of two clauses for inclusion in the proposed  

**57**

agreement, one on the question of court approval and the other on the matter
of estate duty.



The position taken by Mr. Navaratnarajah, Q.C. in his address in the District
Court on behalf of the purchasers on 26th March 1979 was that "whatever may
have been the application that was made in 1965, whatever may have been the
order on that application, yet that application and the order made thereon did
not authorize the defendant to convey his title to the property to the
plaintiff." (See p. 238 (274) of the C.A. Brief).



Learned counsel for the appellant, assuming that there were no letters of
administration, submitted that, if and when the letters were issued, it would,
in terms of Form 87 of the First Schedule of the Civil Procedure Code,
prohibit a sale without the permission of the court. Indeed, in terms of the
grant of letters of administration in this case (see p. 619 of the C.A.
Brief), the administrator was, in terms of Form 87 of the First Schedule to
the Civil Procedure Code "prohibited from selling any immovable property of
the estate unless" he was "specially authorized by the Court so to do."



Admittedly on 31st July, 1968, the date specified in P1, or on October 31st ,
the extended date, the permission of the Court had not been obtained. An
application by way of Petition (pages 516 (614) ‑517 (615) C.A. Brief) and
Affidavit (pages 518 (616) ‑ 519 (617) C.A. Brief) dated 12th October 1968 to
the District Court to sell the property had been allowed by the Court on 18th
October 1968, the vendor being required to furnish draft deed on 8th  November
1968. (See Journal Entry (83) at page 348 (401) C.A. Brief; Journal Entry (84)
page 348 (402) C.A. Brief; and the submissions of counsel and the Order of the
District Court at page (618) C.A. Brief). It was then discovered that the
extent of land had been erroneously stated in the vendor's Petition dated 12th
October 1968 as being 18 acres when it should have been 18 acres and 20
perches. This was rectified by the Court on 23rd  January 1969. (Journal
Entries (88) and (89) at page 453 (534) C.A. Brief).



In the meantime, on 7th December 1968, the purchasers, through their Proctor,
had notified the vendor of the fact that they were no

**58**  

longer interested in a transaction which, the Proctor explained, could not be
completed on account of the incapacity of the vendor to sell the property.
Understandably, as the Journal Entry on 23rd January 1969 (page 453 (534) C.A.
Brief) **** shows, the draft deed had not been submitted on that date, for the
Colombo Paints deal had failed by 6th December. The failure of the transaction
was due to the sudden and unexpected failure of the Colombo Paints deal, and
not on account of the absence of the permission of the court to sell the
property. The signing of an agreement, as far as the purchasers were
concerned, ceased to be relevant. Admittedly, the permission of the court to
sell the property had not been obtained on 31st July or 31st October. However,
that was not a reason for the purchasers' failure to tender the deeds and
purchase price. It was not even an acceptable excuse, for, as the purchasers
themselves later suggested, an appropriately worded condition in the draft
deed could have eliminated any difficulties in that regard.



**THE QUESTION OF ESTATE DUTY**



Learned President's Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the completion of
the transaction on the relevant date in terms of agreement P1, namely, 31st
July 1968, could not have taken place because at that date the property was
encumbered and the vendor could not have sold the property "free of
encumbrances," as agreed in clause 5 of the agreement P1. The property was
'encumbered' because it was at that date a part of the estate of the vendor's
deceased father and no estate duty had been paid as at the relevant date.
Section 27 of the Estate Duty Ordinance (Cap. 241) provides, _inter alia_ ,
that,



(a) the estate duty payable by an executor shall be a first charge on all the
property of which the deceased was competent to dispose at his death and such
charge may be enforced against any such property for the recovery of the whole
or any part of such estate duty; (b) the estate duty payable by any person
other than the executor in respect of any property shall be a first charge on
that property.



Learned Counsel for the appellant observed that, not only had the vendor
failed to make himself capable of fulfilling his obligations by



**59**  

paying the estate duty before the agreed date, namely, 31st July 1968, he had
not done so even within the three months of extended time he had been given,
or even within a reasonable time thereafter. The failure of the transaction
was, he submitted, therefore, solely attributable to the vendor.



Referring to the view of the Court of Appeal that the vendor could have taken
steps to sell the property free of estate duty, learned counsel for the
appellant said, the vendor might indeed have empowered himself to make the
transfer free of the encumbrance of estate duty by paying or securing the
payment of the estate duty for which he was liable and obtaining a certificate
of payment in terms of section 52 of the Estate Duty Ordinance or by obtaining
a certificate of release in terms of section 53; yet if the vendor failed to
do so in time, the blame for the failure of the transaction should be
attributable to him and not to the purchasers.



Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the view taken by the Court
of Appeal that, since the vendor could have had the property released meant
that he 'could have lawfully transferred the land as at 31.07.1968 free from
any encumbrance' was erroneous, for the question was: Did he _in fact_ , and
not merely whether he could, have the property released from the encumbrance?
He had not done so and therefore he was not in a position to transfer the
property free from encumbrances as he was obliged to do. Although the Court of
Appeal seems to have been of the view that since the deeds were in the custody
of the purchasers' notaries, they might have been aware of the existence of
the encumbrance. The fact that the plaintiffs were aware of the existence of
an encumbrance, he argued, did not relieve the defendant of the obligation of
transferring the property free of that encumbrance: _Misso v._ _Hadjear_ (2).



Learned Counsel for the respondents submitted that estate duty was a "charge"
and not an "encumbrance." In any event, in the circumstances of the case, the
paramount consideration was the intention and understanding of the parties.



I agree that this is not just a matter of the interpretation of a notarially
executed deed or of some other written contract. It

**  60**

concerns the different and somewhat more complex task of the interpretation of
a course of conduct and the ascertainment of liabilities and rights in the
circumstances of an agreement which was an outcome of what the parties said
and did. I cannot fairly accept the underlying assumption of the learned
District Judge and the learned counsel for the appellant that while the vendor
was strictly bound by the terms of clause 5 of P1 to convey the property free
of encumbrances, the purchasers were not likewise bound by clause 7 of the
same agreement to tender the deed and purchase price on or before 31st July.
Admittedly, the agreement P1 entered into on 4th April 1968 is very important.
However that document, if I might borrow a phrase from a letter written by the
notaries of the purchasers to their clients (X 20), "in the peculiar
circumstances of this case," was one in a course of proceedings commencing
earlier with the execution of 2 P 2, X 49 A and 2 P 3, X 99 A on 2nd August
1967, when the broker had brought the parties together, and ending on 7th
December 1968, when Proctor Balasunderam in his letter P 20, X 41, repudiated
the agreement.



            The purchasers failed to honour their obligations in terms of clause 7 of tendering a draft deed and paying the stipulated purchase price on or before 31st July 1968. The agreement P 1, therefore, ceased to exist on 31st  July 1968, for clause 8 provided that "if the purchasers shall fail or neglect to observe and comply with any of the obligations herein on their part to be observed and complied with or fail to comply with the purchase as herein provided then and in that event this agreement shall forthwith be deemed to be cancelled and will be of no effect ..." However, it continued to be important as an instrument of reference because, in terms of the informal understanding after that date, the basic and vital terms contained in that document relating to the empowerment of Mendis and Speldewinde to sell were to be embodied in another notarially executed document.



            Although the learned District Judge seemed convinced that the defendant had concealed the fact that the property formed a part of the estate of his deceased father and was liable to estate duty and that "shrewd businessmen like Mr. Mendis and Mr. Speldewinde 

**61**  

would not have touched it with a barge pole" had they known of it, there is no
evidence to support either the conclusion that the vendor had deliberately
concealed the fact that estate duty had not been paid or that the purchasers
would not have entered into the agreement. What comes as a surprise is that
two astute men in the real estate business, who might have been reasonably
expected to inquire whether estate duty had been paid, had, it seems,
recklessly parted with Rs. 40,000 and entered into a notarially executed
agreement 2 P 2, X 49 on 2nd August 1967 and into yet another notarially
executed agreement, P1, on the 4th of April 1968. Or was it something that did
not trouble them?



            In terms of clause 11 of P1, it was agreed that the purchasers' notaries, Messrs. D. L. & F. de Saram would hold the title deeds and title documents of the said land. Surprisingly, the purchasers' notaries too had failed to ascertain whether estate duty had been paid. As they said in their letter X 20 to their clients on 8th October 1968, the inclusion of a condition with regard to the payment of estate duty was something that ought to have been "ordinarily" done. However, the purchasers' notaries did not include any provision in that regard either in P1 or in the draft deed they submitted for signature on 11th  September 1968. The purchasers and their notaries certainly became aware of the failure to pay estate duty at least on 11th  September 1968 when the vendor's notary requested his client not to sign the deed without including a clause relating to estate duty. However, the matter of estate duty was not something the purchasers and their notaries had overlooked until their attention was drawn to it on the 11th of September. The purchasers' notaries intheir letter, X 20, to their clients stated as follows: "We had earlier explained to you that it was quite possible that Mr. Abeysinghe had not paid all estate duty payable on the estate of his father, and on the 11th September 1968 it transpired that he had not paid estate duty on the final assessment." Exactly when the purchasers had been so informed is not clear. However, if the fact that estate duty was payable was unknown before 31st July, it could not have been the reason why the purchasers did not pay the purchase price and tender the deeds in terms of the agreement.



            Although, if as the learned District Judge supposed, the purchasers' would not have touched the transaction with a barge 

**62**  

pole had they known of the fact that estate duty was payable, why did they
insist on continuing with the transaction after they came to know that fact?
The learned District Judge had observed that "if the Defendant had been frank
and explained his difficulties, the combined agile brains of both Mendis and
Speldewinde would have perhaps found an easy solution for him." Indeed, the
fact that the property was subject to the payment of estate duty was not seen
by the purchasers as an encumbrance which would have prevented the vendor from
performing his obligations: there was an easy solution they had. On 25th
September 1968 Mendis wrote to notaries (P3, X 15) advising them of the fact
that a final assessment had been made and that as soon as the payment was
made, the certificate of release would be granted. When the vendor's notary,
and later the purchasers' notaries, insisted on the inclusion of a provision,
Mendis wrote to Abeysinghe on 5th October 1968 (P 5) seeking approval, inter
alia, for the inclusion of a clause authorizing the payment out of the
consideration due, a sum of Rs. 91,262 and interest thereon commencing on
19.9.64 to date of payment to the Department of Inland Revenue on Charge No.
80/01/7/0291. On 17th October 1968 Mendis wrote to the Commissioner of Inland
Revenue seeking confirmation that on payment of estate duty out of the
consideration, the certificate of release will be granted. (X 21). On 25th
October Mendis informed his notaries that the arrangements proposed had been
approved by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue. (P19, X 22). A copy of a
letter dated 19th October 1968 from the Commissioner of Inland Revenue
agreeing to the release of the property if the vendor authorized payment out
of the consideration was forwarded to the vendor's notary by the purchasers'
notaries on 29th October 1968. (P7A, X 23). On 25th November Mendis sought
confirmation from the Commissioner of Inland Revenue that if as directed by
the court half the consideration should be paid into court (Rs. 175,000)which
would pay the estate duty out of the amount so deposited, the certificate of
release would be granted. When letters of administration were granted on 16th
September 1965, it was certified by the District Judge on the basis of a
certificate issued by the Commissioner of Stamps dated 7th June 1965 that Rs.
23,956 had been paid as estate duty. (Page (620) C.A. Brief). Subsequently, an
additional assessment had been made and the Commissioner of Inland Revenue had
informed the Court that the certificate of release would be issued on

**63**  

the payment of Rs. 115,220 and interest. (Journal Entry (76) of 16.1.68 page
451 (531) C.A. Brief). Abeysinghe had appealed against that assessment and so
the Commissioner of Inland Revenue had informed the Court that the certificate
could not be granted before 1.12.1968. (Journal Entry (86) of 11.11.68, page
452 (533) C.A. Brief). This was no problem for Mendis. On 26th September, he
had informed his notaries that Abeysinghe should pay the full amount and call
for a refund after the appeal had been finalized. (P 16).



            If estate duty was an "encumbrance," it was one which, as the purchasers demonstrated, could have been removed by an appropriate clause embodied in the deed ‑ a clause which the purchasers' notaries said "ordinarily" should have been included in the first place ‑ which ought to have been tendered on or before 31st July. It is not necessary to speculate as to what might have been the consequences of executing the deed on 31st  July, since no deed was tendered. However, the learned District Judge did say this: "It would appear that on the date on which the agreement was signed the vendor had failed to disclose . . . . that Estate duty is payable. However, he had the capacity to make the transfer whenever he pleased, but the sale would be subject to Estate Duty .........."I am inclined to agree with that view.



The fact that estate duty had not been paid was not the astonishing surprise
sprung by a deceitful vendor, lacking in candour, on two unsuspecting, naive
and helpless innocents the learned District Judge made it out to be. The
purchasers entered into the transaction because they had an intuitive
appreciation of the fact that a substantial profit could be earned by them if
the Colombo Paints Ltd., transaction went through. It was, as we have seen,
that transaction alone on which they based their hopes. Understandably, they
were anxious to be in a position to drive home the bargain at the opportune
moment and keep their rights under the agreement alive until such time. The
fact that estate duty had not been paid was of little or no concern to their
notaries. Hence a deed was prepared for signature on the 11th of September
without any reference to the matter. When the purchasers became aware of the
fact that estate duty had not been paid, they had a solution. The fact that
estate duty was payable was no impediment to the transaction at any time. Nor

**64  **

was it, as we have seen, a cause for the failure of the Colombo Paints Ltd.



# THE ALTERNATIVE CAUSE OF ACTION



            Admittedly, the purchasers enjoyed the fruits of the property until dispossession by the Land Reform Commission in August 1972. However, prescription did not begin to run from the date of dispossession. The enjoyment of the fruits of the land was not based on any enforceable obligation on the vendor's part to permit it for there was no notarially executed document in that regard. See per Browne and Withers JJ. in _Mudianse v. Mudianse_ (3).There was no usufructuary mortgage, as the appellant suggests. There was no lien, as the District Judge had supposed. The vendor in his letter to Mendis dated 19th December 1967 (X4) explained that the enjoyment of the valuable fruits of the land was a matter of generosity. Possession and the enjoyment of the produce was not in lieu of interest. Possession was merely security for the payment of the amount promised. The debt, as indicated in X 43 was payable in instalments. Recovery became due from the date on which each instalment was payable. The first instalment was due on or before 31st  December 1970. The second on or before 31st  December 1971 and the third on or before 31st December 1972. Although the alternative cause of action was brought in by an amendment of the plaint on 16th June 1975, the relevant date for determining whether the action was prescribed was the date when the action was instituted, namely 29th  July 1974. The first and second instalments fell outside the three year period of limitation in respect of oral agreements and were therefore barred by section 7 of the Prescription Ordinance.



# ORDER



            For the reasons set out in my judgment, I dismiss the appeal with costs payable to the 1st  Respondent.



**FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree.



**GOONEWARDENE, J.** \- I agree



Appeal dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/34.html_  

