##  Shanmugam v. Maskeliya Plantations Limited. - SLR - 208, Vol 1 of 1996
[1993] LKSC 34; (1996) 1 Sri LR 208 (18 November 1993)

**208**

**SHANMUGAM  
****v** **.  
MASKELIYA PLANTATIONS LIMITED**

SUPREME COURT.  
G. P. S. DE SILVA C.J.,  
RAMANATHAN J.,  
ANANDACOOMARASWAMY J.,  
S. C. APEAL NO. 45/96.  
C.A. APPLICATION NO. 73/95.  
ARBITRATION NO. 2346/93.  
25 JULY AND 01 AUGUST, 1996.

Industrial Dispute ‑ Extensions of service ‑ Reference to arbitration under
the Industrial Disputes Act, section 4(1) ‑ Contractual entitlement to
extension ‑ Industrial Disputes Act, section 17(1).

The appellant had been granted three extensions and his application for a
fourth extension was refused. The arbitrator held with the employer that the
employee had no contractual right to an extension.

**Held:**

The award is vitiated by an error of law which goes to jurisdiction in that
the arbitrator approached the applicant's case from the stand point of a
contractual right when the relevant section 17(1) of the Industrial Disputes
Act enjoined him to make such award as may appear to him just and equitable.

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_Faiz_ _Mustapha P.C. with R. K. S. Suresh Chandra_ for the Appellant.

_Gomin_ _Dayasiri with S. Perera_ for the 2nd Respondent.

_Cur._ _adv. vult._

 26 August, 1996.

**G. P S. DE SILVA, C. J.**

The appellant was employed as the personnel officer under the 2nd respondent,
the Maskeliya Plantations Ltd., at the time material to the dispute. He had
been previously granted three extensions of serv­ice after he had reached the
optional age of retirement, namely 55

**209**

years. However, his application for the fourth extension of service was
refused. The appellant made representations to the Commissioner of Labour in
this regard and the dispute was ultimately referred to arbitration in terms of
section 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act. The relevant part of the
reference to arbitration reads thus: "Whether the denial of future extensions
of service to Mr. K. T Shanmugam from November 1993 by the Maskeliya
Plantations Ltd., is justified and if not what relief should be granted to
him" (emphasis added). After an inquiry, the arbitrator held that "the
circulars quoted by the workman do not support the **right** he claimed for
him to go on in the service of Maskeliya Plantations Ltd., till he is 60 years
of age" In the award the arbitrator stated, "The main matter in dispute is the
denial of future extensions of service to the workman. The learned Counsel for
the company stated in his preliminary address to court that there must be
proof of a right claimed, for there to be a denial. I agree." The arbitrator
examined the circulars relating to extensions in service after reaching the
age of 55 years from the point of view of **a right** claimed by the
appellant; he held that there was no such right and that the matter fell
entirely within the discretion of the 2nd respondent.

Aggrieved by the decision of the arbitrator the Appellant sought a writ of
certiorari to quash the award. The Court of Appeal dismissed this application.
Hence the appeal to this Court. Special leave to appeal was granted on the
following question. "Was the Court of Appeal in error in considering the
question of extension in service solely as a matter of contractual right and
not on the basis whether the refusal of extension of service was justified."

The approach of the Court of Appeal to the matter in dispute is clearly
indicated in the following passage in the judgment. "The crucial question in
issue, has the petitioner a right to continue in employment till he reached 60
years? . . . In my view the petitioner was aware that the extension was at the
discretion of the management. As a matter of right he was not entitled to get
an extension."

Mr. Mustapha for the appellant submitted that both the Court of Appeal and the
arbitrator were in serious error in considering the matter in dispute from the
standpoint of a contractual right. Counsel urged that this was clearly
contrary to the relevant statutory provision, namely,

210

section 17(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act which required the arbitrator to
"make such award as may appear to him just and equitable". Mr. Mustapha also
drew our attention to the terms of reference of the dis­pute, where the words
used are "whether the denial of future exten­sions of service . . . is
justified."

Mr. Mustapha rightly conceded that the Appellant has no contractual right to
an extension in service after the optional age of retirement, namely 55 years.
Admittedly, the appellant was granted 3 exten­sions of service after he
reached 55 years but was refused his 4th extension of service. The question
then is whether the refusal of the 4th extension was justified in the
particular facts and circumstances of this case. This was the true issue
before the arbitrator and I agree with Mr. Mustapha that the arbitrator
erroneously viewed the dispute largely, if not, entirely, as a matter of
contractual entitlement.

What then are the facts which resulted in the refusal of the appel­lant's
application for his 4th extension in service? By P 7 dated 7.4.92 he applied
for his 3rd extension in service. The endorsements made on P7 expressly states
that his work and general conduct are good and the extension in service
applied for was recommended by the Chair­man of the Sri Lanka State
Plantations Corporation. The Secretary to the Ministry of State Plantations by
his endorsement on P7 dated 25.5.92 allowed the Appellant's application for
the 3rd extension in service. It is of relevance to note that the 3rd
extension was to expire on 18.11.93.

The decision to grant the Appellant his 3rd extension in service was
communicated to him by P6. It is a letter dated 23.9.92 addressed to the
Appellant by the General Manager of Maskeliya Plantations Ltd. It seems to me
that it is P6 that has given rise to the dispute between the parties and the
Appellant's complaint is founded largely on P6. P6 reads thus:

"23rd September, 1992.  
Mr. K. T. Shanmugam,  
Personnel Officer,  
Maskeliya Plantations Limited,  
"Glencroft", Norwood.

211

Dear Sir,

**Application for extension of service**

We refer to your application dated 7.4.92 requesting the S. L. S. P. C.
Management to grant you an extension in your current employment by another 01
year.

Considering your request, we have decided to grant you another extension upto
18th November, 1993. Please note that we are unable to extend your services
after 18th November, 1993, and that no further extension would be granted.

You are therefore, requested to finalise your retirement arrange­ments by that
date.

Yours faithfully,  
Maskeliya Plantations Limited  
General Manager."

The Appellant's reply to P6 is P8 which reads as follows:

Through the Plantations Director.  
The General Manager,  
Maskeliya Plantations Limited,  
45/12, Ocean Lines Building,  
3rd Floor, Colombo 2.

Dear Sir,

**Application for extension of service**

I have for acknowledgement your letter dated 23rd September, 1992 on the above
subject.

I observe from the 2nd paragraph of your letter, that you are unable to extend
my services after 18th November, 1993, and that no further extension would be
granted. I have also been advised to finalise my retirement arrangements by
that date.

**212**

In this regard I respectfully submit that my 3rd extension which expires on
18.11.93 had already been granted by the Ministry of Plantations Industries on
25th May, 1992 and your letter under reference confirms only that position.
Since the extension granted upto 18.11.93 is my 3rd extension, I am entitled
to further 2 extensions, i.e. 4th and 5th. In these circumstances, I will be
forwarding my application for the 4th extension at the appropriate time and I
will not be finalising retire­ment arrangements as advised by you.

Yours faithfully,  
Maskeliya Plantations Limited,  
K. T. Shanmugam  
Personnel Officer."

The heading of P6 is "Application for extension of service:' It ex­pressly
states that the application for the 3rd extension in service made by P7 has
been granted. This means that the appellant can now re­main in service until
18th November, 1993. At the same time, P6 states that the Appellant will not
be granted any further extensions of service after 18th November, 1993. The
relevant circulars provided that the extension of service on completion of 55
years "shall be at the discre­tion of the management and **will be considered
annually on receipt of applications from those who wish to have their services
extended:'** What needs to be stressed is that P6 effectively precluded the
management from considering on its merits the Appellant's subse­quent
application for his 4th extension in service. The Appellant in fact applied
for his 4th extension in service by letter dated 26.4.93. By P9 dated 3.5.93
the appellant was informed that **" As already indicated **you will not be
given extension of service beyond November, 1993". P6 in effect made
retirement compulsory at the age of 58, in so far as the Appellant was
concerned. This was a decision which was unrea­sonable and arbitrary. Neither
the arbitrator nor the Court of Appeal viewed this matter in the light of the
mandatory provisions contained in section 17(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act
and the terms in which the reference to arbitration was made. This clearly is
an error of law which goes to jurisdiction. The arbitrator has posed the wrong
question and has failed to consider the true question which arose for
decision.

Mr. Gomin Dayasiri for the 2nd Respondent strenuously contended that P6 was in
accord with the relevant circular which required the

**213**

management to give the Appellant one year's notice of retirement. Coun­sel
urged that the Appellant in his evidence conceded that the relevant circular
required the management to give one year's notice to the work­man in the event
of a refusal of extension of service and that precisely was the purpose of P6.
I find, however, that the appellant in his evidence has also stated, "My
position is that the notice refusing extension given to me was irregular as
that notice was tagged on to extension granted to me....It should have been
given to me only when I made my application for the 4th extension:' More
importantly, the unreasonable and arbitrary character of P6 is explicitly set
out by the appellant in his statement filed before the arbitrator. Referring
to the contents of P6, the Appellant states: "In other words what the
Secretary of the Ministry of Plantations granted me once has been re-granted
again by the General Manager of Maskeliya Plantations Ltd., with notice that
no further extensions would be granted **or put it in another form, they
converted my 3rd extension into a period of notice, but they themselves gave
no extension which means that they did not give extension but revoked what was
given:'** (emphasis added).

It is also a matter of significance that no reasons were given for the refusal
of the 4th extension of service. The Appellant repeatedly so stated in his
evidence and the documents support that position.

On a consideration of the matters set out above, I am of the opin­ion that Mr.
Mustapha's submission that the award is vitiated by an error of law which goes
to jurisdiction is well founded. I accordingly set aside the judgment of the
Court of Appeal and direct that a _Writ_ of _Certiorari_ do issue to quash
that part of the award which relates to the Appellant's claim for extension in
service.

In all the circumstances I make no order as to costs of appeal.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.

**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY,** **J**. ‑ I agree.

_**Appeal allowed.**_

_**Certiorari issued**._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/34.html_  

