##  Hussain v. Jiffry - SLR - 185, Vol 1 of 2002 [2002] LKSC 34; (2002) 1 Sri
LR 185 (25 February 2002)

**185**

**HUSSAIN  
v.  
JIFFRY**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA, CJ.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 110/97  
CA NO. 307/84  
DC COLOMBO NO. 4400/RE  
19 JULY, 23 AUGUST AND 15 OCTOBER, 2001  
  
_Landlord and Tenant - Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972 - Whether a tenancy is
terminable by a unilateral notice of termination by the tenant.  
_  
The appellant was the landlord and the respondent was the tenant of premises
No. 297, Main Street, Colombo 11. On 31. 03. 1980, the respondent informed the
appellant in writing that he (the respondent) was relinquishing his tenancy
with effect from that date and requested the appellant to give the premises to
one R. There was no evidence of a new tenancy, nor did the respondent give
vacant possession of the premises to the appellant.  
  
However, the respondent sent a letter dated 05. 07. 1980 to the appellant
informing her "I continued and still remain the lawful monthly tenant of the
premises" with a cheque for rent for the months of April, May and June, 1980,
which established that the respondent had not handed over the premises to the
appellant.  
  
The appellant instituted action for the ejectment of the respondent from the
premises, alleging that by this letter dated 31. 03. 1980 the respondent
voluntarily terminated the tenancy and that he was in unlawful occupation from
01\. 04. 1980.  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1) In the circumstances, there was no termination of the tenancy and the rule
that a tenant cannot contract out of the protection afforded by the Rent Act
applies.  
  
**Cases referred to :**  
  
1\. _Gaffor v. Vivien Perera -_ (1994) 3 Sri LR 114.  
  
2\. _Ranasinghe v. Premadharma_ \- (1985) Sri LR 63 at 72.  
  
3\. _Ibrahim Saibo v. Mansoor_ (D. B.) - (1953) 54 NLR 217 at 224.

**186**

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_Rohan Sahabandu_ with _Athula Perera_ for appellant.  
  
_E. D. Wickremanayake_ with Anandhi Cooray for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

February 25, 2002  
  
**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
  
**The plaintiff-respondent-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the
appellant) instituted action in 1980 against the defendant-appellant
respondent (hereinafter referred to as the respondent) for the ejectment of
the respondent from the premises in question. The appellant took up the
position that the respondent by his letter dated 31. 03. 1980 (P1), terminated
the tenancy voluntarily and that he was in unlawful occupation from 01. 04.
1980.  
  
At the conclusion of the trial the District Court held in favour of the
appellant. The respondent appealed to the Court of Appeal which was allowed by
its decision dated 29. 01. 1997. The appellant, thereafter, appealed to this
Court and special leave to appeal was granted on 17. 07. 1997 only on the
following question :  
  
"As the contract of tenancy is a contract between two parties when the terms
and conditions are accepted by the two parties, can one party unilaterally
change and revoke his earlier decision.  
  
Does notice relied upon by the plaintiff (P1) serve to terminate the tenancy?"  
  
The Court of Appeal held against the appellant on the ground that a tenant can
never contract out of the protection afforded by the Rent Act.

**187**

It is common ground that the respondent was the tenant and the premises in
question is governed by the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972\. It is also common ground
that the respondent wrote a letter to the appellant on 31. 03. 1980 (P1). This
letter was in the following terms :  
  
"Premises No. 297, Main Street, Colombo 11.  
  
I hereby inform you that I am relinquishing my tenancy of the above premises
of which you are the landlady as from the 31st March, 1980.  
  
Mr. A Ragunathan, who is a good friend of mine wants to get  the tenancy of
the premises and shall be grateful if you would give the premises to him."  
  
It is also common ground that after writing the above letter, the respondent
did not give vacant possession and the appellant instituted action to evict
the respondent.  
  
Citing Ghaffor v. Vivien Perera,m the learned counsel for the appellant
stressed that the applicability of common law with regard to the Rent Act has
not been abrogated in its entirety. His position is that, if the Rent Act is
silent on the issue of the tenant renouncing his tenancy, the common law would
be applicable and in such a  situation the appellant could act on the letter
relinquishing tenancy. The contention of the learned counsel is that the only
requirement in this kind of a situation is the acceptance of the relinquishing
of the tenancy by the landlord.  
  
Learned counsel for the respondent, however, was not in agreement with this
view. His contention is that there is no provision in the Rent Act for
application of the common law when there is a lacuna in the Act.  
  
Although there is comprehensive statutory, provision on tenancy in Sri Lanka,
yet the common law applicable to the subject area has

**188**

not been abrogated in its entirety. Referring to the above, Prof. G. L Peiris,
in his book on 'The Law of Property in Sri Lanka, volume II, Landlord and
Tenant (Lake House Investments, 1976) has Stated that -  
  
"The Roman Dutch common law applicable to landlord and tenant has not been
abrogated, in its entirety, by the statutes which govern the subject today in
Sri Lanka. Although some aspects of the common law have been superseded
entirely by provisions incorporated in statutes, there are yet other areas of
the common law which remain substantially intact. The statutes, therefore, are
to be seen as an edifice erected on the foundation of the common law . . ."  
  
It should, however, be noted that although the common law still remains
'substantially intact', the Rent Act incorporates statutory provisions which
are predominantly for the protection of the tenant. In Ranasinghe v.
Premadharma Wanasundera, J. was of the view that -  
  
"The Rent Act has created a statutory relationship between landlord and tenant
drastically altering some common law concepts and has been designed to ensure
a great measure of security and protection to tenants."  
  
With regard to the present position, there is no necessity to consider the
applicability of common law principles, as a similar situation has been
considered in a collective judgment of five (5) Judges in Ibrahim Saibo v.
Mansoor (3). In their collective judgment, the Court stated that -  
  
"A tenant can never contract out of the protection afforded. It follows from
this that he can at any moment recall a promise to surrender possession. The
only two ways in which the statutory protection comes to an end are :  
  
(1) By the handing back of the premises to the landlord;  
  
(2) By the order of a competent Court that is to say a Court acting with
jurisdiction."

**189**

It is conceded that although the respondent wrote the letter P1 dated 31. 03.
1980, the premises in question was not handed over to the appellant. Even if
the respondent had wanted to relinquish the tenancy at the time he wrote the
letter P1, and if the owner has accepted it, still it would be necessary for
the premises to be physically handed over by the respondent to the appellant,
for the statutory protection to come to an end. Under a contract of tenancy,
the owner and the tenant agree and accept the terms of tenancy. Therefore,
although the respondent may have contemplated relinquishing the premises as
revealed in PI, he could, nevertheless, unilaterally change his mind and
reverse his decision, if he had not handed over the premises to the landlord.
In such circumstances the document marked P1 by itself does not serve to
terminate the tenancy.  
  
It is common ground that the premises in question, continued to be in the
possession of the respondent and the letter dated 05. 07\. 1980 (P4) sent by
the respondent to the appellant informing her that, "/ continued and still
remain the lawful monthly tenant of the premises", with a cheque for the rent
for months of April, May and June, 1980, establish that the respondent had not
handed over the premises to the appellant. In such circumstances it cannot be
said that the tenancy agreement between the appellant and the respondent had
come to an end.  
  
For the aforementioned reasons, I hold that the clear intention of the
respondent was to continue to occupy the premises in question without handing
it over to the appellant. The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed and the
judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 29. 01\. 1997 is affirmed.  
  
There will be no costs.  
  
**S. N. SILVA, CJ. -** I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/34.html_  

