##  Eksith Fernando v. Manawadu and Others (St. Thomas' College Cases) - SLR -
78, Vol 1 of 2000 [2000] LKSC 35; (2000) 1 Sri LR 78 (21 January 2000)

**78**  

**EKSITH FERNANDO  
v.  
MANAWADU AND OTHERS  
(ST. THOMAS' COLLEGE CASES)**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND ISMAIL, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 55/99  
CA APPLICATION NO 842/97 (Rev)  
DC COLOMBO NO 4974/SPL  
WITH  
SC APPEAL NO 56/99  
CA APPLICATION NO 915/97 (Rev)  
DC COLOMBO NO 4949/SPL AND  
SC APPEAL NO 57/99  
CA APPLICATION NO 842/97 (Rev)  
DC COLOMBO NO. 4974/SPL  
23rd AND 24th NOVEMBER, 1999  
  
_Interpretation of statutes - "Generalia specialibus non derogant" \-
Qualifications for appointment to the post of Warden, St. Thomas' College -
Applicability of Education Ordinance to STC - Ordinance No. 7 of 1930 - The
right of plaintiff to sue-Section 5 of the Civil Procedure Code.  
_  
Two actions were fled in the District Court against St. Thomas' College Board
of Governors and the Warden of STC seeking a declaration in each that the
purported appointment of the 17th defendant (Eksith Fernando) as warden was
irregular on the ground that 17th defendant, although a graduate, has
absolutely no teaching experience as required by regulations made by the
Minister under the Education Ordinance which was applicable to the STC. The
rules provided that only a graduate with at least 10 years teaching experience
was eligible to be appointed as the Principal of any school, which included a
fee levying school as well. Admittedly the post of Warden is equivalent to
that of a Principal. In each case, an interim injunction was prayed for
preventing the 17th defendant from assuming duties as Warden.  
  
The plaintiff in DC case No 4974 sued as the father of two students attending
STC (parent's case) whilst the plaintiffs in DC Case No 4949 sued as old boys
(old boys' case). The District Judge refused to issue the

**79**

injunctions sought in each case. On applications made to the Court of Appeal
by way of revision which were consolidated, the Court of Appeal set aside the
order of the trial Judge made in the parent's case and ordered the issue of an
interim injunction as prayed for. As regards the old boys' case, the Court of
Appeal held that the plaintiffs had no cause of action to sue. Three appeals
were preferred from the judgment of the Court of Appeal. Of consent the
appeals were consolidated and it was agreed by Counsel that the court decides
on the merits of the legal issues involved.  
  
**Held:**  
  
1\. The maxim "generalia specialibus non derogant" has no application to the
instant case. The Education Ordinance is applicable to the STC and the
appointment of the Warden should be in accordance with the qualifications
specified in the regulations made by the Minister under the Education
Ordinance.  
  
Per Dheeraratne, J.  
  
"1 may mention here, in passing that in order to avoid needless delay and
duplication of proceedings, situations like this should have ordinarily
demanded a trial judge, either taking up the main trial expeditiously or
taking up the interim injunction inquiry and the trial together. I am inclined
to think that the burden of taking such a decision is with the trial Judge,
but the Bar should actively co-operate with him, to reach that decision."  
  
Per Dheeraratne, J.  
  
"All what the (STC) Ordinance has sought to achieve was to grant a corporate
personality to the STC Board, and to declare its powers and functions of
internal management. No part of the functions or powers either of the State or
the Minister of Education has been conceded, conferred upon or granted to the
Board by the STC Ordinance, to make that a special enactment in the field of
education."  
  
2\. The plaintiff in the parent's case has a cause of action within the
meaning of section 5 of the Civil Procedure Code, on the basis of contract. An
implied condition of such contract is for the Board of Governors to provide
the plaintiff's two children with a Warden qualified in terms of the

**80**

regulations made by the Minister. The failure to do so amounts not only to
"the refusal to fulfil an obligations" but also to "the neglect to perform a
duty" within the meaning of section 5 of the Civil Procedure Code. He is.
therefore, entitled to succeed.  
  
3\. The relationship between the old boys and the Board of Governors would not
make the disputed appointment of the warden an infliction of a "wrong" on them
to ground a cause of action to sue the Board of Governors. Therefore, the old
boys' case must necessarily fail.  
  
**Cases referred to:**  
  
1\. Murugesu v. Northern Divisional Agricultural Producers Union (1952) 54 NLR
517  
  
2\. Richard Perera v. Albert Perera (1963) 67 NLR 445  
  
3\. Societe Des Produits Nestle SA v. Multitech Lanka (Pvt) Ltd. (1999) 2 Sri
LR 298  
  
4\. The Vera Cruze (1884) 10 AC 59  
  
5\. Blackpool Corporation v. Slam Estate Company Ltd. (1922) 1 AC 27  
  
6\. Ghouse v. Ghouse (1988) 1 Sri LR 25  
  
7\. London and Blackwall Railway v. Limehouse D.B.W. (1856) 3 KGJ 123  
  
8\. Thaiagarajah v. Karthigesu (1966) 69 NLR 73  
  
9\. Amaris v. Amerasinghe (1919) 21 NLR 176  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgement of the Court of Appeal  
  
K. N. Choksy, P.C. with K. Wyetunga for the 17th defendant - appellant in
55/99 and 17th defendant - respondent in 56/99 and 57/99  
  
D.S. Wijesinghe, P.C. with Roland Perera, for plaintiff - appellants in 56/99  
  
Faisz Musthapha, P.C. with N. Mahendran and Faiza Musthapha Markar for
plaintiff \- respondent in 55/99 and 57/99.  
  
H.L. de Silva, P.C. with Romesh de Silva, P.C. and S.C. Crossette Thambiah for
1st-13th, 15th and 16th defendants - appellants in 57/99 and 1st- 13th, 15th
and 16th defendants - respondents in 55/99 and 1st - 13th defendants -
respondents and 16th and 17th respondents in 56/99.

_Cur adv vult._

**81**

JANUARY 21, 2000  
**DHEERARATNE, J.  
**  
**Introduction  
**  
I must frankly admit that the resolution of the legal disputes in this case
had the teasing nature of solving a crossword puzzle, or rather a cryptic
cross-word puzzle. In DC case No. 4974 the plaintiff as the father of two
students attending St. Thomas College Mt. Lavinia (parent's case), and in case
No. DC 4949 the plaintiffs as old boys of STC (old boys' case), sued the Board
of Directors and the Warden of the STC, seeking a declaration in each case,
that the purported appointment of the 17th defendant - respondent as Warden,
was irregular. In each case, an interim injunction was prayed for preventing
the 17th defendant - respondent from assuming office as Warden. Admittedly the
17th defendant - respondent, although a graduate, has absolutely no experience
as a teacher. The basis of challenging the appointment of the 17th defendant -
respondent as Warden in each case was that the Education Ordinance No. 31 of
1939, was applicable to the STC; that regulations made by the Minister of
Education under that Ordinance; provided that only a person with 10 years
teaching experience was eligible to be appointed as Principal of any school,
which included a fee levying school as well. Admittedly, the post of Warden is
equivalent to that of a Principal. The learned trial judge refused to issue an
interim injunction in the parent's case; thereafter he also refused to issue
an interim injunction in the old boys' case. I may mention here, in passing,
that in order to avoid needless delay and duplication of proceedings,
situations like this should have ordinarily demanded a trial judge, either
taking up the main trial expeditiously or taking up the interim injunction
inquiry and trial together. I am inclined to think that the burden of taking
such a decision is with the trial judge, but the Bar should actively co-
operate with him, to reach that decision. See the observations made in the
cases of Murugesu Vs. Northern Divisional Agricultural Producers Union(1)
Richard Perera Vs

**82**

Albert Perera(2) and Societe Des Produits Nestle SA Vs. Multitech Lanka (Pvt)
Ltd. (3) The plaintiff in the parent's case and the plaintiffs in the old
boys' case moved the Court of Appeal in revision on both the respective orders
of the trial judge. The Court of Appeal, having consolidated both cases, set
aside the order of the trial judge made in the parent's case and made order
issuing an interim injunction as prayed for. As regards the old boys' case,
the Court of Appeal held that the plaintiffs had no cause of action to sue.
From the judgment of the Court of Appeal 3 appeals have been now preferred. In
appeal No. 55/99, the 17th defendant in the parent's case, in appeal No.
56/99, the plaintiffs in the old boys' case, and in appeal No. 57/99, the
defendant Board of Governors of the STC in the parent's case, are the
respective appellants.  
  
When the three appeals came up for hearing before us, in order to secure the
speedy and final resolution of all matters in dispute pending between the
parties, we suggested the following course of action, which, in the best
traditions of the Bar, was met with the ready agreement and approval of
learned counsel for appellants and respondents in all the three appeals; that
was;  
  
1\. Parties agreed to consolidate the appeals SC 55/99,56/99 and 57/99.  
  
2\. Parties agreed that if the Education Ordinance No. 31 of 1939 and the
regulations made thereunder are applicable to the STC, the appointment of the
17th defendant as Warden was invalid.  
  
3\. Parties agreed that this Court should decide the following questions only,
in order to finally determine the District Court cases No. 4947 and No. 4949;
namely, (A) Whether the plaintiff in DC No. 4947 and the plaintiffs in DC No.
4949, had a right to sue to obtain a declaration that the appointment of the
17th defendant was invalid?; (B) If any one of the parties to either action
had a right to sue,

**83**

did the Education Ordinance and the rules made thereunder govern the
appointment of the 17th defendant as Warden?  
  
4\. Parties agreed that final judgments will be entered in the aforesaid
District Court actions in terms of the judgment that will be delivered by this
Court.  
  
We realized during the course of arguments of learned counsel, that the two
intricate and interesting questions of law we have been called upon to answer,
were so much inextricably interwoven with each other, that in deciding them,
we were left with two alternative approaches. The first, was to deal with the
right of the parties to sue, on the assumption that the Education Ordinance
was applicable to the STC and then decide the question of applicability of
that Ordinance; the second, was to deal initially with the question of
applicability of that Ordinance to the STC and then decide the question of the
right of parties to sue. We chose the latter option as it seemed to us to
appeal better both to logic and reason. In deciding those questions of law, we
have specifically disregarded the several items of evidence in this case,
pointing to the fact that the Board of Governors of the STC, had for a long
course of time, acted on the basis that the Education Ordinance was applicable
to the STC; for example obtaining permission from the Minister of Education to
enable the then Warden to continue in office, when the regulations made by the
Minister, which will be referred to in full later, came into force. In our
view, such conduct on the part of the Board of Governors, is irrelevant to the
decision of the legal issue of the applicability of the Education Ordinance.  
  
**THE ST. THOMAS' COLLEGE ORDINANCE NO. 7 OF 1930, RULES MADE THEREUNDER AND
THE EDUCATION ORDINANCE NO. 31 OF 1939, AND REGULATIONS MADE THEREUNDER.  
**  
As the years of enactment of the two statutes indicate, the STC Ordinance is
anterior to the Education Ordinance. According to the long title of the STC
Ordinance, it is an

**84**

enactment to "incorporate St. Thomas' College Board of Governors and to amend
the Law relating to St. Thomas' College". Section 2 of the Ordinance, deals
with the incorporation of the Board of Governors as a corporation sole and
section 10 deals with the power of the Board to make rules. Rule 11 made in
terms of that section reads as follows :  
  
"The Warden and Sub-Warden of St. Thomas' College, Mt. Lavinia, and the
Headmasters of Branch Schools shall be appointed by the Board subject to the
approval of the Bishop, and shall have other academic qualifications as may be
approved by the Board. They shall be members of the Church of Ceylon or of any
Church in communion with the same, unless, in any particular instance, the
Board with the approval of the Bishop shall determine otherwise."  
  
The long title of the Education Ordinance states "An Ordinance to make better
provision for education and to revise and consolidate the law relating
thereto." Section 61 refers to the applicability of Ordinance and reads :-
"The provisions of . this Ordinance shall not apply to any institution,
devoted mainly or entirely to the education in agriculture of persons who are
not less than sixteen years of age". Section 62 defines an "unaided" school to
mean "a school which is not a Government school or an assisted school".
Section 49 provides that on or after 1st June 1951, no person shall maintain
any unaided school, unless the principal or other person for the time being in
control of the school, has notified to the Director-General (DG) in writing,
all such particulars relating to the school, as the DG may, by notice
published in the Gazette, require to be furnished to him, in respect of the
unaided school. Section 50 enables the DG, or any inspecting officer of the
department, or any other person generally or specially authorized by the DG,
to enter and inspect and examine the pupils therein and all the registers of
admission and attendance of any such school. Section 51 empowers the DG, on
being satisfied after an inspection of an unaided school, that it is open to
the type of complaints mentioned in that section, to

**85**

order measures to be taken to remedy the matters of complaint within a
specified time, and if no such remedial measures are taken, to order
discontinuance of such school. Section 37 enables the Minister to make
regulations for or in respect of several matters, one being (n) "the
qualifications, period of training, salaries, appointment, registration,
grading, suspension, and removal. of teachers." It was not seriously contended
that the word "teacher" in that context did not include a "Principal". By a
notification in the Government Gazette of 9.12.1983, regulations made by the
Minister on 29th May 1983 were published. I shall set out that notification in
full.

**THE EDUCATION ORDINANCE**

**REGULATIONS** made by the Minister of Education under section 37 of the
Education Ordinance (Chapter 185)

**RANIL WICKRAMASINGHE  
**Minister of Education

Colombo, May 24, 1983.

**Regulations**

1\. These regulations may be cited as the Assisted Schools and Unaided Schools
Regulations, 1983.  
  
2\. All assisted schools and unaided schools shall conform to the following
requirements in regard to the qualifications, appointment and period of
training of their teachers :  
  
(i) All teachers appointed henceforth should have at least one of the
following qualifications :  
  
(a) University degree;  
  
(b) Trained Teachers Certificate;  
  
(c) Diploma Certificate in Music, Dancing, Art, Agriculture, Home Science,
Technical subjects and any other subject notified from time to time;

**86**

(d) Passes in three subjects at the General Certificate of Education (Advance
Level) Examination.  
  
(ii) Those in category (d) should obtain the Trained Teachers Certificate
within ten years of joining the service.  
  
(iii) A principal should be a University Graduate with at least ten years of
teaching experience.  
  
(iv) A person who has been convicted in a Court of Law for a criminal offence
or has been dismissed from any post in the public service shall not be
eligible for such appointment.  
  
3\. Teachers who do not conform to the conditions stipulated in regulation 2,
but who are already in service are required to obtain the approval of the
Minister to continue in service. It shall be obligatory on the part of the
manager to make the requisite application to the Minister.  
  
**Consideration of submissions made on behalf of the Warden and the Board of
Management of the STC.**  
  
It was forcefully contended by learned President's Counsel appearing on behalf
of the Warden and the Board of Management of the STC, that the STC Ordinance
was enacted prior to the Education Ordinance; that the STC Ordinance is a
special enactment; that it is a self-contained Ordinance meant exclusively for
the STC, while the Education Ordinance is a general enactment applicable to
all schools except to those which have a statute specifically enacted for
them; that Rule 11 made by the Board of Management has not been specifically
repealed or rendered inoperative by the legislature by the passage of the
Educational Ordinance: that there cannot be an implied repeal, that if that
has occurred the Board would be defunct in respect of all its statutory powers
and even cease to exist as a corporate body; and that the maxim ''generalia
specialibus non derogant" must be applied and therefore the Education
Ordinance does not apply to the STC and its Board.

**87**

Among several decided authorities, three principal cases were referred to in
the course of the arguments by learned President' Counsel for the Warden and
the Board of Governors, to which I shall instantly refer. In my view it is
important to consider closely the nature and effect of the enactments dealt
with in those cases. The first of those, was the case of The Vera Cruze(4) in
which Earl of Selborne LC said, "Now if anything be certain it is this, that
where there are words in a later Act capable of reasonable and sensible
application without extending them to subjects specially dealt with by earlier
legislation, you are not to hold that the earlier and special legislation
indirectly repealed, altered, or derogated from merely by force of such
general words, without any indication of a particular intention to do so". The
special Act referred to in that case was the Fatal Accidents Act (Lord
Campbell's Act) of 1846 which dealt with `damages for loss of life'; and the
general Act referred to was the Admiralty Court Act of 1861, which gave
jurisdiction to the Admiralty Court, by using the general words relating to
actions as "over any claim for damages done by any ship". The second, was the
case of Blackpool Corporation Vs. Stare Estate Company Ltd.(5) in which
Viscount Haldane observed ............................... in that state of
matters we are bound, in construing the general language of the 1919, to apply
a rule of construction which has been repeatedly laid down and is firmly
established. It is that wherever Parliament in an earlier statute has directed
its attention to an individual case and has made provision for it
unambiguously, there arises a presumption that if in a subsequent statute the
Legislature lays down a general principle, that general principle in not to be
taken as meant to rip up what the Legislature had before provided for
individually, unless the intention to do so is specially declared. A mere
general rule is not enough, even though by its terms it is stated so widely
that it would, taken by itself, cover special cases of the kind I have
referred to. An intention to deal with them may, of course, be manifested, but
the presumption is that language which in its character only general refers to
subject-matter appropriate to class as distinguished from individual
treatment.

**88**

Individual rights arising out of individual treatment are presumed not to have
been intended to be interfered with unless the contrary is clearly
manifested." The individual Act referred to in that case, was the private (as
opposed to public and general) enactment, the Blackpool Improvement Act of
1917, and the general enactment referred to was the Acquisition of Land
(Assessment of Compensation) Act of 1919; and the dispute which arose in that
case related to the question as to which Act was applicable for the assessment
of compensation for the land acquired. The third, was a judgment of this Court
in Ghouse Vs. Ghouse(6) in which, on the application of the maxim "generalia
specialibus non derogant", it was held that the Muslim Intestate Succession
Ordinance No. 10 of 1931, being a special law applicable to Muslims, prevailed
over the provisions of the general law, the Adoption Ordinance No. 24 of 1941,
as far as a Muslim was concerned. The other illustrations submitted by learned
counsel to demonstrate that the STC Ordinance was a special enactment, were
those private, local and personal enactments passed by the Parliament in the
UK, permitting corporations to do various acts, which they were unable to
perform under the common law, for example, to acquire land, to impose rates or
taxes on inhabitants of an area, in constructing public projects like
railways, canals or harbours and for the supply of gas, electricity or water.  
  
In connection with the proliferation of those private Acts in the UK at one
time, granting special powers to various bodies and boards, not enjoyed by
them under the common law, I would refer to a few illuminating lines from a
review written by Sir Cecil T. Carr KC. on the book (in two volumes) authored
by Dr. O. Cyprian Williams, titled ''The Historical Development of Private
Bill Procedure and Standing Orders in the House of Commons." Sir Cecil wrote :  
  
According to a hoary academic legend, variously retold and never yet verified,
the head of an Oxford College, in the far off days when such appointments were
subject to the condition

**89**

of celibacy, astonished the fellows of his society by announcing his marriage
and confronting them with a clause in the local Canal Act which gave him
statutory sanction.  
  
It could have happened. In the canal mania of the seventeen-nineties,
comparable with the railway mania of the eighteen-forties, over a hundred
Canal Acts were passed. Toulmin Smith, who disliked all local legislation,
complained in particular of the spate of private In closure Acts because
nobody knew what might be hidden in them. In his "Government by Commissions",
published just hundred years ago, he emphasised the danger of obnoxious
enactments being "smuggled through Parliament by a few projectors unknown to
the mass of inhabitants, as now often happens". There are some 4,000 Inclosure
Acts in the century preceding the general statute of 1845, another 4,000
Railway Acts between 1830 and 1887, and some 1,500 Turnpike Acts in the half
century before 1809\. Other impressive ranges of statistics could indicate
that we owe to private bill legislation not only our system of communication
but also our supply of water, gas and electricity and many other social
improvements and amenities." (The Law Quarterly Review Vo166:1950 page 216)  
  
As stated by Wood VC in London and Blackwall Railway Vs. Limehouse D.B. W.0
(Quoted by Craies and by Bindra) "The legislature in passing a special Act,
has entirely in its consideration **some special power which is to be
delegated for the body applying for the Act on public grounds.** When a
general Act is subsequently passed, it seems to be a necessary inference that
the legislature does not intend thereby to regulate all cases not specially
brought before it, but looking to the general advantage of the community,
without reference to particular cases, it gives large and general powers which
in their generality might, except for this very wholesome rule of interpreting
statutes, override the powers which, upon consideration of the particular
case, **the legislature had before conferred by the special Act for the
benefit of the public.** The result of a contrary rule of construction would
be

**90**

that the legislature, having authorised by special Acts the construction of
some public work, would be supposed afterwards by a general Act to throw it
into the power of a few persons to prevent that public work from being carried
out." (Emphasis added)  
  
The reason for this rule of construction is that in passing a special Act, the
Parliament devotes its entire consideration to the particular subject; and
when a general Act is subsequently passed, it is presumed that the Parliament
has not repealed or modified the former special Act, unless it appears that
the special Act again received consideration from the Parliament.  
  
What is the real nature and effect of the STC Ordinance? As the long title of
the Ordinance indicates the legislative purpose of the enactment is to
incorporate the STC Board of Governors and the law relating to the STC. All
what the Ordinance has sought to achieve was to grant a corporate personality
to the STC Board, and to declare its functions and powers of internal
management. No part of the functions or powers either of the State or of the
Minister of Education has been conceded, conferred upon or granted to the
Board of the STC by the Ordinance, to make that a special enactment in the
field of education. The Board has been granted a legal personality, but it has
not been granted any monopoly, immunity or special privilege not granted to
other persons either natural or legal. The Board has not been granted some
special authority to perform any act which it had no authority to perform
under the normal law of the land. It could have run the management of the STC
even without the Ordinance not having been passed, but of course, devoid of
its corporate personality.  
  
Although it is unnecessary to provide for in an enactment of the nature of the
STC Ordinance, through an abundance of caution, section 13 has been put in, to
make it quite certain that rights of others remain unaffected by the passage
of that Ordinance. That section reads, "Nothing in this Ordinance

**91**

contained shall prejudice or affect the rights of the Republic or of any body
politic or corporate, or of any other person, except such as are mentioned in
the Ordinance and those claiming by, from, or under them". The rule making
power granted to the Board under section 10, enables the Board to make rules
inter alia "(d) for the employment, appointment and dismissal of the warden,
the sub warden and other members of the staff of the college and the
orphanage". The rule making power and the rules made thereunder, are nothing
but private arrangements and comprise no part of a general scheme of
legislation; they are meant for the protection of private interests. As Salmon
says, "The great bulk of enacted law is promulgated by the State in its own
person. But in exceptional cases it has been found possible and expedient to
entrust this power to private hands. The law gives to certain groups of
private individuals limited legislative authority touching matters concerning
themselves. A railway company, for example, is able to make by-laws for the
regulation of its undertaking. A university may make statutes binding upon its
members. A registered company may alter those articles of association by which
its constitution and management are determined. Legislation thus effected by
private persons, and the law so created, may be distinguished as 'autonomic'"
(10th Edition - Glanville Williams 161)  
  
The rule making power granted to the Board of the STC under section 10, should
be read subject to the overriding authority of the Minister to make
regulations, in terms of the power granted to him by the Education Ordinance,
in respect of unaided schools, inasmuch as the terms of employment,
appointment and dismissal by the Board of its employees under that section,
should be read subject to the normal law of the land, such as the Employees'
Provident Fund Act, the Shop and Office Employees Act, and the Industrial
Disputes Act etc. The maxim "generalia specialibus non derogant" has no
application in the instant case. For the above reasons I hold that the
Education Ordinance is applicable to the STC and the

**92**

appointment of the Warden should be in accordance with the qualifications
specified in the regulations made by the Minister under the Education
Ordinance  
  
**The right of plaintiffs to sue.**  
  
As stated earlier, in the parent's case and the old boys' case substantial
final reliefs claimed are the same, namely for a declaration that the 17th
defendant is not entitled to be appointed to the post of Warden of the STC and
for a declaration that the appointment of the 17th defendant as Warden is
invalid and/or of no force in law. (Prayer to the plaint in the parent's case
- (a) and (b); in the old boys' case - (a) to (d). In the parent's case the
plaintiff pleaded inter alia, that he is the father of two students attending
the STC; that he is concerned with their welfare and education; and that the
appointment of the 17th defendant, who is disqualified in terms of the Rules
of the Education Ordinance, is prejudicial to the school and its students. In
the old boys' case, the plaintiffs pleaded inter alia, that they have been
elected and are members of the Executive Committee of the Old Boys'
Association (OBA); that it was decided at a meeting of the Executive Committee
of the OBA and the decision was conveyed to the Board of Governors, objecting
to the appointment of the 17th defendant as Warden, since he is disqualified
in terms of the Rules made under the Education Ordinance; and that they have
an abiding interest in the STC as Executive Committee members of the OBA. It,
was further pointed out that according to Rule No. 2 of the OBA Rules of
Association, one of the objects was to make recommendations for the better
management and administration of the STC; therefore it was contended, that the
plaintiffs in the old boys' case were interested in getting a competent and a
qualified Warden appointed. It was also submitted that the STC Rule No. 1(3)
provides, that two representatives from amongst the old boys of the STC Mt.
Lavinia, should be elected as ex officio members of the Board of Governors.
Therefore it was contended that they are not mere strangers or busy - bodies.
It was also contended that,

**93**

they as old boys, have a right to get their children admitted to the STC in
the future. On those facts, it was submitted that they are entitled to the
declaratory relief as prayed for as they have a right to sue, firstly, because
they are persons having "sufficient or real interest"; secondly because they
have a 'contingent right' to have their children admitted to the STC in the
future.  
  
It is important to remember in considering the nature of the two actions, that
we are not concerned with any public law litigation, but with litigation to
vindicate private rights. The basic question to be asked, in the first place,
in relation to both cases, to my mind is, whether there exists a cause of
action to sue, within the meaning of the Code of Civil Procedure (CPC), in
each case. This is so, even in a case where declaratory relief is sought from
an original Court. But before I deal with that aspect of the matter, let me
first examine, what a cause of action is within the meaning of section 5 of
the CPC.  
  
Section 5 reads :- "Cause of action is a wrong for the prevention or redress
of which an action may be brought, and includes the denial of a right, the
refusal to fulfil an obligation, the neglect to perform a duty, and the
infliction of an affirmative injury.  
  
It could be seen that the definition primarily speaks of the existence of a
'wrong': that is a generic term which embraces a variety of specific
categories of wrongs. The definition then seeks to signify some of the
specific categories of wrongs that may be included in that generic term, like
the denial of a right, the refusal to fulfil an obligation etc. It is quite
obvious that the definition deals with what is usually referred to as a civil
wrong or a legal wrong, which as Salmon puts it is "a violation of justice
according to law." A wrong cannot exist independent of a violation (or a
threatened violation) of law.  
  
The tenor of the submissions of both President's Counsel in the parent's case
and the old boys' case, was that declaratory relief could be sought from an
original civil court, independent

**94**

of the existence of a wrong, falling within the definition of a cause of
action. There was always no doubt about the competency of a civil court to
grant declaratory relief in respect of matters not contemplated in section 217
(G) of the CPC, provided there was cause of action within the meaning of the
CPC. The declaratory decrees section 217 (G) of the CPC refer to, are those
that "declare a right or status"; not mere declarations of any sort. The
declaratory relief claimed by the plaintiff in the leading case of
Thaiagarajah Vs. Karthigesu(8) was a declaration of his civil status that he
was not married, which status was denied by the defendant in that case. H.N.G.
Fernando SPJ. (as he then was) delivering the judgment observed :  
  
"Counsel has argued that under our Code a person cannot institute an action
unless he is able to plead that he has a cause of action as defined in section
5 of the Code. A similar argument was considered in Aziz Vs. Thondaman (1959)
61 NLR 217, where the court apparently took the view that because section 217
(G) of the Code declares that a decree may 'declare a right or status', a
person may therefore bring an action to have a right or status declared. The
precise objection, based on the definition of 'cause of action' was (I think
with respect) not clearly formulated in that judgment. The objection is that
the definition **does** expressly include the denial of a **right,** but makes
no reference to the denial of a **status** , and that therefore the denial of
a status does not give rise to an actionable cause. The answer to this
objection is that the definition and the provision of section 217 (G) must be
read together, and construed as far as reasonable so as to render both
provisions effective. Inconsistency is avoided by the construction that, in
the definition, 'denial of a right' includes the denial of a status. To deny a
status can involve the denial of the legal rights flowing from such status. To
deny the plaintiff's status of bachelor was to deny his rights and his
capacity to contract a valid marriage. A cause of action can therefore arise
upon that denial. Any other construction

**95**

would render the provision for a decree or order declaring a status a dead
letter, and would offend the principle of construction ut magis valeat quam
pereat."  
  
What then is the legal nexus between the plaintiff in the parent's case and
the plaintiffs in the old boys' case on the one side and the Board of
Governors on the other, which gives rise to a 'wrong' on which an action could
be grounded? The 'wrong' in each case must be considered separately as the
'wrong' in one, does not become the 'wrong' in the other. Again the fact that
there is no 'wrong' in one case, does not mean that there is no 'wrong' in the
other. That leads me to examine the nature of the legal relationship between
the opposing parties in the two cases.  
  
In my view, the legal relationship between the parent and the Board of
Governors, is one of contract. It is an implied contract to educate his
children. An implied term of that contract, is the obligation on the part of
the Board of Governors, to conform to the regulations made by the Minister, in
relation to the qualifications of the Warden, designed for the purpose of
providing better education. Let m e refer to the legal principle involved.  
  
According to Dr. C. G. Weeramantry's Law of Contracts Volume 1 page 102,
"Contracts may be either express or implied. Express contracts are formed by
the express words of the parties, whether oral or written. Implied contracts,
however, are inferred by the law from the conduct of parties. Both types of
contracts will thus be seen to proceed from the consent of parties, though the
manner of expression of such consent differs.  
  
The only difference between the two types of contract being that the intention
is expressed by words in the one case and by the conduct in the other, the
main practical result flowing from the distinction would probably centre
around the nature of the evidence to be led in proof of the contract and its
terms.

**96**

Implied contracts would arise when for example a patient consults a doctor, or
a pedestrian hails a taxi-cab or a customer sits down to a meal at a
restaurant. In all these cases the law infers a contract from the conduct of
parties.  
  
Particular terms forming part of a contract may be express or implied. Thus, a
number of implied conditions are imported into a contract of sale by the Sale
of Goods Ordinance, while, on occasion, the Courts will by implication read
into a contract terms which are not there in order to give the contract
business efficacy."  
  
I am of the view that the plaintiff in the parent's case, has not one but two
contracts with the Board of Governors, for the education of his two children.
One of the implied conditions of these contracts as mandated by the Education
Regulations made by the Minister, is for the Board of Governors to provide the
plaintiffs two children with a qualified Warden with a minimum of ten years
experience as a teacher. The failure on the part of the Board, to provide the
plaintiffs children with such a Warden, in breach of that implied condition,
amounts to not only 'the refusal to fulfil an obligation', but also 'the
neglect to perform a duty' within the meaning of section 5 of the CPC. Those
are the wrongs, for the prevention or redress of which, a cause of action
accrued to the plaintiff in the parent's case, to sue the Board of Governors.  
  
I am fortified in the view I have taken, by the judgment in the case of Amaris
Vs. Arnerasinghe(9). The plaintiff in that case alleging that the defendant
who was a head teacher in an aided school, refused to grant leaving
certificates to his sons, brought an action to compel the defendant to grant
such certificates and to recover damages. There was a Code issued by the
Department of Education, which contained a rule that a teacher must furnish a
certificate in the prescribed form to every pupil who leaves the school. In
that case De Sampayo J. observed :-

**97**

"The Code, however, contains practically similar provisions in the case of
English schools, and I need only concern myself with the question as to what
bearing the rules have on the obligations of the teacher towards the parents
of the pupils. The Commissioner (of Requests) considered that any infringement
of them was only a matter for the Department of Education, and would not form
the subject of an action. I am not able to take the same view. It is true that
the rules in question 'are primarily intended to serve the purposes of the
Department, and the Government grant may depend on their regular observance.
But they may also affect the relation between the parent and the teacher. That
relation is, of course, referable to a contract. But the terms of the contract
may be expressed or implied. I should say that the grant of a leaving
certificate, such as the Code provides, would in ordinary circumstances be an
implied term of the contract. The withholding of a certificate would prevent
the pupil from entering another and perhaps, better school, and consequently
from making further educational progress. The grant of a certificate is,
therefore, an important matter in the point of view of the parent, and, in the
absence of agreement to the contrary, should naturally be presumed to be part
of his contract with the teacher. There was in this case no express agreement
relating to the certificate, and I think it is only reasonable to hold that
the grant of a certificate was impliedly included in the contract between the
plaintiff and the defendant."  
  
Similar to the view taken by the Commissioner of Requests in Amaris' case
(supra), learned President's Counsel for the Warden and the Board of the STC,
submitted that the breach of any Education Regulations, if any, is a matter
solely for the Department of Education. I am unable to subscribe to that view.
In the instant case, the implied condition was one of remarkable importance to
any parent, concerned with giving the best education to his children, and was
one that was statutorily imposed upon the Board of Governors by the State.

**98**

For the above reasons I hold that the plaintiff in the parent's case has a
cause of action to sue the Board of Governors; and that he is entitled to
succeed.  
  
I .am unable to discover any such relationship in law between the plaintiff
old boys and the Board of Governors, so as to make the disputed appointment of
the Warden, an infliction of a wrong on them to ground a cause of action to
sue the Board of Governors. No cause of action can be grounded either on 'a
sufficient or real interest' or a contingent interest', without a legal nexus
between the parties, giving rise to a `wrong'. Therefore the old boys case
must necessarily fail.  
  
**Conclusion**  
  
Since I have come to positive findings on the two main legal issues, in terms
of the agreement reached by the parties at the commencement of the arguments,
I direct the District Court, Colombo, to make order granting the declarations
claimed in paragraphs (a) and (b) to the prayer of the plaint in action No.
4974 (parent's case), without costs. I further direct the District Court,
Colombo, to make order dismissing action No. 4949 (old boys' case), without
costs.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. -** I agree.  
  
_District Court directed to grant declarations claimed in action   No. 4974
and to dismiss action No. 4949._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/35.html_  

