##  Issadeen v. The Commissioner of National Housing and Others - SLR - 10,
Vol 2 of 2003 [1992] LKSC 35; (2003) 2 Sri LR 10 (2 September 1992)

10

ISSADEEN  
v.  
THE COMMISSIONER OF NATIONAL HOUSING  
  
AND OTHERS

SUPREME COURT

S. N. SILVA, CJ.

BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND

J.A.N. DE SILVA, J.

SC APPEAL NO. 110/96(A)

CA. NO. 755/92

17TH SEPTEMBER, 2002

_Writ of certiorari_ \- _Laches - Writ will not issue where petitioner fails
to explain delay and it causes prejudice to respondent - Application to quash
a decision to vest a house which had been sold to the tenant   Ceiling on
Housing Property Law, No. 01 of 1973, section 13._

The appellant claiming to be the owner of the premises in suit sought to quash
a recommendation of the Commissioner of National Housing to vest the said
premises. The application was filed on 12.10.1992. It was common ground that
the appellant had been aware of the impugned decision from April, 1992.



The impugned vesting was effected pursuant to an application made in 1973
under section 13 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law, No. 01 1973 by the
deceased 2nd respondent ("the deceased") in whose place the 2nd respondent was
appointed. The deceased had been the tenant of the premises from 1959. Since
then, there had been four sales of the premises over the head of the deceased
and the owner of the premises in 1973 who was the respondent

11

  
to the section 13 application was one Andradi to whom the notice of the
decision to vest was given in 1984.



However, in 1979 the appellant's father had purchased the premises from
Andradi and transferred it to the appellant on 14.10.1988.

Consequent to the Commissioner's decision to vest the premises the Minister
made an Order under section 17 of the Law in or about 1989 which order was
duly gazetted. Thereafter the premises were sold by the Commissioner to the
deceased tenant on 19.10.1992 and the deceased transferred the same to the
substituted 2nd respondent and his sister on 17.08.1994. The aforesaid private
transfers were notarially executed.

The previous litigation and the correspondence in respect of the premises
showed that the appellant had been aware of the decision to vest the premis­es
at least by 1991.

**Held :**

1.         The appellant was guilty of laches. He had failed to adduce any acceptable reason to excuse the delay. The delay had caused prejudice to the deceased (the tenant).

2.         In the aforesaid circumstances the court will generally not issue the writ in the exercise of its discretion.

**Cases referred to** :

1.           _Biso Menike_ v _Cyril de Alwis and Another_ (1982) 1 Sri LR 368

2.     _Rajakaruna_ v _Minister of Finance_ (1985) 1 Sri LR 391

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_L.C. Seneviratne,_ P.C. with _V.K. Choksy_ appellant.

_Romesh de Silva,_ P.C. with _H. Amarasekera_ and _I._ _Munaweera_ for 2nd
substi­tuted respondent.

# Cur. adv. vult

April 04, 2003

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.**



This is an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal 1 dated 05.02.1996.
By that judgment, the Court of Appeal dismissed the application of the
petitioner-appellant (hereinafter referred to as

12

 the appellant) for writ of certiorari quashing the order of the Commissioner
of National Housing vesting premises No.14, Collingwood Place, Colombo 6
(hereinafter referred to as "the premises") as stated in letter dated
27.08.1992 (X2) on the basis that the appellant was guilty of laches. On an
application made to this court, special leave to appeal was granted only on
the question as to whether the finding of the Court of Appeal that the
petitioner 10 was guilty of laches was correct.

The facts of this case, _albeit_ brief, are as follows :  


The appellant became the owner of the premises under and by virtue of Deed No.
434 dated 14.10.1988 attested by G.G. Arulpragasam, Notary Public (X1). The
original 2nd deceased respondent-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the
deceased 2nd respondent) was the occupant of the premises and purported  
  
to claim that he was the tenant of the premises. The appellant sub­mitted that
she received a letter dated 27.08.1992 (X2) from the 1st respondent-respondent
(hereinafter referred to as the 1st respondent) informing her that this
premises had been vested in the Commissioner of National Housing in terms of
the provisions of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law, No.1 of 1973 and
requesting the appellant to submit a written claim to the whole or any part of
the price payable in respect of such house under section 2 of the said law.
The appellant thereafter received a further letter dated 02.09.1992 requesting
the appellant to appear before the Valuation Board appointed in terms of
section 22 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law (X4). The appellant
contended that she did not receive any notice of any application made by the
deceased 2nd 30 respondent for the vesting of the premises nor did she receive
any form of intimation as to the provisions of law under which the premises
had been purportedly vested in the Commissioner of National Housing. She
further contended that she was not afforded any intimation or notice of a
proposed intention on the part of the 1st respondent to secure the vesting of
the premises. The appellant in her application to this Court submitted that
even at the time of fil­ing her application to the Court of Appeal, she was
not aware and had not been apprised of the nature and the character of the
pur­ported vesting.

13

It is common ground that the only question that has to be decided by this
Court is whether the appellant is guilty of laches in filing the application
in the Court of Appeal.

  
Learned President's Counsel for the appellant contended that in considering
the question of laches it is the knowledge of the material facts on the part
of the appellant that would be operative and effective in considering redress
from Court. The appellant's position is that she became aware of the vesting
order that was made in respect of the premises only after receiving the letter
from the 1st respondent dated 27.08.1992 (X2). Subsequently she had 50
received a letter dated 02.09.1992 requesting her to appear before the
Valuation Board. Therefore, the appellant contended that she was not given any
intimation of the notice to vest the said premis­es in the Commissioner of
National Housing or of any inquiry in respect of such vesting. Learned
President's Counsel for the appel­lant contended that, if such notice was
given to the appellant, she could have applied to the Board of Review.
Furthermore, learned President's Counsel submitted that the failure in
informing the appellant of any intention or inquiry relating to the said
vesting by the Commissioner of National Housing constituted a breach of
pastoral justice. In support of his submission, learned President's Counsel
for the appellant relied on _Biso Menike_ v _Cyril de Alwis_ _and another_ C)
and _Rajakaruna_ v _Minister of Finance_ (2>. Learned President's Counsel for
the appellant's submission is that since the time the appellant became the
owner of the property and the time she filed her application in the Court of
Appeal, there had been no delay.

Learned President's Counsel for the respondent was emphatic that the appellant
is guilty of laches. In support of this position, learned President's Counsel
took up the following submissions:

1.                     The appellant's predecessor in title was well aware of the application before the Commissioner of National Housing;

2.                     The lawyers who originally appeared for the 2nd respondent in the present case are the same lawyers who appeared for  
one Andradi, in 2362/RE (Andradi was the owner of the premises from whom the
appellant's father purchased it in  
1979);

14



3\. Appellant filed action No. 1/22/91 in the District Court of Mount Lavinia
and the answer of the original 2nd respon- 80 dent was filed on 03.04.1992. In
the said answer, it was dis­closed that the premises had been vested in the
Commissioner of National Housing.



It is relevant and imperative to refer to some of the related facts of this
case at this juncture. The deceased 2nd respondent was a tenant of the
premises since 1959. Originally he was the tenant of one Peter de Silva and
after four transfers over his head one Andradi became the owner of the
premises in question by Deed No.156 dated 13.09.1970, attested by A.I.M.
Kaleel, Notary Public. The deceased 2nd respondent, by application dated 90
02.02.1973 applied to the Commissioner of National Housing for the purchase of
the premises in terms of section 13 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law,
No.1 of 1973. By its order, the Commissioner of National Housing, allowed the
appellant's appli­cation and recommended vesting of the premises. This was
com­municated to Andradi by letter dated 19.11.1984 with a copy to the
deceased 2nd respondent. The premises was vested and the vesting order was
gazetted on 08.02.1990. Thereafter the Commissioner of National Housing
transferred the premises to the deceased 2nd respondent by Deed No. 14983
dated 100 19.10.1992. The deceased 2nd respondent transferred the premises to
the substituted 2nd respondent and his sister by Deed No. 1466, dated
17.08.1994 attested by E.M.P.N. Arthenayake.



The appellant filed action (L/22/91) in the District Court of Mount Lavinia
and the answer of the deceased 2nd respondent was filed on 03.04.1992. In the
said answer, _inter alia,_ the deceased 2nd respondent had pleaded as follows
:



"The defendant further pleads that in the exercise of his lawful rights he had
made application to the Commissioner 110 of National Housing under the
provisions of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law for the purchase of the
premises in suit and on December 27th 1989 an order was made for the vesting
of the said premises in the Commissioner of National Housing with the approval
of the Honourable the Minister of Housing and Construction and the said
vesting

15

  
order was duly Gazetted under the provisions of the Ceiling on Housing
Property Law in the Government Gazette."



It is therefore common ground that notwithstanding the fact that the appellant
became aware of the vesting order in April 1992, 120 she had waited for 6
months to file her application seeking for a writ of _certiorari_ in the Court
of Appeal.



Learned Judge of the Court of Appeal, after considering the material before
Court, held that the appellant and her father were aware of the application
made by the deceased 2nd respondent by the time the action No. 2362/RE, filed
by the Andradi's against the deceased 2nd respondent in the District Court of
Mount Lavinia for ejectment was finally decided by the Court of Appeal in case
No. 95/79(F) on 25.08.1989. It was further held that the appellant should also
have been aware of the vesting order published in 130 1990.



As referred to earlier, the deceased 2nd respondent was the tenant of the
premises, who came into occupation in 1959. The appellant's father purchased
the premises from Andradi, while the deceased 2nd respondent remained as the
tenant, in 1979. Learned President's Counsel relied on _Biso Menike_ v _Cyril
de Alwis  
__and another (supra,_ pp.379-380) in support of his contention that the writ
of certiorari will not be refused when such denial of the writ is likely to
cause grave injustice. In this case Sharvananda, J. (as he then was) stated
that,

"unlike in English Law in our Law there is no statutory time limit within
which a petition for the issue of writ must be filed. But a rule of practice
has grown which insists upon such peti­tion being made without undue delay.
When no time limit is specified for seeking such remedy, the Court has ample
power to condone delays..."



This passage was cited with approval by G.P.S. de Silva, J. (as he then was)
in the Court of Appeal judgment in _Rajakaruna_ v _Minister of Finance
(supra)._



It is however to be noted that delay could defeat equity. 150 Although there
is no statutory provision in this country restricting the time limit in filing
an application for judicial review and the

16



case law of this country is indicative of the inclination of the Court to be
generous in finding 'a good and a valid reason' for allowing late
applications, I am of the view that there should be proper justification given
in explaining the delay in filing such belated applications. In fact,
regarding the writ of certiorari, a basic characteristic of the writ is that
there should not be an unjustifiable delay in applying for the remedy. Prof.
G.L. Peiris, in his book on Essays on Administrative Law in Sri Lanka (Lake
House Investments 160 Ltd., pg. 13 and 15) stated that,



"Where a discretion is available to the Court in regard to the grant or
refusal of certiorari, the writ will generally not issue if there has been
unjustifiable delay on the part of the appli­cant in seeking relief ... The
relevant principle is that relief by way of certiorari must be sought
punctually."



The appellant's contention that she became aware of the vesting order in
regard to the premises only in April 1992 in my view cannot be accepted for
the following reasons. The attorney-at-law for the deceased 2nd respondent
wrote to the attorney-at- 170 law for the appellant on 06.06.1991 replying the
latter's letter dated 06.05.1991 regarding the premises in issue. In the
reply, the said attorney-at-law had informed the attorney-at-law for the
appellant in the following terms:



"My client, Mr. Edward Fernando, was a lawful tenant, enti­tled to the
statutory protection of the Rent Act in respect of the aforesaid premises.
Your attention is drawn to the pleadings, proceedings and judgment in the
District Court of Mount Lavinia Case No.2362/RE (A5)."



In his reply dated 28.06.1991 (A6), the attorney-at-law for 180 the appellant
informed the attorney-at-law for the deceased 2nd respondent in the following
terms :



"Action has already been instituted in the District Court of Mount Lavinia
bearing the above number for recovery of possession of the premises bearing
assessment No.14, Collingwood Place, Wellawatte from your client."



The appellant's petition to the Court of Appeal, although it is dated
30,09,1992, was filed only on 12.10.1992. The appellant

17



has not given any reason for the delay in filing the application, but stated
that she has not received any notice either from the 1st or 190 the 2nd
respondent to this application. Taking into consideration the totality of the
circumstances, it is improbable that the appellant was not aware of the
vesting order made by the Commissioner of National Housing, at the least by
June 1991.



In fact a consideration of the entirety of the circumstances in this case,
reveal that the appellant would have known about the vesting order well before
her attorney-at-law received the letter dated 06.06.1991, referred to above.
In the instant case, in my view, the delay on the part of the appellant has
caused prejudice to the deceased 2nd respondent since he has taken all
necessary 200 steps on the basis that the premises was vested in the
Commissioner of National Housing. The appellant has failed to adduce any
acceptable reason to excuse the delay.



I accordingly hold that the appellant was guilty of laches and answer the
question on which special leave to appeal was granted by this Court in the
affirmative. This appeal is according­ly dismissed, but in all the
circumstances of this case I make no order for costs.

**S. N. SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree.

**DE SILVA, J.** \- I agree.

Appeal dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/35.html_  

