##  Malwattage v. Dharmawardena - SLR - 141, Vol 2 of 1991 [1991] LKSC 35;
(1991) 2 Sri LR 141 (28 October 1991)

**141**

** **

## MALWATTAGE

**v.**

**DHARMAWARDENA**



SUPREME COURT.

BANDARANAYAKE J., KULATUNGE J. AND

WADUGODAPITIYA J.

S. C. APPEAL NO. 8/87.

C. A. NO. 462/79.

D. C. MOUNT LAVINIA NO. 156/ZL.

25 JANUARY, 26 MARCH, 27 AND 30 SEPTEMBER 1991.



_Landlord and Tenant ‑ Rent and Ejectment ‑ Building constructed and eased in
contravention of Housing and Town Improvement Ordinance ‑ Is contract of
tenancy in respect of such building illegal? ‑ Applicability of Rent Act to
such contracts ‑ In pari delicto potior est conditio defendentis. ‑
Vindicatory action._



The respondent's father had constructed an unauthorised house on the premises
in suit. The respondent's mother who was the owner of the pre­mises
transferred same to the respondent. The respondent's father had placed the
appellant in possession and levied a rent. As the building was unauthorised it
was liable to be demolished as an illegal structure in terms of he Housing and
Town Improvement Ordinance.



### 142



**Held:**

**  **

(1)        The maxim in **_pari delicto potior est conditio defendentis_**
does not apply as the respondent had nothing to do with the alleged contract
of tenancy, being in no way party to it.



(2)        The contract was illegal as the building being an unauthorised one,
was incapable of being let. An illegality cannot give rise to tenancy rights
nor can the Rent Act be used to cover up and rectify an illegality under the
Housing and Town Improvement Ordinance.



(3)        There is an express statutory prohibition against occupying a
building which is unauthorised and built in contravention of the provisions of
the Housing and Town Improvement Ordinance (sections 56(1), 7(1) and 13(1)]
and liable to be demolished (sections 12 and 13(2).



**Cases referred to:**

**  **

1\.         _Jajbhay v. Cassim_ , (1939) SALR AD 537, 550

2.         _Theivandram v. Ramanathan Chettiar_ S.C. 40/83; C.A. 485/74(F) ; 

S.C. Minutes of 7.5.1986.



**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_Faiz Mustapha P.C.,_ with _Rauf Hakeem, H. Witanachchi, A. Panditharatne_ and
_Sanaka de Silva_ for Defendant‑Appellant.



_H. L. De Silva P.C._ with _M. Sivanathan, Miss. Sivamalar Sivanathan_ and
_P.M. Ratnawardena_ for respondents.



_Cur. adv. vult._

October 28, 1991.



**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.**



This appeal arises from an action instituted in the District Court of Mount
Lavinia on the 9th of November, 1976 by the Plaintiff‑Appellant‑Respondent

(hereinafter referred to as the Respondent) against the
Defendant‑Respondent‑Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant), for
a declaration of



###  143



title to the premises in suit viz., premises No. 164, Anderson Road, Nedimala,
Dehiwela; for the ejectment of the Appellant; for an order directing the
Appellant to demolish the unautho­rised structure standing on the said land
and for damages.



The Respondent averred in her plaint that her mother Dona Sandaseeli, the
former owner of the land and premises transferred it to her in 1974. The
Respondent's case was that it was her father who had put up the unauthorised
structure on the said land, which structure was now being occupied by the
Appellant, and that it was her father who had permitted the Appellant to
occupy it on a temporary basis. The Respond­ent's position was that the
Appellant was a mere licencee and that the permission given was withdrawn by
notice dated 19.7.1976 (marked P14).



The Respondent's position then, was that despite the notice to quit, the
Appellant was continuing to occupy the said unauthorised structure which did
not come within the provisions of the Rent Act, and further, that her
occupation was contrary to the provisions of the Housing and Town Improvement
Ordinance (Cap. 268).



In her answer the Appellant stated that she was in fact the tenant of a house
and that she originally came into occupation of the premises in suit in 1965
under the Respondent's father. She denied that she was in occupation of an
unauthorised structure and produced in evidence, six rent receipts (marked D1
to D6) issued by the Respondent's father acknowledging the payment of rent by
the Appellant in respect of the said premises.



At the trial, it also transpired that the Respondent's father had instituted
action in March, 1969 for the ejectment of the Appellant from the premises in
suit and for the recovery of arrears of rent (plaint marked P7). Thereafter,
the Respond­ent's mother had sought, in 1972, to eject the Appellant and
recover arrears of rent (plaint marked P8). It appears that both these actions
were subsequently withdrawn.



### 144





            At the conclusion of the trial, the Learned District Judge held:__



(i)         that the Respondent is the owner of the premises;



(i)                  that the Appellant is in occupation of a house with three
rooms and not of a temporary shed;



(iii)       that the construction of the said house was not in accordance with
the provisions of the Housing and Town Improvement Ordinance;



           (iv)       that the Appellant entered into occupation of the pre­mises as a tenant under the Respondents father, and



(v)        that the contract of tenancy was lawful.



The Learned District Judge granted the Respondent a dec­laration that she is
the owner of the premises, but refused to eject the Appellant from the
premises.



The Respondent thereupon appealed against the said judgement to the Court of
Appeal which allowed the appeal and set aside the judgement of the District
Court, and directed that decree be entered for the ejectment of the Appellant,
her servants, agents, and all those holding under herfrom the premises in
suit. The writ of ejectment, however, was not to issue till 2nd May, 1988.



The main point of contention in the appeal before the Court of Appeal on
behalf of the Respondent was that the alleged contract of tenancy was invalid
for illegality in as much as it contravened specific provisions of the Housing
and Town Improvement Ordinance.



The Court of Appeal held:__



(i)                  that having regard to the ambit and intent of the
Hous­ing and Town Improvement Ordinance, the contract of tenancy upon which
the Appellant seeks to found her claim to occupy the premises is tainted with
statutory



### 145



illegality and is therefore ineffective to create rights. As such, the
contract of tenancy is illegal, and the provi­sions of the Rent Act do not
apply to a contract of tenancy rendered illegal by statute;



(ii)        that the premises in suit having been constructed with­out the
requisite authority, is liable for demolition under the provisions of the said
Ordinance, and,



(iii)       that even though the culpability of the Respondent is no less than
that of the Appellant, the Roman Dutch Law recognises that the general rule
embodied in the maxim _in pari delitao potior est conditio defendentis_ (the
defendant's position is superior if culpability is equal) may be relaxed in
cases "where it is necessary to prevent injustice or to promote public policy"
_Jajbhay v. Cassim_ (1). The Court of Appeal held on this point that, "Neither
the interests of justice nor the require­ments of public policy justify the
continued occupation by the defendant of these unauthorised premises".



The Appellant appeals from this judgment.



At the hearing before us, the finding of the Learned Dis­trict Judge that the
Respondent was the owner of the premises in suit was not disputed; nor was it
disputed that the structure occupied by the Appellant, by whatever name
called, was not an authorised structure in terms of the provisions of the
Hous­ing and Town Improvement Ordinance. The assessment regis­ters do not
refer to a building as such (P8, P9, P10, P11 and P16). Further, there has
been no payment of rates in respect of "a house". There was also no dispute
that the appellant had. not come into occupation under the Respondent's
predecessor in title; namely, her mother, who had herself been charged in the
Magistrates' Court of Mount Lavinia for breach of the provisions of the
Housing and Town Improvement Ordinance in connection with the said
unauthorised structure. It was common ground that the unauthorised structure
in question



**146**.



was put up by the Respondent's father (now deceased) who was not the
Respondent's predecessor in title and that it was he who allowed the Appellant
to occupy the premises and, further, that it was he (the Respondent's father)
and not either the Respondent or her mother who issued receipts for rent. It
was also not disputed that the Appellant never attorned either to the
Respondent or to her mother.



Learned President's Counsel for the Appellant, whilst con­ceding that the
structure in question was constructed without an approved plan and was not in
conformity with the provi­sions of the Ordinance submitted before us that this
penalises only the person who allows the occupation and not the person who
occupies the unauthorised premises. Learned President's Counsel for the
Appellant submitted secondly that the Appel­lant was in occupation on a
contract of tenancy and that the illegality with regard to the unauthorised
structure she occu­pied, did not affect the contract itself. The Ordinance
only regulated housing and did not affect contracts entered into in respect of
premises. He therefore submitted that the Court of Appeal misdirected itself
when it held that the Ordinance ren­dered illegal, collateral contracts in
respect of the premises. He submitted, thirdly, that both on the facts and the
law, the Court of Appeal misapplied the principles of the maxim, _in pati
delicto potior est conditio defendentis._ His submission was that far from the
culpability of the two parties being equal, the culpability of the Respondent
was the greater, and therefore the maxim did not apply at all to this case. I
am unable to agree with Learned Counsel on the first and second matters urged
by him above. On his third submission, my own view is that the maxim indeed
does not apply to this case at all; but not for the reason urged by Learned
Counsel for the Appellant. My view is that the Respondent is not _in pari
delicto,_ in as much as she had nothing to do with the alleged contract of
tenancy, being in no way a party to it and that therefore there is no
culpability whatsoever on her part. The maxim thus does not apply for this
reason.



### 147



Learned President's Counsel for the Appellant made a final submission
introducing a new ground without notice to the Respondent; to which Learned
President's Counsel for the Respondent objected. The new point was that this
was not a tenancy action at all, but a _rei vindicatio_ action based on the
ground that the tenant (the Appellant) was a trespasser for the reason that
her contract of tenancy was illegal. Therefore, even conceding that the
contract of letting was illegal, the Respond­ent was not entitled to judgment
in ejectment. I find myself unable to agree with this submission, in as much
as, in any event, this cannot be said to be a _rei vindicatio_ action based on
the ground that the Appellant is a trespasser. It is not pos­sible to hold
that the Respondent is not entitled to judgment in ejectment.



Learned President's Counsel for the Respondent on the other hand, referred us
to documents marked P6, P9 and P10 which are extracts from the Assessment
Registers in respect of the premises in suit covering the years 1951 to 1969,
wherein the property is described as a "garden", and no building of any sort
is mentioned. He also referred us to documents marked D1 to D6 which are rent
receipts issued to the Appel­lant by the Respondent's father who was at no
time the prede­cessor in title of the Respondent. These receipts are for July,
1965, August 1965, September 1965, April 1967, March 1967 respectively.
Counsel submitted that after 1967, no rent was given by the Appellant either
to the Respondent's father or mother. He pointed out that the Appellant
herself had stated in evidence that she stopped paying rent to the
Respondent's father and thereafter deposited the money with the Municipal
Council. There is no evidence whatsoever, that the Respond­ent's predecessor
in title, viz., her mother, either received or accepted rent from the
Appellant at any stage. In 1974, the Respondent acquired title to the property
in question from her mother, who transferred it to her upon a Deed.



Thereafter, there was no attornment to the new owner, viz., the Respondent,
either. Learned President's Counsel for the



**148**



Respondent submitted that therefore there was no illegal con­tract in which
the Respondent and the Appellant participated. In fact there was no contract
at all between them. On the other hand, what the Respondent did (when she
become owner of the premises in 1974) was to serve the quit notice P14 on the
Appellant.



Learned President's Counsel for the Respondent submitted further, that, on the
question of the applicability of the maxim, _in pari delicto potior est
conditio defendentis_ , the Respondent's father might be said to have been in
_pari delicto_ , but not the Respondent, for the reason that the Respondent
did not receive any rent from the Appellant in respect of the premises in
suit; nor did the Respondent ask the Appellant to attorn to her, nor did the
Appellant ever attorn to the Respondent at any stage.



He next made submissions on the question of illegality, and urged that the
alleged contract of tenancy was invalid for ille­gality, in as much as it
contravened certain statutory provi­sions. He referred us to the following
provisions in the Hous­ing and Town Improvement Ordinance:



Section 5 states :



"No person shall erect or re‑erect any building within the limits administered
by a local authority, except in accordance with plans, drawings, and
specifications approved in writing by the Chairman"



Section 6 (1) states:



"No person shall make any alterations in any building within the limits
administered by a local authority without the written consent of the
Chairman".



Section 7 (1) states:



The Chairman shall not __



(a)                approve any plan or specification of any build­ing, or



### 149

                                    (b)        consent to any alteration in any building,



which shall conflict, or cause such building to conflict, with the provisions
of this Ordinance or any other enactment".



Section 12 sets out the Chairman's powers to demolish unauthorised structures.



Section 13 (1) states:



"Any person who shall _



(a)        commence, continue or resume building opera­tions in contravention
of any provisions of this Chapter;



 (c)       execute any building operation in contravention of any of the
provisions of this Ordinance or of any local by‑law.........shall be liable on
summary conviction to a fine not exceeding Rs. 300/‑ and to a daily fine of
Rs. 25/‑ for every day on which the offence is continued after conviction"



Section 15 (1) states:



"No building constructed after the commencement of this Ordinance shall be
occupied, except by a caretaker, until the Chairman has given a certificate
that such building, as regards construction, drainage, and in all other
respects, is in accordance with law".



Section 15 (3) states:



                        "Any person who occupies or allows to be occupied any building in contravention of this Section shall be guilty of an offence, and shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty‑five rupees for each day during which the contravention continues".



### 150



            Learned Counsel submitted that the contract spoken of was quite clearly illegal, and cited the following passage from Wille's "Landlord and Tennant in South Africa", (4th Edition) at page 7, under the heading, "Illegality of Lease":__



A lease, like any other contract, must not be illegal; if the making of the
lease, or the performance agreed upon, or the ultimate purpose of both parties
in con­tracting is prohibited by legislation, or is contrary to public policy,
or is _contra bonos_ _mores_ , the lease is void of legal effect".



At page 28, the following passage appears: __



"The property to be let must not be extra _commercium_ -­i.e., the letting of
which is prohibited by the common law on the grounds of public policy or
morality or by statute".



Learned Counsel for the Respondent submitted, therefore, that in as much as
section 15(3) of the Ordinance prohibited any person from occupying or
allowing to be occupied any building without a certificate of conformity, the
alleged con­tract of letting was illegal. He added that the Respondent
(daughter) should not be saddled with an illegal tenancy created by her
father. It is in evidence that the Respondent's mother was prosecuted in
respect of the illegal occupation and that she was fined Rs. 50/‑.



I am in entire agreement with the submissions of Learned Counsel for the
Respondent. I must state here that in the cir­cumstances, the Appellant's
claim to protection under the Rent Act has no merit and must fail. An
illegality cannot give rise to any such rights; nor can the Rent Act be used
to cover up and rectify an illegality under the Housing and Town Improvement
Ordinance.



It is pertinent to observe that in the instant case no one disputed the fact
that the structure in question was an unauth‑



### 151



orised one and that there was no certificate of conformity in respect of the
said structure, which is the subject matter of the alleged tenancy. Thus, in
terms of Section 15(3) of the Ordi­nance, both the person who actually
occupies such a structure as well as the person who allows another to occupy
it, will be guilty of an offence and will be liable to a continuing penalty
not exceeding Rs. 25/‑ for each day during which the contrav­ention continues.
There can be no doubt therefore, that there is an express statutory
prohibition against occupying such a building, which in turn means that the
structure in question is not one which is "capable of being let" under our
law. According to Dr. H. W. Thambiah ("Landlord and Tenant in Ceylon," citing
Vanderlinden and Maasdorp), this is one of the essential requisites of a
contract of letting and hiring. (pages 2 and 3). Cooper in " The South African
Law of Land­lord and Tenant' agrees when he says:" A lease like any other
contract must be legal; it must not be prohibited by statute........."  (page
10).



In the Court of Appeal judgment, G. P. S. de Silva J. (President of the Court
of Appeal) as he then was, said:___



"Having regard to the ambit and the intent of the Ordi­nance, I am of the
opinion that the contract of tenancy upon which the defendent (i.e. the
Appellant in this appeal) founds her claim to occupy the premises is tainted
with statutory illegality and is therefore ineffective to create rights. The
principle is that.......  When the legal title to the premises is admitted or
proved to be in the plaintiff, the burden of proof is on the defendant to show
that he is in lawful possession. (per Sharvananda C. J. in _Theivandran vs.
Ramanathan Chettiar_ (2) S.C. 40/83; C.A. 485/74 (F); S.C. Minutes of 7.5.86).
This the Defendant has failed to do.......... The premises in suit having been
constructed without the requisite authority is liable to demolition under the

**152**



provisions of the Ordinance (Section 13(2). The plaintiff has given one
month's notice to the defendant to vacate the premises (P14). Neither the
interests of justice, nor the requirements of public policy justify the
continued occupation by the defendant (i.e. Appellant in this appeal) of these
unauthorised premises. Nor do the provisions of the Rent Act apply to a
contract of tenancy rendered illegal by statute.







                                    I would accordingly allow the appeal, set aside the judgement of the District Court, and direct that Decree be entered for the ejectment of the defendant, her servants, agents and all those holding under her, from the premises in suit".



In accordance with the reasoning set out earlier in this judgment. I have to
state that I see no reason to interfere with the judgment of the Court of
Appeal.



I would therefore dismiss this appeal, with the direction that writ of
ejectment will issue forthwith.



The Respondent will be entitled to costs of appeal fixed at Rs. 500/‑.

** **

** **

**Bandaranayake J.** __ I agree.



**Kulatunge J.** __ I agree.  





**_Appeal dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/35.html_  

