##  John Wilson v. Perera and Another - SLR - 291, Vol 1 of 1986 [1986] LKSC
35; (1986) 1 Sri LR 291 (27 February 1986)

**

291

JOHN** **WILSON  
v.  
PERERA AND ANOTHER

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., COLIN-THOME, J. AND TAMBIAH, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 19/85.  
C.A. (S.C.) No. 881/75 (F).  
D.C. COLOMBO 13690/L.  
FEBRUARY 3, 1986.

_

Rei vindicatio action by executor- Claim of tenancy by devise by Last Will of
deceased tenant a Buddhist priest - Partnership with **** deceased tenant - S.
36 of Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972-Dismissal by Rent Control Board of application
by executor to Rent Control Board under s.18 (3) of Rent Restriction Act for
declaration that defendant is not the tenant - Does such dismissal support
inference that defendant is tenant?

_

**292**

Where a person claiming to be the heir and partner in business of a deceased
Buddhist priest who was the tenant of certain premises gave notice to the
landlord under section 18 (2) of the Rent Restriction Act that he would be
continuing as the tenant and the landlord sought a declaration from the Rent
Control Board that the claimant should not be deemed to be the tenant and that
application was dismissed in view of the passage of the new Rent Act, No. 7 of
1972-

**

Held-

**

(1) The defendant was not entitled to give notice under s. 18 (2) of the Rent
Restriction Act as he was not the surviving spouse or child, parent, brother
or sister of the deceased tenant or a dependant of the deceased tenant
immediately prior to the death of the tenant and not a member of the deceased
tenant's household during the whole of the period of three months preceding
his death. A decision by the Rent Control Board that the defendant is entitled
to give notice would be a nullity on grounds of jurisdictional error.

(2) The notice under section 18(2) of the Rent Restriction Act must give the
basis and particulars of the claim to be entitled to be deemed to be a tenant
_(Wickremasi_ nghe _v. Abdul Rahim_ (1954) 56 NLR 280 not followed on this __
point.

_

Semble: -

_

The passage of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 could not have made the pending
proceedings to have come to an end because s. 46 (2) provides for the
continuance of __ such proceedings under __ the repealed law.

**

Cases referred to:

**

(1) _Wickremasinghe v. Abdul Rahim (1954) 56 NLR 280.

_

(2) _Karunaratne v. Fernando (1970) 73 NLR 457.

_ **

APPEAL** from judgment of __ the Court of Appeal.

_

H. L. de Silva, P. C._ with _S. C. Crosette Tambiah_ and _V.R. Selvarajah_ for
the substituted-defendant-appellant.

_

J. W. Subasinghe, P.C._ with _D. J. C. Nilanduwa_ for plaintiff-respondant.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

February 27, 1986. **  
SHARVANANDA, C.J.

**

This is a rei vindicatio action filed by the plaintiff as executor of the
estate of late Dr. T. Sivapragasam in his plaint he averred that Dr.
Sivapragasam, was the owner of premises **** No. 102, Deans Road, that he died
**** on 30.5.1970 leaving a last will which was admitted to

**293**

Probate, by which he appointed the plaintiff as executor. He further averred
that the defendant without any manner of right, title or interest in the said
premises was since December 1970 in wrongful and unlawful occupation of the
premises. He therefore prayed for a declaration of title to the premises, for
ejectment of the defendant therefrom and for damages which was later agreed at
Rs.75 per month from December, 1970. The defendant in his answer stated that
Rev. Rewata was the tenant of the premises and that he died leaving Last Will
bearing No. 1433 dated 21.5.1967, by which he appointed the defendant as his
Executor and heir of the business carried out in the premises. He further
averred that he was a partner of the said business carried on by him And the
deceased-tenant in the premises. He asserted that by virtue of section 36 of
the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, the plaintiff cannot have and maintain the said
action.

The premises, the subject-matter of the action are business premises governed
by the provisions of the Rent Restriction Act of 1948.

At the trial it was conceded that the plaintiff was the owner of the premises
in suit. The case proceeded to trial mainly or the issue whether the defendant
was a lawful tenant. The plaintiff's agent alone gave evidence. Defendant did
not give any evidence. The District Judge dismissed the plaintiff's action on
the ground that the plaintiff could not maintain this action in view of the
fact that the plaintiff had made an application to the Rent Control Board in
terms of section 18(3) of the Rent Restriction Act, to have it declared that
the "defendant shall not be deemed to be the tenant of the premises." The
District Judge reasoned that as the application of the plaintiff was dismissed
by the Rent Control Board the defendant must be deemed to be a tenant of the
premises. He therefore dismissed the plaintiff's action. The plaintiff
preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal and that court by its order dated
12th November 1984, allowed the appeal and set aside the judgment of the
District Judge and held that the District Judge had erred in holding **** that
the defendant should, in law, be deemed to be a tenant or the premises. The
defendant has preferred this appeal from the order of the Court of Appeal.

**294**

It is admitted that the original tenant of the premises was one Rev. Rewata,
that he died on 12.12.1970, and that the defendant-appellant was the tenant of
the adjoining premises at Deans Road. After the death of Rev. Rewata, the
defendant sent notice marked P1 to the plaintiff. The notice runs as follows:-

"Ay. Dr. P. P. Perera

No. 100, Deans Road,

Colombo 10.

17th January, 1971.

John Wilson Esqr.,  
Proctor S.C.,  
Dam Street,  
Colombo.

Dear Sir,

_

Premises No. 102, Deans Road, Maradana, Colombo

_

This is to inform you that Rev. Rewata, the tenant of the above premises died
on the 12th day of December, 1970.

I hereby give you notice under section 18 (1) of the Rent Restriction Act that
I propose to continue in occupation of the premises as tenant thereof.

All rents up to the end of December 1970, have been paid.

I am __ herewith forwarding a Money Order in your favour for the sum of
Rs.71.95 being rent for the month of January, 1971.

Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd...."

The plaintiff's Attorney-at-Law replied by P2 of 24.03.1971. In P2 he stated
that the plaintiff "is unable to accept you as the tenant of the above
premises as you are not a person entitled to give notice under section 18 of
the Rent Restriction Act." He returned the Money Order. Thereafter on
17.09.1971 the plaintiff made an application to Colombo Rent Control Board
under section 18(3) of the Rent Restriction Act. In that application he stated
that the tenant Rev. Rewata died on 12.12.1970 and that the defendant gave
notice under section 18 of the Rent Restriction Act, dated 17.01.1971
proposing to continue occupation of the premises as tenant. He

**295**

averred that the defendant was not a person entitled to give the said notice
under section 18(2) of the Act and prayed that "the Board do make an order
under section 18 (3) that the respondent is a person not entitled to give
notice under section 18 (3) of the Rent Restriction Act"; while the
proceedings of the Rent Control Board were pending the Rent Restriction Act
was repealed and was replaced by the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972 which came into
force on 01.3.1972. On 02.09.1972 the Colombo Rent Control Board made order
that "since the Rent Restriction Act under which the application had been made
to the Board was repealed and as there was no section in the present Rent Act
similar to section 18 of the Rent Restriction Act, the Board considers that
this application cannot be maintained any further," and dismissed the
application. This is clearly a per incuriam order for the reason that section
46(2) of the Rent Act, No.7 of 1972 provided for the continuance of the
proceedings by the Rent Control Board, constituted under the Rent Restriction
Act, upon applications which were made under the provisions of the repealed
Rent Restriction Act. The decision of the Board to dismiss the plaintiff's
application on the ground stated by it is a decision which the Board had no
jurisdiction to take because it was declining to adjudicate on a matter which
it was its duty to adjudicate and hence it is a nullity. The plaintiff however
did not appeal to the Board of Review against the said order nor did he take
steps by way of a Writ of Certiorari or Mandamus to have the said order set
aside and for directions that the Board continue with the proceedings. Instead
he filed the present action on 14.08.1973. The defendant-appellant contends
that since the plaintiff's application to the Rent Control Board under section
18 of the Rent Restriction Act had been dismissed by the Board, the defendant
should be deemed for the purpose of the Rent Act to be the tenant of the
premises. It was also submitted that the plaintiff could not maintain this
action in a court of __ law as the Rent Restriction Act provides special
machinery to which the landlord must resort to have it declared that the
defendant was not entitled to give the notice P1. In support of his contention
Counsel for the defendant-appellant referred us to the judgments in
_Wickremasinghe v. Abdul Rahim_ (1) __ and in _Karunaratne v. Fernando

_

The facts in _Wickremasinghe v. Abdul Rahim (supra),_ were as follows: The
plaintiff was the owner of premises bearing assessment No. 371, __ Dam Street,
Colombo. She let the same on a monthly tenancy at a rental of Rs.108.50 to one
S.A. Seyad Hamid. Seyad Hamid died on the 24th December, 1951 and thereafter
on

**296**

09.01.1952 his brother the defendant gave notice to the plaintiff in terms of
section 18(2) of the Rent Act that he proposed to continue in occupation of
the premises as tenant thereof. The plaintiff replied to this letter on
12.01.1952 expressing unwillingness to accept the notice and also denying the
right of the defendant to avail himself of the provisions of section 18 (2) of
the Rent Restriction Act. The plaintiff instituted the action to eject the
defendant on the ground that he was in wrongful and unlawful occupation of the
premises. The defendant claimed that he should be regarded as plaintiff's
tenant as he had complied with the provisions of section 18(2) by giving the
required notice. He contended that in view of the failure on the part of the
plaintiff to make an application to the Rent Control Board under section 18(3)
on receiving the notice he must be deemed to be the tenant of the premises.
The contention was upheld by the Supreme Court which stated "that the
subsection (2) is one of the many instances to be found in the Act where a
statutory fiction has been created - in this case an artificial construction
being given to the word ‘tenant'. The subsection also provides the only method
by which the ‘tenant' so created call be divested of this artificial character
viz: by an order of the Board obtained on an application made to it by the
landlord of the premises as provided in subsection 3. In that case Counsel for
the plaintiff also contended that the notice given by the defendant under
section 18(3) was not valid as it did not set out that the defendant had been
a member of the deceased's household during the required period. The court
held that-

"that this subsection does not provide that the requirement under subsection
2( _a_ ) and ( _b_ ) must be inserted in the notice although it is desirable
that those particulars should be given. The notice given by the defendant
states _that he is-the brother of the deceased tenant_ and that he proposes to
continue in occupation in terms of section 18(2)( _b_ ). In my view that is
sufficient compliance with the provisions of subsection (2)."

In _Karunaratne v. Fernando (supra),_ the defendant's husband was a tenant of
the premises in suit. He died on 13.1.64 and on 21.1.64, his widow the
defendant sent a notice to the plaintiff under section 18 of the Rent
Restriction Act. The plaintiff replied that the defendant was not entitled to
send such a notice in view of the fact that her husband's tenancy had already
been terminated on 30.11.1963. The plaintiff then filed action for declaration
of title and ejectment of the defendant. The Supreme Court held that if a
landlord challenges the

**297**

right of a person who has given him notice under section 18 (2) to continue
the tenancy, he should have taken the matter to the Rent Control Board under
section 18 (3) of the Act, instead of filing action particularly for title and
ejectment. It observed that-

"The legislature has thought it fit that the Board should decide certain
questions which arise under the action without the necessity for expensive and
often tardy litigation of the court."

Section 18 of the Rent Restriction Act provides as follows :

" 18. Notwithstanding anything in any other law, but subject to any provision
to the contrary in any written contract or agreement,  the succeeding
provisions of this section shall have effect in the event of the death of the
tenant of any premises to which this Act applies-

(2) Any person who

( _a_ ) is the surviving spouse or the child, parent, brother or sister of the
deceased tenant of the premises, or was a dependant of the deceased tenant of
the premises immediately prior to his death; and

(b)  was a member of the household of the deceased tenant (whether in those
premises or in any other premises) during the whole of the period of three
months preceding his death"

shall be entitled to give written notice to the landlord, before the tenth day
of the month succeeding that in which the death occurred, to the effect that
he proposes to continue in occupation of the premises as tenant thereof; and
upon such written notice being given, such person shall, subject to any order
of the Board as hereinafter provided, be deemed for the purposes of this Act
to be the tenant of the premises with effect from the first day of such
succeeding month, and the provisions of this act shall apply accordingly.

(3) The landlord of the premises in relation to which any written notice is
given under subsection (2) by any person may make application to the Board for
an order declaring that such person shall

**298**

not be deemed as provided in that subsection to be the tenant of the premises;
and the board may make order accordingly if satisfied that such person is not
entitled to give the notice for which provision is made by that sub-section.

(4) In the event of written notice being given under subsection (2) by more
than one person, the Board may in its discretion, upon application made either
by the landlord or by any such person, make order declaring which, if any, of
such persons shall be the person who shall for the purposes of this Act be
deemed to be the tenant of the premises."

It is to be noted that the defendant in _Wickremasinghe v. Abdul Rahim
(supra),_ who gave notice under section 18 (2) was admittedly the brother of
the deceased tenant and the defendant in _Karunaratne v. Fernando (supra),_
who gave notice was admittedly the widow of the deceased tenant. In the
present case the defendant is not the surviving spouse or child, parent,
brother or sister of the deceased tenant or was the dependant of the deceased
tenant and was not a member of the household of the deceased tenant. In his
answer in the present action he claimed that he was an Executor and heir and a
partner of the business carried on in the premises. The defendant did not give
evidence to subtantiate his claim to that status. In his submission, counsel
for the defendant appellant stated that he was a dependant of the deceased
tenant. The defendant who is an ayurvedic medical practitioner carrying on his
__ business in premises, viz..: 100, Deans Road (vide P1) did not however
choose __ to make such an untenable claim ; the defendant was undoubtedly not
a person entitled to give the notice authorised by section 18(2).

In his notice P1 the defendant did not even claim that he was related to the
deceased tenant in any one of the relationship set out in section 18 (2) of
the Act. Section 18 (2) specifically says only "such person referred to
earlier in 18 (2) ( _a_ ) & ( _b_ ) shall, subject to any order of the Board,
may be deemed for the purpose of the Act to be a tenant of the premises". So
that unless such a person is, or, bona fide, claims to be any one of the
persons postulated in section 18 (2) ( _a_ ) __ and ( _b_ ) who is entitled to
give notice under section 18 (2), he cannot avail himself of the provisions of
section 18 (2) of the Act and cannot be deemed to be a tenant of the premises
in terms of that section. A person who admittedly does not come within the
pale of __ section 18 (2) cannot be deemed to be a tenant of the premises just
because

**299**

he had purported to give notice under that section. In my view only a person
who is or bona fide claims that he or she is the surviving spouse or child,
parent, brother or sister of the deceased tenant or was a dependant of the
deceased tenant and was a member of the household during the relevant period
preceding the death of the tenant is competent to give notice under section 18
(2) of the Rent Restriction Act and who can, unless the board orders
otherwise, be deemed to be a tenant of the premises. Only a person who claims
such relationship to the deceased-tenant as postulated by section 18 (2) ( _a_
) & ( _b_ ) of the Rent Restriction Act, can take advantage of **** the
provisions of section 18 (2) of the Rent Act. When such a person does so the
Rent Control Board can inquire into the validity of the claim and determine
whether the person seeking to continue to be a tenant is in fact a spouse,
child, parent, brother or sister of the deceased tenant or was a dependant of
the deceased tenant, and was a member of __ the household of the deceased; the
board has jurisdiction to decide that issue. The Board will be acting in
excess of jurisdiction if it decides that a person who admittedly dues not
come within the description of the persons mentioned in section 18 (2) ( _a_ )
& ( _b_ ) is a person entitled to give the notice. Such a decision will be a
nullity on the ground of jurisdictional error.

I cannot agree with that part of the judgment of _De Silva, J._ in
_Wickremasinghe v. Abdul Rahim (supra),_ that the requirement under subsection
18 (2) ( _a_ ) & ( _b_ ), __ need not be inserted in the notice purported to
be given under section 18(2). Unless the landlord is apprised of the basis or
capacity in which the person is giving notice under section, 18 (2), he will
__ not be able to inform himself and decide as to the validity of the notice.
Otherwise, as this case shows, any trespasser can subvert the whole purpose of
section 18 of the Rent Act by frivolously purporting to give notice under
section 18 and imposing himself on the landlord. True in this case the
plaintiff took proceedings before the Rent Control Board and the Rent Control
Board acting on a misconception of the law dismissed the application. The
undisputed facts show that the defendant was not entitled to give a notice
under section 18 (2) of the Rent Restriction Act and hence could not qualify
himself to be deemed a tenant succeeding the deceased tenant. I agree with the
Court of Appeal that on the written notice P1 , the defendant cannot in law be
deemed to be a tenant of the premises. The word "deemed" creates a statutory
fiction and unless all the facts giving rise to that fiction exist, the
fiction cannot be

**300**

invoked or imported. I agree also with the Court of Appeal that the written
notice purporting to be given under section 18 (2) of the Rent Act should set
out the basis upon which the defendant claims to be entitled to give notice to
the landlord. Since the notice P1 given by the defendant was invalid for the
reason that it was not competent for the defendant to give that notice, it was
void in law and no order of the Rent Control Board could have given validity
to it.

The appeal is dismissed with costs.

**

COLIN-THOME, J.** \- I agree.

**

TAMBIAH, J.** \- I agree. _  
  
Appeal dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/35.html_  

