##  Bandaranaike v. De Alwis and Others (2) - SLR - 664, Vol 2 of 1982 [1982]
LKSC 35; (1982) 2 Sri LR 664 (18 October 1982)

# 664

  **BANDARANAIKE**

**v.**

**DE ALWIS AND OTHERS (2)**

SUPREME COURT

SAMARAKOON, C.J., WIMALARATNE, J., AND COLIN‑THOME, J.

S.C. REFERENCE 1 OF 1982.

SEPTEMBER 23, AND 24, 1982.



    Special Presidential Commissions of Inquiry Law, No. 7 of 1978, sections 2, 16 and 18A ‑ Misconduct by Member of Commission ‑ Declaration that he is unable to act‑ Standing of private citizen to bring an action to remove member of Commission.



The 1st respondent is a Judge of the Court of Appeal and the other two
respondents were Judges of the Supreme Court. All three respondents were
appointed by His Excellency the President in terms of section 2 of the Special
Presidential Commissions of Inquiry Law to enquire and obtain information
relating to various matters set out therein.



Notices under section 16 were issued to a number of persons including one
A.H.M. Fowzie businessman, politician and one time Mayor of Colombo. He
received the notice on 1.11.78 and was informed that he was a person whose
conduct should be the subject of inquiry and/or who is implicated or concerned
in the matters under inquiry by the Commission.



On 20.11.78 Fowzie received another notice stating "until further
communication. is sent to you, you are not required to take any step in
respect of the Notice dated 1.11.78."



The 1st respondent held a Power of Attorney on behalf of his son Chanaka who
was away in U.K., working under a contract of employment. The 1st respondent
acting on behalf of Chanaka advertised No. 4, Anula Road and 542/1, Havelock
Road, Colombo 6 for sale and letting respectively in April 1981. Early in
December 1981 one A.H.M. Mohideen and one Ebert Peiris met the 1st respondent
at the above premises and made offers both to buy No. 4 Anula Road and rent
out 542/1, Havelock Road.



On 17th December 1981, the 1st respondent entered into a tenancy agreement
with Mrs. Fowzie having received Rs. 39,000/‑ the previous day. The 1st
respondent in his affidavit stated it was on that day that he came to know
that the tenant was the wife of A.H.M. Fowzie. On 1.1.82 the 1st respondent
entered into a Sale Agreement No. 213 with Mohideen and handed over the keys.
On 11.4.82 the Deed of Sale was executed and the balance of the purchase price
was received on. 15.4.82.



The petitioner alleged that the 1st respondent knowingly engaged in financial
dealings with the said Fowzie and by doing so has (a) committed an act of
grave misconduct (b) vitiated his integrity and thereby shown himself to be
corrupt and guilty of corruption, and (c) compromised his position as a Judge
of the Court of Appeal by his misbehaviour.



# Held -



**Per Samarakoon, C.J.**



(1) "I cannot see anything dishonest in his (1st respondent's) conduct
throughout the transaction. I therefore hold that the allegations of
misconduct (grave, or otherwise), misbehaviour and corruption, are unfounded
and reject them. He has not compromised his position as a Judge of the Court
of Appeal."



**  665**

**  **

(2) Yet the 1st respondent cannot properly continue to sit in judgment over
Fowzie because there is a real likelihood and a reasonable suspicion that his
judgment would be warped by favouritism though there is no proof of it.



I would therefore issue a writ of prohibition forbidding the 1st respondent
from taking any further part in the investigation of the conduct of Fowzie and
also prohibiting him from joining the other Commissioners in a final or other
report to the President which incorporates a decision regarding. Fowzie."



"I desire to state that that confidence in which justice is rooted has been
destroyed as far as the investigation of Fowzie is concerned. Right minded
people would not be unjustified if they look askance at other decisions of the
1st respondent. It might undermine that faith in the Commission itself which
is necessary to command respect for its recommendations. This must be avoided,
whatever the cost.



(3) The petitioner as a member of the public has a right and interest to
maintain this application and to seek the relief claimed.



(4) The order being made does not have the effect of slaying, suspending or
prohibiting the Commission from functioning or setting aside or varying any
order finding, report, determination, ruling or recommendation of the
Commission. It merely prohibits one of the Commissioners from acting in
circumstances.



Per Wimalaratne, J.



(1) Declaration is granted that 1st respondent has by his misconduct become
unable to act as a member of the Commission.



(2) Every citizen has a standing to invite the Court to prevent some abuse of
power and in doing so he can claim to be a public benefactor.



Per Colin‑ Thome, J.



(1) That all the transactions were carried on while the section 16 Notice was
still in force and as there were allegations of serious offences committed by
Fowzie the 1st respondent is guilty of misconduct unbecoming of a Judicial
Officer.



(2) That 1st respondent has, it is declared, become unable to act and is
disentitled to hold office and function as Member of the Special Presidential
Commission of Inquiry.



(3) A writ of quo warranto should issue.



**Cases referred to:**



(1) _Regina v. Dublin Corporation (1878) 2 L.R. fr. 371, 376._

  
(2) _Everett v. Griffiths (1921) 1 A.C. 631, 683._

  
(3) _R v. Sussex Justices, McCarthy, Ex parte (1924) 1 KB 256, 259._

  
(4) _Metropolitan Properties Co. (F. G. C.) Ltd. v. Lannon (1969) 1 Q. B.
577,599._



**APPLICATION** for writs of prohibition and quo warranto.



_Felix R. D. Bandaranaike_ , petitioner in person.



_P. Navaratnarajah, Q.C.,_ with _Dr. M.L.S. Jayasekera, K. Kanag ‑1swaran, K.
Sivanathan _and _A.A.M. llliyas_ for 1st respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._



October 18, 1982.  


**SAMARAKOON, C.J.**



The petition in this case was filed in the Court of Appeal against the three
respondents who comprise the Special Presidential Commission of Inquiry. They
were appointed by the President of the Republic



#  666



by Warrant under his hand in terms of section 2 of the Special Presidential
Commissions of Inquiry Law .No. 7 of 1978. The 1st respondent is a Judge of
the Court of Appeal and the 2nd and 3rd respondents are Judges of the Supreme
Court. The petitioner applied for a Writ of Quo Warranto and a Writ of
Prohibition against the 1st respondent. No relief was claimed against the
other two. As the 1st respondent is a Judge of the Court of Appeal the
petition Was transferred to the Supreme Court in accordance with the
requirements of section 18A(1) of the Law as amended by Act No. 4 of 1978,
That is how this Court became seized of this matter.



By Warrant dated 29.03.1978 (1R1) the Commissioners were directed to inquire
into and obtain information in respect of the period commencing May 28th 1970
and ending July 23rd 1977 relating to the various matters therein set out. The
Warrant required the Commissioners to render a report to the President at the
end of one year but this period has been extended from time to time. The last
extension validates it up to 28th September, 1982. The Commission commenced
sittings in August 1978. On the 9th November 1978 the Court of Appeal by its
decision in Court of Appeal Application No.1 of 1978 held that the said
Warrant issued to the Commissioners was _ultra vires_ the Law and issued a
Writ of Prohibition against the Commissioners prohibiting them from inquiring
into the conduct of the appellant in that case. The legislature then passed
amending Act No. 4 of 1978 with retrospective effect from the date of the
operation of Law No. 7 of 1978. The amendment to section 2 provided that a
Warrant issued under section I may relate to any period whatsoever including
any period before the date of commencement of the Law, hereby nullifying the
decision of the Court of Appeal.



Prior to the 9th November, 1978, notices under the provisions of section 16 of
the Law were issued to a number of persons, one of them being Mr. A. H. M.
Fowzie a businessman, politician and one time Mayor of Colombo. He received a
notice dated November 1, 1978 (1R3). The petitioner was another who was
noticed in terms of section 16. He received notice dated 6th November, 1978
(1R2). Each person was informed that he was a person-



(a) whose conduct should be the subject of inquiry; and/or

(b )who is implicated or concerned in the matters under inquiry, by the
Commission.



It will be convenient at this stage to revert to. the allegations in the
petition. The petitioner alleges that on the 10th December 1979 the
respondents made a second Interim Report to the Preside



**  667**



which has been published as Sessional Paper VI of 1979 (a copy of it has been
produced marked XI). The Report states that notices issued before the said
decision of the Court of Appeal were revoked and thereafter (presumably) after
the amending Act was passed) notice under section 16 were again issued. The
names of several recipients are mentioned, one of them being the said Fowzie.
His passport was impounded on the 8th August, 1978, thereby preventing him
from leaving the country. The petitioner states that this passport was
released on 1st October, 1979. The petitioner then states that while the said
Fowzie was subject to the said notice and thereby subject to the jurisdiction
of the Commissioners the first respondent knowingly engaged in financial
dealings with him. This financial dealing comprises of a land transaction upon
Deed No. 230 dated 11th May, 1982, attested by Pushpa Nanayakkara, N.P. by
which the 1st respondent as Attorney of his son sold and transferred the land
and premises bearing assessment No. 4, Anula Road, Colombo 6, described in the
schedule thereto, to Fowzie's daughter for a sum of Rs. 575,000.00. It is
alleged that the consideration was paid by Fowzie. It appears that commencing
1st January 1982 Mrs. Sakeena Beebee Fowzie, wife of the said Fowzie, took on
rent premises No. 542/1, Colombo 6, at a rental of Rs. 6,500/‑ per mensem.
This transaction was also with the 1st respondent as Attorney of the landlord.
These transactions are admitted. The details of the transactions are not
relevant at this stage and will be considered later together with the
allegations of wrongful conduct. It is alleged that the money paid on both
transactions was money of Fowzie. This allegation too is not controverted.



            The 1st respondent contests the allegation that at the time of these transactions Fowzie was subject to a notice issued under section 16\. He states that the notice 1R3 had been revoked by a notice dated 20.11.1978 (1R5) and that the statement in Report XI that notices had been reissued on all persons mentioned at page 2 thereof was incorrect. He states that in fact such notices were not again issued on Messrs Fowzie and Wickremanayake mentioned therein. The 2nd and 3rd respondents who have filed affidavits support him on this point. Two of the notices that are stated to have been again issued have been marked as exhibits. One is to the petitioner. It is dated 7th May, 1979, (1R14) and the other is to Mr. Jaya Pathirana dated 5th January 1979 (1R15). The counter affidavit of the petitioner does not contradict this statement and I accept the Statement that no notice was again issued on Fowzie. But the question that arises for decision at this stage is whether the notice 1R3 was, in fact and in



#  668



law, revoked by 1R5 as contended by the respondents. 1R5 reads thus-   "20th
November, 1978.



Mr. A. H. M. Fowzie,

81/22, Silversmith Lane,

Colombo 12.



Notice Under Section 16 of the Special Presidential Commissions of Inquiry Law
No. 7 of 1978

Until a further communication is sent to you, you are not required to take any
steps in respect of the Notice dated 1.11.78.

Sgd. J. G. T. Weeraratne

  Chairman"



Revocation in its ordinary sense means a cancellation. Something that was done
is undone. The legal effect of such act is that something that was, is now no
more. 1R5 does not cancel or recall the notice 1R3. That notice remained valid
and effective despite 1R5. The Commissioners' opinion and their decision in
terms of section 16 remain unaltered and operative. Only the filing of the
statement required of Fowzie has been postponed _sine die,_ i.e., until such
time as the Commissioners' decide that it should be filed. In the result the
date of the inquiry stands adjourned _sine die_. Such statement will become
necessary, and the inquiry will be held, when the occasion arises and the
Commissioners stipulate dates for them. Until then the notice 1R3 remains in
abeyance. Its legal validity and its operative effect are in no way undone by
1R5. I cannot therefore see the semblance of a revocation in 1R5. Further it
appears to me that the legal validity of 1R3 cannot be questioned because the
amending Act No. 4 of 1978 by retrospectively ensuring the legal validity of
the Warrant from the 29th day of March 1978 automatically validated all acts
done and steps taken on the faith of it. The notice 1R3 therefore remained
valid in law from the date of its issue. The Commissioners must have been
aware of the impending legislation.. I find that the notice 1R5 is dated
20.11.1978. The amending legislation was certified on 22.11.1978. This
accounts for the notice 1R3 being kept in abeyance by 1R5.



The dates earlier given to the petitioner by notice 1R4 were postponed _sine
die_ by letter 1R5 as in the case of Fowzie. After the 2nd November 1978 a
fresh notice under section 16 has been served on the petitioner (1R14 dated
7.5.79). It refers to the copies of evidence already sent with notice 1R2. It
forwards a further set of evidence given by 4 witnesses and stipulates fresh
dates for filing of



**  669**



his statement and for inquiry. The inquiry against the petitioner commenced on
22.11.1979 and was concluded on 30.12.79. The 1st respondent states that
thereafter the evidence against Fowzie was again considered especially in the
light of facts revealed at the inquiry against the petitioner and it was
unanimously decided that no allegations could be framed against him. Therefore
in January 1980 the Commissioners decided not to take any further steps
against Fowzie. The other respondents confirm this decision in January 1980.
Thus states the 1st respondent in his affidavit ‑



"Mr. A. H. M. Fowzie ceased to be a person whose conduct was a subject of
inquiry before us". (Vide para 13(c) of the 1st respondent's affidavit).



The petitioner challenges the veracity of this statement and gives reasons as
to why it should not be accepted by this Court. I will deal with them later.
The best evidence of the decision of this particular dispute would be the file
or record of the Commission containing a record of such decision and the
consequential directions that must have been given to the Secretary and to his
staff. Such evidence, was not forthcoming although we mentioned to Counsel
that we would like to peruse them. On the other hand this may not have been a
firm decision because the 1st respondent in his affidavit has disclosed the
fact that the Commission also decided to mention only in the final report the
names of those against whom no inquiry was held due to insufficiency of
evidence. However I do not need to rule on this particular dispute as it is
not necessary for this judgment of mine. Furthermore this concerns the conduct
of the Commission which might be questioned later. What is most important is
that even after this alleged decision of January 1980 the notice to Fowzie 1R3
was not revoked in fact or in law. It remains operative up to date and the
decision recorded therein remains valid in law. It is in this background that
the transaction of sale and of letting and hiring must be considered.



At the outset I must state that both transactions were open transactions.
There was no secrecy about them. One of the allegations was that the sale on
Deed X3 was done contrary to the Exchange Control Laws and Regulations in that
it lacked the necessary permission from the Controller of Exchange. This was
denied by Counsel for the 1st respondent who stated that such permission was
in fact obtained. There was no proof of either the allegation of the
petitioner or the assertion of the Counsel for the 1st respondent. It
therefore



#  670



remains merely as an allegation and it is not relevant for the decision of
this case. The properties belonged to the 1st respondent's son, Chanaka, whose
power of attorney was held by the 1st respondent. Chanaka was a Marine
Engineer employed in various ships and was therefore compelled to roam the
seas. At the material time he was in South shields, England where he was
living for the purposes of his contract of service. The 1st respondent
therefore handled these transactions on behalf of his son. House No. 4, Anula
Road (sold on X3) and house No. 542/1, Havelock Road (rented on 1R27(a)) are
stated to be two semi detached houses with a common garage. They were
constructed in 1981 and completed in June 1981. A Certificate of Conformity
was issued for each by the Colombo Municipal Council on the 16th June 1981\.
(1R17 and 1R18). In anticipation of their completion several public
advertisements for their sale or lease were inserted in newspapers in April
1981\. Two of them, in the Ceylon Daily News of 25th April, 1981, and 26th
September, 1981, were produced marked 1R20 and 1R21. These advertisements were
paid for by the 1st respondent and the relevant receipts have been produced
(1R19a ‑ c). Several brokers made offers. Early in December 1981 a broker,
Ebert Pieris by name, along with one A.H.M. Mohideen and another, met the 1st
respondent at the premises and made offers to purchase one and hire the other.
The 1st respondent took time to consider these offers. On the 6th December the
1st respondent decided to accept the offers and so informed broker Pieris. In
the evening of that day Mohideen paid him an advance of Rs. 10,000/‑. On the
next day he called for another 10,000/‑ necessary for payment to the National
Savings Bank and that was paid that very evening by Mohideen. On that occasion
an agreement (1R22) was signed by both 1st respondent and Mohideen. It
mentioned the sum of Rs. 20,000/‑ already received as earnest money for the
sale of the said house No. 4 for a sum of Rs. 575,000/­- to Mohideen or his
nominee (to be named thereafter). Mohideen said that it was for his niece. On
the 16th December Mohideen paid a sum of Rs. 39,000/‑ as rent on the letting
of premises No. 542/1, Havelock Road, and later that day requested the 1st
respondent to grant the tenancy to his sister in law Mrs. Sakeena Beebe
Fowzie. On the 17th December, 1981, the 1st respondent prepared a tenancy
agreement in the name of Mrs. Fowzie, signed it, and handed the same together
with the keys of the premises to Mohideen. It was then, that the 1st
respondent came to know on inquiry that Sakeena Beebe was the wife, and that
the niece of Mohideen was the daughter,



**  671**



of A. H. M. Fowzie. He adds "About this time having seen him at the premises I
came to know that the person who had come on the very first day with A. H. M.
Mohideen was A. H. M. Fowzie". A sale agreement No. 213 dated 1st January,
1982 (IR27) attested by Pushpa Nanayakkara, N.P. was, executed on the same day
and the keys of premises No. 4, Anula Road, were handed over on the same day
to Mohideen as he stated that his brother Fowzie, wished to start making
certain alterations. The agreement (lR27(a)) acknowledges the receipt of a sum
of Rs. 320,000/‑. The balance purchase price .of Rs. 250,000/‑ was paid in
three instalments ‑ the third being on 15.04.82. On the 11th May 1982 the Deed
X3 was executed. The Broker was paid monies due to him on 18th May 1982.
(1R28). The reverse of this Document shows that out of the total sum of Rs.
14,375/‑ a deduction of Rs. 3,300/‑ was made on account of nonpayment of
interest by the buyer. On the 11th May the petitioner appears, to have met the
Secretary, Ministry of Justice personally and represented matters to him. He
had been requested to make his representations in writing. He then wrote
letter dated 12th May (X4) to the Secretary, Ministry of Justice setting out
the facts as known to him. In it he refers to "the transaction still being
incomplete." He does not appear to have been aware of the full facts. He
alleged also that the financial dealings of the 1st respondent referred to
constitute "a vitiation of his integrity" amounting to "corruption". He
followed this up with another letter dated 23rd May 1982 (X5) in which he
states that he had attended the wedding of Fowzie's son at a hotel in Colombo
on 21st May and that the 1st respondent himself was present as a guest at that
wedding. The Minister of Justice appears to have communicated to the President
the above correspondence and had informed the petitioner that he had done so.
The petitioner then addressed the President by letter dated 28th June 1982
setting out in detail the facts as known to him and also his allegations. He
filed the petition in this case on the 9th July 1982. This is the background
upon which our decision has to be made.



The petitioner's allegations are of a twofold nature. The first is that the
1st respondent "knowingly engaged in financial dealings with the said Fowzie"
and by so doing he has ‑



"(a)       committed an act of grave misconduct,  


(b)       vitiated his integrity and thereby shown himself to be corrupt, and
guilty of corruption,

  
(c)       compromised his position as a Judge of the Court of Appeal by his
misbehaviour."



#  672



This is not a "financial dealing", simpliciter. Money has been paid for
valuable consideration. It is a sale of land and a letting of premises. It is
alleged that the 1st respondent entered into this transaction with the
knowledge that he was dealing with Fowzie, a person whose conduct was the
subject of inquiry by the Commission. There is no evidence that the 1st
respondent was aware at the time he entered into negotiations with broker
Peiris and Mohideen of the fact that Fowzie was concerned in this transaction.
The transactions were clinched between these two persons and the 1st
respondent. It was only after the 17th December 1981 that the 1st respondent
became aware of the role of Fowzie in these transactions. By that time tenancy
agreement (1R27(a) ) had been signed and the keys of the house handed over to
Mohideen. By that time also the informal sale agreement (1R22) had been
executed and earnest money received. He could not have resiled from the
tenancy agreement. He could have resiled from the sale agreement and faced the
consequences but this alone would not have helped to clear him of wrongful
conduct if any there was. He completed the transaction as openly and as
lawfully as any vendor would have done. I cannot see anything dishonest in his
conduct throughout the transactions. I therefore hold that the allegations of
misconduct (grave or otherwise), misbehaviour, and corruption, are unfounded
and reject them. He has not compromised his position as a Judge of the Court
of Appeal.



There is however another aspect of the matter to be considered. At the time of
these transactions Fowzie was one of those whose conduct had been the subject
of inquiry by the Commission. The public was aware of this fact. The
proceedings of this Commission were of public importance and its proceedings
received wide publicity in the country through newspapers. Some of the popular
ones gave full coverage to its proceedings. It is common knowledge that they
were keenly read and followed by the reading public. Persons whose conduct was
in question were public men such as Fowzie and other politicians. The public
at large was aware that notices had been served on them in terms of section
16. Those who read Sessional Paper VI would have taken it for granted that
such notice had been issued on Fowzie. Neither they, nor the public, would
have known that this was a mistake. The public could not have known, and
indeed would be ignorant of, the decision of the Commission made in January
1980 not to proceed against Fowzie. That would be known only to the respondent
and perhaps to a few exclusive members of the staff. It has not been
communicated to the President, to Fowzie



**  673**



or to the staff. In the public eye Fowzie was, and continues to be, a person
whose conduct is, in the opinion of the Commission, a matter for inquiry and
therefore still subject to its jurisdiction. It is now stated that there is an
insufficiency of evidence against Fowzie and therefore an investigation would
not be justified and this face will be incorporated in a final report to the
President. A final report has not yet been sent to the President. The position
may well change before it is sent. Should such a situation arise the 1st
respondent cannot take part in any decision concerning Fowzie. In any event he
cannot now join the other Commissioners in making a report to the President
affecting Fowzie. He must bear in mind the cardinal fact that these
Commissioners are bound to act judicially not because they are in fact Judges
of Superior Courts but because their decisions involve consequences that
affect the rights of the citizen. In this instance one of the most precious of
them all is involved, civic rights. The oft quoted statement of May, C. J. in
the Irish Case of _Regina vs Dublin Corporation_ (1) was repeated by Lord
Atkinson and adopted by the House of Lords in the case of _Everett vs.
Griffiths_ (2) as no better definition of a judicial act could be found or
given. It is as follows:‑



"It is established that the writ of certiorari does not lie to remove an order
merely ministerial;........... but it lies to remove and adjudicate upon a
validity of acts judicial. In this connection the term 'judicial' does not
necessarily mean acts of a judge or of a legal tribunal sitting for the
determination of matters of law, but for the purpose of this question a
judicial act seems to be an act done by competent authority, upon
consideration. of facts and circumstances, imposing liability and affecting
the rights of others. And if there be a body empowered by law to inquire into
facts, make estimates to impose a rate on a district, it would seem to me that
the acts of such a body involving such consequences would be judicial acts."



Being judicial acts of Commissioners they are subject to control by the
Superior Court. High standards are expected of them, so much so, that
appearances sometimes become "more important than reality". Lord Hewart's
felicitous, dictum gave expression to this aspect of the matter. He said:



".......... a long line of cases shows that it is not merely of some
importance, but is of fundamental importance that



#  674



justice should not only be done, but should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen
to be done". _Rex vs. Sussex Justices, McCarthy, Ex parte_. (3)



Lord Denning M. R. in _Metropolitan Properties Co. (F.G.C.) Ltd. vs. Lannon_
(4) referred to the operation of this principle thus:



"It brings home this point: in considering whether there was a real likelihood
of bias, the court does not look at the mind of the justice himself or at the
mind of the chairman of the tribunal, or whoever it may be, who sits in a
judicial capacity. It does not look to see if there was a real likelihood that
he would, or did, in fact favour one side at the expense of the other. The
court looks at the impression which would be given to other people. Even if he
was as impartial as could be, nevertheless if right‑minded persons would think
that, in the circumstances, there was a real likelihood of bias on his part,
then he should not sit. And if he does sit, his decision cannot stand. There
must be circumstances from which a reasonable man would think it likely or
probable that the justice, or chairman, as the case may be, would, or did,
favour one side unfairly at the expense of the other. The court will not
inquire whether he did, in fact, favour one side unfairly. Suffice it that
reasonable people might think he did. The reason is plain enough. Justice must
be rooted' in confidence: and confidence is destroyed when right‑minded people
go away thinking: 'The Judge was biased.' "



That was a case in which it was held that the Chairman of the Rent Assessment
Committee had an interest which was of a disqualifying character. It was
conceded that there was no actual bias or want of good faith on the part of
Mr. Lannon the Chairman. Yet there was a real likelihood of bias. The decision
of the Committee was therefore quashed and the inquiry remitted to another
Committee. In deciding the question of bias Lord Denning suggested the
following test:‑



"Test it quite simply: If Mr. John Lannon were to have asked any of his
friends: 'I have been asked to preside in a case about the rents charged by
the Freshwater Group of Companies at Oakwood Court. But I am already assisting
my father in his case against them, about the rent of his flat in Regency
Lodge, where I am living with



**  675**



him. Do you think I can, properly sit?' The answer of any of his good friends
would surely have been: 'No, you should not sit. You are already acting, or as
good as acting, against them. You should not, at the same time, sit in
judgment on them" '



A similar question can be asked of the 1st respondent. Can he properly
continue to sit in judgment over Fowzie? Can he take part in making the final
report to the President? The answer is clearly 'No'. There is both a real
likelihood and a reasonable suspicion that his judgment was warped by
favouritism though, I repeat, there is no proof of that. I would therefore
issue a writ of prohibition forbidding the 1st respondent from taking any
further part in the investigation of the conduct of Fowzie and also
prohibiting him from joining the other Commissioners in a final or other
Report to the President which incorporates a decision regarding Fowzie,



The petitioner however will not be satisfied with such an order. He has prayed
for a writ of prohibition restraining and preventing the 1st respondent from
continuing as a member of the Commission. This writ of prohibition is used to
prevent the exercise of jurisdiction over a particular matter or dispute. It
cannot be used to remove a person from office and I have found no instance of
such user in the past. I cannot therefore accede to this part of the petition.
I however desire to state that that confidence in which justice is rooted has
been destroyed as far as the investigation of Fowzie is concerned.
Right‑minded people would not be unjustified if they look askance at other
decisions of the 1st respondent. It might undermine that faith in the
Commission itself which is necessary to command respect for its
recommendations. This must be avoided, whatever the cost.



Two other matters need decision. It was contended that the petitioner has no
right or interest to maintain this application and to seek the reliefs
claimed. This is a matter of public importance and it is in the public
interest to ensure that machinery set up by Government in the interest of good
order should function properly. Accordingly the Court can award this remedy to
any member of the public. ("Administrative Law" by Wade, Edn 4, page 541 and
542).



Lastly it was contended that this Court "by reason of the provisions of
section 18A(2) of Act No. 4 of 1978 has no power or authority to make order
prohibiting or to make any order which would have the effect of prohibiting,
the holding of any proceedings by the



#  676



Special Presidential Commission". Section 18A(2) reads thus 



"18A(2) No Court shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary, have power
or jurisdiction to make any order at any stage whatsoever and in any manner ‑



(a) staying, suspending or prohibiting the holding of any proceeding before or
by any commission established by warrant issued by the President in the
exercise or purported exercise of the powers vested in the President under
section 2(1) or the making of any order, finding, report, determination,
ruling or recommendation by any such commission;



(b) setting aside or varying any order, finding, report, determination, ruling
or recommendation of any such commission:



Provided that where by reason of the provisions of subsection (1) any
application stands transferred to the Supreme Court, such court may, only upon
final determination of such application, make any such order which, in the
lawful exercise of its jurisdiction, such court may make:



Provided further, that where an application does not stand transferred by
reason of the provisions of subsection (1), the Court of Appeal may, only upon
final determination of such application, make any such order which in the
lawful exercise of its jurisdiction, such court may make, subject however,
that such order shall take effect only upon final determination, by the
Supreme Court in accordance with and subject to such order which the Supreme
Court may make or where no appeal is filed, only upon the expiry of the period
within which an appeal may be filed in the Supreme Court."



This Court is exercising a jurisdiction conferred by Article 140 of the
Constitution by reason of the transfer of this application to this Court from
the Court of Appeal (vide section 18A(1) of Act No. 4 of 1978). That
jurisdiction is being exercised in accordance with the provisions of the first
proviso to section 18A(2). This order does not purport to or have the effect
of staying, suspending or prohibiting the holding of any proceeding before or
by the Commission or the making of any order, finding, report, determination,
ruling or recommendation by the Commission. Nor is the validity of the Warrant
in any way nullified. The Commission can continue its work



**  677**



unhindered. (Vide section 2(1)(2) and (3) of Law No. 7 of 1978). Nor is this
Court being asked to make any decision contravening the provisions. of section
18A(2)(b). It is merely prohibiting one of the Commissioners from acting in
circumstances. What intrinsic worth any recommendation already made, or that
will be made, in the future will have is not a matter for this Court. That
must be judged by those who seek to impose punishments on the basis of such
recommendations.



I have given careful consideration to the question of costs. The petitioner
has acted as a public man in the interests of the public. He has partially
succeeded. This is one of those applications in which monetary matters should
find no place. I therefore do not make any order for costs. A writ of
prohibition will issue in the terms indicated above.



**WIMALARATNE, J.**



I have had the benefit of reading the judgment prepared by the Chief Justice.
I am in agreement with his findings that ‑



(a) even after the alleged decision of the Special Presidential Commission in
January 1980 not to proceed with the case against Fowzie, the notice 1R3
issued to Fowzie was not revoked in fact or in law, and it remains operative
up to date;



(b) the public could not have known, and indeed would be ignorant of, the
decision of the Commission made in January 1980 not to proceed against Fowzie;



(c) Fowzie was, and continues to be, a person whose conduct is, in the opinion
of the Commission, a matter for inquiry, and therefore _still subject to its
jurisdiction_ ;



(d)        the confidence in which justice is rooted is destroyed as far as
the investigation of Fowzie is concerned (subject to what I have to say about
investigations against other persons);



(e)        right minded people would not be unjustified if they look askance
at _other decisions of the 1st respondent;_ and that it might undermine that
faith in the Commission itself, which is necessary to command respect for its
re­commendations;



(f) this (loss of faith) must be avoided, _whatever the cost._



(g) this Court is possessed of jurisdiction to award the remedies prayed for
by the petitioner to any member of the public; and



(h) this Court has the jurisdiction to issue the prerogative writs against the
Special Presidential Commission or any member



#  678



thereof, by virtue of the First Amendment to the Constitution, read with
section 18A(1) of the amending Act, No. 4 of 1978.



For these, among other reasons, the Chief Justice is of the view that the
issue of a writ of prohibition forbidding the 1st respondent from taking any
further part in the investigation of the conduct of Fowzie, or from joining
the other Commissioners in a final or other report to the President which
incorporates a decision regarding Fowzie is justified on the ground of bias.
In the result, there will be no impediment to the 1st respondent taking part
in other investigations against other persons, and in joining the other
Commissioners in a report to the President, as long as it does not incorporate
a decision on Fowzie.



I may say straightaway that the Commission has already made an affidavit
stating that they do not propose proceedings against Fowzie. Under these
circumstances the issue of a writ of prohibition for the limited purpose as
contemplated by the Chief Justice does not, in my view, serve the ends of
justice. How then, can those right minded people who, in the words of the
Chief Justice, "would not be unjustified if they look askance at other
decisions of the 1st respondent be satisfied? How can the undermining of the
confidence in the recommendations of the Commission be avoided at all costs,
which is the very laudable objective to be achieved? The dictum of Lord
Denning that "justice must be rooted in confidence" must not be a mere empty
catchword. Bias is not the only ground of disqualification; misconduct is a
more serious ground. No amount of canons of judicial conduct mouthed at
judicial seminars, no amount of prescriptions on judicial ethics written in
law journals will serve any purpose unless we insist that these self same
commandments are complied with. Those performing judicial and semi‑judicial
functions should be made aware that we give a meaning to the words "justice
must be rooted in confidence"; and justice can never be rooted in confidence
if they who administer justice engage in dealings, financial dealings or land
transactions, with those who are litigants before them.



The main argument of the petitioner has been that the 1st respondent is
disqualified, not on the ground of bias, but on the ground of misconduct, that
as a result of a financial transaction between the 1st respondent and Fowzie,
whilst the latter was yet a person whose conduct was the subject of
investigation by the Commission of which the 1st respondent is a member, the
1st respondent "became unable to act" in terms of section 3(1) of the Special
Presidential Commissions of Inquiry Act. In such situations the President, as
the authority



**  679**



vested with the power to appoint, has the power to remove a member who has so
become unable to act, and to appoint in his place a new member. If no new
member is appointed section 3(2) empowers the remaining members of the
Commission to continue with the inquiry. Apart from removal by the President,
the petitioner contends that there is a judicial power vested in this Court to
declare that a member has become unable to act. He submits that the words
"unable to act" should not be limited to physical or mental disability such as
prolonged illness or absence. He invites us to give the phrase a wider
interpretation so as to include within its compass the case of a member who,
by his misconduct, renders. himself unable to act. In such a case removal by
the President of the member concerned is one remedy. A judicial declaration
that that member has become unable to act is another.



I am of the view that our judicial power extends to the making of such a
declaration. As an illustration let us take the extreme hypothetical case of
a member, either of the Special Presidential Commission or of a Commission of
Inquiry, against whom a prima facie case of bribery has been established. Such
a member who refuses to resign may be removed by the President. Quite apart
from such removal by the Executive, the Judicial Power of the State is virile
enough to declare that such member has become unable to act. The jurisdiction
to make such declaration is vested in this Court by Article 140 of the
Constitution, read with amending Act No. 4 of 1978. The jurisdiction to issue
the writ of quo warranto is at the present time the jurisdiction to make a
declaration, for quo warranto has, in England, been replaced by declaration
and injunction, by virtue of section 9 of the Administration of Justice
(Special Provisions) Act of 1938 ‑ _Wade ‑ Administrative Law (4th Ed.) 497._



Do the circumstances justify the making of such a declaration in this case?
Evidence was led before the Commission in about September 1978\. That evidence
received wide publicity in the media. The Ceylon Daily News' of 2.9.78, for
example, carried the following headline "Fowzie obtained concessions for
people in whom he had an interest" Details of Mayor Fowzie's alleged
intermeddling in certain customs detections and inquiries, as deposed to by an
Assistant Collector of Customs, W. H. Jayawardene, as well as acts of abuse of
power deposed to by B. A. Jayasinghe, Municipal Commissioner, and Tyrell
Gunatilleke S.P. CID were widely reported in the press. Any right minded
person would have formed the view that the conduct of Fowzie deserved
investigation by the Commission. The Commission



#  680



also formed the opinion that Fowzie should face an inquiry. That is why the
Commission issued charges and sent Fowzie a copy of the evidence relating to
him along with the notice 1R3 dated 1.11.78. If then, charges of a serious
nature were pending against Fowzie, any right minded person would expect no
member of the Commission to have any dealings whatsoever with Fowzie even
after the inquiry was over, and not at least till a report was sent to the
President. The act of a member in entering into a land transaction with a
person whose conduct remains the subject of inquiry amounts, in my view, to
misconduct.



But the Commissioners in their affidavits aver that they decided in January
1980 not to proceed further against Fowzie because of (a) the death of B. A.
Jayasinghe, who they say would have been the main witness against Fowzie, and
(b) the findings of the G. P. A. Silva Commission set up to inquire into abuse
of power in local authorities, and the consequential civic disability imposed
upon Fowzie by Parliament. It is not for us to question the soundness of the
above reasons given by the Commission for its change of opinion, but we note
that both these events, namely, the death of B. A. Jayasinghe (on 22.9.78) and
the imposition of civic disability on Fowzie (on 14.8.78) had already occurred
when the Commission first decided to frame charges against Fowzie on 1.11.78.
What is important is that in the eyes of the public Fowzie, like Pathirana,
Manohara and Wickramanayake continued to be a person whose conduct yet
remained to be investigated by the Commission. No amount of private,
uncommunicated decisions arrived at by the Commission would suffice to erase
the impression the public would have had that a prima facie case of a abuse or
misuse of power had been established against Fowzie. A member of the
Commission who enters into a transaction, which involves the sale of a house
and a lease of another house to the daughter and wife of Fowzie, and in
respect of which consideration was paid by Fowzie himself cannot expect to
command that degree of public confidence which is a sine qua non for the
proper functioning of the Commission.



A few words about the transaction itself. The 1st respondent avers, that the
first two instalments of Rs. 10,000/‑ each as advance purchase price for one
of the houses was paid on 6.12.81 by one A. H. M. Mohideen, and that the
deposit of Rs. 39,000/‑ as six months rent for the other house was also paid
by Mohideen on 16.12.81. It was only on 16.12.81, according to the 1st
respondent, that he came to know that the purchaser of one house was to be the
daughter of



**  681**



A.H.M. Fowzie and that the tenant of the other house was to be the wife of
Fowzie. By that time he says it was too late to resile from either
transaction, because he had entered into an informal agreement for the sale of
one house to Mohideen or his nominee for a sum of Rs. 575,000/‑ and had handed
over the keys of the other house to Mohideen. The deed of transfer No. 230 was
executed six months later, on 11.5.82. According to the attestation clause
however, the two instalments of Rs. 10,000/‑ each were paid before 1.1.82 by
A.H.M. Fowzie. There is also the fact that no reference has been made in the
deed of transfer to a previous informal agreement. As the 1st respondent says
he had a copy of the informal agreement with him, and as the payments were all
cash payments, one would have expected the date of payment of the Rs.
20,000/‑; to have been mentioned; instead there is a vague statement that that
amount was paid prior to 1.1.82, which could even be interpreted as being a
date in 1980. There is therefore, no satisfactory proof that the 1st
respondent was not aware about the interest that Fowzie had in these
transactions until 16.12.81. Even if such knowledge dawned on him on that
date, it was open to him to have paid back the Rs. 20,000/‑ and resiled from
the agreement to sell on the ground that the virtual purchaser was a litigant
before him.



As emphasised by the Chief Justice, loss of public confidence in the
Commission must be avoided, whatever the cost. I am of the view that that
objective cannot be achieved by merely prohibiting the 1st respondent from
participating in any inquiry against Fowzie, because the Commissioners
themselves tell us that they have decided not to proceed against Fowzie. It
seems to me, therefore, that one way by which this objective could be achieved
is by the exercise of the judicial powers vested in us by Article 140 of the
Constitution, and declaring that by his misconduct the 1st respondent has
become unable to act as a member of the Commission in terms of section 3(l) of
the Special Presidential Commission of Inquiry Act. I would make the
declaration accordingly, and grant the petitioner prayer (a) of the petition.



I have given careful consideration to the relief prayed for in para (b). A
writ of prohibition restraining the 1st respondent from participating in any
further proceedings of the Commission would virtually amount to a removal of
the 1st respondent. Such power of removal is an executive power, vested
exclusively in the President. I would, therefore, not grant the relief prayed
for in para. (b).



#  682



On the question of costs, every citizen has a "standing" to invite the Court
to prevent some abuse of power, and in doing so he ma claim to be regarded not
as a meddlesome busybody, but as a public benefactor ‑ _Wade 544._



As the petitioner has succeeded in obtaining part of the relief prayed for, I
would allow him half the costs of this inquiry payable by the 1st respondent.



**COLIN ‑THOME, J.**



I have had the advantage of reading the judgments of the learned Chief Justice
and Wimalaratne, J.



The Legislature passed the amending Act No. 4 of 1978 with retrospective
effect from the date of the operation of Law No. 7 of 1978\. The amendment to
section 2 provided that a Warrant, issued under section I may relate to any
period whatsoever including any period before the date of commencement of this
Law. In other words, the amending Act No. 4 of 1978 by retrospectively
ensuring the legal validity of the Warrant from the 29th of March, 1978
automatically validated all acts and steps taken earlier under it Therefore,
the section 16 notice, 1R3, dated 1st November, 1978 served on A.H.M. Fowzie,
remained valid in law and in fact from the date of its issue, and has never
been subsequently revoked up to date. By no stretch of imagination was it
revoked by the letter to Fowzie, 1R5, which merely informed him of the
postponement of the inquiry against him, as another inquiry has been given
priority The respondents were well aware of this. I agree with the learned
Chief Justice that the legal validity of the notice 1R3 and its operative
effect are in no way undone by 1R5, and this notice 1R3, therefore remains
valid in law from the date of its issue.



In this context the financial transactions between the 1st respondent and
Fowzie took place while the section 16 notice 1R3 remained valid.



The 1st respondent has stated in paragraph 13 of his affidavit that the
Commissioners had decided ‑ "in January 1980 not to take an further steps
against Mr. A.H.M. Fowzie" for the reasons that the principal witness B. A.
Jayasinghe who had testified against Fowzie had died and that the G. P. A. de
Silva Commission had already dealt with Fowzie in relation to the
administration of the Colombo Municipal Council. These reasons were supported
by the joint affidavit of the 2nd and 3rd respondents and the letter of the
Commissioner to the President dated 4th June, 1982.



**  683**



An unsatisfactory feature of these averments was that it was not disclosed to
the President or to this Court in the affidavits of the respondents that
serious allegations had been made against Fowzie by W.H.D. Jayawardene,
Assistant Collector of Customs, that on two occasions Fowzie had interfered
with the investigations conducted by Customs Officers into alleged smuggling
offences and that Fowzie had actually abetted the offence of smuggling in one
case by causing the disappearance of two large suitcases from the Customs
premises. The death of B.A. Jayasinghe, and the G.P.A de Silva Commission in
relation to the administration of the Colombo Municipal Council had nothing to
do with these grave allegations against Fowzie.



It i s also significant that the notice 1R3 served on Fowzie was dated 1st
November, 1978, and it informed him that his "conduct should be the subject of
inquiry: and/or (that he) was implicated or concerned in the matters under
inquiry, by the Commission." B. A. Jayasinghe died on the 22nd of September,
1978, before the despatch of this notice to Fowzie.



The 1st respondent has stated in paragraph 28, of his affidavit that early in
December, 1981, when he visited No. 4, Anula Road, Ebert Peiris, a broker,
came with A.H.M. Mohideen, and a third man who remained in solemn silence
without being identified. Mohideen offered to purchase the smaller of the two
premises at No. 4, Anula Road, for Rs. 575,000/‑ and. to take on rent premises
No. 542/1, Havelock Road, for Rs. 6,500/‑ per month. He also offered to
deposit Rs. 39,000/‑ being 6 months advance of rent. There was no agreement at
the start, but on 6th December, 1981, when Ebert Peinis contacted him again he
was agreeable to accept the offer, That afternoon Peiris and Mohideen paid him
an advance of Rs. 10,000/‑ as an advance on the sale. Mohideen told them that
the purchase would be as a dowry for his niece, whose name was not disclosed
to the 1st respondent. The next day he telephoned Mohideen and requested a
further Rs. 10,000/‑. Mohideen gave him the money as agreed, at No. 4, Anula
Road.



On the 16th of December, 1981, Mohideen brought him a further sum of Rs.
39,000/‑. Later that night Mohideen telephoned him at his residence and stated
that the tenancy agreement would be in the name of his sister‑in‑law Mrs.
Shakeena Beebe‑Fowzie. He prepared a document accordingly and having signed it
handed the agreement and the keys of the premises No. 542/1, Havelock Road, to
Mohideen. Then he came to know on enquiry that Mrs. Fowzie was the wife



#  684



of A.H.M. Fowzie and the niece referred to earlier was his daughter. It was
only at about this time that he came to know that the third man who
accompanied Peiris and A.H.M. Mohideen on the 6th December was none other than
A.H.M. Fowzie.



Even after he came to know that it was A.H.M. Fowzie he proceeded with the
transaction and accepted from Fowzie four further instalments amounting to
over 5 1/2 lakhs of rupees. All six instalments were paid to the 1st
respondent in cash. They were not paid in the presence of a Notary.



Although the 1st respondent has averred in his, affidavit that the 1st two
instalments were paid by Mohideen, the attestation Clause of Deed No. 230,
execute on 11th May, 1982, discloses that all six instalments were paid by
Fowzie.



All these transactions were carried on while the section 16 notice against
Fowzie was still in force. and as there were allegations of serious offences
committed by him, I hold that the 1st respondent was guilty of misconduct
unbecoming of a judicial officer.



            I allow the application of the petitioner to issue a writ of quo warranto to the 1st respondent under the proviso to Article 140 of the Constitution, read with section 18A of Act No. 7 of 1978, and declare that the 1st respondent has become unable to act, and that he is disentitled to hold the office and function as a Member of the Special Presidential Commission of Inquiry.



I agree with the order made by Wimalaratne, J., in connection with, the
petitioner's prayer under (a) and (b) and (c).



Writ of prohibition issued.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/35.html_  

