##  Jayasena Perera v. Ratnadasa - SLR - 398, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC 35;
(1981) 1 Sri LR 398 (8 April 1981)

**398**

**JAYASENA PERERA  
v.  
 RATNADASA**

**SUPREME COURT  
SAMARAKOON, C, J., SHARVANANDA, J.,  
AND WANASUNDERA, J.  
S. C. APPEAL NO. 66/80  
C. A. APPEAL N0.209/79(F)  
D. C: COLOMBO CASE NO. C/1 192/M  
MARCH 9, 1981  
**  
_Contract-Ownership of lorry - Contract of sale - Agreement to sell-Sale of
Goods Ordinance s. 2018, 19, 50 and 57 - Difference between "sale" and
"agreement to sell" \- Motor Traffic Act s. 12, 13 and 14.  
_  
Property (in the lorry) passes on sale at the time when the parties intend it
shall. The intention of the parties can be ascertained regard being paid to
the terms of the contract, the conduct of the parties and the circumstances of
-the case. When there was only a promise to sell, though possession was given
to the prospective buyer on payment of a part of the agreed price with the
reservation that the seller is absolved of all responsibility for damage
caused by the lorry, the intention is that property in the lorry should not
pass until the full purchase price was paid. There was here only an agreement
to sell rather than a sale. The delivery of possession is not conclusive.  
  
Where under a contract of sale the property in the goods is transferred from
the seller to the buyer, the contract is called a "sale", but where the
transfer of the property in the goods is to take place at a future time or
subject to some condition thereafter to be fulfilled, the contract is called
an "agreement to sell", An "agreement to sell" becomes a sale when the time
lapses, or conditions are fulfilled subject to which the property in the goods
is to be transferred. An "agreement to sell" is a contract pure and simple,
whereas a "sale" is a contract plus a conveyance.  
  
In a sale the thing which is the subject of the contract becomes the property
of the buyer the moment the contract is concluded and without regard to the
fact whether the goods be delivered to the buyer or remain in the possession
of the seller, whereas in the agreement to sell, the property is to pass at a
future time or subject to the fulfilment of some condition and the goods
remain the property of the seller till the contract is executed and he can
dispose of them. On a sale, if the seller fails to deliver the goods, the
buyer has not only a personal remedy against the seller, but also has the
usual proprietary remedies in respect of the goods, such as an action for
conversion. Where an agreement to sell is broken by the seller, the buyer has
only a personal remedy against the seller. By an agreement to sell a mere jus
in personam is created, by a sale a jus in rem is transferred.  
  
If there was a sale of the lorry, the statutory provisions of the Motor
Traffic Act s. 12,13 and 14 should have been complied with.  
  
**Case referred to  
**  
_(1) Nilabdeen v. G. W. Silva (1976) 78 NLR 454_

**399**

**_APPEAL_** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_Walter Jayawardena Q.C. with Nimal Senanayake, Kithsiri Gunaratne and Miss S.
Senaratne for the defendant-appellant.  
  
R. Manikkavasager for the plaintiff-respondent_

_**Cur. adv. vult.**_

April 8,1981  
  
**SHARVANANDA, J.  
**  
Claiming to be the owner. of motor lorry No. 22 Sri 3593, the plaintiff
instituted this action against the defendant for a declaration that he is the
owner of the motor lorry and for consequential reliefs.  
  
The plaintiff pleaded that the defendant on 1.4.74 sold and delivered to him
the motor lorry No. 22 Sri 3593 belonging to the defendant for a sum of Rs.
36,000/- and that he paid a sum of Rs.16,000/-- as part purchase price of the
said lorry. He stated that the defendant represented to him that he had
misplaced the registration book of the lorry and that he would hand over the
registration book to him on or before 21.4.74. He further pleaded that it was
agreed between them that on the defendant handing over the registration book
and signing the necessary transfer forms, he, the plaintiff, would finance the
lorry through a Finance Company and pay the balance sum of Rs. 20,000/- to the
defendant. According to the plaintiff, after the purchase he had had the lorry
repaired and had his name painted on the body of the lorry and had used the
lorry for his business; though the defendant. had promised to hand over the
registration book to him on 21.4.74, he had never handed over the book to him.
On 18.8.75, he had, at the request of the defendant, brought the lorry to
Colombo to get the registration book and to have the lorry valued, but when
the lorry was so brought, the defendant had forcibly taken possession of the
said lorry from him. The plaintiff's case is that title to the said lorry had
passed to him; the contract of sale of the lorry has been completed and that
he is presently the owner of the said lorry even though he had still not paid
the balance Rs. 20,000/- of the purchase price.  
  
The defendant denied that he had sold the lorry to the plaintiff on 1.4.74.
According to him, on that date the parties had only entered into a written
agreement to sell the lorry and he had accepted the sum 'of Rs. 16,000/- not
as part of the purchase price, but on the terms set out in the said agreement
and he handed over possession of the lorry in terms of the agreement to sell.
The defendant admitted that he took possession of the lorry

**400**

on 18.8.75 as the plaintiff had violated the terms of the agreement to sell.  
  
After trial, the District Judge held that the plaintiff was the owner of the
motor lorry. and awarded him damages in a sum of Rs. 1,500/- per month from
18th August 1975 until possession of the said lorry was restored to him and
that the balance sum of Rs. 20,000/- of the purchase price of the lorry could
be deducted. from the damages payable to the plaintiff. This judgment was
affirmed in appeal by the Court of Appeal.  
  
The defendant has, with the leave of the Court of Appeal, preferred this
appeal to this Court.  
  
The plaintiff framed this action on the basis that the defendant had sold and
delivered the lorry No. 22 Sri 3593 to him on 1.4.74 and that he had become
thereby the owner of the said lorry.  
  
The basic question in the case is: was there a sale of the lorry by the
defendant to the plaintiff on 1.4.74, or was there merely an agreement by the
defendant to sell and transfer the lorry to the plaintiff on his paying the
balance purchase price ?  
  
The determination of the above question depends on the proper construction of
the written agreement entered into between the parties on 1.4.74. The
agreement which is in Sinhala is in two parts, both on the same side of one
sheet of paper, each part defining the obligations of the respective party. To
ascertain the intention of the parties, both parts have to be read together,
and the agreement as a whole must be looked at. The first part P1 signed by
the defendant reads as follows:  
(English Translation)  
  
"I D. J. Perera of Talahena, Malabe, hereby solemnly state that I have
received an advance of Rs. 16,000/- on 1.4.74 from R. A. . Ratnadasa of
Malwalawatte, Veyangoda, on the promise of selling him the Lorry (Morris) No.
22 Sri 3593 owned by me, at the price of Rupees Thirty-six Thousand
(Rs.36,000/-) and that the lorry is not assigned or mortgaged to an individual
or an institution against a loan and I certify that I am agreeable to receive
the balance Rupees Twenty Thousand (Rs. 20,000/-) due to me in respect of the
lorry before 21.4.74 by financing the lorry."  
  
The second part D2 signed by the plaintiff reads as follows

**401**

(English Translation)  
  
"I; R. A. Ratnadasa of Malwalawatte, Veyangoda, certify that l have taken
delivery today, 1.4.74, of Morris lorry No. 22 Sri 3.593 of D. J. Perera,
Talahena, Malabe, on payment of Rupees Sixteen Thousand (Rs.16,000/-) as an
advance and have taken over all responsibilities for the lorry and I should
state clearly that hereafter Mr. D. J. Perera will not be responsible for any
damages caused to the lorry or for any damages caused by the lorry and 1 will
take action to raise the balance payment of Rs. 20.000/- due to Mr. D. J.
Perera before 21.4.74 from a Finance Company:"  
  
The trial Judge has found that possession of the lorry was given to the
plaintiff on 1.4.74 and that he had thereafter had the lorry repaired and had
painted his name on the body of the lorry and has used the lorry for his
business. He also found that the defendant had misrepresented to the plaintiff
that he had misplaced the registration book, when, in fact; the registration
book was at that time. in the custody of the Magistrate's Court of Maho in
M.C. Maho Case No. 28999 and was released to, the defendant only on 23.10.74
and that the defendant was not in a position to produce the registration book
before 21.4.74 as promised by him. He has also accepted the evidence that it
was not possible to obtain finance on a motor vehicle without the registration
book being handed over to the Finance Company. The record in M.C. Maho 28999
shows that on 16th March 1974 the lorry No.22 Sri 3593 was produced in the
Magistrate's Court in connexion with a complaint of transporting timber
without a permit and was released to the defendant on 20th March 1974 on his
furnishing security in a sum of. Rs. 5,000/- and undertaking to produce the
lorry when required. The significance of this undertaking and of the
registration book being in the custody of Court till 23.10.74 has been
overlooked by the trial Judge. Had the defendant transferred the lorry to the
plaintiff on 1.4.74, he would have run the risk of being unable to keep his
undertaking to Court.  
  
The decisive question is: what was the effect of the agreement P1 and D2 ? If
one looks at the Sale of Goods Ordinance (Cap. 84); the material section is
section 18, which states the fundamental rule that the property passes at the
time when the parties intended it shall.  
  
Section 18 (1)  
  
Where there is a contract for the sale of specific or ascertained goods, the
property in them is transferred to the buyer at such

**402**

time as the parties to the contract intended it to be transferred.  
  
(2) For the purpose of ascertaining the intention of the parties, regard shall
be had to the terms of the contract, the conduct of the parties, and the
circumstances of the case.  
  
In section 19 there are certain specific. rules which are to apply for
ascertaining the. intention of parties. But section 19 does not apply to the
facts of this case, because section 19 can only apply according to its terms,
unless a different intention appears. That refers back to section 18, and, as
I construe -the agreement between the parties, a different intention does
appear. In my judgment, the terms of the contract, the conduct of the parties
and the circumstances of the case, all. manifest an intention that the
property in the lorry shall not pass until the purchase is completed by
payment of the balance purchase price.  
  
It is to be borne in mind: that at the time of the. transaction, the plaintiff
was a stranger to the defendant and the latter had no security for the payment
of the balance sum of Rs. 20,000/if he transferred the lorry to the plaintiff.  
  
By P1 the defendant acknowledges receipt of the advance of Rs. 16,000/- and
promises to sell to the plaintiff the lorry at the price of Rs. 36,000/-. The
defendant has not stated therein that he has sold the lorry for Rs. 36,000/-
to the plaintiff and received a part-payment of Rs.16,000/-. By this assurance
set out in D2, the plaintiff absolves the defendant of all responsibility for
any damage caused by the lorry of which he had taken delivery that day. This
assurance on the part of the plaintiff is explicable only-on the basis that
title' to the lorry continued to be in the defendant and the defendant was
concerned with potential liability that stems from his ownership of the
vehicle for any damage caused by the lorry.  
  
In my view the parties have, in terms, expressed the intention that the
property in the lorry should not pass until the full purchase price was paid.
The writing consisting of P1 and D2 records an agreement to sell, rather than
a sale. It is a matter of significance that the plaintiff, in his Iist of
documents annexed to his plaint under section 383' of the Administration of
Justice Law, describes the above document as "agreement to self lorry bearing
registered No. 22 Sri 3593" and not as "sale agreement"

**403**

Great reliance was placed by Counsel for the plaintiff respondent upon the
fact that possession of the lorry was given by the defendant to the plaintiff
on 1.4.74. Though delivery of possession is a relevant factor in determining
the intention of parties, it is not conclusive. The totality of the
circumstances in which delivery of the goods was made has to be considered.  
  
According to the Sale of Goods Ordinance, unless the context or the subject-
matter otherwise requires, "contract of sale" includes, agreements to sell as
well as "sales" ,-"buyer" means a person who buys or agrees to buy goods; and
"seller" means a person-who sells or agrees to, sell goods (section 59(1)):
Where under a contract of sale the property in the goods is transferred from
the seller to the buyer, the contract is called a "sale"; but where the
transfer of the property in the goods is to take place at a future time or
subject to some condition thereafter to be fulfilled, the contract is called
an "agreement to sell" (section 2(3)). An "agreement to sell" becomes a sale
when the time lapses, or conditions are fulfilled subject to which the
property in the goods is to be transferred (section 2(4)). An "agreement to
sell" is a contract pure and simple; whereas a "sale" is a contract plus a
conveyance. In a sale the thing which is the subject of the contract becomes
the property of the buyer the moment the contract is concluded and without
regard to the fact whether the goods be delivered to the buyer or remain in
the possession of the seller; whereas in the agreement to sell, the property
is to pass at a future time or subject to the fulfilment of some condition and
the goods remain the property of the seller till the contract is executed and
he can dispose of them. On a sale, if the seller fails to deliver the goods,
the buyer has not only a personal remedy against the seller (sections 50(1)
and 51), but also has the usual proprietary remedies in respect of the goods,
such as an action for conversion. Where an agreement to sell is broken by the
seller, the buyer has. only a personal remedy against the seller. (section
51). By an agreement to sell, a mere jus in personam is created; by a sale a
jus in rem is transferred.  
  
The Motor Traffic Act (Cap. 203) contains certain provisions spelling the
obligations of parties when change of possession consequent on a change of
ownership takes place. The relevant provisions of the Motor Traffic Act are
sections 12(3); 13 and 14.  
  
Section 12(3) provides that on a change of possession of a lorry upon a
voluntary, transfer made by a registered owner, the registered owner shall
within 14 days after such change of

**404**

possession forward to the Registrar a statement in the prescribed form
together with the revenue licence for the motor lorry and shall deliver to
.the new owner the certificate of registration relating to the lorry or a
duplicate thereof.  
  
Section 13 provides that "every application for the registration of a new
owner upon any change of possession of any motor vehicle shall be made in the
prescribed form .............. .and shall be signed by the person claiming to
be entitled to be regarded as the owner of the motor vehicle."  
  
Section 14 enacts that "no person shall be registered as a new owner of a
motor vehicle unless the application for registration is accompanied by a
certificate of registration or a duplicate thereof relating to the motor
vehicle".  
  
If, as claimed by the plaintiff, there had been a transfer of the lorry to him
on 1.4.74 and he had become the new owner of the . lorry from that date, he
should have complied with the statutory provisions of the Motor Traffic Act
referred to above. However, the plaintiff never made any application to have
himself registered as new owner, and the defendant as registered owner of the
lorry did not take any steps required by section 12(3). The defendant's
conduct is consistent with the position that he did not transfer the lorry to
the plaintiff.  
  
These circumstances militate against the plaintiff's contention that he was
the owner of the. motor vehicle.  
  
It would appear that in April 1975 the defendant had gone along with the
plaintiff to the Alliance Finance Co. Ltd. to assist the plaintiff to obtain
finance on hire-purchase. The proposal form D2 has been signed by the
plaintiff as 'proposer', and the defendant has signed as `guarantor'. The
defendant has been described therein as "owner of lorry No. 22 Sri 3593". The
above entry in the document confirms the contention of the defendant that both
parties regarded 'the defendant as the owner of the said lorry, even as late
as 22nd April 1975. when the plaintiff was seeking to obtain finance on-hire-
purchase. The evidence discloses that, the proposal failed as the plaintiff
was` unable to find another guarantor.  
  
It is to be further noted that the plaintiff at no time sought, on the basis
of his alleged ownership of the vehicle, to obtain the revenue licence or
insurance policy in his name. He had not applied for the revenue licence for
the year 1975, nor had he

**405**

 sought to take out insurance on the vehicle. Until it was taken possession of
by the defendant on 18.8.75, the plaintiff had, in breach of the law, been
running the vehicle without a revenue licence for the year 1975 and without a
policy of insurance in relation to the use of the said vehicle. These
omissions on the part of the plaintiff cannot be reconciled with his claim of
ownership of the lorry in question.  
  
Reliance as placed by the plaintiff on the case of Nilabdeen v. G. W. Silva(1)
where on similar facts the claimant succeeded. The main question involved in
that case .was, who was "the person entitled to possession" for the purpose of
an order under section 102 of the Administration of Justice Law. The Court
quite properly held that the person who had come into possession of the
vehicle on a document similar to P1 was lawfully in possession of the vehicle.
The observations in the judgment on the aspect of passing of property in terms
of section 18 of the Sale of Goods Ordinance are obiter dicta, the correctness
of which is open to question:  
  
For the reasons set out above, I am of the view that the plaintiff had not
established that he had become the owner of the vehicle in question by the
transaction of 1.4.74 between him and the defendant. The basis of the
plaintiff's claim of ownership of the vehicle fails and his action has to be
dismissed.  
  
I allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of the District Court and of the
Court of Appeal and dismiss the plaintiff's action with, costs. The defendant-
appellant will be entitled to costs in the District Court and to costs of
appeal to the Court of Appeal and to this Court.  
  
**SAMARAKOON, C. J**. - I agree  
  
**WANASUNDERA, J.** \- I agree  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/35.html_  

