##  Gunaratne v. The Homagama Pradeshiya Sabha and Others - SLR - 11, Vol 2 of
1998 [1998] LKSC 35; (1998) 2 Sri LR 11 (3 April 1998)

**11**

**GUNARATNE  
v.  
THE HOMAGAMA PRADESHIYA SABHA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
PERERA, J.,  
GUNAWARDENE, J. SC  
APPLICATION NO. 210/97(FR)  
MARCH 04, 1998.  
  
_Environment Law - National Environmental Act, No. 47 of 1980 as amended by
Act, No. 56 of 1988 - Establishment of a Saw Mill - Nuisance \- Environmental
hazards : noise, saw dust, etc. - Permission by Pradeshiya Sabha - Licence
under National Environmental Act - Infringement of Fundamental Rights -
Article 12(1) of the Constitution.  
  
_An application by the petitioner to establish a Saw Mill was recommended by
the Technical Officer of the Pradeshiya Sabha but the Central Environmental
Authority (CEA) refused to approve the application without adducing any
reasons. The petitioner appealed to the Minister who directed the officers of
the CEA to consider the application on its merits. The CEA wrote to the
Pradeshiya Sabha that it had no objection subject to the following conditions:  
  
1\. Noise should not exceed 55 decibels prescribed under the Environmental
Act.  
  
2\. The operation should not be conducted between 6.00 p.m. and 6.00 a.m.  
  
3\. A report from the Ceylon Institute for Scientific and Industrial Research
(CISIR) regarding compliance with conditions relating to noise levels should
be obtained.  
  
4\. Saw dust and other dust particles should not be a hindrance to the members
of the community living in the vicinity.  
  
The letter of CEA was considered by the Pradeshiya Sabha at a meeting and
unanimously approved provided an Environmental Protection Licence was obtained
before commencement of operations. The decision of the Pradeshiya Sabha was
communicated to the petitioner laying down the conditions laid down by the CEA
and a further set of 7 conditions prescribed by the Pradeshiya Sabha. The
petitioner then began preparations. However while preparations were going on
the petitioner received a letter from the Chairman of the Pradeshiya Sabha
informing him that the CEA had informed it of its decision not to recommend
the petitioner's industry and that the Pradeshiya Sabha had requested
clarification from the CEA. The petitioner was directed to temporarily suspend
preparations. An application was made to the Supreme Court for infringement of
Fundamental Rights and a settlement was about to be entered when the 7th to
10th respondents intervened and objected to the settlement on the following
grounds

**12**

(1) Noise emitted by operation of the machinery, unloading of logs, etc., will
create a nuisance and will adversely impact on the place and quiet hitherto
enjoyed by them.  
  
(2) Health hazards would be caused by the saw dust.  
  
(3) The road would be obstructed by vehicles bringing raw materials.  
  
(4) The mill would disturb the calm and peaceful environment of a residential
area.  
  
(5) Establishment of a Saw Mill would violate the provisions of the National
Environmental Act and other public health and building regulations.  
  
**Held:  
  
**1\. The stage at which the complaint was made was the site clearance stage.
It is the stage at which an industrialist is granted or refused permission to
begin preparation for setting up his operations. Obtaining permission at that
stage does not constitute the granting of a licence.  
  
2\. A petitioner who receives a favourable response to a site clearing
application must comply with the terms and conditions upon which such
clearance is granted.  
  
3\. No operations can commence until the petitioner has obtained a licence
issued under Part IV A of the National Environmental Act.  
  
4\. The Central Environmental Authority and delegate institutions like the
Pradeshiya Sabha should hear neighbourhood objections, inform the
industrialist of the objections, hear the views of the industrialist, and
after weighing the evidence in the light of the submissions made by both
sides, decide for reasons stated in writing and no other, that the licence
will be granted or refused. The decision and reasons should be communicated to
the industrialist and the persons who raised objections.  
  
Per Amerasinghe, J.  
  
'Publicity, transparency and fairness are essential if the goal of sustainable
development is to be achieved. In the matter before us, none of these elements
were present . . .  
**  
APPLICATION** for relief for alleged violation of fundamental rights.  
  
_Tilak Marapone with Nalin Ladduwahetty, Jayantha Fernando and Anuja
Premaratne_ for petitioner.  
  
_Manohara R. de Silva_ for 1st respondent.  
  
_K C. Kamalasabeyson, ASG with N. Pulle_ for 2nd to 6th respondents.  
  
_Lalanath de Silva with Mihiri Gunawardene_ for 7th to 10th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**13**

April 03, 1998  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.  
**  
The petitioner made an application to the Homagama Pradeshiya Sabha for the
purpose of establishing a saw mill at Kandalanda. This application was
referred to the Central Environmental Authority by the Pradeshiya Sabha. The
site was visited by the Technical Officer of the Pradeshiya Sabha. The officer
recommended the petitioner's application. The matter was then referred to the
Central Environmental Authority which, without adducing any reason, refused to
approve the application. The petitioner then appealed to the Minister in
charge of the subject of Environment. The Minister directed the officers of
the Central Environmental Authority to consider the application on its merits.
The Central Environmental Authority then wrote to the Pradeshiya Sabha stating
that it had no objection to the siting of the proposed Saw Mill at the place
proposed, subject to certain conditions being complied with, namely:  
  
1\. that the proposed operations of the saw mill should not discharge noise
levels above the 55 decibel limits prescribed under the provisions of the
Environmental Act;  
  
2\. that the operation should not be carried on between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m.;  
  
3\. that a report, once in three months from the Ceylon Institute for
Scientific and Industrial Research should be submitted with regard to
compliance with the conditions relating to noise levels;  
  
4\. that saw dust and other dust particles emanating from the saw mill should
not be a hindrance to the members of the community living in the vicinity of
the proposed saw mill.  
  
The letter of the Central Environmental Authority was placed for consideration
at a meeting of the Pradeshiya Sabha which unanimously decided to grant the
petitioner permission to proceed with the preparations to set up the mill
provided that an Environmental Protection Licence would be obtained before the
commencement of the operations. The decision of the Pradeshiya Sabha was
communicated to the petitioner laying down the conditions stipulated by the
Central Environmental "Authority and a further set of 7 conditions prescribed
by the Pradeshiya Sabha.

**14**

The petitioner then proceeded to prepare the premises by clearing the site,
erecting a boundary wall and obtaining an electricity service connection.
While preparations were going on, the petitioner received a letter from the
Chairman of the Pradeshiya Sabha informing him that the Central Environmental
Authority had informed the Pradeshiya Sabha of its decision not to recommend
the petitioner's industry, but that the Pradeshiya Sabha had written to the
Central Environmental Authority seeking clarification on the matter. The
petitioner was directed to temporarily suspend preparations. The petitioner
then appealed to the Minister in charge of the subject of environment and he
was directed to meet the Director-General of the Central Environmental
Authority and make representations to him. The Director-General informed the
petitioner that he had been informed that the proposed industry would be a
nuisance to the public in the area and, therefore, the authorization initially
given was withdrawn.  
  
The petitioner then filed an application in this Court on 28th February, 1997,
alleging that the respondents had violated his fundamental rights guaranteed
under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution and praying, inter alia, that the
Court make order quashing the letter dated 27.1.97 issued by the Pradeshiya
Sabha suspending the authorization earlier given by the Pradeshiya Sabha to
the petitioner.  
  
When the matter came up for support on 17 March, 1997, the Court observed that
all counsel agreed that the petitioner may proceed to establish his Saw Mill
on the premises referred to in paragraph 8 of the petition subject to the
terms and conditions set out in letter P5 issued by the first respondent (the
Homagama Pradeshiya Sabha) and subject to any other statutory conditions
applicable under the National Environmental Act, No. 47 of 1980, as amended by
Act No. 56 of 1988, and subject to the right of the fifth respondent (The
Central Environmental Authority) to conduct all necessary tests and
investigations to be satisfied that the conditions had been complied with. If
the conditions had been complied with, the first and fifth respondents would
issue all necessary licences for the carrying on of the petitioner's business.
In the circumstances, the Court considered it unnecessary to consider the
question of granting leave to proceed at that stage.  
  
When the matter came up before Court on 17 June, 97, learned counsel for the
Pradeshiya Sabha undertook to instruct the Pradeshiya Sabha to send officers
to take steps leading to the issue of the Certificate of Conformity. The
application of certain persons \- the 7th

**15**

to 10th respondents - to be added as intervenient-respondents was not
considered on that day. On 30th June, 1997 learned counsel appearing for the
intervenient-respondents objected to the settlement arrived at on 17.3.97. The
application for intervention was allowed on 29 August, 1997. The petitioner
moved that contempt proceedings be taken against the Chairman of the fifth
respondent. Leave to proceed was granted for the alleged infringement of
Article 12 (1) of the Constitution on 11 September, 1997\. When the matter
came up before Court on 9.12.97, learned counsel for the Central Environmental
Authority stated that he had no objection to the issue of the Certificate of
Conformity. Learned counsel for the Pradeshiya Sabha stated that the building
was in conformity with the approved plan except for an omission which if
rectified would bring the building into conformity with the plan. Learned
counsel for the intervenient respondents objected to the issue of the
Certificate of Conformity.  
  
The intervenient-respondents object to the establishment of the saw mill on
the grounds that (1) noise emitted by the operation of the machinery,
unloading of logs, etc., will create a nuisance and will adversely impact on
the peace and quiet hitherto enjoyed by them; (2) health hazards would be
caused by saw dust; (3) the road would be obstructed by vehicles bringing raw
materials to the Saw Mill; (4) the Mill would disturb the calm and peaceful
environment of a residential area; and (5) the establishment of the Saw Mill
would violate the provisions of the National Environmental Act and other
public health and building regulations.  
  
The stage at which the complaint was made to this Court is the site clearance
stage. It is the stage at which an industrialist is granted or refused
permission to begin preparations for setting up his operations. Obtaining
permission at that stage does not constitute the granting of a licence. A
petitioner who receives a favourable response to a site clearance application
must comply with the terms and conditions upon which such clearance is
granted. In the present case, as we have seen, the Central Environmental
Authority and the Pradeshiya Sabha have both laid down several conditions,
aimed no doubt, at eliminating the hazards and inconveniences that the
intervenient-respondents fear. In any event, no operations can commence until
the petitioner has obtained a licence issued under Part IV A of the National
Environmental Act. One would expect that the Central Environmental Authority
and delegate institutions, like the Homagama Pradeshiya Sabha, would hear
neighbourhood objections, inform the industrialist of the objections, hear the
views of the

**16**

industrialist, and after weighing the evidence in the light of the submissions
made by both sides, decide for reasons stated in writing and no other, that
the licence will be granted or refused. The decision and the reasons should be
communicated to the industrialist and the persons who raised objections.  
  
Publicity, transparency and fairness are essential if the goal of sustainable
development is to be achieved. In the matter before us, none of these elements
were present and in my view the first and fifth respondents acted in an
arbitrary manner in suspending the authorization granted earlier. In fact the
first and fifth respondents, during the hearing, stated that they were
prepared to permit the resumption of work, thereby acknowledging the fact that
the suspension was an ill-considered act.  
  
In the circumstances, I hold that the first and fifth respondents violated
Article 12 (1) of the Constitution and I make order quashing the suspension of
authority to proceed with the setting up of the Saw Mill as set out in the
letter of the first respondent dated the 27th of January, 1997.  
  
The fifth respondent is directed to pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 10,000 as
costs.  
  
**PERERA, J. - I agree.  
  
GUNAWARDENA, J. - I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/35.html_  

