##  Smithkline Beecham Biologicals, S.A. and Another v. State Pharmaceutical
Corporation of Sri Lanka and Others - SLR - 20, Vol 3 of 1997 [1997] LKSC 35;
(1997) 3 Sri LR 20 (20 May 1997)

20

SMITHKLINE BEECHAM BIOLOGICALS S.A. AND ANOTHER  

**V.** ****

**STATE PHARMACEUTICAL CORPORATION OF SRI LANKA AND OTHERS  **

** **

SUPREME COURT.

DR. AMERASINGHE, J.,

WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND

DR. GUNAWARDENA, J.

S.C. (F. R.) NO. 89/97.

MARCH 27, 1997.

APRIL 16, 18, 1997.



Fundamental rights - Award of contract on tenders - Right to equality - Duty
of the Tender Board to act fairly in awarding contract \- Article 12(1) of the
Constitution.

_ _

Offers were invited worldwide by the State Pharmaceutical Corporation on
behalf of the Director of Health Services for the supply of Rubella Viral
Vaccine. There were five offers. Of them, SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A.
Belgium (fourth lowest tenderer) was the only person who had made a responsive
bid conforming with the tender document at the relevant date. In particular,
its product had been registered with the Cosmetic Devises and Drugs Authority
of Sri Lanka, which was a requirement of the tender conditions. It was also a
past supplier; and there was no past complaint with regard to the previous
tender. None of the other tenderers who were scheduled and considered were
registered; nor were they past suppliers. Accordingly, the Cabinet Appointed
Tender Board decided to award the tender to SmithKline Beecham Biologicals
S.A. Thereafter, without communicating that decision to the tenderers and
requesting them to make any representations to the Tender Appeal Board, as
required by the Guidelines on Government Tender Procedure, the Tender Board
allowed time to tenderers to obtain registration. Pending such registration,
the tender board altered its original decision and made a limited award to
SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A. for 2.5 million doses of vaccine.
Thereafter the Tender Board proceeded to award 2 million doses of vaccine to
Biocinie S.P.A. Italy (which had since registered its product) on the basis
that the price quoted by it was "The lowest offer".



**Held:**

** **

1\. The submission of the counsel for the respondents that the application
should be dismissed in limine as the acts in question relate to purely
contractual rights of parties cannot be accepted.  



**21**



**(Per Dr. Amerasinghe, J.)**

** **

"The complaint of the petitioners is not that there has been a breach of
contract; their complaint is that they were not awarded a contract because
certain officials had acted unfairly."



2\. In view of the fact that the product of Biocine S.p.A. had not been
registered when the tender closed, its offer was the lowest offer, but not the
lowest responsive offer; and therefore, Biocine S. p .A. was not qualified to
tender. The decision to award it 2 million doses of vaccine was in breach of
the Guidelines on Government Tender Procedure which provided equal opportunity
for persons to participate and compete on identicle terms and conditions.
Consequently, the impugned decision of the Tender Board relating to the
procurement of 4.5 million doses of Rubella Viral Vaccine was violative of
Article 12(1) of the Constitution.



**Cases referred to:**

** **

1 _. Roberts v. Ratnayake_ (1986) 2 Sri LR 36, 45.

_ _

2 _. Wijenaike v. Air Lanka Ltd._ (1990) 1 Sri LR 293.

_ _

3 _. Radhakrishna Agrawal v. State of Bihar_ AIR __ (1977) S.C. 1496.

_ _

4 _. Palihawadana v. Attorney-General_ FRD Vol. 1 -1, (1978-79-80) 1 SLR 65.

_ _

5 _. Jayanetti v. Land Reform Commission_ (1984) 2 Sri LR 172, 184.

_ _

6 _. Srilekha Vidyarthi v. State of U. P. AIR_ (1991) S.C. 537, 550.

_ _

7 _. F. C .I. v Kamdhenu Cattlefield Industries_ (1993) 1 S.C.C. 71.

_ _

8 _. Mahabir Auto Stores v. Indian Oil Corporation AIR_ (1990) S.C. 1031.

_ _

9 (a) _Vitarelli v Seaton_ (1959) 359 US 535, 79 S. Ct 968 3 L. Ed. 2d 1012
(1959).

_ _

9 ( _b).Kiriwanthe and Another v Navaratne and Another_ 1990 3 SLR 11 at 15.

_ _

10. _Roman Dayaran Shetty v. The International Authority of India and Others AIR_ (1979) S.C. 1628



11\. Barbier v. Connolly 113 U.S. 27 (1885).

_ _

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.



_Shibly Aziz, PC._ with _Nigel Hatch_ for the petitioner.



Saleem Marsoof, D.S.G. with Shavindra Fernando, acting. S.S.C. for the
respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._

_ _

May 20, 1997.  


**DR. AMERASINGHE, J.**

** **

Offers were invited worldwide by the State Pharmaceutical Corporation, on
behalf of the Director of Health Services, on the 14th  


**22**



of May 1996, inter alia, for the supply of Rubella Viral Vaccine. The Tender
(DHS/27/6/97) closed on 3rd July 1996. The bids were opened on the 3rd of July
1996. Offers were received from (1) Hubut Pharmaceuticals Ltd. of China; (2)
Institute of Immunology Croatia; (3) Serum Institute of India; (4) SmithKline
Beecham Biologicals S.A. Belgium; (5) Biocine S.p.A. Italy. The offers of (1)
Institute of Immunology Croatia; (2) Biocine S.p.A. Italy; (3) Serum Institute
of India; and (4) SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A., were scheduled and
evaluated on the 12th of August 1996 by the Technical Evaluation Committee
appointed by the Secretary to the Treasury. The Technical Evaluation Committee
reported and recommended that each of the following, namely, The Institute of
Immunology Croatia, Biocine S.p.A. Italy and the Serum Institute of India was
"not registered, not a past supplier, not acceptable." The Committee stated
that SmithKline and Beecham Belgium, was "Acceptable subject to supplying with
cold chain monitors and renewal of registration in 1997." It was noted by the
Committee that SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A. Belgium was (1) a
registered (2) previous supplier, and (3) that there were no past complaints
with regard to that tenderer.



On the matter of specifications, the Committee made the following entry in
respect of three of the suppliers, including SmithKline Beecham Biologicals
S.A.: "Specs conform except details of cold chain monitors."



The State Pharmaceutical Corporation on the 27th of August 1996 sought
confirmation that the product Would be supplied with cold chain monitors.
Confirmation was made on the 29th of August 1996 by SmithKline Beecham
Biologicals S.A. that cold chain monitors would accompany each shipping box.



Since it was required of suppliers that the product should be registered under
the Cosmetic Devices and Drugs Act, and the registration of the product of
SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A. was valid only up to the 22nd of March
1996, whereas the product was required to be supplied in January **and in May
1977,** SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A. were required to renew the
registration of

**23**



their product. Accordingly, the registration was extended for five years from
the 23rd of March 1997.



The Cabinet Appointed Tender Board (CATB) on the 2nd. of September 1996
recorded the following:



"The Tender Board. after considering the T.E.C. recommendation decided to
award the tender to SmithKline Beecham - Belgium the fourth lowest tendered
for U.S. $ 990,000. The three parties that were lower viz - Messieurs
Institute of Immunology Croatia, Biocine Italy and Serum Institute of India
are not registered parties. The T.B. noted that SmithKline Beecham is
registered up to March 1997."



On November 1st 1996, the Managing Director of the State Pharmaceuticals
Corporation wrote to Dr. Dudley Dissanayake, Secretary Ministry of Health,
Highways & Social Services, the third respondent, with a copy to the Chairman
of the State Pharmaceuticals Corporation and Advisor to the Cabinet Appointed
Tender Board, the fifth respondent, as follows:



"I would like to make the following suggestions with regard to two items due
to be taken up at the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board. meeting, today. ,



PARACETAMOL TABLETS



.......................................



II. RUBELLA VACCINE -



This refers to my letter dated 18.9.96 on Rubella Vaccine.. The earlier
decision was to award to a particular Company to the value of approximately
Rs. 54 Million. However, according to the schedule there were three other
companies who had quoted much less, but unfortunately they are not registered.
If one of them are (sic.) registered there will be a substantial amount of
saving.

**24**



Therefore we have written to the CDDA asking for the registration status of
these three companies. We have been informed that two companies have submitted
their samples for testing and reports are awaited. Therefore Tender Board may
consider to take this matter up at the next meeting within (sic.) next 2/3
weeks.



I spoke to Dr. Samaranayaka - Director - Medical Supplies Division on the
above two suggestions. These suggestions are acceptable to him"



The Cabinet Appointed Tender Board recorded its decision as follows:



"The T.B. recommends the tender of M/S SmithKline Beecham Belgium for 2.5
million doses to be delivered in January 1997 at U.S. $ (illegible) by the
lowest acceptable tenderer and registered party. The T.B. considered the
letter of M.D. S.P.C. dated 1/11/96. In the course of discussion it became
apparent that a delay in placing orders could lead to stocks running out.
Therefore M/S Smith Kline Beecham's offer is recommended. The T.B. also noted
that there are 2 million more doses to be ordered in 1997. By that time it is
hoped that more parties would be registered." '



The offers for the supply of the Rubella vaccine, lapsed on 3rd November 1996
upon the expiry of the 120-day period of validity stipulated in Tender
Condition (6). In response to a request from the State Pharmaceutical
Corporation dated the 12th of November 1996, SmithKline Beecham Biologicals
S.A., the Serum Institute of India, and Biocine S.p.A. (the 7th respondent)
confirmed the extensions of their offers and bid-bonds on November 14th,
November 13th and November 21st 1996, respectively.



The State Pharmaceutical Corporation published the "World wide tender results
of High Value items from 1.1.96 to 30.9.96" in the Daily News of the 25th of
November 1996. Among the 23 items listed, there is the following:



25



Tender No.     Item     Quantity     Supplier     Value

DHS/26/9/96     Rubella     1.2        SmithKline     USD 256,250  
                       Vaccine      million      Beecham     SLR 13.43    
                        Live     vials     Biologicals     million    
                                                             SA Belgium                                 



On the 3rd of December 1996, the Managing Director of the State Pharmaceutical
Corporation sent the following "note" to the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board,
with a copy to the Chairman of the Corporation:



"Further to my letter to the Secretary dated December 2, 1996 and our
submission to the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board dated December 5, 1996. Now
the following two companies have registered:



1) Biocine S.P.A., Italy



2) Serum Institute, India



These two company's tenders are much lower than the 3rd lowest. However, none
of the items of Biocine, Italy have been purchased in the past by us while
Serum Institute, India is a past supplier for many vaccine types. Therefore I
suggest to award:



1) 25% (i.e. 1,125 million doses) as a sample order to Biocine, Italy  


2) 75% (i.e. 3,375 million doses) to be awarded to Serum Institute of India."



The Cabinet Appointed Tender Board met on the 10th of December 1996. In
recording its decision, it referred to its decision on the 2nd of September,
the fact that it had met again on' the 1st of November to consider the letters
of the Managing Director of the State Pharmaceuticals Corporation to the
Secretary /Health Dated 18.9.96 and 1.11.96 and its decision on that date. The
Cabinet Appointed Tender Board then stated as follows:

**26**



"At today's meeting (10.12.96) of the CATB it was revealed that the CATB
recommendations of 2.9.96 and 1.11.96 have not gone up to Cabinet. As a result
they were confronted with the matters mentioned in the note by MD/SPC to the
CATB dated 9.12.1996. Under the present circumstances and given the fact that
two other parties are now registered, CATB recommends that an award of 2.0
million doses be made to Biocine, Italy, the price being the lowest responsive
offer.



Only 2.0 million doses is being recommended in this instance as. Biocine,
Italy is a new supplier. This is recommended on the basis that each
consignment would be suitably tested before despatch to hospitals.



If supplies of this vaccine are timely and in order and complied with quality
assurance tests, CATB recommends that the balance quantity (2.5 million doses)
should also be awarded to Biocine, Italy."



It is stated in the Preface to the Guidelines on Government Tender Procedure
that they were designed, inter alia, "To keep the process fully transparent
and honest." Paragraph 2 (h) of Part I of the Guidelines states that the
Tender process should ensure transparency. Transparency requires at least that
Tenderers should be informed of decisions so that they might see what had been
decided and have the opportunity of demonstrating why the decision was
incorrect. And so, paragraph 136 of Part I of the Guidelines requires the
Secretary to the Ministry concerned, within one week of the determination of a
Cabinet Appointed Tender Board to inform in writing, all Tenderers who
responded to the Tender Call, the intention to award the Tender to the
successful Tenderer and request that if there are representations to be made
against the determination, such appeals should be submitted in writing to the
Tender Appeal Board with a copy to the Ministry concerned.



The Secretary to the Ministry concerned did not comply with the requirements
of paragraph 136 of Part I of the Guidelines. When SmithKline Beecham
Biologicals S.A wrote a letter dated the 13th of December 1996 to the Chairman
of the Tender Board C/o the State

**27**



Pharmaceutical Corporation stating that the firm was awaiting a communication
of the decision of the Tender Board, there was no response to that letter.



SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A. became aware of the latest decision of the
Cabinet Appointed Tender Board, as they say in their letter dated the 22nd of
January 1997 and in paragraph 14 of the affidavit of the Managing Director of
SmithKline Beecham Mackwoods Ltd, through "highly placed officials"/ "senior
officials of the 1st respondent corporation." They then wrote to the Chairman
of the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board C/o The State Pharmaceuticals
Corporation on the 22nd of January 1997 alleging that Biocine S.P.A. had
failed to comply with the "fundamental and mandatory requirements of the
tender conditions", and warned that, unless there was confirmation that
SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A. would be awarded the contract, it would be
compelled to take legal action. There was no reply to that letter.



The duty of the Secretary was, in terms of paragraph 136 of the Guidelines, to
inform tenderers that if there were representations to be made against the
decision of the Tender Board, they should be submitted to the Tender Appeal
Board. The Secretary did not do so. In the circumstances, the letter, which
contained representations made against the determination of the Tender Board,
ought to have been forwarded by him to the Tender Appeal Board, so that in
terms of paragraph 138 the Cabinet could have been informed of the decision of
the Appeal Board. These matters were not mentioned in the Cabinet Memorandum
dated the 28th of January 1997 which has been produced in evidence by Mr. M.
D. D. Pieris, the Chairman of the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board and the 2nd
respondent in the matter before us. (See paragraph 14 (n) of his affidavit
dated 5th March 1997).



In the Memorandum to Cabinet, the Hon. Minister of Health, Highways and Social
Services stated that he concurred with the recommendation of the Cabinet
Appointed Tender Board and recommended that Cabinet Approval be granted to
award 2.0 million doses of Rubella Viral Vaccine to M/S Biocine Italy at a
total cost of U.S.$ 360,000; SL Rs. 19,923,300/00. "Also to award balance of
2.45 million Rubella Viral Vaccine to same supplier if supplies of 2.0 million

**28**



doses Vaccines are timely and in order and complied with quality assurance
tests at a total cost of US $ 450,000 SL Rs. 24,904,125/00.



On the 29th of January 1997 SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A. and SmithKline
Beecham Mackwoods Ltd. filed a petition in this Court alleging the
infringement of their fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 12 and/or
Article 12(2) of the Constitution. On the 30th of January 1997 the Court
granted the petitioners leave to proceed for the alleged violation of Article
12 (1) of the Constitution. The Court issued interim orders restraining the
import of the Rubella Vaccine from Biocine S.p.A. and restraining the
respondents from taking any steps to prevent SmithKline Beecham Biologicals
S.A. being awarded the contract for the supply of the Vaccine in terms of
prayers 'g' , and 'h' of the petition, which orders were extended pending the
final hearing and determination of this matter.



Learned Counsel for the respondents submitted that the application should be
dismissed in limine, since the acts in question did not constitute
'administrative' or 'executive' action "as they relate to purely contractual
rights of parties". He submitted that only an infringement of a fundamental
right can be redressed through an application made under Article 126 of the
Constitution. In support of his submission learned counsel cited Roberts v.
Ratnayake(1): at p 45.



" ... where the rights and obligations of parties to such agreement have to be
determined according to the ordinary law of contract, then even the State has
to be treated in the same way as any other ordinary party ... where the rights
and obligations of the parties to such a contract fall to be determined by the
ordinary law of contract, then the provisions of Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution have no application, and cannot be invoked."



The decision in Roberts (supra) was followed in Wijenaike v. Air Lanka Ltd.
and Other (2) at p. 293. Wijenaike also followed the view expressed in certain
Indian decisions which had held that, although acts of the State at the
threshold stage or at the stage of granting a contract would attract the
constitutional guarantees of equality and equal protection of the law, yet,
where there was a contract in force, Article 12 would apply only if the rights
and liabilities were statutory: e.g. see Radhakrishna Agrawal v. State of
Bihar(3).

**29**



Article 12(1) of the Constitution states that "All persons are equal before
the law and are entitled to the equal protection of the law". With great
respect, I am unable to accept the view that "law" in Article 12 (1) is
confined to enactments of Parliament: In my view "law" includes regulations,
rules, directions, instructions, guidelines and schemes that are designed to
guide public authorities. If they contain provisions that are impermissible in
terms of the provisions of Article 12(1), or if in their application the
guarantees of Article 12(1) are violated, they must be declared to be
unconstitutional: This Court has consistently proceeded on that basis from the
time of Palhihawadana v. Attorney- General(3) See also Jayanetti v. Land
Reform Commission(5) at p. 184\. I am also unable to agree with the view that
a distinction should be drawn between cases in which there is a contract and
those in which the matter is at a thereshold stage or some stage before the
making of the contract: In my view, where there is a breach of contract and a
breach of Article 12 (1) brought about by the same set of facts and
circumstances, it cannot be correctly said one of the remedies only can be
availed of, the other being thereby extinguished; nor can it be correctly said
that the aggrieved party must be confined to his remedy under the law of
contract, unless there is a violation of statutory obligations: In Srilekha
Vidarthi v. State of UP A. L .R.(6) at p. 550, the Supreme Court of India
considered contracts vis-a-vis Article 14 of the Indian Constitution, which
corresponds with Article 12 of our Constitution. Verma, J (as he then was)
speaking for the Court said:



"The state cannot be attributed the split personality of Dr. Jekyll and Mr.
Hyde in the contractual field so as to impress on it all the characteristics
of the State at the threshold while making a contract requiring it to fulfill
the obligation of Article 14 of the Constitution and thereafter permitting it
to cast off its garb of State to adorn the new robe of a private body during
the subsistence of the contract enabling it to act arbitrarily subject only to
the contractual obligations and remedies flowing from it. It is really the
nature of its personality as State which is significant and must characterize
all its actions, in whatever field, and not the nature of function,
contractual or otherwise, which is decisive of the nature

**30**



of scrutiny permitted for examining the validity of its act. The requirement
of Article 14 being the duty to act fairly, justly and reasonably, there is
nothing which militates against the concept of requiring the State always to
so act even in contractual matters. There is a basic difference between the
acts of the State which must invariably be in public interest and those of a
private individual, engaged in similar activities, being primarily for
personal gain, which may or may not promote public interest. Viewed in this
manner, in which we find no conceptual difficulty or anachronism, we find no
reason why the requirement of Article 14 should not extend even in the sphere
of commercial matters for regulating the conduct of State activity."



A similar view was taken by the Indian Supreme Court in F.C.I. v. Kamdhenu
Cattlefield Industries (7).



The petitioners are before this Court complaining that they have been denied
equal treatment and that they have been denied the equal protection of the taw
guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the Constitution. The complaint of the
petitioners is not that there has been a breach of contract: their complaint
is that they were not awarded a contract because certain officials had acted
unfairly. Public functionaries must ensure that the guarantees of Article 12
of the Constitution are observed in the discharge of their duties and in the
exercise of their powers, regardless of whether there is a statute or contract
on which the rights of a petitioner may be based: See Mahabir Auto Stores v
Indian Oil Corporation A. I R.(8). For the reasons I have explained, the
submission of learned counsel for the respondents that the petition must be
rejected in limine cannot be accepted.



Chapter XIII of the Financial Regulations and various circulars issued from
time to time by the Ministry of Finance prescribe the procedures to be
followed in obtaining goods and services by Government bodies. On the 30th of
September, 1996, The General Treasury issued a most important document:
**Guidelines on Government Tender Procedure.** In the Preface to that
document,  


**31**



the following observations are made by President of Sri Lanka and Minister of
Finance and Planning:  


"Though the Tender procedure adopted at present is comprehensive, it has not
prevented the occurrence of irregularities. Due to its complexity, the
finalization of tenders has taken unusually long periods. It is observed that
our procedure takes the longest in this region.



Therefore, the Government decided to prepare Guidelines on Tender Procedure,
introducing amendments to the present procedure where necessary, in order to
achieve the following objectives:



1\. To keep the process fully transparent and honest.

  
2\. To speed up the process.

  
3\. To obtain financially the most advantageous and qualitatively the best
services and supplies for the country.



At present it takes 24-36 months to bring a tender process to conclusion. This
adversely affects development work and often leads to cost escalations.



Constant allegations of corruption and lack of transparency have a
debilitating effect on the Government administration and Government officers.
The objective of formulating these guidelines is to eliminate the weaknesses
by collating all the instructions, strengthening the procedures and assisting
users by introducing features like check lists, standard documents etc.



Therefore, this document attempts to reduce the time taken for the process to
six (6) months, while keeping the whole process transparent and ensuring a
level playing field to all tenderers ...

**32**



I hope these guidelines will help tenderers to offer their services with the
minimum of problems and delays. These guidelines will make the officer's task
easier in completing the process expeditiously and accurately ...



I sincerely hope that this document will serve to streamline the purchasing
and selling procedures of Government, in order to achieve speed, efficiency
and transparency and to provide a level playing-field for all citizens who
participate in the economic process of the country."



Paragraph 6 of Part 1 Chapter I of the Guidelines stipulates that "The Tender
process should be concluded in the shortest possible time." As observed in the
Preface to the Guidelines, delay "adversely affects development work and often
leads to cost escalations," In the matter before us, yet another undersirable
consequence has been highlighted, namely, the possibility that stocks of
essential items may run out, a fact, as we have seen, that was noted by the
Cabinet Appointed Tender Board. In paragraph 15 of the affidavit dated the 5th
of March 1997, Mr. M. D. D. Pieris, who was Chairman of the Tender Board,
states as follows: "... Rubella vaccine is administered on potential mothers
to prevent the birth of deformed children ... the current annual requirement
of the vaccine in Sri Lanka is 4,500,000 doses whereas what is available in
stock at present is only 600,000 doses. I state that in these circumstances,
irreparable loss and damage would be caused to the Republic of Sri Lanka if
the interim order already granted is extended any further." The interim order
was granted to ensure that pending a determination of whether the procedures
adopted in dealing with tender DHS/27/6/97 were in violation of the
Constitution, the procurement of the vaccine under that tender would be
suspended. Any damage that might be caused by a shortage of stocks is
referable to the failure of the Tender Board and certain officials to adhere
to the procedures prescribed by the Government designed, inter alia, to
eliminate delays.



In the matter before us, the process started when the Secretary of the Cabinet
of Ministers on the 6th of March 1996 informed **  
 **

**33**



the Secretary of the Ministry of Health, Highways and Social Services that Her
Excellency the President had approved the appointment of the Tender Board to
determine the procurement of pharmaceuticals for the State Pharamaceutical
Corporation in 1996. However, it was not brought to a finality. The Cabinet
Appointed Tender Board,, accepting the recommendations of the Technical
Evaluation Committee, made a decision on the 2nd of September 1996: However,
the Secretary of the Ministry of Health neither took action to pursue residual
action for the completion of the tender award, nor did he inform tenderers of
the decision that had been made, nor was a Cabinet Memorandum submitted under
the hand of the Minister, forwarding the reports of the Tender Board and the
Technical Evaluation Committee with the recommendations of the Minister.



In my view, it was the failure of the Secretary of the Ministry of Health to
take necessary action that not only caused the delay but also opened the door
to the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board, eventually misdirecting itself, The
Cabinet Appointed Tender Board, as we have seen, at its meeting on the 10th of
December 1996 noted that at that meeting that "it was revealed that the CATB
recommendations of 2.9.96 and 1.11.96 had not gone to Cabinet. **As a result
they were confonted with the matters mentioned in the note by MD/SPC to the
CATB dated 9.12.1996.**



The emphasis is mine.



In my view, the "confrontation" would have been avoided if the salutary
directions given in paragraphs 135 and 136 of the Guidelines had been
followed:



135\. The determination of the Tender Award will be notified by the Chairman
of the Tender Board to the Secretary of the Ministry concerned or the Head of
the Department concerned, as the case may be, who will thereafter pursue
within one week residual action for the completion of the tender award.

**34**



136\. In the case of A CATB, the Secretary to the Ministry concerned will,
within one week of the determination inform in writing, all Tenderers who
responded to the Tender Call, the intention to award the Tender to the
successful Tenderer and request that if there are any representations to be
made against the determination, such appeals should be submitted in writing to
the Tender Appeal Board with a copy to the Secretary of the Ministry
concerned. Simulataneously, a Cabinet Memorandum should be submitted under the
hand of the Minister, forwarding the Reports of the Tender Board and the TEC,
with the recommendation of the Minister.



137\. An appeal against an award should be lodged with the Appeal Board within
one week of the intimation of the determination. The appeal should contain all
materials required to support the averments and should be self-contained for
the Board to arrive at a conclusion ...



138\. The Appeal Board shall report to the Cabinet, through the Secretary to
the Cabinet within two weeks of an appeal being lodged"



There was an appeal dated the 29th of November 1996 against the award of the
contract to SmithKline & Beecham Biologicals S.A. by the Country Manager of
Biocine S.p.A. but this was not dealt with in the manner prescribed in
paragraphs 136, 137 and 138 of the Guidelines: Biocine S.p.A. did succeed
eventually, in so far as it became the tenderer recommended by the Minister
acting on the recommendations of the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board but, as we
have seen, not because its appeal had been considered by a Tender Appeal Board
whose decision had been reported to the Cabinet, as required by the
Guidelines.



The Chairman of the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board does not in his affidavit
of the 17th of February 1997 state that either he or the Cabinet Appointed
Tender Board were influenced by the fact that

**35**

Government of Sri Lanka owed the State Pharmaceutical Corporation over As. 300
million on account of the supply of medical products with the result that the
State Pharmaceutical Corporation had to borrow from Commercial Banks at the
market rate of interest to maintain supplies of products. Nor does this appear
as a stated reason for any of the several decisions of the Cabinet Appointed
Tender Board. However, in his second affidavit dated the 5th of March 1997 the
Chairman of the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board seeks to justify the decision
made by the Tender Board on that ground. The Managing Director of the State
Pharmaceutical does not advert to this matter in any of the documents placed
before us, although he does refer to the matter of savings. Cost, per se, is
no doubt one of the matters the Tender Board may have legitimately taken into
account in arriving at its decision. However, the indebtedness of the State
Pharmaceutical Corporation was another matter.  
  
Learned counsel for the respondents, whilst conceding that the provisions of
the Guidelines had not been followed in the matter of submitting the
recommendations to the Cabinet, submitted that the "omission is understandable
as the Guidelines were issued only on or about 30th September." This can
hardly be pleaded as an excuse, for at least by the time of the second
decision on the 1st of November the Secretary concerned, as the chief
accounting officer of his Ministry, might reasonably have been expected to be
acquainted with the contents of a document of prime importance to the proper
discharge of his duties. Moreover, somewhat curiously, learned counsel for the
respondents sought to justify the alteration of the views of the Cabiner
Appointed Tender Board on the ground that since the first decision, the
Guidelines had been issued, in terms of which "the foremost objective" of the
tender process, when it relates to procurements, is the achievement of
"maximum benefit to the Government" at the "least cost". Either the Secretary
to the Ministry of Health was unaware of the Guidelines and, therefore, did
not comply with them, or he was aware of them and, therefore, followed them.
If the Tender Board was in fact guided by the so-called foremost objective of
the tender process set out in the Guidelines, then the

**36**

Secretary of the Ministry of Health, as a Member of the Cabinet Appointed
Tender Board, was aware of the Guidelines. In paragraph 17 of his affidavit
dated the 17th of February 1997, the Chairman of the Cabinet Approved Tender
Board admits "that the tender board having considered all relevant matters ...
recommended to the Cabinet of Ministers in terms of the Financial Regulations
(1992) and Guidelines on Government Tender Procedure (1996) that the tender
with respect to the Rubella Vaccine ahould be awarded to the 7th respondent In
the circumstances, the failure on the part of the Secretary to the Ministry of
Health, the third respondent, to comply with the Guidelines, is neither
"understandable" nor excusable. Although he has been duly given notice, he has
not filed an affidavit explaining his failure to comply with the prescribed
procedures.  
  
Part I of the Guidelines deals with 'Government Procurement". Chapter I of
that part deals with matters 'General". Paragraph 2 of that Chapter sets out
what the "Tender process should ensure". They are stated to be as follows:  
  
(a) The least cost and maximum benefit to the Government.  
  
(b) Adherence to prescribed standards, rules and regulations.  
  
(c) Optimum Economic Advantage to the nation.  
  
(d) Maximum income in the disposal of assets or in granting of rights,
concessions or exclusive benefits.  
  
(e) Equal opportunity for interested parties and persons to participate and
compete on identical terms and conditions and emergence of competence and
efficiency.  
  
(f) Expeditious execution of works and delivery of goods and supplies.  
  
(g) Compliance with local laws and international obligations.  
  
(h) Transparency and uniformity of the evaluation procedure.  
  
(i) Confidentiality of information provided by tenderers."

**37**



The explanation of the respondents for the change of the decision of the
Cabinet Appointed Tender Board is that it was compelled to do so by the
Guidelines issued by the General Treasury in September 1996 since, as the
learned Deputy Solicitor-General stated in his written submissions, "the
foremost objective of the tender process when it relates to procurements is
the achievement of 'maximum benefit to the Government' at the 'least cost'. He
said that "the award in favour of the 7th respondent [biocine S.p.A.] would
save the Government approximately Rupees 9,937,800." In support of his
submission, the learned Deputy Solicitor-General cited paragraph 14 (j) of the
Affidavit, dated, 5th March 1997, of the second respondent who was the
Chairman of the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board, wherein it was stated as
follows:



"... the tender board was conscious of the saving of approximately Rs.
9,937,800/- that could be made by accepting the tender of the 7th respondent,
which was the lowest responsive offer as against the offer of the 1st
petitioner."



Admittedly, "The least cost and maximum benefit to the Government" is, as we
have seen, placed by paragraph 2, Chapter 1, Part 1, of the Guidelines at the
head of the list of what the "tender procedure should ensure". There is no
evidence to support the view that the arrangement was on a hierarchical basis.
Moreover, "the least cost" is not referred to as the ultimate or sole
criterion: the criterion of "least cost" is subject to the criterion of
"maximum benefit to the Government". If "maximum benefit to the government"
meant "maximum financial benefit" in the sense of saving rupees and cents, the
reference to "maximum benefit to the Government" is tautologous. It is not:
"Maximum benefit to the Government" refers to other, quite distinct, notions:
obvously, the cheapest, as common experience shows, may not procure the best
product. On the other hand, affordability is always an important
consideration, and, in relation to some matters, perhaps, having regard to our
limited resources, it may be appropriate to settle for something less
desirable: but when any authority is dealing with a product concerned with the
lives of the people, including the unborn citizens **  
 **

**38**



of Sri Lanka - as in the case of Rubella Vaccine which, as we have seen,
according to the Chairman of the Tender Board, is to be injected into pregnant
women to immunize their babies - would the Government compromise, may it
gamble? Can it afford to do with less than the best available in terms of
efficacy? Specifically, in this case, the Government acted with care: It
appointed a Technical Evaluation Committee of four persons including Dr. T. A.
Kulathilaka, Epidemiologist, Dr. (Mrs) N. Vithana, Virologist, and Dr. J. M.
J. Munasinghe, Pharmacologist. Financial considerations were also to be
considered, and so, the fourth member of the Committee nominated by the
Secretary to the Treasury was Mr. M. Piyasena, Director Public Finance,
General Treasury.



Instead of stating that the objective of the Guidelines was to procure the
cheapest services, the President and Minister of Finance, in the Preface to
the Guidelines said that the prescribed procedure was "To obtain financially
the most advantageous and qualitatively the best services and supplies for the
country." What the "Tender procedure should ensure" is, inter alia, stated in
the Guidelines to be "optimum Economic Advantage to the nation": I understand
this to mean that the procedure relating to Government procurements should
ensure the most favourable conditions for the advancement of the People by
obtaining "financially the most advantageous and qualitatively the best
supplies for the country." What is "financially the most advantageous and
qualitatively the best supplies for the country" is pre-eminently a matter of
policy that the Government, which is accountable to the People, must decide.
In order to assist it in making an informed decision in the best interests of
the People, the Government has, through the Financial Regulations, Circulars,
and the Guidelines of 1996, laid down procedures to be followed in the matter
of Government procurements. Unless they are followed, the Government is liable
to be misled in making its decisions. Therefore, there must be scrupulous
adherence to procedures laid down by the Government. Part I Chapter I
paragraph 2 (b) states that the tender process should ensure "adherence to
prescribed standards, rules and regulations."

**39**



The respondents' claim that cost was the decisive factor is inexplicable in
the light of the fact that in respect of oral polio vaccine (Tender No.
DHS/R/VAC/96), which was awarded under the same world-wide tender (P 1) that
dealt with the Rubella virus vaccine (Tender No. DHS/26/9/96), the contract
was awarded to SmithKline Beecham Biologicals SA **despite the fact that its
quotation was not the lowest**. It was awarded the contract, as the Marketing
Director of the 2nd Petitioner explains in paragraph 8 of his affidavit;
because "inter alia it was the sole registered supplier thereof".



Answering the averments of the Marketing Director, the Chairman of the Tender
Board, in paragraph 9 of his affidavit dated the 5th of March 1997, said: "I
state that the question of registration of the product was only one of the
matters taken into consideration in awarding the 1st Petitioner the tender for
the supply of vaccines in question, and I reiterate the averments of paragraph
13 and 16 of my affidavit dated 17th December 1996. I further state that in
view of the financial difficulties now faced by the Government of Sri Lanka as
well as the 1st Respondent Corporation, and the existing budgetary
constraints, the price factor has become extremely important if not crucial in
tender deliberations."



As we have seen, Mr. M. Piyasena, the Director of Public Finance of the
General Treasury, was a member of the Technical Evaluation Committee that
recommended the award of the contract for the supply of Rubella vaccine to
SmithKline Beecham Biologicals SA. Was he unaware of or unmindful of the
financial difficulties referred to by the Chairman of the Cabinet Appointed
Tender Board? Was Mr. V. S. Amaradasa, Director of Public Finance and a Member
of the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board, the fourth respondent, unmindful or
unaware of the financial difficulties referred to by the Chairman when the
board decided on the 1st of November 1996 to award the contract to SmithKline
Beecham Biologicals S.A.? Were the financial difficulties of the Government
less when the Board decided in September and November 1996 to award the
contract to SmithKline Beecham Biologicals SA than in December when it decided
to award the contract to Biocine S.p.A.? What

**40**



was the explanation for the award of the previous contract on Tender No.
DHS/26/9/96 for the supply of Rubella vaccine to SmithKline Beecham
Biologicals S.A. in 1996 when it was the third lowest tenderer? It was not
cost, but the fact it was the only registered responsive bidder.



The Chairman of the Tender Board is unable to explain why the cost factor was
decisive in the case of the Rubella vaccine but not in the case of the polio
vaccine. The truth of the matter is that, being the only registered supplier,
the only responsive bid for the polio vaccine was made by SmithKline Beecham
Biologicals SA. However, although that supplier was also the only responsive
bidder for the Rubella vaccine, the Tender Board, which had earlier correctly
decided on the recommendations of the Technical Evaluation Committee to award
the Tender to SmithKline Beecham Biologicals SA, later decided to award the
contract to Biocine S.p.A. by misdirecting itself to believe that it was
obliged or entitled to do so.



Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the Tender Board had "a
clear discretion".



Specifically, in the matter before us, he said, because:



"the tender conditions marked P1 provide that



The Tender Board reserves to itself the right without question to reject any
or all offers, the right to accept any part of a quotation, or order only such
quantities and items as may be required."



This provision reiterates and expressly reserves the basis 'power' (this term
is used in the 'Hohfeldian sense) of the offeree recognized by Financial
Regulation 697 (2) and Part I Chapter X paragraph 131 of the Guidelines ... to
deal in whatever way he pleases with an offer received by him under the law of
contract."

**41**



If learned counsel for the respondents was right in asserting that a private
individual may act as he pleases with an offer, he is, in my view, mistaken in
treating the State (including its agencies) as being on the same footing as a
private individual. The State is not in the same position. In contractual
matters, State action, such as the procurement of drugs for its health
services, having as it does a public element, must be transparent, timely, and
financially the most advantageous and qualitatively the best for the country:
See the Preface to the **Guidelines** of 1996. In order to achieve those ends,
it has been provided in paragraph 2 of Chapter 1, Part, I of the
**Guidelines** certain things that the "tender process should ensure". They
include "equal opportunity for interested parties and persons to participate
and compete on identical terms and conditions": Paragraph 2 (e) of the
**Guidelines** ; and "transparency and uniformity of the evaluation
procedure": paragraph 2(h) of the Guidelines.



Recognizing its unique role and special responsibilities, the Government has
prescribed procedures to be followed in the matter of procurement in its
Financial Regulations and the **Guidelines** of 1996. It is stated in
paragraph 2 (b) of the **Guidelines** that the tender process should ensure
"adherence to prescribed standards, rules and regulations". Paragraph 2(g) of
the **Guidelines** requires that the tender process should ensure "compliance
with local laws": this would, of course, include compliance with Article 12 of
the Constitution that guarantees equality before the law and equal protection
of the laws. In determining whether there was conformity with the procedures
laid down for the purpose, infer alia, of ensuring equal protection of the law
by providing, what was twice described in the Preface to the **Guidelines**
as, "a level playing field", what is relevant are the norms laid down by the
State. The Financial Regulations provide in regulation 697 that  
  
(1)  ..............  


(2) The Board shall have power

**42**



(a)       To accept any tender, or portion of a tender;  


(b)       To accept portions of more than one tender;  


(c)       To reject all or any tenders;  


(d) ...  


(e)        ...  


Tender Board shall, in every case, record the reasons for its decision.

  
 (3) ......  


(4) Tender Board should compare tenders received with departmental cost
estimates. Tenders which are considerably higher than the departmental
estimate should normally be rejected. If the tenders are all excessively high,
action should be taken under (2) (e) above [i.e. direct that fresh tenders be
called for].



(5)       By and large a Tender Board should accept the lowest evaluated
tender ... which satisfies all conditions, specifications etc. of tender; and
except with the ... approval of the Cabinet in the case of tenders in excess
of Rs. 5,000,000 in value no tender other than the lowest ... should be
accepted; and that too only if such lowest ... tender satisfies all
requirements.



(6) All tenders which are not in conformity with the stipulated specifications
and conditions of tender should be rejected; but a Tender Board is not
precluded from accepting a tender, if  


(a) the specifications are better than those prescribed;

  
(b) the specifications or conditions offered conform substantially to those in
the tender documents and vary only in minor details.



(7) If negotiations in regard to the variation of any conditions or
specifications, or in regard to any other matter pertinent to the final
adjudication have to be conducted after the tenders have been opened, the
Tender Board should conduct such negotiation  


**43**



only after notice to all the tenderers. A full record of all such negotiations
should be maintained. The final adjudication following on such negotiation
should not be made by the Tender Board without the approval of the appropriate
authority under FR. 799.



(8) ..."  
  
It is evident from the foregoing provisions of the Financial Regulations that,
although a Tender Board does have very wide powers, it does not have
uncontrolled, and unrestricted powers. It cannot, for instance, accept any
tender that fails to conform substantially to the specifications and
conditions of the Tender documents.



The **Guidelines** provide as follows in Part I Chapter X:



"131\. The Tender Board shall have power to:



(a) accept any tender, or portion of a tender;



(b) accept portions of more than one tender;



(c) reject all or any tenders;



(d) direct that fresh tenders be called for



(e) ...



The authority for the determination of the Award is subject to the approval of
the appropriate higher authority.



132\. ..



133\. If a Tender Board recommends a deviation of non-critical nature from the
tender conditions, the reasons for such deviation should be recorded clearly
on the minutes of the proceedings ...



134\. Only the bids which are responsive and qualified substantially
conforming in accordance with the tender documents are considered for detailed
evaluation.

**44**



Therefore, after the detailed evaluation, the Tender Board should recommend
the lowest, evaluated, responsive, qualified bid for acceptance. Where the
Tender Board does not agree with the recommendations of the Technical
Evaluation Committee, the reasons for such disagreement should be clearly
stated."



Therefore, the **Guidelines** too make it clear that a Tender Board may only
consider bids which are responsive and qualified by substantially conforming
with the tender documents. The State acid its agencies are bound by and must
rigorously and scrupulously observe the procedures laid down by them on pain
of invalidation of an act in violation of them. Justice Frankfurter in
Vitarelli v. Seatom(9)(a)) said: "An executive agency must be rigorously held
to the standards by which it professes its action to be judged ; Accordingly,
V... [an action] is based on a defined procedure, even though generous beyond
the requirements that bind the agency, the procedure must be scrupulously
observed ... This judicially evolved rule of administrative law is now firmly
established and, if I may add, rightly so. He that takes the procedural sword
shall perish with the sword."



The State Pharmaceutical Corporation called for tenders for the supply of
certain products required by the Department of Health Services on a world wide
basis. It set out the terms and conditions of the tender and the
specifications relating to each of the products in a document issued to those
who wished to tender. (P1). Clause 9(a) states as follows:



**" All drugs imported to Sri Lanka must be registered with the Cosmetics
Devices and Drugs Authority of Sri Lanka and Tenderers should attach
photocopies of the current Registration Certificates with their Tender Offers.
Registration numbers should be indicated on Schedule 11. Tenderers must,
advise their local agents to attend to product Registration."**



The underlining appears in the document itself. Some other matters, not
germane to the matter in dispute, are also similarly  


**45**



underlined. The registration of certain products is required under the
Cosmetic Drug Act No. 27 of 1980. Registration is to ensure that the product
meets required standards. Clause 29 of the tender document (P1) states as
follows:



"Awards are made to suppliers taking into consideration among other factors:
price quoted. past performance, quality of samples, delivery offered, product
registration etc., and the decision of the Tender Board is final. No.
correspondence will be entertained from unsuccessful tenderers."



Clause 34 of the document (P1) states: "Prospective tenderers should acquaint
themselves fully with these terms and conditions..."



In paragraph 8 of his affidavit dated the 5th of March 1997, the Chairman of
the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board states, inter alia, that "the past practice
in regard to the award of tenders for the supply of medical supplies shows
that the registration of the drug at the time of closing of tenders was not
treated as a mandatory requirement as what was required by the Cosmetic
Devices and Drugs Act was that the drug should be registered at the time of
importation."



Whatever his interpretation of the law may be, the fact is that registration
was stated, and stated with emphasis, **in the tender document** (P1) to be a
condition of the award.



Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the requirement of
registration was not mandatory and that the failure to register was not a
fatal flaw. He cited Kiriwanthe and Another v. Navaratne Another(9(6)) at p.
15, in support of his submission. I do not think that the dicta he referred to
assist him in this case.



Admittedly, where the specifications or conditions offered conform
substantially to those in the tender documents and vary in only minor details,
a Tender Board is not precluded from accepting a Tender: See F. R. 697 (6)
(b). Considering the broad policy of the condition and the critical and
substantial nature of the mischief to which it is directed. namely, assurance
of the quality of the product, I am of the

**46**

  
view that the requirement of registration was mandatory and could not be
treated as a mere formality or technicality, or minor detail that could have
been waived or ignored either by the Technical Evaluation Committee or by the
Tender Board. The necessary consequence of a failure to comply with the
condition relating to registration is the rejection of the tender. (See F.R.
697 (6) and **Guidelines** , Part 1, clause 134).



If a Tender Board recommends a deviation of a non-critical nature from the
tender conditions, the reasons for such deviation should be recorded clearly
on the minutes of the proceedings. ( **Guidelines** , Part 1, clause 133.)
There is no record of the Tender Board having regarded registration as being a
matter of a non-critical nature. The Tender Board does not recommend a
deviation at all: On the other hand, it proceeds on the basis that
registration is essential.



In paragraph 14 (i) of his affidavit, the Chairman of the Board states that
the decision was made "... in accordance with the relevant tender conditions
and regulations taking into consideration all relevant matters including the
price quoted, the past performance, quality of samples, delivery offered and
product registration." He was repeating the criteria set out in clause 29 (1)
of the tender document which we have set out above. Whatever the alleged "past
practice" may have been, there is no doubt that as far as **this tender** was
concerned, registration was necessary, and therefore, the Tender Board, quite
properly took that into account.



The Chairman of the Tender Board states in paragraph 14 (i) of his affidavit
dated the 5th of March 1997 that the Tender Board took past performance and
quality of samples into account in arriving at its decision to award the
contract for the supply of Rubella vaccine to Biocine S.P.A. The Technical
Evaluation Committee does not in its report that samples were received from
all the tenderers, but it states nothing with regard to their quality. Whereas
SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A. had supplied that vaccine in the previous
year, and had their product registered at the date of the opening of the
tenders, viz. 3rd July 1996, Biocine S.P.A.had neither supplied

**47**



Rubella vaccine earlier, nor was its product registered at the relevant time.
The Technical Evaluation Committee in its report said that the product of
SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A., were registered, but stated that none of
the other tenderers had registered their products. The Technical Evaluation
Committee in its report stated that SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A., had
been a previous supplier and in the column "Past Complaints" stated "No
complaints". With regard to the other tenderers, including Biocine S.p.A., the
Committee states that they were not previous suppliers and in the column "Past
Complaints" states "Not applicable". The Managing Director of the State
Pharmaceutical Corporation in his note dated the 9th of December 1996, which
eventually persuaded the Tender Board to change its mind, states that "none of
the items of Biocine, Italy have been purchased in the past", and "therefore"
suggests that 25% (i.e. 1,125 million doses) be awarded to Biocine, Italy, as
"a sample order". The Cabinet Appointed Tender Board decided to award a
contract for supply restricted to 2 million doses to Biocine, Italy, for the
stated reason that it was a "new supplier". In the circumstances, how could
the Chairman of the Tender Board truthfully say that the Tender Board took
account either of the past performance and the quality of the product of
Biocine S.P.A.to whom the contract was awarded? The Tender Board was unable to
recommend the acceptance of the Biocine S.P.A. bid. with confidence, and
therefore recommends acceptance "on the basis that each consignment would be
suitably tested before despatch to hospitals." The balance quantity of
supplies are to be awarded to Biocine S.P.A." If the supplies of this vaccine
are timely and in order and complied with quality assurance tests.



In his letter dated the 1st of November 1996, the Managing Director refers to
the fact that "two companies have submitted their samples for testing and.
reports are awaited." The Cabinet Tender Board at its meeting on 10th December
1997 found itself, as it says in its minutes, "confronted with the matters
mentioned in the note by MD/SPC to the CATB dated 9.12.1996." Although in his
letter dated November 1 1996, the Managing Director of the

**48**



State Pharmaceutical Corporation acknowledged the fact that the three other
companies which had quoted were "unfortunately ... not registered", in his
note dated the 9th of December 1996 he stated that " **Now** the following two
companies have registered: (1) Biocine S.p.A., Italy (2) Serum Institute
India," The emphasis is mine.



Although the Managing Director had recommended that 25% (i.e. 1, 125 million
doses) be awarded as a sample order" to Biocine from whom no products had been
previously ordered, and that 75% (i.e. 3,375 million does) be awarded to Serum
Institute India which he said was "a past supplier for many vaccines", (but
not adverting to the relevant fact that its **Rubella vaccine** had not been
registered when the tender closed) the Tender Board decided to make an award
of 2.0 million doses to Biocine, Italy, "the price being the lowest responsive
offer." It was the lowest offer, but not the lowest **responsive** offer, for
the product of Biocine S.P.A.was not registered, and therefore, Biocine S.p.A.
was not qualified to tender.



Quotations were called for 4.500.00 doses to be delivered as follows: 2.5
million doses in January 1997 and 2 million doses in May 1997\. The tender
submitted by SmithKline Beecham Biologicals SA on 19th June 1996 was for
4,500,000 doses. The Tender Board at its meeting on the 2nd of September 1996,
recommended the award of the contract to Smithkline Beecham Biologicals
without any variation of the total doses or the manner of delivery. However,
at its meeting on the 1st of November 1996, whilst confirming its earlier
decision that SmithKline Beecham SA's offer should be recommended, it stated
as follows: "The T.B. also noted that there are 2 million more doses to be
ordered in 1997. **By that time it is hoped that more parties would be
registered.** The emphasis is mine.



Three things should be pointed out:



(1) It is not the parties but the drug that must be registered, for it is the
quality of the drug that matters.

**49**

(2) The decision of the Tender Board on the 2nd of September 1996 was to
recommend the acceptance of the Tender of SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A.
as the only tenderer whose product was registered, for the delivery of the
entire required quantity stipulated in the tender document, namely 4.5 million
doses, which, according to the tender document were required to be delivered
as follows: 2.5 million doses to be delivered in January 1997 and 2 million
doses in May 1997. However, the Tender Board at its meeting on the 1st of
November 1996, took account of the letter of the Managing Director of the
State Pharmaceutical Corporation dated the 1st November 1996 in which it was
stated that, although other tenderers who had quoted less were "unfortunately
not registered", moves were afoot to have them registered. The Managing
Director suggested that the Tender Board should therefore postpone its
decision for two or three weeks. However, the Tender Board, fearing that "a
delay in placing orders could lead to stocks running out" recommended the
acceptance of the offer of SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A., as the "lowest
acceptable tender of a registered party", **but limited the supply to the 2.5
million doses required by the tender document to be delivered in January
1997**.: See the minutes of the meeting of the Tender Board dated 1st November
1996 and paragraph 3.3 of the Cabinet Memorandum. The tender document had
called for the supply of a quantity of 4.5 million doses. In terms of
Financial Regulation 697 (2) (a) a Tender Board has the power to accept any
tender or portion of a tender. However, it is required to record the reason
for its decision. There is no record in the minutes of the Tender Board for
limiting the award to 2.5 million doses. However, the minutes do state as
follows: "The T.B. also noted that 2 million more doses [are] to be ordered in
1997. By that time it is hoped that more parties (sic.) would be registered.'
White the view of the Managing Director of the State Pharmaceutical
Corporation that the decision of the Tender Board should be postponed so as to
enable some of the unsuccessful tenderers to have their products registered
was not accepted because stocks of supplies might run out, the Tender Board,
shared the Managing Director's hope that the unsuccessful tenderers would in
time have their products registered so that the contract for the supply of the
balance

**50**

quantity of 2 million doses could be awarded to one or more of them. This is
made clear in paragraph 3.3 (d) of the Cabinet Memorandum which states as
follows:  
  
Considering State Pharmaceuticals Corporation Managing Director's letters
Tender Board considered, the other parties who had applied for registration
could register for the balance quantity of 2 million doses to be delivered in
may 1977."  
  
(3) The award of a tender must be based on compliance with the terms and
conditions of the tender documents **on the date and at the time specified for
the closing of the tender**. An offer that does not comply with the terms,
conditions and specifications at that date and time must be rejected in the
same way as a late offer. If there are to be negotiations in regard to the
variations in conditions or specifications or to any other matter pertinent to
the final adjudication other than clarifications, they may be made only after
due notice being given to all the tenderers: See paragraph 132, Part I, of the
**Guidelines** , 1996. It is in that way that a "level playing-field" on which
there is equal opportunity for persons to participate and compete on identical
terms and conditions, and transparency and uniformity of the evaluation
procedure of the tender process can be achieved: Cf. paragraph 2 (d), (e) and
(h) of the **Guidelines** , 1996. It cannot be permitted that if, by some
stratagem or neglect, the decision of a Tender Board to the Cabinet is not
made in due time as required by paragraph 136 of the **Guidelines,** a
position of advantage could be gained for a party.  
  
At the relevant date, namely, the 3rd of July 1996, none of the tenderers for
the supply of Rubella vaccine had their products registered except SmithKline
Beecham Biologicals S.A.. SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A. was, therefore,
the only person who had made a responsive bid conforming with the tender
document at the relevant date.  
  
The Tender Board, when it was "confronted" by the information furnished by the
Managing Director of the State Pharmaceutical Corporation by his note dated
the 9th of December 1996 that "now two companies have registered: (1) Biocine,
SpA., Italy

**51**



(2) Serum Institute, India", misdirected itself in believing that therefore
the products of those two tenderers could also be considered. The level
playing-field principle enunciated in the Preface to the **Guidelines**
required that the claims of tenderers should be decided as at the date
stipulated, and not as and when they satisfied the conditions of the tender
document. There is no other way in which Government procurements can be made
in a fair manner, ensuring "equal opportunity for interested parties and
persons to participate and compete on identical terms": Paragraph 2 (e) of the
**Guidelines** ; and ensuring "transparency and uniformity of the evaluation
procedure": Paragraph 2 (h) of the **Guidelines**.



It is also in that way that equal treatment required by Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution can be meted out. Paragraph 2(g) of the **Guidelines** , 1996
states that the Tender process should, inter alia, ensure compliance with the
law. There must be compliance with requirements that ensure an equal
opportunity for persons to participate and compete on identical terms and
conditions (see paragraph 2(e) Part I Chapter 1 of the **Guidelines** , 1996)
if there is to be compliance with Article 12 (1) of the Supreme Law - the
Constitution.



In Roman Dayaran Shetty v. The International Airport Authority of India and
Others(10), a notice inviting tenders was issued by the International Airport
Authority of India, a statutory public corporation. The notice stated in
paragraph (1) that "sealed tenders in the prescribed form are hereby invited
from Registered 2nd Class Hoteliers having at least 5 years' experience for
putting up and running a 2nd Class Restaurant and two snack bars at the
Airport for a period of three years." The latest point of time up to which the
tenders could be submitted was stipulated in the notice to be 12 p.m. on the
25th of January 1977 and it was stated that the tenders would be opened on
that date at 12.30 hours. There were six tenderers. Five of them were found to
have submitted incomplete tenders in that they had failed to comply with
clause 9 of the terms and conditions of the tender document by not furnishing
with their tenders some or all of the following documents: income tax

**52**



certificates, affidavits concerning their immovable properties and solvency
certificates. The only tender which fully complied with the terms and
conditions set out in the **tender form** was that of the 4th respondent.
Moreover, the offer of the 4th respondent was the highest. While submitting
his tender, the 4th respondent had pointed out in a letter that they had ten
years experience in catering to reputed commercial houses, training centres,
banks and factories and that they were also doing considerable outdoor
catering for various institutions. However the letter showed that the 4th
respondent had experience only of running canteens and not restaurants and
that they did not satisfy the description of "registered II nd Class Hotelier
having at least 5 years experience" as set out in paragraph (1) of the
**Notice** inviting tenders. In response to letters from the Airport Authority
inquiring whether the 4th respondent was registered and requiring the 4th
respondent to furnish supporting documentary evidence, the 4th respondent,
after describing its services, stated that its proprietor had "experience
equivalent to that of a 2nd Class or even 1st Class hotelier." This satisfied
the Airport Authority which proceeded to accept the tender of the 4th
respondent. The appellant, who was not a tenderer, challenged the award.
Bhagwati, J, (as he then was) said at pp. 1633-1634:



"Now it is true that the terms and conditions of the tender form did not
prescribe that the tenderer must be a registered 2nd class hotelier having at
least 5 years experience nor was any such stipulation to be found in the form
of agreement annexed to the tender but the notice inviting tenders published
in the newspapers clearly stipulated that tenders may be submitted only by
registered 2nd class hoteliers having at least 5 years experience and this
tender notice was also included amongst the documents handed over to
prospective tenderers when they applied for the tender forms ... Now, here the
expression used in paragraph (1) of the Notice was "registered 2nd class
hotelier" and there can be no doubt that by using the expression the 1st
respondent intended to delineate a certain category of persons who alone
should be eligible to submit a tender. The 1st respondent was not acting
aimlessly or insensibly in insisting

**53**



upon this requirement not was it indulging in a meaningless or futile
exercise. It had a definite purpose in view when it laid down this condition
of eligibility in paragraph (1) of the Notice ... The test of eligibility laid
down was an objective test and not a subjective one ... Now, unfortunately for
the 4th respondents, they had over 10 years experience of running canteens but
**at the date when they submitted their tender** , "(the emphasis is mine)"
they were not running a II grade hotel or restaurant. Even if the experience
of the 4th respondents in the catering line were taken into account from 1962
onwards, it would not cover a total period of more than 4 years 2 months so
far as catering experience in 2nd Grade hotels and restaurants is concerned.
The 4th respondents thus did not satisfy the condition of eligibility laid
down in paragraph (1) of the notice and in fact this was impliedly conceded by
the 4th respondents in their letter dated 26th February 1977 where they stated
that they had "experience equivalent to that of a 2nd Class or even list Class
hotelier". The 4th respondents were, accordingly, not eligible for submitting
a tender and the action of the 1st respondent in accepting their tender was in
contravention of paragraph (1) of the notice."



The Tender of Biocine S.p.A. was incomplete in that it failed to annex a
photocopy of the current registration certificate to their tender as required
by clause 19 of the tender document. Nor could it furnish a registration
number in the Schedule as required by clause 19. It was unable to do so for
the reason that its product was not registered as required by clause 19.
Compliance with the conditions of the tender had to take place by the 3rd of
July 1996 - the prescribed final date for the submission of tenders. If late
compliance was to be permitted only in some cases, that would place burdens on
some while conferring an unfair advantage on others and that would be in
violation of the guarantee of equality of treatment and the equal protection
of the law enshrined in Article 1.2 of the Constitution. Over a century ago
Justice Field observed that "no greater burdens should be laid upon one than
are laid upon others in the same calling and condition": Barbier v.
Connolly(11) .

**54**



The Tender Board stated that it was recommending the offer of Biocine S.p.A.
because it was the lowest quotation. Had the opportunity been given to others,
there might, perhaps, have been even lower quotations. What was the new date
for qualification? In order to expeditiously and fairly deal with the matter,
it was imperative to fix a definite date at which eligibility should be
determined. Such a date was fixed. That date was the 3rd of July 1996. Only
complete tenders from tenderers who had complied with the terms, conditions
and specifications set out in the tender document could have been evaluated
and accepted. The others should have been rejected. That is how the State, in
its defined and publicly announced procedures, had stated its procurements, or
those made on its behalf, should be obtained: Paragraph 134 **Guidelines;
Financial Regulation** 697\. Those procedures, inter alia, profess the
standards by which the State in the procurement of Rubella vaccine in the
tender under consideration were to be judged. The State (and its agencies)
were obliged to scrupulously observe them and must be rigorously held to them,
not only because, as we have seen it is a requirement of administrative law,
but also because, conformity with Article 12 of the Constitution requires it.
In general, that Article requires (1) the law, including the standards by
which the State (or its agencies) have professed to govern itself as set out
in regulations, rules, procedures, guidelines, directions, schemes and so on,
should be uniform; and (2) that such law should be administered uniformally,
according to the stated criteria and measures, with evenness in respect of all
persons similarly situated; unless, either in the formulation of the law or in
its application there are rational explanations for differentiation.



In Roman Dayaran Shetty, (supra) the appellant who objected to the award of
the contract to the 4th respondent was himself not a tenderer. Bhagwati, J
observed at pages 1650-1651 as follows:



"If there was no acceptable tender from a person who satisfied the condition
of eligibility, the 1st respondent could have rejected the tenders and invited
fresh tenders on the basis of a  


**55**



less stringent standard or norm, but it could not depart from the standard or
norm prescribed by it and arbitrarily accept the tender of the 4th
respondents. When the 1st respondent entertained the tender of the 4th
respondents even though they did not have 5 years experience of running a 2nd
class restaurant or hotel, it denied equality of opportunity to others
similarly situate in the matter of tendering for the contract. There might
have been many other persons, in fact the appellant himself claimed to be one
such person, who did not have 5 years experience of running a 2nd class
restaurant, but who were otherwise competent to run such a restaurant and they
might also have competed with the 4th respondents for obtaining the contract,
but they were precluded from doing so by the condition of eligibility
requiring five years experience. The action of the 1st respondent in accepting
the tender of the 4th respondents, even though they did not satisfy the
prescribed condition of eligibility, was clearly discriminatory since it
excluded other persons similarly situate from tendering for the contract and
it was also arbitrary and without reason. The acceptance of the tender of the
4th respondents was, in the circumstances invalid as being violative of the
equality clause of the Constitution as also of the rule of administrative law
inhibiting arbitrary action."



In the matter before us, on the relevant date, namely, the 3rd of July 1996 -
the date when the Tenders were closed, the only tenderer who was qualified was
SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A. since only its Rubella Viral Vaccine was
registered as required by the Tender document (P1). The only responsive bid
was therefore that of SmithKline Beecham Biologicals S.A. although it was not
the lowest bid. The only tenderer who was able to comply with the requirement
in Clause 19 that a copy of the certificate of registration should be annexed
to the Tender was SmithKline Biologicals Beecham S.A.Therefore the only
complete tender was that of SmithKline Beecham Biologicals and therefore it
was the only tender that qualified for evaluation. The Tender Board
misdirected itself by believing that it was obliged to recommend the
acceptance

**56**



of the tender of Biocine S.p.A. because its price was "the lowest responsive
offer". It may have been the lowest offer, but at the relevant date, namely
the 3rd of July 1996 it was not a "responsive" offer at all, for Biocine
S.p.A. had failed to comply with the condition of registration .



For the reasons stated in my judgment, I declare that the decisions and
recommendations of the Technical Evaluation Committee on the 12th August 1996
and the decisions and recommendations of the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board on
the 2nd of September 1996 are in conformity with the procedures prescribed by
the Government for the procurement of 4.5 million doses of Rubella Viral
Vaccine Live BP 93 referred to as Item SR 9165 in the Schedule to the Tender
Document (P1) under and in terms of Tender Ref. DHS/27/6/97, and that those
decisions are in conformity with Article 12(1) of the Constitution.



For the reasons stated in my judgment, I declare that the decisions and
recommendations of the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board on the 1st of November
1996 and on the 10th of December 1996 relating to the procurement of 4.5
million doses of Rubella Viral Vaccine Live BP 93 referred to as Item SR 9165
in the Schedule to the Tender Document (P1) under and in terms of Tender Ref.
DHS/27/6/97 violate Article 12(1) of the Constitution and are therefore of no
force or avail in law.



I make order that the State shall pay a sum of Rs. 25,000 to each of the
petitioners as costs.



**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.



**DR. GUNAWARDENE, J.** \- I agree.



_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/35.html_  

