##  Sirajudeen and Two Others v. Abbas - SLR - 365, Vol 2 of 1994 [1994] LKSC
35; (1994) 2 Sri LR 365 (10 October 1994)

**  365 **

            **SIRAJUDEEN AND TWO OTHERS**

**v.  
ABBAS**

SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 45/93.

C.A. NO. 282/86 (F).

D.C. KANDY NO. L10357.

MARCH 01, 02 , APRIL 29, 30 & 31\.

MAY 30, 31 AND SEPTEMBER 13, 14 AND 30, 1994.



Vindicatory suit ‑ Prescriptive title ‑ Prescription Ordinance, section 3 ‑
Burden of proof ‑ Mode of proof.



Where the evidence of possession lacked consistency, the fact of occupation
alone or the payment of Municipal rates by itself is insufficient to establish
prescriptive possession.



Where a party invokes the provisions of section 3 of the Prescription
Ordinance in order to defeat the ownership of an adverse claimant to immovable
property, the burden of proof rests squarely and fairly on him to establish a
starting point for his or her acquisition of prescriptive rights.



A facile story of walking into abandoned premises after the Japanese air raid
constitutes material far too slender to found a claim based on prescriptive
title.



As regards the mode of proof of prescriptive possession, mere general
statements of witnesses that the plaintiff possessed the land in dispute for a
number of years exceeding the prescriptive period are not evidence of the
uninterrupted and adverse possession necessary to support a title by
prescription. It is necessary that the witnesses should speak to specific
facts and the question of possession has to be decided thereupon by Court.



One of the essential elements of the plea of prescriptive title as provided
for in section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance is proof of possession by a
title adverse to or independent of that of the claimant or plaintiff. The
occupation of the premises must be of such character as is incompatible with
the title of the owner.

**  366**

Cases referred to:



1.         _Ahamed Thajudeen v. M. N. M. Pathumuttu Natchiya and Others_ 57 CLW 57, 59.



2. _          Hassan v. Romanishamy _66 CLW 112.



3. _          Chelliah v. Wijenathan _54 NLR 337, 342 _._



4. _          Peynis v. Pedro _3 SCC 125.



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_N. R. M. Daluwatte P.C._ with _A. R. M. Kaleel_ for defendant‑appellants.

_K. Kanag ‑Isvaran P.C. _with _Harsha Cabraal, Chandaka Jayasundera, M. A.
Sumanthiran_ and S. _Mahenthiran_ for plaintiff‑respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._

October 10, 1994. __

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.**



The plaintiff **** instituted these proceedings seeking a declaration of title
to the premises in suit, namely No. 10, Yatinuwara Patu Mawatha, Kandy, and
for the ejectment of the defendants. The date of action was 15.5.73. After
trial, the District Judge dismissed the plaintiff's action. The plaintiff
appealed to the Court of Appeal which set aside the judgment of the District
Court and entered judgment for the plaintiff. The defendants have now
preferred an appeal to this court.



The plaintiff's case was that he purchased this property along with premises
No. 8 of Yatinuwara Patu Mawatha, Kandy on the deed P1 dated 30.11.71 from
Saharuban Bee Bi (hereinafter called Bee Bi). In P1 there is the recital of
the vendor's title namely, (i) that it was jointly owned and possessed by her
father and his brothers; (ii) that at a division of the houses and premises
jointly owned by her father and her brothers, premises No. 10, and No. 8 (as
well as some other premises) were allotted to Bee Bi and her sister Salha
Natchiya as their father's share; (iv) that Bee Bi entered into exclusive
possession of premises Nos. 8 and 10; (v) that in consideration of a sum of
Rs. 3000/‑ she was transferring to the plaintiff premises Nos.10 and 8. Apart
from the oral evidence of the plaintiff, cogent documentary



**  367**

evidence of sound probative value was placed before the District Court in
support of the title asserted by Bee Bi in the recitals in P1. The relevant
issues were issues (1) and (2) which read as follows:



(1)        Did the person called Bee Bi have title to the land and premises
described in the schedule to the plaint?



(2)        Did the abovenamed Bee Bi by Deed No. 4363 dated 30.11.71 (i.e. P1)
sell and transfer the aforesaid land and premises to the plaintiff?



Both issues were answered in the affirmative by the District Judge who went on
to hold that the title conveyed on P1 was "amply proved" and was in fact not
challenged.



The Court of Appeal affirmed the finding of the trial Judge on issues (1) and
(2). Thus the concurrent findings on the issue of title are clearly in favour
of the plaintiff. This court in granting the defendants special leave to
appeal specifically stated, "special leave to appeal is granted **only** on
the question whether the Court of Appeal was justified in reversing the
finding of the District Court on the question of prescription in favour of the
1st defendant."



The defendants filed a joint answer on 6.9.74. The 1st defendant pleaded that
he has been in possession of the said premises No. 10 for a period of over 15
years and acquired a prescriptive title thereto; he further averred that he
was the owner of the adjoining premises Nos. 8, 12 and 14 as well. The 2nd
defendant took up the position that he was a tenant under the 1st  defendant.
Since the legal title to the premises in suit (No. 10) was in the plaintiff (a
matter which could not have been challenged and was not challenged at the
hearing before us) the burden of establishing the plea of prescriptive title
was clearly on the 1 st defendant.



As observed by K. D. de Silva, J., in _Ahamed Thajudeen v. M. N. M. Pathumuttu
Natchiya and Others_ (1). __ "The burden of proof of prescription depends on
the question of legal ownership." The Court of Appeal held that the 1st
defendant had failed to discharge the burden, and reversed the finding of the
District Judge in his (1st defendant's) favour. The question for consideration
on this appeal is



**  368**

whether the Court of Appeal was correct in holding against the 1st defendant
on his plea of prescriptive title.



What then is the evidence led on behalf of the 1st defendant to establish his
claim of prescriptive title to the premises in suit? According to the 1st
defendant, he came into occupation of premises No. 10 in June 1947. He found
these premises (and the adjoining premises Nos. 8, 12 and 14) abandoned after
the Japanese air raid. On the advice of his elder brother, he effected repairs
and went into occupation of premises No. 10. He then commenced to run a
business on these premises. In proof of occupation of premises No. 10, he
relied strongly on 1 D1, 1 D3 and 1 D11. However, a scrutiny of these
documents do not support the 1st defendant's evidence of occupation from 1947,
as submitted by Mr. Kanag‑Isvaran, counsel for the plaintiff respondent. 1 D1
relates to a notification dated 1.9.69 under section 7 of the Business Names
Ordinance in respect of cages 6 and 8\. The changes notified relate to the
name of the individual and the nationality of the individual. 1 D3 is a
similar document dated 4.5.56. It indicates changes in cages 3 and 8, that is,
the place of business and the nationality of the individual. 1 D3 is clear
proof of the fact that the 1st defendant's business (Laila Industrial Works)
shifted to the premises in suit in **February 1956** and not in 1947 as
claimed by the 1st defendant in his evidence. 1 D11 is the Certificate of
Registration under the Trade Marks Ordinance and it shows that as on 28.12.54
the 1st defendant was carrying on his business at 29, Brownrigg Street, Kandy,
and not at the premises in suit. It is significant that the 1st defendant
failed to produce the certificate relating to the **original registration of
his business.** This was the vital document which could have supported his
oral evidence, if in truth he was in occupation of the premises from 1947\.
The documents he has marked in evidence (1 D1, 1 D3 and 1 D11) are
contradictory of his oral evidence of possession from 1947\. It is to be noted
that his oral evidence is that his residence and his place of business were
the same at all times.



Besides, there is no consistency in his claim in regard to the period of his
occupation of the premises in suit. In his original answer dated 6.9.74 he
pleaded prescriptive possession for a period of over 15 years. In his amended
answer of 13.10.80 he averred that he was

**  369**

in possession as owner for 33 years. In his further amended answer of
10.11.81, he claimed that he possessed the premises as owner for over 36
years. Thus it would appear that his case in respect of the period of
possession varied from answer to answer. This naturally affects the
credibility of his story of occupation from 1947.



Furthermore, the issues raised on behalf of the 1st defendant in the course of
trial show a disturbing lack of consistency in the case as presented before
the court. These issues read as follows:



(1)        Are the premises in suit subject to the provisions of the Rent Act?



(13)      If so, can the plaintiff maintain this action as constituted
presently?



.           (4)        Has the plaintiff considered the 1st defendant as his

tenant?



(15)      If so, can the plaintiff maintain this action?



If the 1st defendant's case is that by virtue of prescriptive possession he is
the owner of the premises (as specifically pleaded in the answer, the amended
answer and the further amended answer) what is the need to invite the court to
hold that he was "protected" tenant under the plaintiff, and thus secure "the
dismissal of the plaintiff's action for ejectment." The irreconcilable
position made manifest by these issues casts grave doubt on the 1st
defendant's story of occupation of the premises in his own right as owner from
1947. In my view, the effect of these issues tells heavily on his case as
presented at the trial.



The one item of evidence on which the 1st defendant relied to sustain his plea
of prescriptive possession was the payment of rates to the Municipal Council.
The witness Yapa, attached to the Municipal Council, Kandy, was called to
identify the receipts for the payment of rates marked 1 D5 to 1 D10 and 1 D18
to 1 D30. The earliest receipt 1 D18 was dated 31.1.62. It is to be noted that
Yapa in cross examination admitted that "rates can be paid by the tenant or
the

  **370**  

owner of the house or by any other person." On this point the observations of
Basnayake, C.J. in _Hassan v. Romanishamy,_ (2) are intensely relevant; "The
payment of rates is by itself not proof of possession for the purpose of
section 3, for rates can be tendered by a tenant or one occupying any premises
with leave and licence of the owner or by any other person." The payment of
rates therefore does not advance the case of the 1st defendant any further.



Mr. Daluwatta for the defendants appellants strongly urged that apart from the
oral evidence of the 1st defendant and the document 1D11, the plaintiff
himself admitted that the defendant was in occupation of the premises from at
least 1953. But what needs to be stressed is that the fact of occupation alone
would not suffice to satisfy the provisions of section 3 of the Prescription
Ordinance. One of the essential elements of the plea of prescriptive title as
provided for in section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance is proof of possession
"by a title adverse to or independent of that of the claimant or plaintiff."
In other words, there must be proof that the 1st defendant's occupation of the
premises was of such character as is incompatible with the title of Bee Bi and
her predecessors in title. In the present case, there is a conspicuous absence
of evidence of "adverse" possession. The trial Judge has altogether failed to
appreciate this significant weakness in the 1st defendant's case. It seems to
me that he has not properly addressed his mind to the important fact that the
burden is definitely on the 1st defendant to establish his plea of
prescriptive title.



There is another relevant aspect of the plea of prescriptive title which was
overlooked by the trial Judge. That principle is best stated in the words of
Gratiaen, J. in _Chelliah v. Wijenathan_ (3), "where a party invokes the
provisions of section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance in order to defeat the
ownership of an adverse claimant to immovable property, the burden of proof
rests squarely and fairly on him to establish a starting point for his or her
acquisition of prescriptive rights." Mr. Daluwatta relied on 1 D1 as the
starting point of prescription. As already stated, 1 D1 is of little or no
avail to the 1st defendant's case. In my view, the 1st defendant has failed to
establish a starting point for his acquisition of prescriptive title. This too
is another important lacuna in the 1st defendant's case.

**  371**

On a consideration of the totality of the evidence led in support of the 1st
defendant's case, all that we are left with is the facile story of walking
into abandoned premises after the Japanese air raid. The material is far too
slender to found a claim based on prescriptive title. Mr. Kanag‑Isvaran for
the plaintiff respondent relevantly cited the following passage from Walter
Pereira's Laws of Ceylon, 2nd Edition, page 396. "As regards the mode of proof
of prescriptive possession, mere general statements of witnesses that the
plaintiff possessed the land in dispute for a number of years exceeding the
prescriptive period are not evidence of the uninterrupted and adverse
possession necessary to support a title by prescription. It is necessary that
the witnesses should speak to specific facts, and the question of possession
has to be decided thereupon by court. _Peynis v. Pedro_ (3). __ In the present
case there is a significant absence of clear and specific evidence on such
acts of possession as would entitle the 1st defendant to a decree in his
favour in terms of section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance.



In this view of the matter, it is unnecessary for me to consider the several
other submissions made by Mr. Kanag‑Isvaran, as affecting the credibility of
the testimony of the 1st defendant; nor is it necessary to consider the
conduct of the 1st defendant in relation to his claim of ownership to premises
Nos. 8, 12 and 14 which are in close proximity to the premises in suit.



In the result, the judgment of the Court of Appeal is affirmed, and the appeal
is dismissed with costs.



**KULATUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.



Appeal dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/35.html_  

