##  Perera v. People'S Bank - SLR - 84, Vol 2 of 1995 [1993] LKSC 35; (1995) 2
Sri LR 84 (21 September 1993)

**84**

**PERERA**  
  **v.  
PEOPLE'S BANK **

SUPREME COURT  
G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.,  
KULATUNGA, J.  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. NO. 131/94  
C.A. NO. 612/93  
D.C. COLOMBO NO. 80/DR  
MARCH 31 AND APRIL 27, 1995

_Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act 2 of 1990 - Decree Nisi - Leave to
appear conditionally - Order stayed by Court of Appeal till 6.9.1993 - On
6.9.93 defendant absent - Decree Nisi made absolute by District Court - Is it
Per Incuriam as there was an order extending the stay order from 6.9.93 by
Court of Appeal? - Defendant in default - Attracts S. 6(3) of Act. No. 2 of
1990._

The plaintiff-respondent-Bank instituted proceedings under the provisions of
the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990, to recover Rs. 3.5.
million. The District Court entered decree nisi. The defendant moved for
unconditional leave to appear and show cause. The District Court made Order on
17.8.93 to deposit a sum of Rs. 3.5 million on or before 1.9.93, as a
precondition to the grant of Leave to appear and show cause. The Court of
Appeal acting in Revision stayed the said Order till 6.9.1993. When the case
was called on 6.9.1993, in the District Court, the defendant was absent and
the decree was made absolute. Unknown to the District Court, the defendant had
on 6.9.93 obtained from the Court of Appeal an Order to extend the Stay Order
till 21.9.93. The defendant once again moved the Court of Appeal to set aside
the Order of the District Court dated 6.9.93. This was refused.

**Held:**

i) There was default on the part of the defendant on 6.9.1993 to appear in the
District Court.

ii) The defendant had failed to deposit the required sum of money; he was
absent and unrepresentative; and the District Court was not informed that an
application was being made in the Court of Appeal to extend the 'Stay Order'.

85

Revision is a discretionary remedy and the conduct of the defendant is a
matter which is relevant. The defendant's conduct disentitles him the relief
by way of revision.

**APPEAL** from the Judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_E. D. Wickremanayake for the Defendant-Appellant._  
_S. A. Parathalingam with Ian Fernando for the Plaintiff-Respondent._

_Cur adv. vult._

May 12, 1995\.  
**G. P S. DE SILVA, CJ.**

The plaintiff-respondent Bank (the plaintiff) instituted these proceedings in
the District Court under the provisions of the Debt. Recovery (Special
Provisions) Act; No. 2 of 1990 for the recovery of a sum of Rs. 3.5 million
with interest from the defendant-appellant (the defendant). The District Court
entered decree nisi which was served on the defendant. The defendant filed
petition and affidavit along with certain documents and moved for
unconditional leave to appear. and show cause against the decree nisi. Written
submissions were filed by the parties. The District Court by its order dated
-17th August 1993 rejected the defendant's prayer for unconditional leave and
ordered the defendant to deposit a sum of Rs. 3.5 million to the credit of the
case on or before 1st September, -1993 as a precondition to the. grant of
leave to appear and show cause. The defendant by his application in revision
dated 25.8.93 sought, inter alia, to set aside the aforesaid order of the
District Court dated 17th August 1993.

The sum of Rs. 3.5 million had to be deposited to the credit of the case on or
before 1st September, 1993.: On 1st September 1993 the defendant moved the
Court of Appeal and obtained a- stay of proceedings till 6th. September,
1993:: When the case was- called in the District Court on 1st September 1993
(pursuant to the order of the District Court dated 17.8.93) the court was then
informed of the order made- by the Court of Appeal staying proceedings until
6th September 1993:. The District Court accordingly made order on 1st,
September 1993. staying further proceedings till 6th September 1993:: The
District Court further directed that the case be called on 6th September 1993
(vide J. E. of 1.9.93).

86

When the' case was called in the District Court on 6.9.93 Counsel for` the
plaintiff-Bank moved the court to have the decree nisi made absolute. The
District Court allowed the application and made the decree nisi absolute. In
the meantime, unknown to the District Court, the defendant has obtained an
order from the Court of Appeal on the same day (6th September 1993) extending
the stay order till 21.9.93.

In a subsequent application in revision dated 16th September 1993, the
defendant sought to set aside the order of the District Court dated 6.9.93
whereby the decree nisi was made absolute. At the hearing before us, Mr.
Parathalingam for the plaintiff-Bank raised a preliminary objection, namely,
that the order of the District Court making the decree nisi absolute concluded
the proceedings and that no useful purpose would now be served by setting
aside the order of the District Court dated 17th August 1993. At the hearing
before us, Mr. Parathalingam for the Plaintiff-Bank and Mr. E. D.
Wickremanayake for the defendant made their submissions both orally and in
writing only on the preliminary objection.

The principal submission of Mr. Wickremanayake was that the order of the
District Court made on 6th September 1993 was an order made per incuriam. Mr.
Wickremanayake strenuously contended that there was a stay order issued by the
Court of Appeal operative till 6th September and that the stay order was
extended on the 6th September itself till 21st September 1993, Counsel
strongly urged that the order of the District Court dated 6th September was
clearly an order made per incuriam in view of the stay order granted by the
Court of Appeal. On the other hand, Mr. Parathalingam argued that the
defendant was **in default** and the District Court rightly made the decree
nisi absolute in terms of the provisions of section 6(3) of the Debt Recovery
(Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990.

On 6th September 1993 the case was called before the District Court. It was
called for the purpose of ascertaining whether the defendant had complied with
the order dated 17.8.93 which required him to deposit Rs. 3.5. million to the
credit of the case. The defendant was fully aware of the purpose for which the
case was being called on 6.9.93 as is evidenced by the motion dated 1.9.93
filed on behalf

87

of the defendant in the Court of Appeal. It is not disputed that the defendant
had failed to deposit the required sum of money. What is more, the defendant
was absent and unrepresented. The Court was not informed that an application
was being made in the Court of Appeal to extend the "Stay Order". There was no
intimation to the court that the money would be deposited in the course of the
day. There was complete silence on the part of the defendant. These were the
particular circumstances in which the Court allowed the application made on
behalf of the plaintiff-Bank and proceeded to make the decree nisi absolute.
On a consideration of the totality of these facts I am inclined to the view
that there was a "default" on the part of the defendant on 6.9.93 to appear in
court. .

In any event, revision is a discretionary remedy and the conduct of the
defendant is a matter which is intensely relevant. I hold that the conduct of
the defendant disentitles him to relief by way of revision in the facts and
circumstances of this case. The appeal is accordingly dismissed but without
costs.

**KULATUNGA, J. -** I agree.

**RAMANATHAN, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/35.html_  

