##  Gamini Atukorale v. Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga and Others - SLR -
60, Vol 1 of 2001 [2000] LKSC 36; (2001) 1 Sri LR 60 (12 December 2000)

**60**

**GAMINI ATUKORALE  
v.  
CHANDRIKA BANDARANAIKE KUMARATUNGA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
S.N. SILVA, CJ.  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.,  
P.R.P. PERERA, J.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION PETITION  
SC NO. 1/2000  
20TH, 22ND AND 23RD JUNE AND 03RD AND 04TH JULY, 2000  
  
_Election Petition - Presidential Election - Preliminary objections -
Dismissal in limine - Section 91 (a) and (b) of the Presidential Elections
Act. No. 15 of 1981 - General intimidation; other circumstances in consequence
of which the majority of electors were or may have been prevented from
electing the candidate whom they preferred - Non-compliance with the
provisions of the Elections Act - Section 96 of the Act - The requirement that
the petition shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which
the petitioner relies.  
  
_At the Presidential Election held on 21. 12. 1999 out of 11,779,200
registered voters the total number of votes polled was 8,635,290 reflecting a
poll of 73.31%. Out of that number 199,536 or 2.31% votes were rejected
leaving a balance of 8,435,754 valid votes. Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunge
P.A. (the 1st respondent) polled 4,312,157 viz, 51.12% votes. Ranil
Wickremasinghe UNP polled 3,602,748 viz, 42.71 % votes. The other candidates
numbering 11 polled 520,849 votes their percentage ranging from 4.08%
downwards. Accordingly, the 1st respondent was declared elected to the office
of President.  
  
The petitioner, the General Secretary of the United National Party (UNP)
presented an election petition in terms of section 93(b) of the Presidential
Elections Act, No., 15 of 1981 (the Act) seeking the following reliefs under
section 94 of the Act:  
  
(a) a declaration that the election is void;  
  
(b) a declaration that the return of the person elected was undue.  
  
The petition was based on three grounds provided by section 91 of the Act,
namely,

**61**

(i) General intimidation by reason of which the majority of electors were or
may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred
namely, Ranil Wickremasinghe (paragraphs 8(a) and 9 of the petition)  
  
(ii) Non-compliance with the provisions of the Presidential Elections Act, No.
15 of 1981 by reason of which the election was not conducted in accordance
with the principles laid down in such provisions which noncompliance affected
the result of the election (paragraphs 8(b) and 10 of the petition)  
  
(iii) Other circumstances, by reason of which the majority of electors were or
may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred,
namely, the said Ranil Wickremasinghe (Paragraphs 8(c) and 11 of the
petition).  
  
The respondents raised certain preliminary objections to the petition and
sought a dismissal of the petition in limine. They averred that the petition
does not contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the
petitioner relies to establish the grounds of avoidance pleaded therein; and
also there were certain defects in pleading grounds (ii) and (iii) above.  
  
In paragraph 9 of the petition, the petitioner pleaded incidents of
intimidation in 67 polling divisions out of the 156 polling divisions in which
the poll was taken and set out the relevant ground of avoidance in paragraph
8(a). As regard the alleged non-compliance with the provisions of the Act
relied upon in paragraph 8(b) which is said to have affected the result of the
election, paragraph 10 of the petition refers to some events relating to the
counting of votes in two polling divisions, viz Kesbewa and Maharagama. It
contains sub paragraphs and details in respect of which the court observed
"Let alone the respondents, even the petitioner would not be in a position to
comprehend the contents of these averments." In paragraph 11, the petitioner
purported to state the impact of what is described as "other circumstances"
relied upon for avoiding the election by referring to the "cumulative effect"
of general intimidation and of non-compliance with the provisions of the Act
pleaded in paragraphs 9 and 10 as well.  
  
**Held :  
  
**1\. It would be incumbent on the petitioner in terms of section 96(c) to
state concisely the material facts on which he relies to obtain the reliefs he
has sought in terms of section 91(a). The pleadings would be considered as
being adequate only if _ex facie_ the petitioner could

**62**

be granted the relief sought, on the assumption that the petition is
unopposed.  
  
2. _Per_ S.N. Silva, CJ.  
  
"To secure a majority of votes Mr. Ranil Wickremasinghe had to poll 1, 230,258
additional votes (being the total of the votes polled by the PA and the other
parties plus one more vote) Therefore the averment in the petition that by
reason of general intimidation the majority of voters were prevented from
electing Mr. Ranil Wickremasinghe, tantamounts to a statement that the general
intimidation "affected" a minimum of 1,230,258 persons who would have
otherwise voted for him"  
  
3\. The degree of probable success on the part of the petitioner is not one
that can be evaluated at this stage. At this stage the court could consider
only whether the petition passes muster by satisfying the requirements of
section 96 read with section 91 of the Act.  
  
4\. The petition contains a clear statement of avoidance relied on with
reference to its description in section 91(a), the ingredients of the grounds
of avoidance and the material facts in relation to each ingredient. If the
petition is unopposed the petitioner could be granted the relief sought on the
basis of these averments. The petitioner would be permitted only to lead
evidence in relation to the material facts that have been disclosed, viz, the
incidents referred to in paragraph 9 in relation to the respective polling
divisions.  
  
5\. There is a total failure to set out any of the matters necessary to be
pleaded in relation to the grounds of avoidance relied upon in paragraph 8(b)
of the petition, viz, alleged non-compliance with the provisions of the Act.
The contents of paragraphs 8(b) and 10 are, therefore, rejected; and the
petitioner is not permitted to present any evidence on that account. To avoid
an election non-compliance should be of such a kind or character that it could
be said that the election had not been conducted in accordance with the
principles underlying those provisions.  
  
6\. The petitioner has attempted to plead the manner in which the alleged
"other circumstances" (referred to in paragraph 8(c)) affected the result of
the election as a cumulative effect of the general intimidation and of non-
compliance with the provisions of the Act pleaded in paragraphs 9 and 10. In
view of the finding on the alleged "non-compliance with the provisions of the
Act" as a ground of relief,

**63**

the averment in paragraph 8(c) is materially defective. The averments of
paragraphs 8(c) and 11 are, therefore, rejected  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1. _Bandaranaike v. Premadasa_ (1989) 1 Sri L.R. 240  
  
2\. _Bandaranaike v. Premadasa_ (1992) 2 Sri L. R. 1  
  
3. _Wijewardena v. Senanayake_ (1972) 74 NLR 97  
  
4\. _H. V. Kamath v. Election Tribunal_ (1958) AIR Madhya Pradesh 168  
  
5\. _Bruce v. Odhams Press Ltd_ (1936) 1 KB 697 at 712-13(c)  
  
6\. _Udhav Singh v. Madhav Rao Scindia_ (1977) 1 Supreme Court Cases  
  
7\. _Hardwari Lal v. Kanwal Singh_ (1972) AIR SC 515  
  
8\. _Azar Hussain v. Rajiv Gandhi_ (1986) (Supp) Supreme Court Cases 315  
  
9. _North Louth Case_ (1911) 60 M & H 124  
  
10. _Tarnolis Appuhamy v. Wilmot Perera_ 49 NLR 361 at 368  
  
11\. _Illangaratne v. G. E. de Silva_ 49 NLR 169  
  
12\. _Abeywardena v. Ariya Bulegoda_ (1985) 1 Sri L. R. 86  
  
13\. _Rutnam v. Dingiri Banda_ 45 NLR 145  
  
14\. _Pelpola v. R.S.S. Gunawardena_ 49 NLR 207  
  
15\. _Jayasinghe v. Jayakody_ (1985) 2 Sri L.R 77 at 89  
  
16\. _Munasinghe v. Corea_ 55 NLR 265  
  
**PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION - Preliminary objections  
  
**_K.N. Choksy, P.C_. with _L.C. Seneviratne, P.C., Ben Eliyathamby, P.C.,
Paul Perera, P.C., Daya Pelpola, S.J. Mohideen, D.H.N. Jayamaha, S.
Wimalachanthiran, A.P. Niles, Raja Dep, Lakshman Perera and Ronald Perera_ for
petitioner.  
  
_H.L. de Silva, P.C. with P.A.D. Samarasekera P.C., Ranjit Abeysuriya, P.C.,
Faisz Musthapha, P.C., D.S. Wijesinghe, P.C., Nihal Jayamanne, P.C., S.S.
Sahabandu, P.C., R.K.W. Goonesekera, D.P. Mendis, Peter Jayasekera, Jayampathy
Wickremaratne, Javid Yoosuf, Aravintha Athurupana Gaston Jayakody and Sarath
Weerakoon_ for 1st respondent.  
  
_K.C. Kamalasabayson, P.C., Attorney-General With Salim Marsoof, P.C.,
Additional Solicitor General, Shavindra Fernando, Senior State Counsel.,
Uditha Egalahewa_ , State Counsel and _Nerin Pulle_ , State Counsel for 2nd
and 3rd respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult.  
_  
**64**

December 12, 2000.  
**  
SARATH N. SILVA, CJ.  
  
**This Petition has been presented by the General Secretary of the United
National Party and it relates to the Presidential Election, held on 21. 12.
1999\. The Petitioner has joined three persons as Respondents. The 1st
Respondent is the candidate who was declared elected to the office of
President. The 2nd and 3rd Respondents are, respectively, the Commissioner and
the Acting Commissioner of Elections. The Petitioner is seeking a declaration
that the election of the 1st respondent is void and that the return made in
her favour is undue.  
  
Thirteen persons were nominated as candidates at the said election. The votes
received by the candidates are as follows

1\. Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga | PA |  4,312,157 | 51.12%  
---|---|---|---  
2\. Ranil Wickremasinghe | UNP |  3,602,748 | 42.71%  
3\. M.D. Nandana Gunathilake | JVP |  3,44,173 | 4.08%  
4\. Harischandra Wijetunga | SMBP | 35,854 | 0.43%  
5\. W.V.M. Ranjith | Ind 2 | 27,052 | 0.32%  
6\. Rajiva Wijesinghe | LP | 25,085 | 0.30%  
7\. Vasudeva Nanayakkara | LDA | 23,668 | 0.28%  
8\. Tennyson Edirisuriya | Ind 1 | 21,119 | 0.25%  
9\. Abdul Rasool |  SLMK. | 17,359 | 0.21%  
10\. Kamal Karunadasa | PLSF | 11,333 | 0.13%  
11\. Hudson Samarasinghe | Ind 3 | 7,184 | 0.09%  
12\. Ariyawansa Dissanayake | DUNF | 4,039 | 0.05%  
13 Alwis Weerakkody Premawardhana | PFF | 3,983 | 0.05%  
  
There were 11,779,200 registered voters and the total number of votes polled
was 8,635,290 reflecting a poll of

**65**

73.31%. Out of that number 199,536 or 2.31% votes were rejected with 8,435,
754 valid votes being distributed amongst the candidates as stated above.  
  
Section 93(a) read with Section 94 of the Presidential Elections Act, No. 15
of 1981, permits any person who was a candidate at the election, who claims to
have had a right to be returned or elected at such election, to present a
petition and to seek a declaration from this Court that such person was "duly
elected and ought to have been returned," on any one or more of the grounds
set out in section 91 of the Act. None of the unsuccessful candidates at the
said election have availed of this right and presented a petition to this
Court seeking a declaration that such candidate should have been returned or
elected in place of the 1st Respondent.  
  
The Petitioner, not having been a candidate, has presented this petition in
terms of Section 93(b) as the person who signed the nomination paper of the
candidate of the United National Party (U.N.P.). Although he has averred in
paragraphs 8(a) and 11(b) (i) & (ii) of the Petition that "the majority of
electors were or may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they
preferred, namely, Ranil Wickremasinghe," he has not claimed the relief
permitted by section 94(c) to secure a declaration from this Court that the
said candidate was duly elected and ought to have been returned. The
Petitioner has restricted the relief that he seeks only to a declaration that
the election of the 1st Respondent is void, which if upheld by this Court
would result in another election being held as provided in Section 101(1) (a)
of the Act. However, it has to be noted that if the Petitioner sought the
further declaration that a candidate other than the 1St Respondent should be
declared elected, Section 95(1)(a) requires him to join all the candidates as
Respondents to the Petition, which he has opted not to do.  
  
The Petitioner relies on three grounds for the avoidance of the election of
the 1st Respondent. These three grounds are:

**66**

General intimidation by reason of which the majority of electors were or may
have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred, namely,
Ranil Wickremasinghe;  
  
(ii) Non-compliance with the provisions of the Presidential Elections Act, No.
15 of. 1981, by reason of which the election was not conducted in accordance
with the principles laid down in such provisions, which non-compliance
affected the result of the election;  
  
(iii) Other circumstances, by reason of which the majority of electors were or
may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred,
namely, the said Ranil Wickremasinghe;  
  
The grounds (i) and (iii) above come within the ambit of Section 91 (a) of the
Act and ground (ii) comes within Section 91(b) of the Act.  
  
Respondents have raised preliminary objections to the Petition and have sought
a dismissal of the Petition, broadly on similar grounds.  
  
The principal objection is that the Petition does not contain a concise
statement of material facts on which the Petitioner relies to establish the
grounds of avoidance pleaded by him. There are also certain defects in
pleading grounds (ii) and (iii) stated above on which a rejection of these
grounds is sought.  
  
The objections involve an examination of the elements that constitute each
ground of avoidance pleaded by the Petitioner and of the material facts
pleaded by him in relation to each such ground, in order to ascertain whether
the Petition complies with the mandatory requirements of law.  
  
We have had the benefit of two judgments of this Court which relate to the
Presidential Election held in December

**67**

1988, to wit, the cases of _Bandaranaike v. Premadasa_ , reported in (1989) 1
SLR page 240(1) and (1992) 2 SLR page 1(2). It is ironic that although a
period of 12 years have lapsed from the commencement of that Election Petition
to the present one, the same learned President's Counsel feature in this case
as well, subject to a reversal of roles.  
  
The objections relate to the provisions of two sections of the Presidential
Elections Act, No. 15 of 1981. They are Section 91 which states the grounds of
avoidance of an election of a candidate and Section 96 which lays down the
contents of an election petition.  
  
Section 91 reads thus: -  
  
"The election of a candidate to the office of President shall be declared to
be void on an election petition on any of the following grounds which may be
proved to the satisfaction of the Supreme Court, namely -  
  
(a) that by reason of general bribery, general treating, or general
intimidation, or other misconduct, or other circumstances, whether similar to
those before enumerated or not, the majority of electors were or may have been
prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred;  
  
(b) non-compliance with the provisions of this Act relating to elections, if
it appears that the election was not conducted in accordance with the
principles laid down in such provisions and that such non-compliance affected
the result of the election;  
  
(c) that a corrupt practice or illegal practice was committed in connection
with the election by the candidate or with his knowledge or consent or by any
agent of the candidate;

**68**

(d) that the candidate personally engaged a person, as a canvasser or agent or
to speak on his behalf, knowing that such person had within seven years
previous to such engagement been found guilty of a corrupt practice under the
Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council, 1946 or the law relating to
the election of Members of Parliament, or the law relating to Referenda, or
under this Act;  
  
(e) that the candidate personally engaged a person, as a canvasser or agent or
to speak on his behalf, knowing that such person had been a person on whom
civic disability had been imposed by a resolution passed by Parliament in
terms of Article 81 of the Constitution and the period of such civic
disability specified in such resolution had not expired;  
  
(f) that the candidate was at the time of his election a person disqualified
for election to the office of President."  
  
It is to be noted that grounds (a) and (b) of Section 91 are of a general
nature with a concomitant impact on the result of the election. If these
grounds are established, the election would be declared void. Whereas, grounds
(c), (d), (e) and (f), are what may be described as "candidate specific
grounds;" where a particular action of a candidate or his agent or any
disqualification of the candidate is drawn in issue. Unlike in the case of
grounds (a) and (b) the entire election itself would not be drawn in issue in
relation to the latter set of grounds. If any of these grounds are established
in relation to the particular candidate who is elected, the return of the
person so elected would be declared undue.  
  
Section 96, which specifies the contents of an election petition, reads as
follows  
  
"An Election Petition -

**69**

(a) shall state the right of the Petitioner to petition within section 93;  
  
(b) shall state the holding and result of the election;  
  
(c) shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the
Petitioner relies;  
  
(d) shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt or illegal practice that
the Petitioner alleges, including as full a statement as possible of the names
of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt or illegal practice and
the date and place of the commission of such practice, and shall be
accompanied by an affidavit in support of the allegation of such corrupt or
illegal practice and the date and place of the commission of such practice;  
  
(e) shall conclude with a prayer as, for instance, that some specified person
should be declared duly returned or elected, or that the election should be
declared void, or as the case may be, and shall be signed by all the
Petitioners; provided, however, that nothing in the preceding provisions of
this section shall be deemed or construed to require evidence to be stated in
the petition."  
  
Paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (e) would apply in relation to any Petition,
whatever be the ground of avoidance that is relied on. Whereas paragraph (d)
would apply in relation to the specific grounds of corrupt or illegal practice
as stated in Section 91(c).  
  
The grounds of objection stem from Section 96(c), that the petition does not
contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner
relies.

**70**

This requirement has come up in issue in several cases both in this country
and in India where the statutory provision is similar. In dealing with the
said requirement, this Court in the case of Bandaranaike v. Premadasa(1) at
page 263, cited with approval the judgment of H.N.G. Fernando, CJ., in the
case of Wijewardena v. Senanayake(3). In that case the Court considered the
parallel provision contained in Section 80B(c) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) Order in Council, (Cap. 381), as amended. The wording of that
Section is identical to Section 96(c). Commenting on the requirement that the
Petition must set out the material facts on which the petitioner relies, the
Court observed as follows : (at page 100)  
  
"The learned Election Judge has held that this statement in paragraph 3 of the
petition does not satisfy the requirement in S. 80B(c) that the petition must
set out the material facts on which the Petitioner relies. In a case in which
a Petitioner relies on the commission of a corrupt or illegal practice by the
successful candidate or his agent, paragraph (d) of S.80 expressly specifies
the facts which the Petitioner must state with regard to the commission of the
alleged corrupt or illegal practice. But this specification of what are
material facts in that class of case does not in my opinion relieve the
Petitioner of the duty to specify material facts in a case in which he seeks
to avoid an election on a different ground. For instance, a Petitioner cannot
merely state that the successful candidate was disqualified for election, for
such a statement would specify only the ground for the avoidance of the
election, but not any fact on which he relies to establish that ground; in
this example, if the material fact is that the Respondent was at the time of
his election a public officer or a government contractor, or was not a citizen
of Ceylon, or was the subject of some disqualifying conviction, S. 80B(c)
requires that fact at least to be stated. So also, in the case of a charge of
general intimidation, a Petitioner must specify at the least the nature of the
alleged intimidation;

**71**

whether it consisted of actual violence, or of threats of violence, or of some
other kind of intimidation, and when and where such intimidation is alleged to
have occurred. A Petitioner cannot be permitted merely to specify a ground of
general intimidation in an election petition with the hope that he can
substantiate it with evidence subsequently secured.  
  
Prior to the amendment of 1970, the scheme of the Order in Council was such
that particulars of a matter alleged in an election petition could under Rule
5 of the Rules be furnished on application of the Respondent. There were
decisions to the effect that in view of this rule, a bare allegation e.g.
bribery by an agent, need only be made in a petition. I agree with the trial
Judge in this case that the amendments of 1970, which repealed Rule 5 and
required a concise statement of material facts to be made in the Petition,
were intended to secure that a Respondent will know from the petition itself
what facts the Petitioner proposes to prove in order to avoid the election and
will thus have a proper opportunity to prepare for the trial."  
  
Thereafter what is required was summed up at page 101 in the following terms:  
  
"The term 'material facts' has a plain meaning in the context of the
requirements relating to pleadings, namely facts material to establish a
party's case.  
  
In the case of _Bandaranaike v. Premadasa_ (supra), having referred to
portions of H.N.G. Fernando CJ.'s judgment cited above, the Court made a
further observation which emphasizes the object of this requirement as follows
(at page 263) .  
  
"The object of the requirement is clearly to enable the opposite party to
prepare his case for the trial so that he may not be taken by surprise."

**72**

In _Senanayake's case_ (supra) H.N.G. Fernando, CJ., at page 101 observed that
he was not inclined to follow decisions of the Indian courts with regard to
the interpretation of this provision, since the history of our law is
different. However, in the case of _Bandaranaike v. Premadasa_ (supra)
extensive references have been made to the decisions of the Indian Courts and
in submissions before us, both counsel 'cited extracts of these judgments. In
the circumstances I would now, bearing in mind the observations made in
Senanayake's case, refer to the corresponding provisions in the Indian statute
and the dicta in the leading cases, in which these provisions have been
interpreted.  
  
The corresponding provision in India is Section 83 of the Representation of
People Act of 1951. It contains a similar provision as in Section 96 of our
Act.  
  
The distinction between a concise statement of material facts required by
Section 96(c) and the requirement to state the full particulars of any corrupt
or illegal practice alleged by the Petitioner, as provided in Section 96(d),
is found in identical words in Section 83(1)(a) and (b) of the Indian Act. The
Indian Courts have laid emphasis on the distinction, so that each requirement
would have its true meaning.  
  
In an early case, _H. V. Kamath v. Election Tribunal_ (4), the Court
interpreted this provision with reference to a similar requirement in the
Rules made under the Judicature Act in England as to the contents of pleadings
in a civil suit. The Court held as follows:  
  
"An examination of the scheme of the Act will show that the party filing an
election petition is required to state therein two things. This is to be found
in S. 83 which says that an election petition shall contain a concise
statement of the material facts on which the Petitioner relies and shall set
forth full particulars of any corrupt practice, etc. A distinction is made
between a statement of the material

**73**

facts and particulars of any corrupt practice. Under the unamended Act a list
of corrupt practices had to be filed Not much difference has, however, been
made, though the language has been changed, between the requirements as they
existed before the amendment and after the amendment.  
  
Both before and after the amendment an election petition must contain a
concise statement of the material facts and also set forth full particulars of
any corrupt practice which the Petitioner alleges. The distinction which has
been made between "material facts" and "particulars" bring to our mind the
leading case on the subject of pleadings reported in _Bruce v. Odhams Press
Ltd_.,(5), where Scott, L.J., laid down the law in relation to Order XXV and
Order XIX of the Supreme Court Rules in the following words:-  
  
"The cardinal provision in R.4 is that the statement of claim must state the
material facts. The word 'material' means necessary for the purpose of
formulating a complete cause of action; and if any one `material' fact is
omitted, the statement of claim is bad; it is 'demurrable' in the old
phraseology, and in the new is liable to be 'struck out' under Order XV, R.4:
see _Phillipps v. Phillips_ (1878) 4 Q.B 127 (D); or 'a further and better
statement of claim' may be ordered under Order XIX, R.7".  
  
The function of `particulars' under R.6 is quite different. They are not to be
used in order to fill material gaps in a demurrable statement of claim - gaps
which ought to have been filled by appropriate statements of the various
material facts which together constitute the plaintiffs cause of action. The
use of particulars is intended to meet a further and quite separate
requirement of pleading imposed in fairness and justice to the defendants.
Their function is to fill in the picture of the plaintiffs cause of action
with information sufficiently detailed to put the defendant on his guard as to
the case he has to meet and to enable him to prepare for trial."

**74**

"The above quotation makes a distinction between ,material facts' and
`particulars'. Neither of course includes evidence which is required to prove
the allegations. The same scheme is to be found in the Code of Civil
Procedure, where the cause of action has to be stated with completeness and
unless there is a complete cause of action the plaintiff is not entitled to
judgment. Indeed the plaint can be rejected if it does not disclose a complete
cause of action. Where, however, the cause of action involves narration of
particulars, e.g. in a case of fraud, those particulars have to be supplied
with sufficient clarity and precision."  
  
In the case of _Udhav Singh v. Madhav Rao Scindia_ (6), the Supreme Court of
India gave a similar interpretation to these provisions with a 'more
comprehensive pronouncement of the requirement. At page 523, it is stated as
follows :  
  
"All the primary facts which must be proved at the trial by a party to
establish the existence of a cause of action or his defence, are "material
facts". In the context of a charge of corrupt practice, "material facts" would
mean all the basic facts constituting the ingredients of the particular
corrupt practice alleged, which the Petitioner is bound to substantiate before
he can succeed on that charge. Whether in an election petition, a particular
fact is material or not, and as such required to be pleaded is a question
which depends on the nature of the charge levelled, the ground relied upon and
the special circumstances of the case. In short all those facts which are
essential to clothe the petitioner with a complete cause of action, are
"material facts" which must be pleaded, and failure to plead even a single
material fact amounts to disobedience of the mandate of Section 83(1)(a).  
  
"Particulars", on the other hand, are "the details of the case set up by the
party". "Material particulars" within the contemplation of clause (b) of
section 83(l) would therefore

**75**

mean all the details which are necessary to amplify, refine and embellish the
material facts already pleaded in the petition in compliance with the
requirements of clause (a). `Particulars' serve the purpose of finishing
touches to the basic contours of a picture already drawn, to make it full,
more detailed and more informative."  
  
In the cases of _Hardwari Lal v. Kanwal Singh_ (7), and _Azhar Hussain v.
Rajiv Gandhi_ (8), the Supreme Court of India, formulated the test to
ascertain whether there has been due compliance with the requirement to plead
a concise statement of material facts, from a slightly different perspective.  
  
In _Lal's_ case (supra) the Court formulated the test as follows :  
  
"Material facts are facts which if established would give the Petitioner the
relief asked for. If the respondent has not appeared could the court have
given a verdict in favour of the election petitioner. The answer is in the
negative because the allegations in the petition did not disclose any cause of
action." (at page 520)  
  
And, in _Rajiv Gandhi's_ case (supra) at page 327 the same test is stated thus
:  
  
"Material facts are, facts which if established would give the Petitioner the
relief asked for. The test required to be answered is whether the Court could
have given a direct verdict in favour of the election petitioner in case the
returned candidate had not appeared to oppose the election petition, on the
basis of the facts pleaded in the petition."  
  
The foregoing survey of the relevant statutory provisions that have been
applicable here and in India reveals a commonalty in the requirement. It
appears that the requirement to plead material facts on which a party is
relying

**76**

on has been originally drawn from the Rules made under the Judicature Act of
England as to pleading in civil suits.  
  
The requirement in Section 96(c) cannot in my view, be taken in isolation. It
has to be construed initially in the context of the remaining provisions of
the Section, which states the contents of an election petition, commencing
with the right of the Petitioner to present the petition and culminating in
the prayer for relief. The words in Section 96(c) " **. . .** the material
facts on which the Petitioner relies," should therefore in my view be
construed, as the material facts on which the Petitioner relies, to secure the
relief sought in the petition. Relief can be sought only on the basis of any
one or more of the grounds of avoidance stated in Section 91. Hence the
material facts required to be stated are those necessary to establish the
particular ground of avoidance that is relied upon to secure such relief. This
linkage, between the ground of avoidance relied on and the disclosure of
material facts, has been stated in Wijewardena's case (supra) in very simple
language as "facts material to establish a party's case".  
  
The Indian Courts, following English precedents have had recourse to the
phrase "cause of action", used in civil procedure to enunciate this
requirement. In civil procedure, a cause of action is the wrong, for the
redress of which an action may be brought. The legal component of a wrong
would be, the right, duty or obligation recognized by law. The factual
component would be the matters on which, the right, duty or obligation at
issue is founded and on the basis of which the claim for relief is pleaded.
When related to the Elections Law, the legal component of the "wrong" would be
the ingredients of the ground of avoidance, that is relied upon and the
factual component would be the matters necessary to establish each such
ingredient. Viewed from this perspective, the question whether there has been
sufficient compliance with the requirement to plead material facts, could
rightly be answered only by posing the further question as stated in the later
Indian judgments. That is, whether the material facts pleaded in the

**77**

petition by themselves warrant a verdict in favour of the Petitioner, if the
Respondent does not appear in defence. Hence, the Petitioner would clear this
threshold, only if he has pleaded sufficient material facts to establish each
ingredient of the ground of avoidance that is alleged.  
  
The requirement to disclose material facts of the ground of avoidance in the
petition itself, appears to be based on certain rules of prudence that feature
in the judgments that have been cited. In Wijewardena's case (supra), it is
stated as follows :-  
  
"A Petitioner cannot be permitted merely to specify a ground of general
intimidation in an election petition with the hope that he can substantiate it
with evidence subsequently secured." (at page 100)  
  
The observation implies that although evidence need not be pleaded in the
petition, it should be available, when the petition is presented and the
concise statement of material facts should be based on such evidence. The
sanction is against evidence being "subsequently secured. "The safeguard is
imposed since the likelihood of evidence, thus secured being prevaricated or
otherwise tainted is much stronger.  
  
Another rule of prudence which underpins this requirement is stated in
_Wijewardena's_ and _Bandararanaike's_ cases (supra). It is based on the need
to notify the Respondent of the facts the Petitioner proposes to prove in
order to avoid the election, so that he will not be taken by surprise and will
have a proper opportunity to prepare for the trial. Due notice to the adverse
party of the matters relied on against him is a principle of natural justice.
Hence the relevant provision should be construed to give its full effect.  
  
I would now sum up the manner in which the requirements in Section 96(c), read
in the context of the relevant provision of Section 96, which states the
contents of

**78**

an election petition and of section 91 which states the grounds of avoidance
of an election, will apply :  
  
(1) It requires an election petition to contain ;  
  
(a) a clear statement of the ground of avoidance relied on with reference to
its description in Section 91 and the ingredients of such ground of avoidance;  
  
(b) a concise statement of material facts on which the Petitioner relies in
relation to each ingredient of the ground of avoidance.  
  
(2) The question whether there has been sufficient compliance with the said
requirements will be decided by examining the contents of the petition and
ascertaining whether on the basis of the matters pleaded, the Petitioner would
be entitled to the relief sought, if the Respondents do not appear and oppose
the petition.  
  
(3) If the answer is in the negative, the petition itself or any particular
ground in respect of which the contents of the petition are found to be
deficient, will be rejected.  
  
In the light of the foregoing, I would now examine the ground of general
intimidation and the objection raised thereto.  
  
The ground of general intimidation is contained in Section 91(a) along with
certain other grounds, having an impact of a general nature, on the election
as a whole. This provision, when paraphrased by deleting words that relate to
other grounds, would read thus :  
  
"that by reason of **. . .** general intimidation' **. . .** , the majority of
electors were or may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they
preferred."  
  
On a plain reading of the section as paraphrased, this ground of avoidance
comprises of two main ingredients :-

**79**

(1) general intimidation, which would consist of events or incidents of
intimidation of a widespread nature. Halsbury's Laws of England (Vol. 15 page
442) contains a succinct statement of what constitutes intimidation, which is
drawn from several judgments of the English Courts. It reads thus "In the case
of intimidation, persons of ordinary courage and intelligence must have been
prevented from voting as they wished;"  
  
(2) the impact these events or incidents had on the electoral process, viz,
that, by reason of general intimidation, the majority of electors were or may
have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred.  
  
In the case of _Bandaranaike v. Premadasa_ (supra) it was contended by counsel
for the Petitioner that the section postulates "a composite concept" and that
the latter part of the section sets out "the necessary effect of the unlawful
pressures" (vide 1992 SLR page 14). In other words, the contention was that by
proof for the events or incidents of intimidation of a widespread nature, the
Petitioner would be entitled to the relief sought: that, the Petitioner does
not have a separate burden of proving the extent to which these events or
incidents constituting general intimidation 'affected' the result of the
election, and that this is an inference the Court should draw on the basis of
the events or incidents of intimidation.  
  
The Court clearly rejected this contention. Mr. H.L. de Silva who was the
counsel for the petitioner in that case and who persistently advanced the said
contention, now seeks the full benefit of the rejection of his submission.  
  
The consistent trend of authority has been to consider the 'affect' of the
events or incidents of intimidation on the result

**80**

of the election as a distinct ingredient in the ground of general
intimidation. This trend of authority appears to have been influenced by a
decision in England in the North Louth case (supra) which was relied on by
Nagalingam, J., in the case of _Tarnolis Appuhamy v. Wilmot Perera_ (10). This
case related to the first Parliamentary Election held under the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council, 1946. Nagalingam, J., cited the
following passage in the judgment of Gibson, J., in the North Louth case
(supra), which reads thus :  
  
"To upset an election for general intimidation it is necessary to "show that
there was such general intimidation as might have 'affected' the result of the
election" (emphasis added).  
  
The decisions in the cases of _Illangaratne v. G.E. de Silva_ (11), and
_Abeywardena v. Ariya Bulegoda_ (12), are based on the premise, that the
'affect', the acts of intimidation had on the result, is a distinct ingredient
of the ground, which has to be proved by the election petitioner. An
examination of the decision in _Rutnam v. Dingiri Banda_ (13), and _Pelpola v.
R.S.S. Gunawardena_ (14), being cases where positive findings have been made
on the ground of general intimidation, shows that the Court has laid emphasis
on this ingredient and has come to findings on the basis of the number of
voters 'affected' by the acts of intimidation. In the case of _Jayasinghe v.
Jayakody_ (15), Sharvananda, J., (as he then was) dealt with this ingredient,
in the following terms :  
  
"In order to succeed in his petition, the petitioner has got to prove a
further ingredient, viz, that the majority of electors may have been prevented
from electing the candidate who they preferred **. . .** " (emphasis added).  
  
In the preliminary order in the case of _Bandaranaike v. Premadasa_ (1), (at
page 261) the Court summed up its findings on this aspect, as follows :

**81**

"We agree with Mr. Choksy that mere proof of the several instances or acts of
general intimidation would not suffice to avoid an election. In addition, the
petitioner has to prove that these several acts or instances had the result or
consequence that 'the majority of electors were or may have been prevented
from electing the candidate whom they preferred'."  
  
In the final order in that case(2) (at page 22) the Court considered the said
finding to be a part of the ratio decidendi. The Court observed that :  
  
"The order made by this Court on the preliminary objections is clearly binding
on us, although Mr. de Silva argued that some of the crucial findings therein
are erroneous. Having regard to the nature of the preliminary objections that
were raised, the Court was called upon to analyse the ingredients of the
charge of general intimidation postulated in S.91 (a). At the hearing on the
preliminary objections the foundation of the submissions of Mr. de Silva was
that S. 91(a) embodied the essential principles of the English Common Law
relating to a free and fair election. The Court did not accept this
contention. The Court ruled on what it considered to be the true meaning of
the words'. . . the majority of electors were or may have been prevented from
electing the candidate whom they preferred'. This ruling is undoubtedly a part
of the ratio decidendi of the order and it is not open to us to place a gloss
on it or to deviate from it. What is more, we cannot overlook the significant
fact that the trial proceeded on the basis of the interpretation placed by the
Court on S. 91 (a) in the preliminary order."  
  
It was also held that the burden of proof of this ingredient is, "clearly on
the petitioner in terms of Section 91(a)." (at page 54).  
  
Mr. de Silva's submission before this Court is that the petitioner should
plead in his election petition, as forming

**82**

part of the concise statement of material facts, not only the material facts
as to the events or incidents of intimidation that constitute general
intimidation, but also material facts relevant to the other ingredient of the
ground of general intimidation viz, the 'affect' these events or incidents had
on the result of the election. He submits that since the result is stated by
way of the number of votes polled by each candidate, the manner in which the
alleged incidents 'affect' the result, should also be stated in numbers. In
brief, his submission is that the number of voters that the petitioner alleges
were 'affected' should be stated 'at least approximately in relation to each
event, disclosed in the petition. Mr. Choksy concedes that the `affect' the
alleged general intimidation had on the result of the election is a distinct
ingredient of the ground of general intimidation and that there is a burden on
the petitioner to prove both ingredients viz, the events or incidents which
constitute general intimidation and the `affect' these events or incidents had
on the result of the election. But, he submits that the averment in the
petition, (vide paragraph 8(a)) where he has pleaded that by reason of the
occurrence of the incidents set out in paragraph 9, which constitute general
intimidation, the majority of electors were or may have been prevented from
electing the candidate whom they preferred, namely Ranil Wickremasinghe, there
is sufficient compliance with the requirement to plead material facts relevant
to the impact, general intimidation had on the result of the election. The
gravamen of the submission is that, by clearly identifying the candidate who
would have won, but for the general intimidation, the petitioner has indicated
the total number of voters who were thus `affected'. It was submitted that it
is well nigh impossible for the petitioner to state even the approximate
number of voters `affected' in relation to each incident of intimidation
stated in the petition.

**83**

In terms of Section 91(a), the ground of general intimidation would consist of
two ingredients. These two ingredients would constitute the cause of action in
an election petition and the burden of proving both ingredients would be on
the petitioner. It would be incumbent on the petitioner in terms of Section
96(c) to state concisely the material facts on which he relies on to. obtain
the relief he has sought, in relation to both ingredients. The pleading would
be considered as being adequate only if ex facie the petitioner could be
granted the relief sought, on the assumption that the petition is unopposed.  
  
The nature of the material facts the petitioner should plead in relation to
the first ingredient, has been identified in Wijewardena's case (supra at page
100),: "A petitioner must specify at least the nature of the alleged
intimidation; whether it consisted of actual violence, or threats of violence,
or of some other kind of intimidation, and when and where such intimidation is
alleged to have occurred". In this case the petitioner has set out in
paragraph 9 of the petition, the nature of the alleged intimidation, in
several sub paragraphs, by stating the incidents in each district in relation
to the respective polling divisions that come within such district. The
respondents have not raised any objection as to the adequacy of the material
facts thus pleaded in paragraph 9.  
  
The objection of the respondents is in relation to the second ingredient. Mr.
de Silva's submission that this ingredient is distinct and cannot be taken as
a corollary of or an inference to be drawn from the first, is unassailable.
This submission is supported by the ingredients that manifest on a
paraphrasing of the relevant provisions of Section 91 (a) and the decisions in
the cases ranging from Tarnolis Appuhamy's case decided in 1948, to the
Bandaranaike v. Premadasa case decided in 1992, as set out in the preceding
portions of this judgment. There is also merit in Mr. de Silva's submission
that since the result of the election is stated and could be

**84**

comprehended only in relation to the number of votes polled by the respective
candidates, the extent to which the intimidation 'affected' the result, should
also be ascertained with reference to the number of voters thus 'affected'. On
this basis Mr. de Silva further submits that, to satisfy the requirement of
pleading material facts relevant to the second ingredient, the petitioner
should state the number of voters `affected' by each incident of intimidation
specified in paragraph 9 of the petition. This further submission is, in my
view, inconsistent with the bifurcation of the content of Section 96(a) into
two ingredients.  
  
As noted above, the two ingredients, one being of general intimidation and the
other based on the requirement of 'affectation', although linked in certain
respects are distinct in their content. The several incidents of intimidation
in respect of the given polling divisions, are pleaded in paragraph 9, in
compliance with the requirement to state material facts relevant to the
alleged general intimidation. It has to be borne in mind that each incident
thus pleaded does not by itself constitute an ingredient of the ground of
avoidance in Section 96(a). It is the collection of these incidents that
constitute the ingredient of general intimidation. By submitting that the
petitioner should specify the number of voters affected in relation to each
incident that is pleaded, Mr. de Silva is in effect seeking particulars with
regard to the material facts pleaded in relation to the ingredient of general
intimidation. That would in my view, amount to a stretching of the requirement
to plead material facts relevant to the ingredient of general intimidation,
beyond the limits permitted by Section 96(a). From a practical perspective, it
would place an unduly onerous burden on a petitioner to plead with
specificity, the number of voters affected in relation to each of the numerous
incidents of intimidation. Hence, the further submission of Mr. de Silva as
stated above, is one that cannot be accepted.

**85**

On the other hand, the question that arises for consideration, based on the
bifurcation of the ingredients in the ground of avoidance relied on, is
whether the petitioner has pleaded material facts relevant to the second
ingredient. "This ingredient relates to the extent to which the general
intimidation `affected' the result of the election. Although general
intimidation would consist of a collection of single incidents of
intimidation, when considering the sufficiency of a pleading, I am of the view
that what should be pleaded as material facts, is the impact the totality of
general intimidation had on the result of the election.  
  
There is a significant paucity in the averments of the petition, in stating
the material facts as to the impact the alleged general intimidation had on
the result of the election. The strong criticism which Mr. de Silva, makes on
this score is not without merit. Whilst the petition contains pages of what
are alleged as incidents of intimidation in paragraph 9, the averment with
regard to the impact these incidents had on the result of the election is
contained in a single sentence in paragraph 8(a), which reads thus  
  
"That by reason of the occurrence of the incidents and the commission of the
acts set out in paragraph 9 hereof, there was general intimidation by reason
of which the majority of electors were or may have been prevented from
electing the candidate whom they preferred, namely the said Ranil
Wickremasinghe."  
  
The Petitioner's case is one of `preventive intimidation' and not 'coercive
intimidation.' It is not alleged that as a result of the intimidation, persons
who would have voted for Mr. Ranil Wickremasinghe, were coerced to vote for
another candidate. The allegation is that persons who would have voted for Mr.
Ranil Wickremasinghe were prevented from exercising their franchise. The
extent to which such intimidation `affected' the result should therefore be
seen in the number of

**86**

persons who were thus prevented. This number is discernible in the statement
that, if not for the alleged prevention, Mr. Ran l Wickremasinghe would have
got a majority of the votes. The manner in which a majority could be claimed
by an unsuccessful candidate is clearly stated in the case of _Bandaranaike v.
Premadasa_ (2), at p. 54. In that case the majority of the successful
candidate was 279,339 votes and the Court made the following observation.  
  
"It was the submission of counsel that even if the petitioner got one more
vote than the majority obtained by the 1st respondent she could still not have
been declared elected. Mr. Choksy contends that the petitioner in order to win
had to get the total votes received jointly by the UNP and the SLMP plus one
more vote. Thus she would have had to get 515,059 more votes than she polled
in order to have succeeded at the election. It appears to us that this
submission is well-founded."  
  
In the present case the majority of the 1st respondent was 709,409 votes. The
other candidates polled 520,849 votes. To secure a majority of votes, Mr.
Ranil Wickremasinghe had to poll 1,230,258 additional votes. Therefore the
averment in the petition, that by reason of general intimidation the majority
of voters were prevented from electing Mr. Ranil Wickremasinghe, tantamounts
to a statement that the general intimidation 'affected' a minimum of 1,230,258
persons who would have otherwise voted for him. This figure is given in the
1st respondent's written submissions, which shows that the 1st respondent has
comprehended the averment in like manner.  
  
In fairness to learned counsel for the is, respondent it should be noted that
he has given the figure of 1,230,258 votes, not to fill a lacuna in the
pleading of the petitioner, but to demonstrate the degree of improbability of
supporting such a claim with evidence. He- has described the amount of the
votes thus claimed as 'an astronomical figure.'

**87**

The poll of 8,635,290 out of 11, 779,200 registered voters represents a high
turnover of 73.31%. If a further 1,230,258 persons voted (on the assumption
that everyone of them voted for the candidate as claimed in the petition) the
turnout would have to go upto 9,845,548 which in relation to the number of
registered voters would be 83.75%. Counsel uses the word `astronomical' since
such a percentage of polling would be way above what is recorded in any
national poll. It is also seen that the petitioner has pleaded incidents of
intimidation only-in 67 polling divisions out of the total number of 156
polling divisions in which the poll was taken. Hence the additional figure of
1,230,258 votes would have to come from only these 67 polling divisions. For
instance, in the Kalutara District, in which there are 8 polling divisions,
the petitioner refers to incidents of intimidation only in one polling
division.  
  
Learned Counsel for the 1st respondent has pointed out that the largest number
of incidents of intimidation stated in paragraph 9 of the petition are from
the Kandy and Kurunegala districts, but according to the declared result the
candidate of the U.N.P had secured a higher percentage in these districts than
his national average of 42.71%. The analysis of the number of incidents
related to the percentage of poll reflected in table 'A' annexed to the
written submissions show that in the districts of Gaffe, Matara and
Hambantota, where only a few incidents of intimidation are cited, the
percentage of the U.N.P candidate was 38%, 36% and 37%, respectively, being
figures well below his national average. On the other hand, the second largest
number of incidents in the country have been cited in relation to the polling
division of Mahiyangana, where the candidate of the U.N.P secured 54.82% of
the votes being a figure much higher than his national average of 42.71% and
the 1st respondent secured only 39.17% which is much below her national
average of 51.12%. Based on such an analysis counsel has submitted "that there
is no co-relation between the number of incidents of violence disclosed in the
petition in respect of any particular district affecting the UNP and the

**88**

percentage of votes obtained by the UNP in respect of that district."  
  
When the averments in the petition are related to the declared result, the
foregoing may be a valid criticism. On the declared result the candidate of
the UNP secured 3,602,748 votes. To claim a further 1,230,258 votes he has to
increase his vote by 29.32%. This figure may not be astronomical as described
by counsel, but is undeniably on the high side. Be that as it may, these
submissions of learned counsel for the 1st respondent relate to the question
whether on the basis of the evidence to be adduced, the petitioner could
possibly succeed in securing the relief sought by him. In my view the degree
of probable success on the part of the petitioner is not one that can be
evaluated at this stage. It is for the Petitioner to take stock of his case
and decide whether he should proceed with the case or not. At this stage the
Court could consider only whether the petition passes muster by satisfying the
requirements of section 96 read with section 91 as analysed above.  
  
In relation to the second ingredient in the ground of general intimidation
which is now specifically at issue, the extent to which the result of the
election is alleged to have been 'affected' is discernible from the statement
in the petition, that the majority of the voters were thereby prevented from
electing the candidate of their choice, namely, Mr. Ranil Wickremasinghe. If
the averments in paragraph 8(a) and 9 are examined in the light of what is
required to be pleaded in terms of Section 96(c) as construed in the preceding
portions of this judgment in relation to the ground of general intimidation,
it would be seen that, the petition contains :  
  
(i) The first ingredient of the ground viz, that there was general
intimidation.  
  
(ii) A statement of material facts in relation to the said ingredient viz, the
incidents of intimidation set out in the several sub paragraphs of paragraph
9.

**89**

(iii) The second ingredient of the ground, viz, that by reason of the alleged
general intimidation the majority of electors were or may have been prevented
from electing the candidate whom they preferred.  
  
(iv) A statement of material facts in relation to the said ingredient, viz,
the averment which clearly identifies the candidate, who would have won if not
for the general intimidation. The number of voters 'affected' by the general
intimidation is discernable from this averment.  
  
Thus the petition contains a clear statement of the ground of avoidance relied
on with reference to its description in section 91(a), the ingredients of the
ground of avoidance and the material facts in relation to each ingredient. If
the petition is unopposed, the petitioner could be granted the relief sought
on the basis of these averments. The petitioner would be permitted only to
present evidence in relation to the material facts that have been disclosed,
viz, the incidents referred to in paragraph 9 in. relation to the respective
polling .divisions. Hence no question would arise of the respondent being
taken by surprise by evidence being presented of any other facts. It would be
the petitioner's burden to prove that the general intimidation `affected' a
minimum of 1,230,258 registered voters within the polling divisions specified
in paragraph 9 of the petition, all of whom would have otherwise voted for the
candidate of the U.N.P, and thereby secured a majority for that candidate at
the election.  
  
Subject to the foregoing reservations, I overrule the objection raised in
respect of the ground of general intimidation pleaded in paragraphs 8(a) and 9
of the petition.  
  
The next ground relied on by the petitioner is the alleged non-compliance with
the provisions of the Presidential Elections Act.

**90**

This ground as stated in section 91 (b) of the Act, consists of three
ingredients that could be described as follows :  
  
1\. non-compliance with the provisions of the Act in relation to elections;  
  
2\. the degree of such non-compliance in relation to the election, in that it
should appear that the election was not conducted in accordance with the
principles laid down in such provisions; and  
  
3\. the impact of such non-compliance, in that it `affected' the result of the
election.  
  
There is a clear distinction in what would constitute each ingredient.
Although the elements of one ingredient flow to the other, each ingredient
should be perceived in its distinct dimension. To begin with, there should be
an identified provision or provisions of the Presidential Elections Act, that
have not been complied with. The next ingredient involves the picture that
emerges from the totality of the alleged non-compliance. That, it appears from
such incidents of non-compliance, that the election was not conducted in
accordance with the principles laid down in the provisions that have not been
complied with. The last ingredient relates to the extent to which the non-
compliance 'affected' the result of the election.  
  
In the case of _Munasinghe v. Corea_ (16) Nagalingam, ACJ, considered the
application of the parallel provision contained in section 77(b) of the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council, 1946. Commenting on the
distinction between ingredients (1) and (2) above, viz, the non-compliance
with the provisions of the Act and the failure to conduct the election in
accordance with the principles laid down in such provisions, Nagalingam, ACJ,
observed as follows :  
  
"This language, to my mind, draws a sharp distinction between a failure to
comply with the provisions of the

**91**

Order-in-Council in regard to elections and a failure to conduct an election
in accordance with the principles laid down in such provisions.  
  
Every non-compliance with the provisions of the Order in Council does not
afford a ground for declaring an election void, but it must further be
established (apart from any other requirement) that the non-compliance with
the provisions was of such a kind or character that it could be said that the
election had not been conducted in accordance with the principles underlying
those provisions. Are the "principles laid down in the provisions' of the
Order-in-Council different from the provisions themselves? Unless they were,
no adequate reason can be assigned for the draftsman using the language he has
used. The difference, I think, consists not so much in the nature of the non-
compliance as in the degree of that non-compliance; it consists not in a bare
non-compliance but in the magnitude or extent of the non-compliance."  
  
Hence in order to plead a concise statement of material facts in compliance
with the requirements stated in the preceding portions of this judgment, the
petition should contain the following matters  
  
(1) The provision or provisions of the Act that are alleged to have been not
complied with;  
  
(2) the incidents relevant to such non-compliance; the degree of the non-
compliance in relation to the election; and  
  
(3) the manner in which the non-compliance affected the result of the
election.  
  
The Petitioner adverts to this ground in paragraphs 8(b) and 10 of the
petition.  
  
Paragraph 8(b) consists of a mere repetition of section 91 (b) of the Act,
devoid of any fact whatever. This averment,

**92**

taken by itself, is of no consequence. It refers to paragraph 10 as containing
the "reasons". Paragraph 10 refers to some events relating to the counting of
votes in two polling divisions, viz, Kesbewa and Maharagama in the Colombo
District. It consists of sub-paragraphs numbered (i) to (xi). Subparagraphs
(i) to (viii) relate to Kesbewa and (ix) to Maharagama. Thereafter the sub-
title "Kesbewa Electorate' appears again and the contents of sub-paragraphs
(i), (ii) and (iii) are combined and repeated as sub-paragraph (x). The
contents of paragraph (ix), that appear under the sub-title "Maharagama' are
repeated in sub-paragraph (xi) under the sub-title "Kesbewa Electorate." Let
alone the Respondents, even the Petitioner would not be in a position to
comprehend the contents of these averments. There is a total failure to set
out any of the matters necessary to be pleaded in relation to this ground of
avoidance. I would therefore reject the contents of paragraphs 8(b) and 10 of
the petition. The Petitioner is not permitted to present any evidence on this
account.  
  
I would now consider the averments relevant to the third ground relied on by
the Petitioner described under the title of "other circumstances", being a
ground of avoidance contained in section 91(a). This ground is adverted to in
paragraphs 8(c) and 11 of the petition.  
  
Paragraph 8(c), merely states,  
  
"that by reason of other circumstances set out in paragraph 11 the majority of
electors were or may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they
preferred **. . .** "  
  
In paragraph 11 which bears the title 'other circumstances' the Petitioner has
set out certain matters in seven sub-paragraphs without any averment relating
to the manner in which these matters 'affected' the result of the election. In
part (B) of paragraph 11, the Petitioner has purported to state the impact of
what is described as 'other

**93**

circumstances' had on the election, by referring to the 'cumulative effect' of
the facts and circumstances set out in paragraphs 9 and 10 as well. The
Petitioner has thereby attempted to plead the manner in which the alleged
'other circumstances' affected the result of the election as a cumulative
effect of the general intimidation and of noncompliance of the provisions of
the Act, pleaded in paragraphs 9 and 10. Hence this averment is materially
defective. I would therefore reject the averments of paragraphs 8(c) and 11 of
the petition. The Petitioner is not permitted to lead any evidence on this
account.  
  
For the aforementioned reasons, I make order rejecting the contents of
paragraph 8(b), 8(c), 10 and 11 of the petition and the Petitioner is not
permitted to lead any evidence on this account. I also make order overruling
the preliminary objections raised in respect of the ground of general
intimidation pleaded in paragraphs 8(a) and 9 of the petition subject to the
aforementioned reservations and direct that this application be set down for
trial.  
  
There will be no costs.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**PERERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Preliminary objection in respect of ground of general intimidation overruled
subject to reservations. Other objections upheld._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/36.html_  

