##  Shanmuganayagam and Another v. The Commissioner General of Inland Revenues
- SLR - 390, Vol 1 of 1991 [1991] LKSC 36; (1991) 1 Sri LR 390 (12 July 1991)

**390**

**SHANMUGANAYAGAM AND ANOTHER  
V.  
THE COMMISSIONER - GENERAL OF INLAND REVENUE**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO J.  
AMERASINGHE J.  
AND DHEERARATNE J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 1/88  
CA/LA/SC NO. 28/87  
CA NO. 1/79 02  
JULY 1991.  
  
_Income Tax Test applicable to new undertaking for exemption of income tax
-Inland Revenue Act, No. 4 of 1963, section 6 - Commencement of new venture.  
_  
Mrs. Edmund Rodrigo ran a saree printing work-place for rural girls - her
object being to assist the girls to advance themselves. She supplied them with
imported cloth and the girls printed and sold the sarees. Mrs. Rodrigo levied
a small charge from the profits of each saree. On 20.9.1966 the business was
registered as Flower Textiles.

**391**

On 28.2.1968 the business was converted into a partnership under a new
proprietory arrangement A Mrs. Shanmuganayagam and others joined the venture.
Earlier the business had been conducted at the residence of Mrs. Rodrigo and
later at the residence of Mrs. Shanmuganayagam. Mrs. Rodrigo ceased to be a
partner on 31.8.1968. in the meantime the business had developed. The
partnership purchased raw material and sold the manufactured goods. In
September 1968 the business was moved to a newly constructed building at
Edmonton Road.  
  
Mrs. Shanmuganayagam (one of the partners) claimed exemption from liability to
pay taxes on her share of the profits and income from Flower Textiles for the
years 1970/ 71 and 1971/72. The Commissioner of Inland Revenue disallowed Mrs.
Shanmuganayagam's claim. In appeal the Board of Review held with the
Commissioner. As Mrs. Shanmuganayagam was not in agreement, six questions
turning on the date of commencement of commercial production were referred to
the Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal held that commercial production
commenced in 1964/65. An appeal was referred to the Supreme Court.  
  
**Held:  
**  
(1) Section 6 of the Inland Revenue Act No. 4 of 1963 grants income tax
exemption to an industrial undertaking commenced after 01 April 1951 provided
the Commissioner of Inland Revenue is satisfied inter alia, that "the
undertaking is not formed by the splitting up or reconstruction of any
business previously in existence."  
  
(2) Whether an undertaking is a new venture or an old one would depend on a
variety of factors. The transfer of assets from the old business to the so
called new venture would be one indication of continuation after
reconstruction as opposed to the creation of an altogether new venture. Here
the quotas of raw materials and foreign exchange allocated to Mrs. Rodrigo
constituted the most important asset of the venture and continued even after
she retired.  
  
(3) As it was in the beginning, the business always continued to be the
printing of sarees. A business may be conducted in a somewhat altered or
varied form and, indeed, there may even be a complete reconstruction of the
old venture but it may nevertheless continue to be the old business. Instead
of farming out work here the partnership employed a permanent staff.
Significantly the accounts of the continuing partnership were made up for 12
month periods from the date of retirement of Mrs. Rodrigo's, viz. 31 "August.  
  
(4) Section 6 does not reckon the date of commencement of the 5 years period
(for exemption) from the date of commercial production. In any event the
business was of a commercial nature. Profit may have been at first incidental.
Gradually partial altruism was replaced by the total motive of pecuniary gain.
The business was commercial from its beginning.  
  
**Cases referred to  
**  
_1\. Commissioner of Income Tax V, Gaekwar Foam Rubber Co. Ltd.,_ 35 1 TR 662,
669, 670.  
  
_2\. Textile Machinery Corporation V. Commission of Income Tax_ 107 TR 195,
203, 204.

**392**

**APPEAL** from answers supplied by Court of Appeal to question referred by
the Income Tax Board of Review.  
  
_K. Nadarajah with Miss. M.P.C. Joseph and R.G.L. de Silva_ for appellants  
  
_K. Sri Pavan_ S.S.C. for respondent - respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

12 July 1991  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.  
**  
One Mrs. Edmund Rodrigo had, at her residence at No. 4, Flower Terrace, taught
girls from rural areas the art of printing sarees. She supplied them with
cloth imported on the basis of quotas and import licences granted to her for
this purpose by the Ministry of Industries. The printed sarees were sold by
the girls. The principal object of this venture was to assist the girls to
advance themselves in life. However, Mrs. Rodrigo levied a charge varying from
Rs. 1 - 1.50 on the profits from each saree sold. In the year of assessment
1965/1966 she had, according to the tax return (R6) made by her husband,
received a sum of Rs. 7000 from this levy of Rs. 1 - 1.50. In the following
year of assessment he acknowledged in the tax return (R7) the receipt of Rs.
7000 from the levy. In the next year Mr. Rodrigo in the tax return (R8)
acknowledged the receipt of Rs. 3695 from the levy. On 20 September 1966 the
venture was registered under the Business Names Ordinance (Cap. 149) as a
business under the name of "Flower Textiles". In his tax return for 1968/1969
(R9) Mr. Rodrigo stated that the business of Flower Textiles was closed down
in April 1967.  
  
However, on 28 February 1968 the business which was, as it were in a state of
suspended animation was re-vivified under a new proprietary arrangement. The
business was converted into a partnership, with four others, including one
Mrs. C. Shanmuganayagam, one of the two Appellants in this case, (the other
being her husband) joining Mrs. Rodrigo in her saree-printing venture. The
particulars in the Certificate of Registration under the Business Names
Ordinance were duly amended to reflect the change.  
  
The business of Flower Textiles under the partnership was not conducted at the
residence of Mrs. Rodrigo but at the residence Mrs. Shanmuganayagam at No.
103, Hulftsdrop Street. The business at Hulftsdrop Street was carried on by
contracting with other textile

**393**

printers to do the work of printing. The partnership purchased raw material
and sold the manufactured goods. Mrs. Rodrigo ceased to be a partner on 31st
August 1968. Between the date of the revival of the business in the form of a
partnership (28 February 1968) and the date of retirement of Mrs. Rodrigo (31
August 1968) from the partnership business, the partnership had a turnover of
Rs. 43,403.  
  
A new building was constructed at Edmonton Road at a cost of Rs. 14,000 in
which new equipment purchased for Rs. 2449 was installed. The business
expanded rapidly after it moved in September 1968 to its new home at Edmonton
Road. When Mrs. Shanmuganayagam, one of the partners, was called upon to pay
taxes, she claimed that she was not liable to pay taxes on her share of the
profits and income from Flower Textiles for the years 1970/ 1971 and
1971/1972. Her contention was that, in terms of Section 6(2)  
  
(ii) of the Inland Revenue Act No. 4 of 1963, the income and profits from
Flower Textiles was entitled to exception from lax for a five year period as a
new industrial undertaking which had commenced business in September 1968.  
  
The Commissioner of Inland Revenue disallowed Mrs. Shanmuganayagam's appeal.
He was of the view that Flower Textiles was not within the five year period
during the years of assessment 1970/71 and 1971/72. She then appealed to the
Board of Review which held that, although the profits of the business known as
Flower Textiles were exempted from tax from the year of assessment 1965/66 to
the year of assessment 1969/1970, the profits for the years of assessment
1970/71 and 1971/ 1972 did not fall within the 5 year period of exemption
referred to in Section 6 of the Inland Revenue Act.  
  
Since Mrs. Shanmuganayagam was not in agreement with the decision of the Board
of Review, the Board of Review in terms of section 102 of the Inland Revenue
Act No. 4 of 1963 submitted the case to the Court of Appeal for its opinion on
the following questions:  
  
(a) Whether on the evidence led in the case the Board of Review erred in law
in coming to the conclusion that the commercial production of the business of
Rower Textiles commenced in the year 1964/65 as there was no industrial
undertaking of Flower Textiles prior to the year of assessment 1967/68,

**394**

(b) Whether the Board of Review erred in law in determining that the profits
of the business of Flower Textiles were exempted from tax from the year of
assessment 1965/66 to 1969/70, which question was not in fact referred to the
Board of Review for decision, as there was no such business of Flower Textiles
in existence prior to the year of assessment 1967/68;  
  
(c) Whether on the evidence in the case the Board of Review erred in law in
holding that the commercial production of the business of Flower Textiles
commenced earlier than September 1968;  
  
(d) Whether on the evidence led in the case the Board of Review has erred in
law in holding that the industrial undertaking of Flower Textiles consisting
of textile printing and processing was formed in 1968 in terms of Section 6(1)
(ii) of the Inland Revenue Act No. 4 of 1963 by the splitting up or
reconstruction of a sales commission business carried on by Mrs. E. Rodrigo
since 1964 without any equipment as expressly declared in her Income Tax
Returns;  
  
(e) Whether the Board of Review erred in law in stating that the profits of
the business of Flower Textiles for the years of assessment 1970/71, 1971/72
are liable to tax.  
  
(f) Whether the Board of Review could have reached the conclusion that the
business under consideration commenced in 1964/65.  
  
After several days of hearing, the Court of Appeal reserved Order and on
27.11.1987 answered the questions (a) - (e) in the negative and question (f)
in the affirmative.  
  
This is an appeal from that Judgment of the Court of Appeal. The essence of
Mr. Nadarajah's submission on behalf of the Assessees-Appellants is that the
business conducted at Edmonton Road from September 1968 was a new industrial
undertaking producing approved goods or commodities and it was therefore
entitled to exemption from tax under Section 6 of the Inland. Revenue Act for
the years of Assessment 1970 - 1971 and 1971 -1972, which years fell within
the five year tax exemption period.  
  
Mr. Nadarajah submitted that a provision such as Section 6 of the Inland
Revenue Act No. 4 of 1963 ought to be liberally construed so that effect might
be given to the intention of Government to encourage

**395**

industrialization by the setting up of new enterprises. He conceded, however,
that there was no ambiguity in the section. In the circumstances, in my view,
there is no need for construction. I must give effect to the plain meaning of
the words of the section.  
  
Section 6 of the Inland Revenue Act No. 4 of 1963 grants income tax exemption
to an industrial undertaking commenced after 1 April 1951 provided the
Commissioner of Inland Revenue is satisfied, inter alia, that "the undertaking
is not formed by the splitting up or reconstruction of any business previously
in existence . . "  
  
Mr. Nadarajah says that the Edmonton Road operation was a new venture and not
formed by a splitting or reconstruction of the Hulftsdorp or Flower Road
venture. Whether an undertaking is a new venture or an old one in that sense
would depend on a variety of factors. The transfer of assets from the old
business to the so called new venture would be one indication of continuation
after reconstruction as opposed to the creation of an altogether new venture.
In this case, fie quota of raw materials and foreign exchange allocated to
Mrs. Rodrigo constituted the most important asset of the venture and continued
during the period when Mrs. Rodrigo was a partner and after she retired from
the partnership of Flower Textiles.  
  
Mr. Nadarajah cited the decisions in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Gaekwar
Foam Rubber Co. Ltd. (1) and Textile Machinery Corporation v. Commission of
Income Tax (2). These decisions make it clear that, where, as in this case, an
undertaking carries on its former activities without loss or abandonment of
its original activities or identify, it would not be new, distinct and
separate from the old business. As it was in the beginning, the business
always continued to be the printing of sarees.  
  
A business may be conducted in a somewhat altered or varied form and, indeed,
there may even be a complete reconstruction of the old venture, but it may
nevertheless continue to be the old business.  
  
The Edmonton Road operation was located at a new address. It was set up in a
new building which was constructed at a cost of Rs. 14,000. Equipment worth
Rs. 2449 was installed in these premises and instead of "farming out" work,
the partnership employed a permanent staff of 25 workers and 15 casual
employees. Its turnover

**396**

increased to Rs. 412210/77 during a twelve month period. Significantly, the
accounts of the continuing partnership were made up for twelve month periods
from the date of retirement of Mrs. Rodrigo, viz. 31 August. Admittedly the
venture had flourished and the place and mode of doing business were altered
to meet the growing needs of the venture and to further improve its efficiency
and productivity. But it was the business Mrs. Rodrigo started at Flower Road.  
  
It was alleged that the "commercial production" of business of Flower Textiles
commenced after September 1968, that is after it moved to Edmonton Road.
Section 6 does not reckon the date of commencement of the five year period
from the date of commercial production. In any event the business was of a
commercial nature. Profit may have been at first incidental. Gradually,
partial altruism was replaced by the total motive of pecuniary gain. But the
business was commercial from the days of its beginnings on the verandah of
Mrs. Rodrigo's residence, for in exchange for the supply of raw materials and
guidance on printing and advice on marketing, she received a commission from
the sale of each saree. The dominant motive in the early days may have been
regard for the welfare of the rural girls. But it was not the only purpose.  
  
I affirm the Order of the Court of Appeal with regard to the answers given by
it in response to the case stated by the Board of Review and dismiss the
appeal without costs. However, it is not necessary for me to consider the
observations of the Court of Appeal with regard to the question of the
appropriate circumstances for judicial intervention in relation to the
decisions of the Commissioner and I refrain from deciding that matter.  
  
**FERNANDO, J. - I agree.  
  
DHEERARATNE, J. - I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/36.html_  

