##  K. S. De Silva v. National Water Supply and Drainage Board and Another -
SLR - 1, Vol 2 of 1989 [1989] LKSC 36; (1989) 2 Sri LR 1 (5 July 1989)

**

1

K. S. DE SILVA  
v.  
NATIONAL WATER SUPPLY AND DRAINAGE BOARD AND  
ANOTHER

**

SUPREME COURT  
H. A. G. DE SILVA, J., G. P. S. DE SILVA, J. AND JAMEEL, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 42/88;  
C.A. APPLICATION NO. 386/88  
JUNE 01, 1989

_

Writ of Mandamus - Failure by Court of Appeal to give reasons - Public duty

_

The post of Accountant in the National Water Supply and Drainage Board is not
a public office which attracts the remedy of mandamus. If the appointment is
contractual, the writ does not lie. A distinction must be drawn between duties
enforceable by mandamus which are usually statutory and duties arising merely
from contract.

It is neither possible nor desirable to lay down a hard and fast rule as to
whether reasons need be given when the court refuses to issue notice on
respondents. Much depends on the nature of the application, the remedy sought,
the pleadings, the submissions made to the Court and other matters germane to
the maintainability of the application.

In the case of the petitioner, there was no necessity to give reasons when the
Court of Appeal refused notice.

**

Cases referred to:

**

1.  _Rodrigo_ v _Municipal Council, Galle and another_ 49 NLR 89

2.  _Wijesinghe_ v. _Mayor of Colombo_ 50 NLR 87

3\. Perera v. _Municipal Council of Colombo_ 48 NLR 66

**

APPEAL** from Order of Court of Appeal

F. _C. Perera_ with _Upali Ponnamperuma_ and _A, W. Leelaratne_ for
petitioner-appellant.

_

H. Soza_ for respondents-respondents.

_

Shibly Aziz, P.C. _Addl. Solicitor General and S. _Rajaratnam,_ State Counsel
as _amicus.

Cur. adv. vult,

_

July 05, 1989.

**

G.**   **P. S. DE SILVA, J.

**

The petitioner who is an employee of the National Water Supply and Drainage
Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board) filed an

**2**

application before the Court of Appeal for a writ of Mandamus on the General
Manager of the Board. The first respondent was the Board and the second
respondent was the General Manager of the Board. In his petition he alleged,
inter alia, that

(i) he was appointed as Book-keeper (Grade III) of the Board by letter of
appointment dated 13.06.75;

(ii) he was promoted as an Accounts Clerk, Grade I, by letter dated 20.05.86;

(iii) by circular dated 29.08.86 the Board called for applications from its
employees for the post of Accountant, Grade IV;

(iv) the petitioner applied for the post, was called for an interview, and the
Board approved his appointment to the post of Grade IV Accountant;

(v) the 2nd respondent, the General Manager has failed to carry out the
directions of the Board and has failed to issue to the petitioner the letter
of appointment. The petitioner accordingly prayed for a writ of Mandamus
directing the 2nd respondent to issue the letter of appointment.

When this application was supported by Counsel for the petitioner on 20.05.88,
the Court of Appeal made the following order: "We have heard counsel in
support. Notice is refused". The petitioner has now preferred an appeal to
this court against the order refusing notice. Special leave to appeal to this
court was granted on two grounds: (1) whether the Court of Appeal was wrong in
law in not giving reasons for its order made on 20.05.88, (2) Even so, would
such failure entitle the petitioner, in the circumstances of this case, to the
relief he has claimed in the petition?

I shall first consider the ground of appeal (2) set out above. The principal
submission of Mr. Perera for the petitioner was that the writ of Mandamus is
available inasmuch as the 2nd respondent has failed to perform a public legal
duty, namely, to issue a letter appointing the petitioner to the post of
Accountant, Grade IV, as directed by the Board. On the other hand, both Mr.
Aziz, Additional Solicitor-General, and Mr. Soza for the respondents
maintained that the writ does not lie for the reason that the petition does
not disclose a failure to perform a duty of a public nature which is an
essential pre-requisite for the issue of the writ. Mr. Soza further submitted
that some of the averments in the petition are not factually correct. This,
however, is not a matter which could properly be taken into account, since
notice did not issue on the respondents. The appeal before us has to be
considered on the assumption that the averments in the petition are correct.

**3**

On a scrutiny of the averments in the petition, it is clear that the
petitioner is applying for a writ of Mandamus on the 2nd respondent so that he
may be admitted to the office of Accountant, Grade IV. It seems to me that the
precise question which arises for consideration is whether such office is a
public office, for if it is an appointment which is essentially contractual in
character, the writ does not lie. The principle is succinctly stated by H. W.
R. Wade: "A distinction which needs to be clarified is that between public
duties enforceable by Mandamus, which are usually statutory, and duties
arising merely from contract. Contractual duties are enforceable as matters of
private law by the ordinary contractual remedies, such as damages, injunction,
specific performance and declaration. They are not enforceable by Mandamus
which in the first place is confined to public duties ....." (Administrative
Law, 5th Edn. Page 635)

The case of _Rodrigo_ vs. _The Municipal Council, Galle & another, _(1)
appears to me to have a direct bearing on the matters that have arisen for
decision on this appeal. That was a case where the petitioner who was a
Revenue Inspector in the Moratuwa Urban Council applied for a writ of
Mandamus. He was transferred to the Galle Municipal Council (1st respondent)
by the Local Government Service Commission. When the petitioner reported for
work at the Galle Municipal Council, he was refused work and he was not paid
his salary. The petitioner sought a writ of Mandamus to order the respondents
(the Municipal Council and the L.G.S.C.) "to give the petitioner work and to
pay his salary". In refusing the application for the writ, Windham, J. stated
that one of the matters upon which the court must be satisfied is that "the
petitioner is being prevented from exercising a right to perform certain
duties and functions legally conferred upon him by virtue of his holding an
office carrying with it such a right ..... in the present case the petitioner
has no powers or duties statutorily vested in him. It may well be that he is a
public servant and in the employ of a public body (i.e. the 1st respondent)

... But that is not the test. The question is whether he has public duties and
powers vested in him by statute, so that he can be said to be statutorily
entitled to exercise them". In short, Windham, J. held that the petitioner was
not the holder of an office "to which specified duties and powers had been
statutorily attached."

Another decision which throws some light on this question is _Wijesinghe vs.
Mayor of Colombo & another, _(2). The petitioner was

**4**

appointed to the post of Charity Commissioner by the Local Government Service
Commission. The Municipal Council, Colombo, declined to recognise his
appointment. The petitioner moved for a writ of Mandamus to order the
respondents (the Mayor and the Secretary of the Colombo Municipal Council) "to
permit him to perform his duties in the exercise of his lawful functions as
Charity Commissioner.....". In allowing the application, Gratiaen, J. stated:
" I do not agree that the petitioner's right to the office of Charity
Commissioner was only of a private nature which could adequately be enforced
in a civil suit. The petitioner is an executive officer of the Council by
virtue of section 176 of the Municipal Councils Ordinance of 1947 ..... many,
if not all, of the powers and functions contemplated are clearly powers and
functions of a public nature" (at pages 90 and 91). See also the case of
_Perera vs. Municipal Council of Colombo,_ (3).

In support of his submission that the petitioner in the application before us
is seeking admission to an office which is of a public character, Mr. Perera
referred us to sections 68 and 69 of the National Water Supply and Drainage
Board Law No.2 of 1974. But these two sections refer only to the powers and
duties of the General Manager of the Board and the powers of the Board to
appoint "to its staff such officers and servants as the Board may deem
necessary and determine their terms of remuneration and other conditions of
employment". We were not referred to any rules made under the said Law No.2 of
1974 which speak of the powers or duties attached to the post of Accountant.
In my opinion, the office to which the petitioner is seeking admission is not
a "public office" of the kind which attracts the remedy by way of Mandamus. It
is an office essentially of a contractual or private character. Accordingly,
as a matter of law, the writ of Mandamus does not lie and the application must
fail.

I now turn to the next question, namely, whether the Court of Appeal was wrong
in law in not giving reasons for its order refusing notice. Mr. Perera urged
that the order of the Court of Appeal was gravely prejudicial to the
petitioner and that he was handicapped in the presentation of the appeal to
this court by reason of the fact that no reasons were given. While conceding
that it would have been desirable for the Court of Appeal to have given
reasons for its order, Mr. Soza maintained that the law did not require the
Court of Appeal

**5**

to give reasons. It was the submission of Mr. Aziz that this was not a case in
which it was necessary to give reasons.

Mr. Soza referred us to de Smith's Judicial Review of Administrative Action,
4th Edn. where the learned author states: "There is no general rule of English
Law that reasons must be given for administrative (or indeed judicial)
decisions" (page 148). Both Mr. Aziz and Mr. Soza drew our attention to an
article entitled "Statements of Reasons for Judicial and Administrative
Decisions" by Michael Akehurst appearing in the (1970) Modern Law Review at
page 154. The learned writer commences his article with the statement: "The
general rule is that there is no duty to state reasons for judicial or
administrative decisions".

It is unnecessary for present purposes to consider the "general rule" set out
above. It is neither possible nor desirable to lay down a hard and fast rule
as to whether reasons need be given when the court refuses to issue notice on
the respondents. Much depends on the nature of the application, the remedy
sought, the pleadings, the submissions made to the Court, and other matters
germane to the maintainability of the application. Suffice it to say, that on
the facts and circumstances pleaded in the petition filed in these proceedings
it was _manifest_ that a writ of Mandamus did not lie. In this view of the
matter, I am of the opinion that it was not incumbent on the Court of Appeal
to give reasons for refusing notice in the instant case. In the result, the
appeal fails and is dismissed, but in all the circumstances, without costs.

We wish to place on record our appreciation of the assistance given by Mr.
Aziz who appeared as amicus curiae.

**

H.A.G. DE SILVA, J.** \- I agree.

**

JAMEEL, J. **_-_ I agree.

_

**Appeal dismissed.**

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/36.html_  

