##  Macan Marker Limited v. Nicholas and Others - SLR - 129, Vol 1 of 1987
[1986] LKSC 36; (1987) 1 Sri LR 129 (7 November 1986)

**

129

MACAN MARKAR LIMITED  
v.  
NICHOLAS AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
RANASINGHE, J., L. H. DE ALWIS, J. AND H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.  
S.C. No. 36/85 - CA/LA 61/84.  
MAY 30, JULY 2, 3, AUGUST 26, 27 AND 28, 1986.

_

Landlord and Tenant - Certificate of tenancy - Section 35(2) of Rent Act No. 7
of 1972 - Question of Law.

_

The 1st respondent filed an application to the Rent Board of Colombo seeking a
certificate of tenancy under s. 35(2) of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 in respect
of certain premises belonging to the appellant. There was overwhelming
evidence that the appellant always regarded the 1st respondent's employer as
its tenant and was not prepared to accept the 1st respondent as its tenant.
The Rent Board held that 1st respondent was the appellants' tenant but the
Board of Review reversed this finding treating the question of sufficiency of
evidence as a question of law. The Court of Appeal quashed the decision of the
Board of Review on the footing that the Board of Review was not entitled to
review findings of fact made by the Rent Board. The appellant appealed-from
the decision to the Supreme Court.

**

Held :

**

Whether the evidence placed before the Rent Board was sufficient to establish
a contract of tenancy between the 1st respondent and the appellant company is
clearly a question of law. So is the proper interpretation of the documents
produced. The Board of Review was entitled to review the Rent Board's
decision. There was no contract of tenancy between the appellant and 1st
respondent.

**

Cases referred to:

**

(1) _Edward v. Bairstow -_ (1955) 3 All E. R. 48.  

(2) _Commissioner of Inland Revenue v. Fraser -_ (1942) 24 Tax Cases 498.  

(3) _Ceylon Transport Board v. Gunasinghe -_ (1968) 72 NLR 76.

**

APPEAL** from decision of the Court of Appeal reported at (1985) 1 SLR 130.

_

Dr. H. W. Jayewardene, Q. C._ with _S. J. Kadirgamar, Q. C., D. S. Wijesinghe_
and _Miss T. Keenawinna_ for petitioner-appellant.  

_

H. L. de Silva, P. C_. with _Bimal Rajapakse_ and _P. A. Abeyakoon_ for
respondents.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**130**

November 7, 1986.  
  
**H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.

**

The 1st respondent filed an application to the Rent Board of Colombo seeking a
certificate of tenancy under section 35(2) of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 in
respect of Flat No. 47 Galle Face Court II, Colombo 3, alleging that he was
the tenant of the appellant in respect of these premises. The appellant denied
that there was such a contract of tenancy and further pleaded that the Rent
Board had no jurisdiction to inquire into the question as to whether there was
a contract of tenancy. The Rent Board after inquiry held that there was a
legal relationship of landlord and tenant between the 1st respondent and the
appellant. Thereupon the appellant appealed to the Board of Review and the
appeal was heard without any objection being taken by the 1st respondent. The
Board of Review after hearing submissions by its order set aside the decision
of the Rent Board and dismissed the 1st respondent's application for a
certificate of tenancy. The 1st respondent then filed an application in the
Court of Appeal praying for a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari to
quash the order of the Board of Review. The Court of Appeal allowed the
application of the 1st respondent and issued the Writ quashing the decision of
the Board of Review. It is from this judgment of the Court of Appeal that the
appellant has appealed to this court.

The facts are briefly as follows: The 1st respondent was employed at M/s.
George Steuart & Co. as its Mills Manager and was in occupation of a flat
within the company's premises. After the death of his wife, he expressed a
desire to vacate that flat and find accommodation elsewhere. The company was
agreeable to this and by A1 confirmed that the 1st respondent would be paid a
rent allowance of Rs. 350 per month with effect from January 1973 with a view
to assisting him to meet the rent he would have to pay for the new flat. One
Mrs. Muthucumaraswamy who knew that the 1st respondent was searching for a
flat introduced him prior to November 1973 to Mecci Macan Markar a member of
the appellant-company, but the latter informed him that no flats at Galle Face
Court, owned by the appellants were available at that time.

It appears at some point of time thereafter a two bed-roomed flat at Galle
Face Court fell vacant and by A2 the 1st respondent's employers, the company,
intimated to the appellants that a flat should be reserved for the 1st
respondent. By A3 the appellants offered the

**131**

vacant flat to the company on the conditions stated therein. The company by A4
confirmed that the 1st respondent was prepared to take the flat on the terms
listed in the appellant's letter with effect from 15th January 1974 and
forwarded a cheque A4A for Rs. 2,054.75 issued by the 1st respondent being
three months rent in advance. The company also confirmed that the monthly
rental of Rs. 656.25 would be paid direct to the appellant by them. The
appellants issued a receipt A5 for the three months rent, in the name of the
company. The company thereupon by A6 returned the receipt to the appellant
requesting a fresh receipt to be issued in the name of the 1st respondent who
it said was the tenant of the flat. It further stated that the rental payments
were being made by the company on account of the 1st respondent. The
appellants however refused to issue a fresh receipt in the name of the 1st
respondent; and in A10 stated that in their books the flat is registered in
the name of the company. This reply was sent by the appellants after inquiries
were made by them from the company as to whether the flat was occupied by the
1st respondent and his family or whether there were others too occupying it
(A7), and the company had by A9 confirmed that the sole occupants of the flat
were the 1st respondent and his family.

A further attempt was made by the 1st respondent by A8 to have a receipt
issued in his name but this attempt too did not succeed whereupon the company
wrote to the appellants A13 inquiring whether it would be possible to register
the flat in the name of its occupant the 1st respondent and also informed the
appellants that the ""company was only involved as far as payments of rent
which were being attended to, by way of recoveries from the 1st respondent's
emoluments". This is confirmed by A16, the particulars of emoluments for April
1978 of the 1st respondent which show that a sum of Rs. 350 has been credited
to his emoluments as rent allowance and a sum of Rs. 686 has been deducted
therefrom as rent paid. The company further informed the Deputy Food
Controller in A11 that the 1st respondent, their Mills Manager was the tenant
of the flat concerned and that rents were being paid by the company on account
of him. A 18 confirms this latter position where the company acknowledges the
receipt from the 1st respondent, a sum of Rs. 686 being the rent of flat at
Galle Face Court occupied by him.

The appellants by A19 made a complaint to the company as regards a nuisance
caused by the servants of the 1st respondent and the fact that this letter was
passed on to the 1st respondent the occupier of

**132**

the flat who would reply direct to the appellants was intimated by A20 and in
fact the 1st respondent by A21 informed the appellants that he had taken
action to inform this servant about the complaint. He further requested the
appellants to address all communications regarding the actual running of the
flat, its proper maintenance or any other problem to him who is the
appellant's tenant and not to the company who are only his employers and have
merely consented to deduct the rent from his remuneration and forward it to
the appellants. To this the appellants wrote A22 to the 1st respondent stating
that the tenant of flat in question, according to their books was the company
and as such all communications regarding the flat would continue to be
addressed to them. A further communication from the appellant inquired from
the company as to the position of the flat occupied by the company as the
appellant's tenant in view of the fact that the Government had decided to take
over all the Agency Houses in Sri Lanka. The company replied that only a part
of their Agency business had been taken.

The Court of Appeal in its judgment gave the grounds for issuing the Writ of
Certiorari to quash the decision of the Board of Review as follows

(1) The Rent Board had come to a conclusion on the plain reading of the
documents and the Board of Review had done the same;

(2) the Rent Board had taken into account that the sheet anchor of the
appellant's case was that their books or registers had the company as tenant,
but these books were not produced while the Board of Review had not taken into
account that the 1st respondent had given evidence and it had also glossed
over the non-production of the books and registers by the appellants;

(3) the Board of Review had not shown that there was no evidence for the
finding of the Rent Board and that the finding was inconsistent with the
evidence and contradictory of it;

(4) what the Board of Review had done was that it had on the same material
substituted for the findings of facts and opinion of the Rent Board its own
findings on facts and its opinion, i.e. the Board of Review had come to a
different conclusion on the facts from that of the Rent Board and given its
finding "a legal decoration or embellishment'" by reference to the three cases
cited in its order;

**133**

(5) the main question before the Rent Board was to determine who was the
tenant of the flat i.e. whether it was the 1st respondent or the company and
the order of the Rent Board showed that it correctly directed itself as to who
is a tenant. Its finding from the facts that Nicholas was the tenant was an
inference of fact as set out in the judgment of Viscount Simonds in the Edward
v. Bairstow (1) ;

(6) the decision of the Board of Review was not in accordance with the
principles set out in the cases cited by it in the course of its order;

(7) the Board of Review had acted without jurisdiction or in excess of
jurisdiction in holding that the 1st respondent was not the tenant of the
appellant in respect of that flat.

Appellant's counsel submitted that since the Court of Appeal does not act as
an appellate tribunal in granting a Writ of Certiorari, there was no ground in
this case which would justify interference by the Court of Appeal. He
submitted there was no case put forward on the basis that as far as the Board
of Review was concerned there was (a) a lack of jurisdiction (b) a denial of
natural justice or (c) an error on the face of the record. He further
submitted that the decision of the Board of Review was final and conclusive
under section 40(4) of the Rent Act and even if one assumes the Court of
Appeal had the power, it still could not interfere with the final and
conclusive determination of the Board of Review and deliver a judgment of its
own. It was his contention that the interpretation of documents and their
application was a question of law and at the least it is a question of mixed
law and fact. He cited the case of Edward v. Bairstow (supra) (1) where it was
held per Viscount Simonds at pages 53 and 54 that

"though it is a pure finding of fact, it may be set aside on grounds which
have been stated in various ways but are I think, fairly summarised by saying
that the Court should take that course if it appears that the Commissioners
have acted without any evidence or on a view of the facts which could not
reasonably be entertained ... To say that a transaction is or is not an
adventure in the nature of a trade is to say that it has or has not, the
characteristics which distinguish such an adventure. But it is a question of
law, not of fact, what are those characteristics, or, in other words what the
statutory language means. It follows that the inference can only be regarded
as an inference of facts if it is assumed that the tribunal which made it is
rightly directed in law what the characteristics are'.

**134**

Lord Radcliffe in his speech at page 57 states

"When the case comes before the Court, it is its duty to examine the
determination having regard to its knowledge of the relevant law. If the case
contains anything ex facie which is bad in law and which bears on the
determination, it is obviously erroneous in point of law. But without any such
misconception appearing ex facie, it may be that, the facts found are such
that no person acting judicially and properly instructed as to the relevant
law could have come to the determination under appeal. In these circumstances
too the Court must intervene. It has no option but to assume that there has
been some misconception of the law, and this has been responsible for the
determination. So there, too, there has been an error in point of law. I do
not think that it much matters whether this state of affairs is described as
one in which there is no evidence to support the determination or as one in
which the true and only reasonable conclusion contradicts the determination".

In Commissioner of Inland Revenue v. Fraser (2) it was held that

"in cases where it is competent for a tribunal to make findings of fact which
are excluded from review, the Appeal Court has always jurisdiction to
intervene if it appears either that the tribunal has misunderstood the
statutory language - because a proper construction of the statutory language
is a matter of law - or that the tribunal had made a finding for which there
is no evidence or which is inconsistent with the evidence and contradictory of
it. It is not as a rule possible to say whether the tribunal in any particular
case where the Court finds that it has erred, has failed to appreciate the
meaning of the statute or whether it has made a finding without having
evidence to support it".

It has been contended that as an appeal to the Board of Review from a decision
of a Rent Board was, by the proviso to section 40(1) of the Rent Act No. 7 of
1972, only upon a matter of law, the Board of Review could not substitute its
views on the facts for those found by the Rent Board.

The Board of Review in its order had correctly stated the position when it
cited the case of Ceylon Transport Board v. Gunasinghe (3) in which
Weeramantry, J. sets out and approves the principles that an appellate body
should adopt where an appeal on a finding of fact is not available. He states
that-

**135**

"where the statute makes an appeal only in respect of questions of law, the
appropriate Court is not without jurisdiction to interfere where the
conclusion reached on the evidence is so clearly erroneous that no person
properly instructed on the law and acting judicially could have reached that
decision".

This judgment also goes on to follow the dictum referred to earlier of Lord
Normand in Inland Revenue v. Fraser (supra) (2).

The Board of Review has enumerated the grounds on which it has set aside the
order of the Rent Board as follows:

(1) The finding of the Rent Board that there was a lawful contract of tenancy
was based on an incorrect construction of the documents filed and the evidence
led.

The 1st respondent gave evidence and relied on the documents produced. His
only witness was Mrs. Muthucumaraswamy whose evidence did not in any way help
the Board to come to the conclusion it did. Learned counsel for the 1st
respondent contended that the Rent Board considered a multiplicity of facts
and circumstances before it came to the conclusion that the 1st respondent was
the tenant of the appellants and not the Company. In fact the Rent Board in
its subsequent findings has clearly shown a misconception of the evidence and
a perusal of the order belies its assertion that all the documents produced
have been analysed in their true perspective. It appears that the Rent Board
has failed to consider the contents of the documents.

(2) (a) The letter A3 constitutes the offer and was made to the Company and
not to the 1st respondent.

In fact the only occasion that the 1st respondent had any contact with the
appellants was at the time Mrs. Muthucumaraswamy introduced the 1st respondent
to Mr. Mecci Macan Markar but on that occasion there was no vacant flat and as
such no offer could have been made to the 1st respondent.

**136**

(b) Similarly A4 indicates that though the offer was to the Company it was
being accepted on behalf of the 1st respondent, i.e. a person to whom no offer
was made. The rent was to be paid by the Company.

(c) The receipt A5 for the three months advance of rent was issued by the
appellants to the Company.

(3) The letter A6 asked for the receipt to be issued in the name of the 1st
respondent but this was refused by A 10 as the Company had been registered as
tenants in the appellant's books. From this it was clear that the appellant
was not prepared to accept the 1st respondent as its tenant.

(4) The continued payment of the monthly rent by the Company after letter A 14
indicates that they had accepted the appellant's position as set out in A 14.

(5) The documents clearly indicated that the appellants were at no time
willing to accept the 1st respondent as their tenant and hence there was no
agreement as was necessary to create a lawful contract of tenancy. In short
there was no consensus ad idem between the 1st respondent and the appellants.
Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the reason why the 1st
respondent was so anxious to be considered the tenant was because he wanted to
purchase the flat under the Ceiling on Housing and Property Law and to this
end he had made an application which had been rejected.

(6) The documents subsequent to A 14 and the contract of the parties appear to
indicate that though the Company had not wanted to take the premises on rent,
they acquiesced in the position adopted by the appellants, subsequent to the
receipt of A 14. They probably adopted this attitude in order to ensure that
their employee had 'convenient and suitable' accommodation to enable him to
attend to his duties as Mills Manager. Whatever their motive may have been it
would not create a contract of tenancy between the appellant and 1st
respondent.

**137**

The non-production of their books by the appellants does not detract from the
overwhelming evidence afforded by the documents produced, that the appellants
had the Company in mind as their tenants and not the 1st respondent.

(7) Apart from the material provided by the documents, there was no oral
evidence given of an agreement between the 1st respondent and the appellants.

Whether the evidence placed before the Rent Board was sufficient to establish
a contract of tenancy as between the 1st respondent and the appellant-company,
is clearly a question of law. So is the proper interpretation of the documents
produced. In my view the Board of Review has rightly held that

"The finding of the Rent Board is inconsistent with the evidence and
contradictory of it".

Hence the Board of Review was entitled to review the Rent Board's decision and
make the order the Board of Review has made.

Submissions were also made on the question whether the Court of Appeal had
jurisdiction to review the decision of the Board of Review in view of section
40(11) of the Rent Act which states that the decision of the Board of Review
on an appeal from the order of a Rent Board shall be final and conclusive. In
view of my conclusion that the Board of Review had the jurisdiction to review
the Rent Board's order in the circumstances of this case, it is not necessary
for me to deal with the question regarding the jurisdiction of the Court of
Appeal to entertain this application.

I therefore allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of the Court of
Appeal. The 1st respondent will pay to the appellants Rs. 4,200, as costs in
the Court of Appeal and as costs of the appeal to this Court.

**

RANASINGHE, J. -** I agree.  

**

ALWIS, J.** I agree.

_Appeal allowed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/36.html_  

