##  Ratnayake and Others v. Perera and Others - SLR - 451, Vol 2 of 1982
[1982] LKSC 36; (1982) 2 Sri LR 451 (1 June 1982)

# 451

  **RATNAYAKE AND OTHERS**

**v.**

## C.D. PERERA AND OTHERS

SUPREME COURT

SHARVANANDA, J., VICTOR PERERA, J., AND COLIN‑THOME, J.

S.C. 32/81 - CA. No.2332/80

MAY 3 AND 4, 1982. 1982.



    Trade Union Ordinance, Section 52 ‑ Interpretation Ordinance, Section 2(gg) ‑Writ of Mandamus ‑ Availability to enforce performance of public duty ‑ No private contractual right



The appellants and the 3 respondents are teachers and are also members of the
Lanka Guru Sangamaya. A is a member of the General Committee of the Sangamaya
for the year 1980/81, 1st respondent is the Secretary, 2nd respondent is the
President and 3rd respondent is the Treasurer.



The appellants 43 in number alleged that as duly elected members of the
General Committee they requisitioned a meeting of the Central Committee in
terms of their Constitution but that the respondents acting in concert refused
to convene the meeting and had committed various other breaches of their
duties in violation of the Constitution.



The appellants therefore prayed for a Writ of Mandamus directing the
respondents to do various things besides convening the meeting.



The respondents filed objections stating that the Writ of Mandamus was not
available to appellants.



**452**

**  **

**Held ‑**



Neither the Lanka Guru Sangamaya nor the respondents, its officials are public
bodies performing duties of a public nature; the duties that the petitioners
want the respondents to be compelled to perform by Writ of Mandamus are not
duties of a public nature for which a Writ will lie. They are contractual
duties outside the ambit of Mandamus.



**Cases referred to:**



(1) _Bonsor v. Musicians Union_ _(1956) A.C 104; (1955) A.E.R. 518_.

  
(2) _Perera v. Municipal Council, Colombo (1947) 48 NLR 66._

  
(3) _Perera v. Ceylon Government Railway Union Staff Benevolent Fund (1963) 67
NLR 191_.

  
(4) _De Alwis v. Silva (1967) 71 NLR 108._

  
(5) _Siriwardene v. Fernando (1973) 77 NLR 469._

_  
(6) Ex ‑parte Napier (1852) 18 Q.B. 692._

  
(7) _King v. Governor & Co., Bank of England 2, B and Ald. 620, 622._

  
(8) _Farasmus v. Film Artists Association (1963) 1 AER 636_.

  
(9) _Trade Exchange Ceylon Ltd. v. Asia Hotels Corporation Ltd. (1981) 1 Sri
LR 67_.



**APPEAL** from Judgement of the Court of Appeal



_Nimal Senanayake, S.A._ with _(Mrs.) A.B. Disanayake and Arunatilake de
Silva_ for the petitioners ‑ appellants.

_  
D. S., Wijesinghe with Percy Dharmawardena_ for the respondents respondents.



_Cur. adv. vult._



June 1st, 1982



**SHARVANANDA, J.**



The petitioners‑appellants and the three respondents belong to the teaching
profession. They are members of the trade union called and known as 'Lanka
Teachers Union' (Lanka Guru Sangamaya). The petitioners‑appellants are elected
members of the General Committee of the Sangamaya for the, year 1980/81 and
came to function as such from 27.7.1980. The 1st respondent is the elected
General Secretary; and 2nd respondent is the elected President; and the 3rd
respondent is the elected Treasurer of the said union for the year 1980/81 and
have functioned as such from 27th June 1980.



Under the provisions of the Constitution of the Union the first respondent is
charged with the performance of the administrative duties of the union under
the supervision of the General Committee and with the duty of convening
meetings of the Central Committee and General Meetings of the Union in
accordance with the Constitution of the Union; the second respondent is under
a duty to preside at meetings and ensure the observance of the Rules of the
Constitution

**  **

**453**

**  **

at meetings; and the third respondent is charged with the duty of keeping
proper accounts of the union and ensuring that union funds are used for
purposes authorised by the Central Committee and to prevent utilisation of the
funds of the union without the sanction of the Central Committee in
accordance' with the rules of the union.



The petitioners who numbered 43 in the Court of. Appeal alleged inter alia
that they were all duly elected members of the Central Committee of the union
and that despite the requisition dated 20th August 1980 signed by the 38
members to convene the meeting of the Central Committee, the 1st and 2nd
respondents acting in concert with the 3rd respondent have inter alia refused
to convene a meeting of the Central Committee and had committed various
breaches of their duties in violation of the provisions of the union
Constitution. The petitioners therefore prayed for the issue of a Writ of
Mandamus‑



"(a)      directing the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents to convene a meeting of
the Central Committee of the Lanka Guru Sangamaya, for the purpose of
submitting a statement of claims of expenditure and income and consideration
of such statement;



(b)        for the appointment of a date of meeting of the Central Committee.



(c)        for an injunction restraining any expenditure by the 1st, 2nd and
3rd.respondents of the money of the union other than expenses necessary for
the convening of the Central Committee meeting.



(d)        directing the respondents to place on the Agenda of meeting;

(i)         the consideration of returns and declarations made by the
respondents under the provisions of the Trade Union Ordinance and the issuing
of directions by the Central Committee in respect thereof,

(ii)        directions by the Central Committee in respect of all financial
matters and legal actions pending in Court."



The respondents filed objections to the application. While denying the
allegations of the petitioners, they took the objection in limine, that the
application of the petitioners for the grant of Writ of Mandamus was
misconceived and that such a Writ was not available to the petitioners.



The Court of Appeal upheld the objection and held that the duty cast on the
Secretary of the Lanka Guru Sangamaya to summon a



# 454



meeting of the Central Committee on a requisition made by 1/3 of the members
of the Central Committee was not a duty of a public nature and hence the Writ
of Mandamus did not lie to compel its performance. The petitioners have
preferred this appeal against the order of dismissal of their application.



The main contention of the petitioners-appellants is that the duty to summon
the meeting is a statutory duty and that the duty is of a public nature.
Reference was made to the provisions of the Trade Union Ordinance and
regulations made thereunder, and it was contended that the Constitution of the
Lanka Guru Sangamaya had statutory orientation being "Written Law" within the
meaning of ‑section 2(gg) of the Interpretation Ordinance.



The Interpretation Ordinance section 2(gg) (Chap.2) states that "In this
Ordinance and in every written law  Written Law" shall mean and include "all
Ordinances and Acts of Parliament and all Orders, Rules, Bye‑Laws, Regulations
made by any body of persons under the authority of the statute."



It was submitted that the sole question posed by this section was whether the
Rules of the Union have been made under the authority of a statute and if so,
they constituted "Written Law". Counsel urged that these rules have been made
under the authority of the Trade Union Ordinance and the Regulations made
thereunder. Section 52 of the Trade Union Ordinance authorises the making of
regulations by the Minister. It provides that the Minister may make
Regulations for the purpose of carrying out or giving effect to the principles
and provisions of the Ordinance. There is no provision in the Trade Union
Ordinance or in the Regulations made thereunder empowering. any private person
or group of private persons to frame any statutory Rules or Constitution for
any trade union. It is not claimed that the Constitution of the Lanka Guru
Sangamaya was made by the Minister, or any other public authority in the
exercise of the regulation making power under section 52.



It was however submitted by Counsel that as section 8 of the Ordinance makes
registration of a trade union compulsory and as section 10 makes satisfaction
of the Registrar, that the objects, rules and Constitution of the union do not
conflict with any of such provisions and are not unlawful, condition precedent
to registration of such union, and as section 38 makes it mandatory that Rules
of every registered trade union should provide for all the matters



**455**

**  **

specified in the First Schedule and as part VI of the Ordinance makes
provision for certain matters of the Constitution of the union, that the Rules
or Constitution of the union constituted "Written Law" as defined in the
Interpretation Ordinance and hence had statutory force.



The fundamental flaw in the argument relating to the applicability of section
2(gg) of the Interpretation Ordinance is that it overlooks the fact that the
statutory definition of the words contained in section 2 of the Interpretation
Ordinance applies only when such words are part of any enactment and are to be
interpreted. ‑ That definition cannot be applied in a non‑statutory context.
Our attention has not been drawn to the words "Written Law", in the text of
the Ordinance and hence that definition of "Written Law" cannot be invoked in
support of the 'argument that the Rules of the Union constituted Law of the
land.



Regulation 3 of the Trade Union Regulations of 1935 made under section 52 of
the Ordinance provides that every application made under section 9(1) of the
Ordinance for the registration of a Trade Union should be substantially in
form "B" of the Regulation and form "B" requires a copy of the Rules of the
union to be attached to the application for registration. For a trade union to
be registered under section 8, it is essential that it should have a
Constitution or Rules. Section 38 mandates that the Rules of the union should
provide for the matters specified in the first schedule. One of the matters so
specified is the appointment or election and removal of any Executive and of
Trustees, Secretary, Treasurer and other Officers of the Trade Union.
According to item 8 of the form "B" referred to in Regulation 3 provision has
to be made in, the Rules of the union, inter alia for the manner in which the
meeting of the union should be held, minutes of the meetings I should be
recorded and confirmed and meetings of the Board should take place and the
manner in which the executives, the officers of the union, the auditor or
trustee shall be appointed and removed. Compliance with the requirement that
the trade union should have a constitution and that the constitution should
provide for all matters referred to above, is a sine qua non to secure
registration of the union. It is however to be noted that the contents of the
Rules are left to the free determination of the members of the union. Section
15 empowers the Registrar to cancel the registration if the trade union
rescinds any Rules providing for any matter, for which provision is required
by section 38\. The fallacy in counsel's argument lies in his assumption that
registration of the union in conformity with the requirements of the Trade
Union

         

# 456



Ordinance operates to stamp the union's constitution with statutory character.
Registration does not impart any statutory quality to the Rules of the union.
Trade unions are not the creation of statute, they are the creations of
contract and their rules are consensual in nature.



The registered trade union is not a corporation, nor an individual, nor a
partnership. A union becomes on registration a legal entity distinct from an
unregistered trade union. A registered trade union is recognised by the law as
a body distinct from the individuals who from time to time compose it. _Bonsor
Vs. Musicians Union_. (1)



A trade union thus possesses some sort of entity apart from its members.
However a trade union is basically a voluntary association and contract is the
foundation or basis for its Rules. The union has no statutory constitution ‑
the rights of its members stem from the contract of membership. The
fundamental concept that the relationship between the members and the trade
union is the product of contract has to be borne in mind in determining the
question of law raised in the appeal, namely, whether it is a private or
public body.



The general rule of Mandamus is that its function is to compel a public
authority to do its duty. The essence of Mandamus is that it is a command
issued by the superior Court for the performance of public legal duty. Where
officials have a public duty to perform and have refused to perform, Mandamus
will lie to secure the performance of the public duty, in the performance of
which the applicant has sufficient legal interest. It is only granted to
compel the performance of duties of a public nature, and not merely of private
character that is to say for the enforcement of a mere private right, stemming
from a contract of the parties-



"The duty to be performed must be of a public nature. A Mandamus will not lie
to order admission or restoration to an office essentially of a private
character, nor in general, will it lie to secure the due performance of the
obligations owed by a company towards its members, or to resolve any, other
private dispute, such as a claim to reinstatement to membership of a trade
union, nor will it issue to a private arbitral tribunal" de Smith Judical
Review 4th Ed. page 540.



It is settled law that for Mandamus to lie the applicant must have a legal
right to the performance of some duty, of a public and not of a private
character _‑ Perera Vs. Municipal Council, Colombo_. (2) Even a duty arising
under a statute may be a duty of a private kind.



**457**

**  **

it was held in _Perera vs. Ceylon Government Railway Union Staff Benevolent
Fund_ (3) that the duty under section 17 of the Railway Union Staff Benevolent
Fund Ordinance, of the Secretary and Treasurer to summon a General Meeting is
neither a public duty nor a duty to be performed in the interests or for the
benefit of the people and that hence a Writ of Mandamus will not lie to compel
its performance. It was again held in _De Alwis vs.. Silva_ , (4) that the
administrative regulations laid down in the Ceylon Government Manual of
Procedure did not have the status of "Law" and‑ that non‑compliance with them
could not be enforced by Mandamus. Thus it is fundamental for the invocation
of the remedy of a Writ of Mandamus that there must be refusal to perform some
duty of a public nature and not of a privte character.



Counsel for the appellants referred to the case of _Siriwardena Vs. Fernando_
(5), as pointing out the criteria for identifying what was "Office of public
nature" for the purpose of the issue of a Writ of Quo Warranto. In that case
it was held that offices of President and Vice President created by bye‑laws
of a Co‑operative Society registered under section 6 of the Co‑operative
Societies Ordinance were offices of a public nature. The judgment in that case
is based on the admission of Counsel for, both petitioner and the respondents
that the office in question was one which had been created under a statute"
and on the assumption that a bye‑law of the Nattandiya Coconut Producers
Co‑operative Society Ltd., Lunuwila, was "written law", within the meaning of
section 2(gg) of the Interpretation Ordinance. The correctness of this
admission and assumption is open to question and this conclusion may have to
be reviewed in an appropriate case. It is not necessary for the purpose of
this case to go into the question of the, correctness of the above conclusion;
it is sufficient to state that it is not legitimate to apply the indicia for
identifying an "office of a public nature" to determine what is a, "duty of a
public nature" for the enforcement of which a Writ of Mandamus will lie.



"The right of the applicant may arise from and the duty which he seeks to
enforce may be imposed by either (1) statute (2) charter or (3) the common law
or custom as e.g. the right of burial in the parish church yard" Short on
Mandamus 228. However today the chief function of the Writ is to compel the
performance of public duties prescribed by statute though it lies as well for
the enforcement of a common law public duty, Lord Campbell C.J., in Ex‑Parte
Napier (6) at 695 stated that ‑ "a legal obligation which is the proper



# 458



substratum of a Mandamus can arise only from common law, statute or some
contract."



Professor Wade in his book 'Administrative Law' 4th Edition, page 603
correctly characterised this statement as a loose dictum which need not
necessarily mean that Lord Campbell thought that Mandamus was a remedy for a
breach of contract. "Rights flowing merely from a contract of membership
should not be within the scope of Mandamus", The Court does not issue a Writ
of Mandamus in a case in which the right which the petitioner wants to enforce
is based on a contract. Contractual duties are enforceable as matter of
private law by the ordinary contractual remedies, such as damages, injunctions
and specific performance, Duties enforceable by Mandamus are those imposed by
law. "This is an application at the instance of several partners in a trading
company to compel its co‑partners in a trading ,company to compel its
co‑partners to divide the profits, but that is merely a private purpose and
present a fit subject for inquiry on the other side of the Hall. There is no
instance in which the Courts have granted a Mandamus to a trading corporation"
‑ per Bayley, J. in _King vs. Governor & Co., Bank of England._ (7)



The prerogative remedies of Certiorari, Prohibition, and Mandamus cover the
field of governmental powers and duties. Modern Government is founded almost
exclusively on statutory powers and duties vested in public bodies and the
regular method of enforcement of those duties is by way of Mandamus. If a,
public official refuses to perform his duties Mandamus is the proper remedy.
But if an official of a body such as a trade union vested with no statutory
power conducts himself in the same way this remedy is inapplicable. The rights
of its members are spent by their contract of membership and are secured by
the ordinary remedies of private law.



The Rules of a trade union are not statutory Rules and cannot be equated to
the regulations framed under section 52 of the ordinance. They are the terms
of the contract of association between the members of the union. In the‑course
of his judgment in _Bonsor vs. Musicians union,_ (1) Denning L.J. said of
Trade Union rules ‑ "They are more like bye‑laws than a contract." Diplock
L.J., and Upjohn L.J., in _Farasmus vs. Film Artists 'Association_ (8)
dissented from this view and stated that there was no true analogy between the
rules of a trade union and the bye‑laws of a public corporation and that the
principle of ultra vires was not applicable to the rules of trade‑unions, as
it would apply in the case of bye‑laws. On appeal The House of Lords (1964 ‑
1.A.E.R. page 25) approved this statement of the law.



**459**

**  **

In the relationship between union and members, or among the members including
the officials of a trade union, the constitution of the union occupies a
position of primary legal importance. The rights and obligations of the union
are demarcated by the Rules. It is a reflection of the fact that the trade
union is a voluntary association that the general principle governing its
constitution is that of freedom of contract. The union rules are all framed
freely according to the will of the members and their enforceability is
governed by general principles of the law of contract, a transgression of the
rules is wrongful for the reason that it is a breach of the contract of
association, it is therefore open to an aggrieved member to seek his remedy in
private law; but since the rules do not involve performance of a duty of
public nature the remedy of Mandamus will not be available to him.



Counsel for the petitioners referred to the powerful position of trade unions
in the operations of the welfare society of today and to the momentous impact
of their actions on the public at large. On this score Counsel contended that
the public are interested in the performance by the officials of the union, of
their duties and that hence those duties are of public nature. The fallacy in
the argument is manifest. The measure of a body's potentiality to affect the
public at large cannot be the criterion for determining the legal status of
the body whether it is a public or private body.



Lord Denning's observations on the inadequacy of present legal remedies to
counter the mischief resulting from group action is apposite here:



"In the 19th century the individual was pre dominant in our affairs, in the
20th century it is a group. The industrial scene is dominated by groups ‑ of
employers' on the one hand and employees on the other. The nationalised
undertakings of large companies control the destinies of thousands and spend
millions of money. The associations of workmen ‑ organised officially and
unofficially ‑ exert enormous power over working men and women and have great
impact on the daily lives of the people. Like the powers of government, these
powers of the groups are capable of misuse and abuse .... The trade unions and
employers' associations are all voluntary associations they wield tremendous
power over every man and woman in the land. They can give or take away his or
her right to work. They can put him or her on the dole. They can call strikes
or other lock‑outs. By so doing they can inflict widespread



# 460



Damage.....The question at once arises: if these groups of people abuse or
misuse their power, can the Court of Law do anything to restrain them? It is
the most important question affecting society today. _None of the old
machinery of Certiorari, Mandamus or Prohibition is available against these
groups because they are not public authorities._ If there is to be machinery
it has to be newly designed and newly made" Lord Denning The Discipline of Law
at page 147 at 148.



In my view neither the "Lanka Guru Sangamaya" nor the respondents its
officials, are public bodies performing duties of a public nature. The duties
that the petitioners want the three respondents to be compelled to perform by
a Writ of Mandamus are not duties of a public nature for which such a Writ
will lie. They are contractual ditties outside the ambit of Mandamus.



The activities of private persons, whether natural or juristic, are outside
the bounds of Administrative Law. _Trade Exchange Ceylon Ltd., Vs. Asia Hotels
Corporation Ltd._ (9).



I agree with the Court of Appeal that the petitioners have misconceived their
remedy. I affirm the judgment of that Court and dismiss the appeal with costs.



**VICTOR PERERA, J.,** ‑ I agree.



**COLIN ‑THOME, J.**, ‑ I agree.



Appeal dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/36.html_  

