##  Husseniya v. Jayawardena and Another - SLR - 93, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC
36; (1981) 1 Sri LR 93 (27 March 1981)

**93**

**HUSSENIYA  
V.  
JAYAWARDENA AND ANOTHER**

**SUPREME COURT.  
WEERARATNE, J., SHARVANANDA, J. AND WANASUNDERA, J.  
S. C. No. 61/79-C.A. 493/78 (F)- D.C. GALLE 8307/L.  
MARCH 6,1981.  
**  
_Landlord and tenant-Action for ejectment- Tenant in arrears of rent-Payment
by sub -tenant- Need for such payments to be in name of tenant or on his
behalf if arrears to be discharged- Failure of sub-tenant to establish this
-Plaintiff entitled to judgment.  
_  
_Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, section 21 -Payment of rents to authorised person
-Payments must be in name of or on behalf of tenant.  
_  
**Held  
**  
(1) Under our law a stranger to a contract acting without authority may
validly is made in the name of the discharge the debtor's obligation provided
the payment is made in the name of the debtor and for his benefit. In the
present case, however, the 2nd defendant who was a sub-tenant of the 1st
defendant had failed to establish that he deposited rents in the name of the
1st defendant or on his behalf and the evidence in fact pointed to the deposit
having been made by the 2nd defendant in his own name. Such a deposit was not
effective to discharge the 1st defendant's liability for arrears of rent to
the landlord.  
  
(2) Further, the provisions of section 21 of Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, having
been invoked on behalf of the 2nd defendant, inasmuch as the payments were
made to the Municipality, the 2nd defendant had to establish that he had so
paid the rents in the name of or on behalf of the tenant (1st defendant) to
the Municipality, which in terms of the section was a statutory agent of the
landlord. The section only contemplates the deposit of rent being made by the
tenant and the deposit made by the 2nd defendant did not attract the benefit
of the provisions of section 21.  
  
(3) Accordingly, the finding that the 1st defendant was in arrears of rent
must be upheld and judgment be entered for the plaintiff.  
  
Per Sharvananda, J.  
  
On the facts it would appear the allegation of collusion between the plaintiff
and the 1st defendant made by the 2nd defendant is not without substance.
There was no good reason for the 1st defendant's failure to pay rent from
February, 1972\. But such allegation has no relevance to the question of
ejectment of the sub-tenant if the tenant, in fact, had fallen into arrears of
rent as prescribed by the Rent Act .................If the tenant in collusion
with the landlord or otherwise fails to pay rent and, in fact, falls into
arrears of rent, the sub-tenant's right of occupation is jeopardised, His
right to occupation is dependent on the tenant's right to occupation and he is
liable to eviction if the statutory protection given by the Rent Act to a
tenant and of which a sub-tenant may avail himself ceases to be available to
him by reason of fraud or collusion on the pan of the tenant."  
  
**Cases referred to**  
  
_(1) Bousfield v. Divisional Council of Stutterheim, (1920) 19 S.C.74._

**94**

_(2) commissioner for Inland Revenue v. Vesser, (1959) 1 S.A.L.R. 452.  
  
(3) Ibrahim Saibo v. Mansoor. (1953) 54 N.L.R. 217; 48 C.L.W. 35.  
  
A. Mampitiya, with N. R. M. Daluwatte, for the plaintiff - respondent-
appellant.  
  
M. S. A, Hassan, with Miss Sheila Jayatillake, for the 2nd defendant-
appellant­-respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 27, 1981.  
  
**SHARVANANDA, J.  
**  
This is an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal allowing the appeal
of the 2nd defendant-respondent and dismissing the plaintiff-appellant's
action with costs.  
  
The plaintiff-appellant sued the 1st and 2nd defendant­ respondents for
ejectment from premises Nos. 5, 7 and 9, Ward Street, Galle, on the ground
that the 1st defendant, being the tenant of the plaintiff, was in arrears of
rent from 1.2.72 up to the date of the plaint, viz., 21.5.74, and also on the
ground that the 1st defendant had without her consent sub-let the premises to
the 2nd defendant.  
  
The 1st defendant denied that he was in arrears of rent and prayed for the
dismissal of the plaintiff's action.  
  
The 2nd defendant filed answer denying that he was a sub­tenant of the 1st
defendant and claimed that he was in fact the tenant of the premises under the
plaintiff, that he had offered the rent to the plaintiff in February, 1972,
but as she refused to accept the rent, all the rent from February, 1972 had
been deposited by him in the Municipality of Galle. He further pleaded that
this was an action instituted by the plaintiff in collusion with the 1st
defendant in order to eject him. According to him, the 1st defendant was
permitted by his predecessors to use a portion of the premises in suit and was
a licensee under him.  
  
The position taken up by the 2nd defendant in the pleadings and in his
evidence was that his predecessors, Wilmot Jayawardena and after him Hinni
Nona, were tenants of the plaintiff and that on the death of Hinni Nona, his
mother, on 8th February, 1972, he succeeded her as tenant of the plaintiff and
in such capacity offered the rent for February,

**95**

1972 to the plaintiff, but she wrongfully refused to accept the rent from him.  
  
The main issues on which the case proceeded to trial were:  
  
(a) Who was the tenant of the premises-the 1st defendant or the 2nd defendant?  
  
(b) If the 1st defendant was the tenant, whether he was in arrears of rent
from February, 1972; and  
  
(c) Whether the 1st defendant had sub-let the premises to the 2nd defendant
without the written consent of the plaintiff.  
  
After trial, the trial Judge entered judgment for the plaintiff, holding that
the 1st defendant was, in fact, the tenant and that he had wrongfully sub-let
the premises to the 2nd defendant, and further that the 1st defendant was in
arrears of rent as pleaded in the plaint.  
  
The 2nd defendant thereupon appealed to the Court of Appeal, and the Court of
Appeal by its judgment dated 26.11.79 while affirming the finding of the
District Judge that the 2nd defendant's predecessor Hinni Nona was in
occupation of the premises as sub-tenant thereof and that on her death on 8th
February, 1972, the 2nd defendant succeeded her as sub-tenant under the 1st
defendant, proceeded to hold that the sub-letting had taken place prior to the
date of commencement of the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972 (i.e., prior to 1.3.72)
and hence section 10(7) of the Rent Act protected such sub-letting, so long as
the 2nd defendant continued to be the sub-tenant of the premises or part
thereof. The Court further held that since the 2nd defendant had deposited the
rent from 1.3.72 to 31.8.72 and further rents up to 31.3.75 in the
Municipality, such deposit was a valid payment of rent and that hence the 1st
defendant was not in arrears of rent when the plaintiff filed this action and
consequently both the 1st and 2nd defendants were entitled to the protection
of the Rent Act. It allowed the appeal of the 2nd defendant and dismissed the
plaintiff's action with costs.  
  
On the appeal before us, the concurrent finding that the 1st defendant was the
tenant of the premises and the 2nd defendant was his sub-tenant was not
canvassed and was accepted by counsel

**96**

for the 2nd defendant- respondent. it was also common ground that the 2nd
defendant had, in fact, deposited on 29th September, 1972, the rents for these
premises for the period 1.3.72 to 31.8.72 and thereafter for the subsequent
period up to 31.3.75 in the Municipality in favour of the plaintiff. The sole
question canvassed before us was whether such payment by the 2nd defendant
constituted valid payment of rent to the plaintiff so as to wipe out the 1st
defendant's arrears of rent. The finding of the trial Judge that the 1st
defendant had himself failed to pay any rent for the month of February, 1972
and thereafter was not questioned and was accepted by all parties.  
  
In holding that the deposit of the rent to the credit of the plaintiff for the
relevant period by the 2nd defendant was a valid payment which accrued to the
benefit of the 1st defendant the Court of Appeal fell into the fundamental
error of assuming that the Rent Clerk of the Galle Municipal Council had
stated in his evidence that the rents for these premises for the period 1.3.72
to 31.8.72 had been paid by the 2nd defendant "in the name of the 1st
defendant". This assumption is not borne out by the evidence of that witness.
According to the record, the Clerk had only stated: "A Sum of Rs. 540 being
rent from March, 1972 to August, 1972, has been paid on 29.9.72 by Nissanka
Jayawardena (the 2nd defendant). This money has been paid in the name of
Mohamed Ismail Asma Husseniya (plaintiff). Money has been paid up to March,
1975 at the rate of Rs. 90 a month". Not even the 2nd defendant in his
evidence has stated that he deposited the rent in the Municipality in the name
of the 1st defendant. It is not conceivable that the 2nd defendant would have
made the deposit of rent in the Municipality in the name of the 1st defendant,
as, according to him, during the relevant period he was the tenant of the
premises and the 1st defendant was his licensee and hence, in the
circumstances, it was not at all likely that he would have paid the rents in
the name of the 1st defendant. In fact, in re-examination he stated: "On
8.2.72 1 paid the money direct to the plaintiff. When I paid the money for the
month of March, the same was refused. Thereafter I deposited the money in the
Municipal Council". The conclusion is irresistible that the 2nd defendant did
not make the deposit in the Municipality in the name of the 1st defendant, but
made it in his own name in the purported discharge of his obligation qua
tenant. The burden was on the 2nd defendant to establish that the deposit made
by him served to wipe out the 1st defendant's arrears of rent. To succeed

**97**

in that defence, he had to prove that the deposit made by him was made in the
name of the 1st defendant or on his behalf. He has failed to do so.  
  
In view of its unwarranted assumption that the deposit of rent was made by the
2nd defendant in the name of the 1st defendant, the Court of Appeal came to
the wrong conclusion that such payment went to discharge the obligations of
the 1st defendant and that hence the 1st defendant was not in arrears of rent.  
  
The person who ought ordinarily to render performance is a debtor. He may also
render performance through an agent acting on his behalf. Under the Roman
Dutch Law, although the debtor or the agent is the proper person to perform
the contract, he is not the only person entitled, to do so. Any person
interested in the payment of the debt can discharge the obligation. A sub-
tenant could make payment of the rent due from a tenant to a landlord if such
payment was for the purpose of preventing his own goods from being seized
under the landlord's tacit hypothec.  
  
"A sub-tenant is entitled to pay the landlord the rent due to him by the
tenant either in order to free his (the sub-tenant's) goods from the
landlord's tacit hypothec, or acting as negotiorum gestor for the tenant."
(Voet 19.2.21 Wille Landlord and Tenant, 3rd Edition at 169).  
  
"The Civil Law, differing in that respect from the English Law, allows a
stranger to a contract to carry out his terms and to extinguish the obligation
of the debtor irrespective of whether the debtor is ignorant of the payment or
unwilling that it should be made by a third party." (Wessels Law of Contracts,
1937 Edition, Vol. 1, paragraph 2130 at p. 658). However, in paragraph 2134,
Wessels states:  
  
" For such payment to be effective, it must however be quite clear that the
third party makes the payment for the benefit of the debtor. "  
  
(Van Leeuwen, Cens. For., 1.4.32.3)  
  
In book 46.3.7 Voet states the law:  
  
"Although payment to my creditor's creditor will not be valid without my
creditor's consent except in so far as my actions on

**98**

his behalf have been for his benefit though unknown to him."  
  
Thus, according to Voet, the payment to operate as a discharge of the debt due
to the landlord must be for the benefit of the landlord and must purport to be
on his behalf.  
  
Pothier, in his Law of Obligations, states:  
  
" Section 463: it is not essential to the validity of the payment that it be
made by the debtor or any person authorised by him; it may be made by any
person without such authority, or even in opposition to his orders, provided
it is made in his name and in his discharge and the property is effectually
transferred; it is a valid payment , it induces the extinction of the
obligation and the debtor is discharged even, against his
will..................But if the payment was not made in the name of the real
debtor, it will not be valid: if a man paid in his own name a sum of money,
believing that he was the debtor when in fact it was not due from him but from
some other person, this payment would not extinguish the obligation of the
real debtor."  
  
In Bousfield v. Divisional Council of Stutterheim (1) at 71, De Villiers, C.J.
accepted the law as laid down by Voet and Pothier that payments made by a
stranger to a contract are valid and discharge the obligation, but he added:
"It is necessary however that the tender made by a perfect stranger should be
made in the name of the debtor", and held that if a tender is made by a
stranger in his own name, the creditor may refuse to accept payment.  
  
Thus it would appear that under our law a stranger to a contract acting
without authority, may validly discharge the debtor's obligation, provided the
payment is made in the name of the debtor and for his benefit, in which event
the debtor is discharged even against his will. (Commissioner for Inland
Revenue v. Vesser (2) at 458 (A.D.)) The payment must however be made to the
landlord or his agent.  
  
In this case the 2nd defendant has failed to establish that he deposited the
money in the name of the 1st defendant or on his behalf. On the other hand,
the evidence points to the deposit having been made by the 2nd defendant in
his own name, Hence such deposit is not effective to discharge the 1st
defendant's

**99**

liability for arrears of rent. Further, the payment was not made to the
plaintiff or to any agent appointed by him; the payment was to the
Municipality.  
  
Counsel for the 2nd defendant referred to section 21 of the Rent Act, No. 7 of
1972, and claimed that payment in terms of section 21 had been made to the
Municipality, which has been made the statutory agent of the landlord and that
such payment is deemed to be payment to the plaintiff, which redounded to the
benefit of the 1st defendant -tenant. Section 21 reads as follows:  
  
"21 (1) The tenant of any premises may pay the rent of the premises to the
authorised person instead of the landlord.  
  
(2) Where any payment of rent of any premises is made on any day in accordance
with the provisions of sub-section (1), it shall be deemed to be a payment
received on that day by the landlord of the premises from the tenant thereof.  
  
(4) In this section I authorized person' with reference to any premises means
the Mayor or a Chairman of the Local Authority within. whose administrative
limits the premises are situated."  
  
The principle of the Roman Dutch Law set out above applies only if the rent
has been paid by the sub-tenant in the name or on behalf of the tenant to the
landlord or his agent. In this case the rent has not been paid by the 2nd
defendant to the plaintiff -landlord in terms of the Roman Dutch Law. Section
21 of the Rent Act has appointed the Local Authority to be the statutory agent
of the landlord for the due payment of rent. For the 2nd defendant to avail
himself of the benefit of that section, he should satisfy all the conditions
prescribed for the deeming-section (21 (2)) to come into operation. Section 21
contemplates the deposit of rent to be made by the tenant. Admittedly, the
deposit of rent has not been made to the 'authorised person' by the 1st
defendant or anyone authorised by him. In the circumstances, the deposit made
by the 2nd defendant in the Municipality without the authority of the 1st
defendant does not attract the benefit of the provisions of section 21 and the
2nd defendant cannot claim the salvation of section 21.

**100**

For the above reasons, I cannot agree with the judgment of the Court of Appeal
that the deposit made by the 2nd defendant complies with the requirement of
the Roman Dutch Law or of section 21 of the Rent Act.  
  
In view of my above conclusion, it is not necessary to go into the question
whether the sub-letting of the premises by the 1st defendant to the 2nd
defendant took place prior to the commencement of the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972,
or not.  
  
On the facts it would appear that the allegation of collusion between the
plaintiff and the 1st defendant made by the 2nd defendant is not without
substance. There was no good reason for the 1st defendant's failure to pay
rent from February 1972. But such allegation has no relevance to the question
of ejectment of the sub-tenant if the tenant, in fact, had fallen into arrears
of rent as prescribed by the Rent Act. As was said in Ibrahim Saibo v. Mansoor
(3) at 223 D.B., "the position of a monthly sub-tenant whose immediate
landlord is a monthly tenant is precarious ...... . . . . . . . . His right to
occupation is fragile." If the tenant in collusion with the landlord or
otherwise fails to pay rent and, in fact, falls into arrears of rent, the sub-
tenant's right of occupation is jeopardised. His right to occupation is
dependent on the tenant's right to occupation and he is liable to eviction if
the statutory protection given by the Rent Act to a tenant and of which a
sub­tenant may avail himself ceases to be available to him by reason of fraud
or collusion on the part of the tenant.  
  
I allow the appeal of the plaintiff -appellant and set aside the judgment of
the Court of Appeal and restore the judgment of the trial Judge entering
judgment for the plaintiff as prayed for. The 2nd defendant will pay the
plaintiff -appellant his costs in the Court of Appeal and in this Court.  
  
**WEERARATNE, J. - I** agree.  
  
**WANASUNDERA, J. -I** agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_  

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/36.html_  

