##  Wijayapala Mendis v. P.R.P. Perera and Others - SLR - 110, Vol 2 of 1999
[1999] LKSC 36; (1999) 2 Sri LR 110 (27 April 1999)

**110**

**WIJAYAPALA MENDIS  
v.  
P. R. P. PERERA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
GUNAWARDANA, J. AND  
GUNASEKARA, J.  
S.C. SPECIAL (WRIT)  
APPLICATION NO. 2/98  
C.A. APPLICATION NO. 545/98  
MARCH 4 AND 11 1999

_Writ of Certiorari - Findings and recommendations of the Special Presidential
Commissions of inquiry Law, No. 7 of 1978 as amended \- Sections 9 (1), (2)
and 18A of the Law - Want or excess of jurisdiction - Breach of natural
justice and error of law on the face of the record - Unreasonability - Article
140 of the Constitution._

The Special Presidential Commission of Inquiry whose finding and
recommendation were challenged by the petitioners held an inquiry and found
the petitioner guilty of misuse or abuse of power on the ground that when he
was a Cabinet Minister he used undue influence and acting collusively with a
fellow Minister, arranged with the relevant Ministers, governmental
authorities and the Land Reform Commission to exchange an extent of 76 acres
of land allowed to him and his daughter by the Land Reform Commission for a
more valuable land being a partition of Siringapatha Estate. It was alleged
that the alternative land which the petitioner obtained by way of exchange
under section 22 of the Land Reform Law had been valued by the Land Reform
Commission with the approval of the Chief Valuer at Rs. 15,000 per acre in
1982 when in fact the land ought to have been valued at rates ranging from Rs.
30,000 to Rs. 50,000 an acre. It was further alleged that the petitioner
forcibly appropriated the 76 acres of alternative land from the southern end
of Mawatta Division of Siringapatha Estate whilst the authorities were only
agreeable to releasing land from the Northern end of that Division. The
Commission held that the petitioner thereby caused wrongful loss to the
Government; and recommended, under section 9 (1) of the SPC Law, that the
petitioner be made subject to civic disability. The finding of the Commission
was gazetted on 26.5.1997. The petitioner filed his application on 12.6.1998.

**111**

**Held :**

1\. The fact that consequent upon the recommendation of the Commission a
notice of a Resolution for the imposition of civic disability on the
petitioner under Article 81 of the Constitution had been placed on the Order
Paper and that the matter was pending before Parliament did not constitute a
bar to the grant of certiorari.

( _Bandaranaike v. Weeraratne_ (1981) 1 Sri LR 10 distinguished)

2\. The application was not time barred by delay.

_Per_ Fernando, J.

"Delay is never an absolute bar, particularly where the challenge is to
jurisdiction. In any event, a plea of delay must be considered on equitable
grounds; as for instance, whether the conduct of the petitioner indicates
acquiescence or a waiver of his rights and whether any appreciable prejudice
had been caused to the adverse party by that delay. Nothing of that kind has
been alleged."

3\. The jurisdiction which the court exercises under Article 140 of the
Constitution is unfettered. It is not restricted by the provisions of sections
9 (2) and 1 8A of the SPC Law.

4\. The findings and the recommendation of the Commission were vitiated for
want or excess of jurisdiction in that -

(a) the report of the inquiry had been made with the participation of only two
out of the three members who constituted the Commission (Paskaralingarn v.
Perera (1998) 2 Sri LR 169 followed).

(b) The inquiry against the petitioner for an alleged 'exchange' of land
belonging to the LRC was in excess of the Presidential Warrant. The relevant
part of that Warrant specified only 'sales and leases of land" as being
amenable to such inquiry.

(c) The attempt by the Commission to settle the matter by suggesting to the
parties that the Mawatta land for which the petitioner had still not been
granted site may by consent be returned to the LRC showed that the
Commissioners believed that there was nothing to report: the Commission
thereby ceased to have jurisdiction to proceed with the matter.

5\. The findings were in breach of natural justice in that -

112

(a) the Commission failed to call material witnesses including Minister
Thondaman who had given approval for the impugned 'exchange of the Mawatta
land; for the demarcation of .land by the National Livestock Development Board
which was then managing that land; and for the retention by the petitioner of
the portion of land which he had actually taken over.

(b) only two of the Commissioners (the 1st and 2nd respondents) made the
decision. The other member who participated at the inquiry at the hearing did
not consider the evidence and the submissions. There was no justification for
this omission. The decision was also made in haste and no reasons were given
on some important issues.

_Per_ Fernando, J.

"Natural justice is fairness in action. The inquiry against the petitioner
failed to reach minimum standard of fairness demanded of a judicial or quasi-
judicial inquiry."

6\. There were serious errors of law on the face of the record in respect of
the manner in which the Commission considered the evidence relating to the
approval of the 'exchange', the identification of the portion of the land to
be given to the petitioner, the alleged forcible taking over of a different
portion, the existence of a seed paddy farm on the land surrendered by the
petitioner and the valuation of the two lands. Some vital documents, many
material items of oral evidence were ignored and others were misconstrued.

_Per_ Fernando, J.

"Considered in isolation each of these is a serious error of law; taken
cumulatively, they are so extensive and so grave as to amount to a denial of a
fair inquiry."

7\. The Commissioners acted on the assumption that the automatic consequence
of a finding that there was a misuse or abuse of power must be the
recommendation for the imposition of civic disability. They had wrongly
assumed that they had no discretion in the matter. The impugned
recommendations are arbitrary and unreasonable.

8\. The findings of the 1st and 2nd respondents cannot stand and the
recommendations are necessarily null and void.

**113**

**Cases referred to:**

1. _Cooray v. Bandaranaike_ SC Special (Writ) No. 1/98 SC Minutes 5th February, 1999.

2. _Paskaralingam v. Perera_ (1998) 2 Sri LR 10.

3. _Bandaranaike v. Weeraratne_ (1981) 1 Sri LR 10.

4. _Sabapathy v. Dunlop_ (1935) 37 NLR 113 129.

5. _Senanayake v. de Silva_ (1972) 75 NLR 409, 432-433.

**APPLICATION** for a writ of certiorari against the Special Presidential
Commission of Inquiry.

_E. D. Wickremanayake_ with _Gomin Dayasiri, J. Kulathileke_ and _Ms.
Priyanthi Gunaratne_ for the petitioner.

_K. C. Kamalasabayson, PC,_ SG, with _Shavindra Fernando,_ SSC and _V. Corea,_
SC for the respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

April 27, 1999  
**  
FERNANDO, J.**

This is an application by the petitioner for Certiorari to quash the findings
and the recommendations made against him by a Special Presidential Commission
of Inquiry.

Pursuant to section 2 of the Special Presidential Commissions of Inquiry Law,
No. 7 of 1978 (as amended), by Warrant dated 2.2.95 HE the President
established a three-member Special Presidential Commission of Inquiry ("the
Commission"), consisting of the 1st to 3rd respondents, namely Justice P. R.
P. Perera, Judge of the Supreme Court, Chairman, Justice H. S. Yapa, Judge of
the Court of Appeal, and Justice F. N. D. Jayasuriya, Judge of the Court of
Appeal (then a Judge of the High Court). That Warrant authorised the
Commissioners:

"to inquire into and obtain information in respect of the management,
administration and conduct of affairs of the public bodies

114

referred to in the Schedule hereto during the period commencing on July 24,
1977 and ending on August 16, 1994, and more specifically in respect of the
transactions, activities and matters relating to such public bodies referred
to in that Schedule or the Government, and

(a) whether there has been any malpractice or irregularity, or non-compliance
with or disregard of the proper procedures applicable in relation to, such
management, administration and conduct of affairs or to any such transaction
or activity of such public body or the Government, resulting in loss, damage
or detriment to such public body or the Government;

(b) whether any contractual obligations relating to any such transaction or
activity or of such public body or the Government, have been entered into or
carried out, fraudulently, recklessly, negligently or irresponsibly, resulting
in loss, damage or detriment to such public body or the Government;

(c) whether there has been non-compliance with, or disregard of, the proper
procedure applicable to the calling of tenders or the entering into of
agreements or contracts, by such public body or the Government;

(d) whether such non-compliance with, or disregard of proper procedures has
resulted in -

(i) ' the improper or irregular or discriminatory award of any such tender for
the purchase or sale of property including shares by such public bodies or the
Government, or the provisions of any service, to or by such public body or the
Government;

(ii) loss, damage or detriment to such public body or the Government, or the
incurring of any unjustified, unreasonable or unwarranted expenditure on any
transaction or activity;

(e) whether proper independent valuations had been obtained, where relevant,
in respect of any such transaction;

115

(f) whether proper procedures and adequate safeguards have been adopted to
ensure that such public body or the Government obtained the optimum price or
benefit for the purchase or acquisition or sale of property including shares
by such public body or the Government, or the provision of any service to or
by such public body or the Government;

(g) whether terms of payment which have been agreed, with the purchaser or
seller or owner of such property including shares by such public body or the
Government for the provision of any service to or by such public body or the
Government, have been detrimental or disadvantageous to such public body or
the Government;

(h) the person or persons responsible for the act, omission, or conduct, which
has resulted in such loss or damage to such public body or the Government in
respect of any such transaction or activity;

(i) whether any inquiry or probe into any of the aforesaid matters had been
obstructed or prevented in any manner, resulting in loss or damage to such
public body or the Government and person or persons responsible for such
obstruction;

(j) the procedure which should be adopted by such public bodies or the
Government in the future to ensure that such transactions or activities are
carried out with transparency and with proper accountability with a view to
securing the optimum price or benefit for such public body or the Government;

(k) whether there has been -  
  
(i) misuse or abuse of power, influence, interference, fraud, corruption and
nepotism in relation to any such transaction or activity or matter;

(ii) non-compliance with or contravention of, any law written or otherwise on
the part of any Prime Minister, Minister or other

116

public officer or other person or persons as defined in Law No. 7 of 1978, as
amended by the Special Presidential Commissions of Inquiry (Special
Provisions) Act No. 4 of 1978, and Act No. 38 of 1986, or other person or
persons, and the extent to which such Prime Minister, Minister or other public
officer, or person or persons is or are responsible for such non-compliance or
contravention;

And to make recommendations with reference to any of the matters that have
been inquired into under the terms of this warrant." [emphasis added]

The Warrant required the Commissioners to transmit to the President within six
months reports or interim reports setting out the findings of their inquiries
and their recommendations.

It is necessary to reproduce to some parts of that Schedule:

" 1\. Air Lanka Ltd. | Purchase of Airbus Aircraft.  
---|---  
  |  
2\. Hotel Developers (Lanka) Ltd. | Matters relating to the Hilton  
  |  Hotel Project and acts of  
  | commission and omission by.  
  |  . . . . .  
**. . . . . . . . . . . . .** |  
6\. Urban Development Authority | Major sales and leases of property.  
  |  
7\. Sri Lanka Ports Authority | Acquisition of lands, their valuations  
  |  **. . .** and transactions of  
  |  ten million rupees and over.  
  |  
8\. Ceylon Electricity Board | Transactions of ten million  
  | rupees and over **. . .**  
**. . . . . . . . . . . . .** |  
17\. Land Reform Commission | Sales and leases of land.  
  |  
18\. Government Contracts and tenders of ten million |  [emphasis added]  
rupees and over, and sales and leases of land by the |  
government." |  
  
117

The Commission held several ex parte "preliminary hearings" commencing on
11.9.95, and then issued a Notice dated 13.11.95 under section 9 of the Law
requiring the petitioner to show cause why he should not be found guilty of
misuse or abuse of power. After inquiry, an interim report (the "interim
report") dated 2.3.97 was submitted to the President signed only by the 1st
and 2nd respondents, and not by the 3rd respondent although he continued to be
a member of the Commission. There was then published in the Gazette of 26.5.97
a brief summary of that report of which the following is relevant to this
application:

"The following contents of the report dated 2nd March, 1997, of the Special
Presidential Commission of Inquiry, 1995, appointed to inquire into alleged
malpractices **. . .** are published as directed by Her Excellency the
President in accordance with section 9 of the [Law] **. . .**

ALLEGATION RELATING TO WRONGFUL EXCHANGE OF 76 ACRES OF PANIKANKULAM IN THE
ANURADHAPURA DISTRICT BELONGING TO THE [PETITIONER] IN EXCHANGE FOR 76 ACRES
OF LAND AT MAWATTA DIVISION OF SIRINGAPATHA ESTATE, DANKOTUWA, BELONGING TO
THE LAND REFORM COMMISSION.

_Charges :_

The respondent in this case Tenahandi Wijayapala Mendis was required to show
cause why he should not be found guilty of misuse or abuse of power, in that
"he did whilst holding office as a Cabinet Minister of the Government of Sri
Lanka between the period 1.10.1980 and 26.2.1990 directly or indirectly induce
Hon. E. L. Senanayake, the then Minister of Agricultural Development and
Research, Hon. S. Thondaman, the then Minister of Rural Industrial
Development, Mr. K. D. M. Chandra Bandara, Member of Parliament, officers of
the said Ministries, officers of the Land Reform Commission and the National
Livestock Development Board, to permit him to surrender an extent of about 76
acres of land called Panikankulam situated in the Anuradhapura District
belonging to him and his daughter Manouri Mendis and obtaining in exchange

118

an extent of 76 acres of land from the Mawatta division of Siringapatha Estate
situated at Dankotuwa in the Puttalam District, thereby causing wrongful loss
to the Government of Sri Lanka and/ or the National Livestock Development
Board and/or the Land Reform Commission".

_The Findings :_

Upon a careful consideration of the evidence adduced before this Commission we
are satisfied that the request made to the Chairman, LRC by Mr. Chandra
Bandara in his capacity as MP Anuradhapura West to recover the land called
Panikankulam for the purpose of converting it into a Seed Paddy Farm (vide
P5A), was not a genuine request, but a sham. We are also satisfied that in the
context of the relationship which existed between the respondent and Mr.
Chandra Bandara who held office as Cabinet Minister and Deputy Minister,
respectively, in the Government that they had acted in collusion to achieve a
different objective in recommending to the LRC the take-over of the land at
Panikankulam belonging to the respondent. It is clear on the evidence before
us that when Mr. Bandara made this request for the ostensible purpose of
setting up a Paddy Seed Farm on Panikankulam, he was acting in collusion with
the respondent who had initiated this course of action and was determined to
achieve his real objective of procuring a portion of Siringapatha estate for
himself and his daughter which on the evidence before the Commission was much
more valuable than Panikankulam which the respondent offered in exchange
therefore.

Having regard to the totality of the evidence of this case, we are firmly of
the view that had it not been for this dubious and highly questionable
exchange of land under section 22 of the Land Reform Commission Law mooted by
the respondent in collusion with Mr. Chandra Bandara, the then MP for
Anuradhapura West, 76 acres of Mawatta estate would well have been sold for a
sum of over Rs. 2,665,000 in the open market.

We hold, therefore, that wrongful loss has indeed been caused to the LRC and
the Government of Sri Lanka, by alienating an

119

extent of 76 acres from Mawatta division, Dankotuwa, belonging to the LRC in
exchange for 76 acres of Panikankulam which has been valued at Rs. 998,500 by
the then Chief Valuer as the commercial value of this property.

We hold that the allegation set out in the Show Cause Notice has been
established.

_Recommendation :_

In view of our finding in respect of the allegation set out in the Show Cause
Notice, we hold the respondent guilty of misuse or abuse of power under the
provisions of section 9 (1) of the Special Presidential Commissions of Inquiry
Law, No. 7 of 1978, as amended by the Special Presidential Commissions of
Inquiry (Special Provisions) Act, No. 4 of 1978 and the Special Presidential
Commissions of Inquiry (Amendment) Act, No. 38 of 1986.

We, accordingly, recommend that the respondent Tenahandi Wijayapala Hector
Mendis be made subject to Civic Disability under the provisions of section 9
(1) of the aforesaid Special Presidential Commissions of Inquiry Law, No. 7 of
1978, as amended by the Special Presidential Commissions of Inquiry (Special
Provisions) Act, No. 4 of 1978 and the Special Presidential Commissions of
Inquiry (Amendment) Act No. 38 of 1986."

The petitioner filed an application dated 12.6.98 in the Court of Appeal
praying for Certiorari to quash those findings and recommendations; on 16.6.98
that Court made order transferring the application to this Court in accordance
with section 18A; and on 22.6.98 this Court issued notice on the respondents.

The respondents did not plead, and Mr. Kamalasabayson on their behalf did not
contend, that our jurisdiction was in anyway restricted by the provisions of
sections 9 (2) and 18A of the Law. I respectfully agree with Dheeraratne, J.
that the jurisdiction which this Court exercises under Article 140 is
unfettered ( _Cooray v. Bandaranayake_ (1)).

120

_The Facts :_

It is necessary to state briefly the facts relating to five matters in
particular: the approval in principle of the "exchange", the identification of
the portion of land to be given to the petitioner, the forcible taking over of
a different portion by the petitioner, the existence or establishment of a
seed paddy farm on the land to be surrendered by the petitioner, and the basis
of valuation, as well as the valuation, of the two lands sought to be
exchanged.

The following summary of the facts is based on the interim report,
supplemented by other relevant items of oral and documentary evidence which,
though led in the course of the proceedings before the Commission, have not
been referred to in the interim report; the latter evidence is italicized (and
references are given to the documents and/or the pages of the proceedings).

When the Land Reform Law, No. 1 of 1972, came into operation the petitioner
declared ownership of 250 acres of a land called Panikankulam, of which he was
entitled to retain only 50 acres; and he was permitted to effect an "inter-
family transfer" of 26 acres to his daughter. This was the 76 acres (the
"Panikankulam land") which was sought to be exchanged for 76 acres (the
"Mawatta land") from Mawatta division of Siringapatha estate. However, the
statutory determination in respect of the petitioner's 50 acres was Gazetted
by the LRC only on 10.7.90. ft is not known whether and when the petitioner
executed an inter-family transfer in favour of his daughter, and there seems
to have been no survey plan identifying the particular allotment for such
inter-family transfer (proceedings of 3.10.95, page 17, and page 11850).

By letter dated 28.10.80, Chandra Bandana, MP Anuradhapura West, requested the
Chairman, Land Reform Commission (LRC), to "recover" the Panikankulam land
situated in his electorate for conversion into a paddy seed farm. The
petitioner by letter dated 30.10.80 informed the then Minister of Agriculture,
under whom the LRC was, that he had no objection to that request, provided
alternative land was given from Siringapatha estate; nothing seems to have

121

happened for over two months, until on 23.1.81 the Minister referred that
letter to the Chairman, LRC, with the endorsement "I approve". That estate was
in the possession of the National Livestock Development Board (NLDB) which was
managing it on behalf of the LRC; the NLDB came under the Ministry of Rural
Industrial Development (RID); and the Chairman, LRC, by letter dated 29.1.81
requested the Secretary, Ministry of RID, to ascertain from the Chairman,
NLDB, whether 76 acres from Siringapatha estate could be released.

The interim report does not refer to any action taken by the LRC thereafter,
between February, 1981 and January, 1982.

On 31.3.81 the petitioner handed over possession of the Panikankulam land to
the District Authority of the LRC (R1 and R13 dated 31.3.81).

Thereafter, the petitioner wrote P6B dated 23.9.81 to the Minister, RID,
referring to the request made by the LRC to hand over 76 acres to him, and
asked him to expedite the matter. By P6C dated 1.10.81, the latter's Co-
ordinating Officer forwarded P6B to the Chairman, NLDB.

The Chairman, NLDB, wrote on 28.10.81 to the Secretary, RID, stating that
Siringapatha estate was one of the best coconut lands, and that releasing 76
acres from that estate would be detrimental to the NLDB. That reply was given
by him without any investigation into the feasibility of releasing the land
requested (27.2.96, pages 7351-2). According to the interim report:

"after he despatched [that] letter he was summoned for a meeting at the
Ministry of RID where Minister Thondaman, the [petitioner] and Festus Perera
were present. Subsequent to [that] letter [the Chairman] had met the
[petitioner] and had discussions **. . .** and as [the petitioner] had
expressed his willingness to accept 76 acres from Mawatta division, he had
reluctantly agreed to release 76 acres from that division and informed the
Secretary, RID, accordingly by his letter dated 11.1.82."

122

That letter dated 11.1.82 does not manifest any "reluctance', but merely
states that the petitioner agreed to take 76 acres from Mawatta division. By
another letter dated 25.1.81 the Chairman informed the Secretary, RID, that
the petitioner had agreed to take that extent from the northern end.

The Secretary, RID, testified that, some time before 20.1.82, he was summoned
to attend another meeting, at which Minister Thondaman, the petitioner, the
Chairman, NLDB, and Festus Perera were present; and that "the Minister agreed
to give [76 acres from Mawatta] subject to the decision of the Chairman, NLDB,
who would determine a portion of land from Mawatta division which was not
essential for his development work". The Secretary, RID, wrote on 20.1.82 to
the Chairman, LRC, that they were agreeable to release 76 acres from Mawatta,
the location and boundaries to be decided by the NLDB so as not to interfere
with its activities.

On 24.1.82 the petitioner had visited Mawatta division, and he had agreed to
take 76 acres from the northern part; that is confirmed in a letter dated
25.1.82 from the Chairman, NLDB, to the Secretary, RID. There was also the
evidence of a Director, LRC, that he had informed the petitioner by letter
dated 3.2.82 that the demarcation of the boundaries of the 76 acre block would
be done by the NLDB.

The interim report states the conclusion that the NLDB and its Chairman:

"have from the very outset been opposed to the proposal to release any land
from Mawatta division to the [petitioner]. The evidence discloses that it was
with a great degree of reluctance that the Chairman ultimately agreed to
release a portion of land from Mawatta division, on the specific condition
that the [petitioner] agreed to the NLDB demarcating the boundaries starting
from the northern end."

However, the interim report made no reference to the Chairman's letter R5
dated 29.10.81 to the Sri Lanka Libya-Livestock Development

123

Co. Ltd. (SLLLDC), regarding a request for the release to that Company of that
portion of land from Mawatta division which contained the existing poultry
unit. in that letter the Chairman stated that that section could not be
released (because it contained buildings, etc.), but offered "equally suitable
land of lesser productivity available in close proximity", namely, a portion
of Field No. 4 comprising 130 acres which consisted entirely of old coconut
which would soon require replanting. What the petitioner later took seems also
to have been from Field No 4. (page 7440).

That omission is all the more significant because the interim report did
mention in another context - the valuation of the Mawatta land - that the
balance portion of Mawatta estate [Division ?] had in fact been sold by the
LRC at Rs. 30,000 per acre to that Company in 1983. The interim report failed
to consider why the Chairman had been willing to release 130 acres to SLLLDC
on 29.10.81, although just the day before he had declined, without any
investigation, to release any land whatsoever from Siringapatha estate to the
petitioner. The 1st respondent asked him:

"So without any type of investigation your first reaction was to inform him
that it cannot be released?

A: Yes, because we depend on the income of coconut to run the farm." (27.2.96,
page 7352).

According to the Manager of Siringapatha estate, in February, 1982, the NLDB
had instructed him to assist a surveyor to demarcate the 76 acres from the
northern end; he met the surveyor in the company of the petitioner, and
clearly indicated the relevant area; however, he was not present at the
survey; but he had given his Assistant Manager specific directions to instruct
the surveyor to demarcate from the northern end. (The Assistant Manager did
not give evidence.) When he went to Mawatta division to hand over, he found
that, contrary to instructions, land had been demarcated from the southern
end, and the petitioner's men had already started fencing that portion with
barbed wire and railway sleepers. The substance of his evidence was that it
was due to the pressure exerted upon him by the petitioner that he handed over
that portion to the

124

LRC officials (who in turn must have handed over possession to the
petitioner).

The surveyor testified that he had been instructed by the Assistant General
Manager, NLDB, to demarcate 76 acres from the northern end; that he found that
he could not carve out one contiguous block of 76 acres; that he informed the
Assistant Manager, who told him to get instructions from the NLDB; and that he
then met the Assistant General Manager, NLDB, who asked him to carve out one
contiguous block of 76 acres starting from the western end. (The Assistant
General Manager, NLDB, was not called to give evidence.) It was also his
evidence that soon thereafter the Chairman, NLDB, entrusted to him the survey
of the rest of Mawatta division as well - an indication that the Chairman was
not dissatisfied with him (pages 11869,12069). The 1st and 2nd respondents did
not accept his evidence.

The Chairman, NLDB, wrote on 18.2.82 to the Chairman, LRC, recording what had
happened, and "disassociating ourselves with this release". He said he had
already brought this to the notice of his Minister, who summoned him for yet
another meeting on 3.3.82 at which the petitioner was present, and directed
him forthwith "to inspect the portion of land which the [petitioner] preferred
to take and consider whether [that land] could be released to him":

"He had accordingly visited Mawatta [on 4.3.82 and] **. . .** saw to his utter
surprise that an extent of about 76 acres had already been fenced with railway
sleepers and barbed wire. This was not the portion of land which the
[petitioner] had agreed to take from the northern end. He had on this day seen
the [petitioner] also **. . .** [who had requested him] not to take any action
against the Assistant Manager [who had permitted the land to be fenced]."

He returned the same day, and reported to Minister Thondaman who appeared to
be very surprised. Thereafter, he had addressed a letter dated 12.3.82 to the
Minister:

125

" **. . .** stating that a major portion of the 76 acres earmarked had already
been barb wired and any adjustments at this stage would require relocating
these fences, and also having regard to certain other matters in the context
of this demarcation he had allowed the status quo to remain as proposed by the
[petitioner] since the advantages that would accrue to the Farm would far
outweigh the disadvantages resulting from the readjustment.

In summarizing that letter, the interim report fails to mention that the
purpose of that visit, as disclosed by that letter, was only to see whether
some minor adjustment could be made. I will refer to that matter later.

_The assessment of the evidence of the Chairman, NLDB :_

The interim report states that the gist of the Chairman's testimony was:

" **. . .** to the effect that if the final decision in regard to the
allocation of land from Mawatta division to the [petitioner] lay with him, he
would undoubtedly have refused this request. He had consistently objected to
this course of action. He was compelled to succumb to the pressures exerted on
him both by Minister Thondaman and the [petitioner] and to quote his own
words, he ultimately 'surrendered'. In the circumstances, he had no other
alternative."

Minister Thondaman was not called to give evidence.

The 1st and 2nd respondents had little hesitation in accepting the Chairman's
evidence, for the reason that:

"We were impressed with the frank and forthright manner in which [he]
testified **. . .** He was a truthful witness whose evidence we accept without
reservation. He was 82 years old at the time he testified and although his
recollection may not have been perfectly accurate in certain instances due to
his age, we had no reason to doubt his integrity or his testimony at any stage
in spite of the

126

very severe cross-examination **. . .** Besides his evidence has been
corroborated by both [the Secretary, RID, and the Director, LRC] and the
documentary evidence produced in this connection."

However, even a cursory examination shows not only that his evidence was vague
and uncertain, and even contradictory, on important aspects, but also that it
was inconsistent with letters contemporaneously written by him; indeed, the
record shows that the Commissioners themselves realised these infirmities even
while he was giving evidence. None of these matters have even been referred to
in the interim report.

The 1st and 2nd respondents glossed over the defects in his evidence,
attributing them to his being 82 years of age. Mr. Wickremanayake complained
that even that was incorrect, because twice - and both times in answer to the
1st respondent - the witness had given his age, as 75 (on 12.9.95) and 76 (on
29.2.96). While there was no reason to doubt the integrity of the witness,
there were serious shortcomings both in his evidence, and in its assessment,
and to that I must now turn.

In his ex parte evidence-in-chief, the Chairman, NLDB, made various assertions
(which were later probed in cross-examination). He described Siringapatha
estate:

"That was prime coconut land well-fertilized and yielding about 4,000 - 5,000
nuts per acre. It was adjoining the Coconut Research Board land more or less.

Chairman : So this is about the best land?

A : Best land." (12.9.95, page 11) [emphasis added throughout]

A Ittle later counsel asked:

"Was the area that was fenced the best area in the Mawatta division or **. .
.**?

A : The entire division was a good estate. So I cant say it is the best
portion.' (12.9.95, page 16)

127

But the witness quickly reversed himself: "I was surprised when he had taken
from the best; and a few minutes later agreed with the 3rd respondent:

"Q : 76 acres of Mawatta from the middle which was the best part of Mawatta ?
A: Yes **. . .** " (12.9.95 page 21)

Twice the 1st respondent asked him, "Left to yourself you would not have given
any part of Mawatta?' (12. 9.95, pages 21-22), and the witness agreed,
explaining on the second occasion:

" **. . .** I would never have given. [On another occasion a late Minister]
wanted some [forty acres of prime] land and I refused to give. So then he said
that he will break my legs when I come to [his electorate] **. . .** I
reported the matter to [my] Minister, and then he reported to [the then
President]. Then he denied **. . .** then a meeting was summoned and [the late
Minister] was asked to apologize to me."

It is not surprising that the witness asserted (page 21) that he would not
have been influenced by the petitioner.

The Chairman, NLDB, repeatedly claimed that he had not been aware, even as
late as the meeting of 3.3.82, that the petitioner had taken over 76 acres
otherwise than from the northern end of Mawatta division (as previously
agreed); and persisted in that position despite being shown his own letter of
18.2.82 by which he had protested to the Chairman, LRC:

"That means [the petitioner] had taken over in February?

A : I wasn't aware of this even at the meeting on the 3rd of March **. . .** "

" **. . .** Q : On 10.2.82 [18.2.82] you have written to the Chairman, LRC **.
. .** protesting **. . .  
**  
Chairman : There is a little controversy [sic] in that. Now by the letter of
10.2.82 [18.2.82 the witness] has protested

128

to the Chairman, LRC. Then [his] evidence was that at the meeting of the 10th
[3rd] of March he was not aware that the [petitioner] had taken over the land.  
  
Hon Jayasuriya: Only when he went on inspection [4.3.82] he discovered it **.
. . .**  
  
(Examination continued)

Q: How did you write a letter on the 10th [18th] February protesting against
this?  
  
A : The LRC people had come to this land.  
  
Q : You were aware that possession had been taken over on 5th February,
apparently, you knew at that time?  
  
A : I cant recollect, it is a little complicating.

Q : Why did you go on the 4th of March?  
  
A : That I can remember because the Minister asked me to go and see whether we
can give some land from Mawatta.  
  
Q : So this is the other portion that had been taken over?

Chairman : The other portion is?

Mr. Premaratne: The best portion of the land which is fenced.  
  
Chairman : On the 10th [18th] of February, 1982 [the witness] protested to the
Chairman, LRC **. . .** therefore [he] was aware that the [petitioner] had
taken over a certain portion of the land. l cant reconcile that with his
evidence on the 3rd of March 1982, when he was directed to go there on the 4th
he was surprised that [the petitioner] had already taken possession.

Hon. Jayasuriya: The two positions are inconsistent." (12.9.95 pages 25,
28-29).

The 1st respondent then intervened with a series of leading questions,
forcefully putting a position to the witness:  
  
"Anyway, what you say is by 10th of February, 1982, you were aware that [the
petitioner] had taken some portion of the land?  
  
A : Some portion of the land. Yes.  
  
Q : When you went there in March you found that he had taken the best portion
of the land which had already been fenced, that is what you are saying?

129

A : Yes.  
  
Q : That is what surprised you, not the fact that he had taken possession. Is
that your position?  
  
A : Yes." (12.9.95, pages 29-30).

Almost immediately thereafter the 1st respondent turned to the letter dated
12.3.82 which the witness had written to the Minister after his visit to
Mawatta on 4.3.82 :

"Q : To get back to your letter of 12.3.82, you wrote to the Minister a strong
protest informing the Minister that the best portion of the estate had been
taken over and had been fenced with sleepers, barbed wire and so on ?  
  
A : Yes.

(Mr Premaratne marks the letter dated 12.3.82 as P21)"  
  
There were three questions rolled up: that his letter was a protest, that it
referred to the best land having been taken, and that it had been fenced. Was
the answer "Yes" a reply to all three questions, or only to the last?

"Q : To this letter to the Minister did you get a reply?

A : No.  
  
Q : What was the reaction of the Minister to that letter?  
  
A : He did not reply that letter nor did the Secretary, but after that he
would have given me verbal instructions.  
  
Q : To fall in line?  
  
A : I think so. I can't say something of which I am not very sure. That is
what must have happened thereafter.  
  
Q : Anyway, after your protest of the 12th of March, 1982, you ceased to
protest any further?  
  
A : Yes, there was no point in protesting." (12.9.95, pages 31-32)

Naturally, those matters were probed in cross-examination. On many matters,
the Chairman's recollection was poor. Thus he could only remember meeting the
petitioner once, on 3.3.82 (27.2.96, pages 7363-4, 7366). When shown his own
letter P16 dated 11.1.82

130

which referred to discussions with the petitioner, he said: "I am very sorry.
I cant remember what discussions I had after so many years" (page 7365).
Nevertheless, the interim report baldly records that he testified to three
meetings.

He was asked whether the northern portion of Mawatta was more or less the same
as the portion which the petitioner took, in regard to the fertility and the
age of the plantation. Before he could answer, the 3rd respondent intervened:

Q : In the same condition?  
  
A : Same condition. But this land is very close to the Assistant Manager's
quarters, office and other buildings. That was one of the objections **. . .**  
  
Q : That is the only unsatisfactory feature about it?  
  
A : Yes.  
  
Q : In other respects you have have nothing to say?  
  
A : And there is a water course going in the centre where the cattle [go for]
water." (page 7443).

Turning to his evidence-in-chief of an annual yield of 4,000 to 5,000 nuts per
acre, he was shown the relevant annual report of the NLDB, and was forced to
concede that the average yield per acre for the entirety of Siringapatha
estate at the relevant time was only 3,064 nuts per acre. He also admitted
that no part of Mawatta division "more or less adjoins the Coconut Reseach
Board land" (page 7537).

The witness had previously fallen into line with the leading questions put to
him (on 12.9.95, pages 29-30) by the 1st respondent, as to when he became
aware that the petitioner had taken possession: that by 10th of February,
1982, he was aware of this, and that his surprise was only because the
petitioner had taken the best portion. But on 29.2.96, under cross-
examination, he again reverted to the position that until 4.3.82 he was not
aware that the petitioner had taken over any land from Mawatta. The 1st
respondent himself then pointed out the contradiction to him - but to no
avail:

131

"Q : How do you reconcile your evidence **. . .** ?  
  
A : On the 3rd of March if I was aware of this whole situation that the land
actually is physically taken over, then I would have told my Minister at that
time that there is no point in my visting Mawatta to select land **. . .**

Hon. Yapa : But it is difficult to reconcile. You say there was a meeting on
3rd March and you were asked to go and earmark the land to be given to [the
petitioner]?

A : Yes.  
  
Q : By then you have already written this letter **. . .** that already land
has been ear-marked. How do you reconcile these two situations?  
  
A : (Witness silent)." (pages 7541-4).

The cross-examination moved on to the letter dated 12.3.82 which the Chairman
wrote to the Minister after visiting Mawatta on 4.3.82. Although he had
readily agreed (on 12.9.95) in answer to a leading question put to him by the
1st respondent, that he wrote a strong protest to the Minister that the best
portion had been taken over, he was asked to read the letter and identify the
protest; he could not. It was then put to him that the only purpose of his
visit was to iron out a minor aspect of the demarcation (ie to provide a
corridor to connect two portions of the land which then remained with the
NLDB). Before he could answer, the 1st respondent told him to read the letter,
and asked him:

" **. . .** You were asked to visit the place and to resolve that problem
[relating to the corridor]. Isn't that what the letter speaks of?  
  
A : Yes.

Q : So is that correct?  
  
A : Yes. I have written it. It should be correct." (page 7548).

It then became clear that by that letter the Chairman had not protested at
all, but on the contrary had given five reasons why the status quo should not
be disturbed. The 1st respondent then told the witness: "this is the
impression we get from your letter". The witness, weakly, suggested that he
had intended to convey a protest, but did not do so directly because he could
not go against a Minister (page

132

7550). Nobody reminded him how firmly he had stood up to that other Minister
who had even threatened to break his legs.

Finally, he gave up the position that he had protested because the best land
had been taken: he agreed (page 7552) that as far as the land was concerned
whether it was from the northern end or from the place where the petitioner
actually got it, it was the same type of land. Both as to his reluctance to
part with the land, and as to how good the land really was, the most relevant
contemporaneous documentary evidence was his letter R5 dated 29.10.81
(referred to earlier), which too, somehow, escaped the attention of the 1st
and 2nd respondents.

_The valuation :_

The lands sought to be exchanged had been valued at the relevant time by a
valuer, Somathilleke, who was then Director (Valuation and Compensation), LRC.
His valuation was on the basis of the agricultural value of the two lands,
because his view was that a valuation for the purpose of alienation by way of
exchange under section 22 of the Land Reform Law should be on that basis. His
position was that land alienated under that section could only be used for the
limited purposes set out therein. According to him, on that basis, the Mawatta
land was worth Rs. 99,000 more: and that sum the petitioner paid to the LRC.
He also stated that his valuation had been approved by the Chief Valuer (page
4077).

However, in June, 1995, the Commission had requested the Chief Valuer to value
the lands as at 1982. He assessed the market values: the Mawatta land at Rs.
2,665,000 (four blocks at rates ranging from Rs. 30,000 to Rs. 50,000 per
acre) and 65 acres of the Panikankulam land at Rs. 660,000. The latter
valuation had been made although he had not been able to identify 26 acres of
the Panikankulam land correctly; and he subsequently made a hypothetical
valuation of its open market value, at Rs. 988,500.

The interim report does not mention that during the ex parte stage the 1st
respondent had told the Solicitor-General, who was assisting

133

the Commission, that it may be useful to call somebody from the LRC, either
the Chairman or someone else, "particularly to clarify this position in regard
to exchanges which fall outside the ambit of the Law"; and that in fact R. S.
Ramanayake, who had been the Chairman from 1978 to 1982, was called by the
Solicitor-General for that purpose. Reference was made to his evidence only in
quite a different context, namely the existence of the seed paddy farm.

In his evidence, Ramanayake stated that "when property was alienated by the
Commission, for agricultural purposes, the valuation was always on an
agricultural basis"; that although valuations were done by an officer of the
LRC, they were reviewed by the Chief Valuer; and that the maximum price at
which land was alienated from Siringapatha estate was Rs. 15,000 per acre, and
that was for a 15 acre block abutting the main road. (pages 10841, 10859 and
10871)

It is without considering that evidence as to the practice of the LRC during
the period 1978 to 1982 that the 1st and 2nd respondents proceeded on the
basis that it was market value which was relevant; the evidence of the valuer
and of Ramanayake as to approval by the Chief Valuer was not even mentioned;
and with one minor exception, the prices at which other allotments from
Siringapatha estate had previously been alienated were not considered. The
interim report mentions a subsequent alienation, of "the balance portion of
Mawatta estate [which] was sold by the LRC at Rs. 30,000 per acre to the
SLLLDC in 1983", but fails to refer to and consider the fact that the Chief
Valuer took rates as high as Ps. 50,000 per acre in determining the 1982 value
of the 76 acres given to the petitioner.

The interim report cited an amendment to section 22 of the Land Reform Law
effected by Act No. 39 of 1981 (which came into force on 3.6.81), adding a new
provision enabling "alienation by way of sale, with Ministerial approval, for
non-agricultural purposes", and added:

"Thus the limitation placed upon alienation of land vested in the LRC in
regard to the purposes for which agricultural land vested in that Commission
may be used has in fact been eliminated. This amendment permits the outright
sale of lands **. . .** with the approval

134

of the Minister and has come into effect on a date very much anterior to
[5.2.82 when] 76 acres of Mawatta was handed over to the [petitioner] by the
LRC."

This amendment the 1st and 2nd respondents seem to have regarded as
justification for valuation on a market value basis. However, the interim
report itself discloses that the only approval given by the Minister of
Agriculture was on 23.1.81, long before the amendment, and therefore could not
have been treated as an approval of an alienation for non-agricultural
purposes in terms of the amending Act of 1981.

_The Seed Paddy Farm_

Finally, the 1st and 2nd respondents concluded that the request made by
Chandra Bandara to establish a seed paddy farm was a sham, and that his
request had been made in collusion with the petitioner to enable the
petitioner to obtain land which was much more valuable than the Panikankulam
land; that no steps had been taken by Chandra Bandara to pursue the project;
and that his subsequent conduct was inexplicable. Those observations were made
without having required him to explain or to testify. The interim report
discusses the evidence of several witnesses including Ramanayake and Nimal
Gunaratne, Deputy Director (Revenue), LRC:

"The uncontradicted testimony of [Gunaratne] was that no seed paddy farm was
started on Panikankulam **. . .** He vouched for the fact that there was no
seed paddy farm on this land during the entire period he managed this
project."

"Mr. Marapana also sought to rely on the evidence of Ramanayake **. . .** to
establish the existence of the seed paddy farm **. . .** According to
Ramanayake the LRC was running a seed paddy farm on this land for some time
and he was aware of the fact because one of his Directors [Madawela] was in
charge of the Division which managed this Project. Apart from this vague
answer he did not claim to have any personal knowledge of this fact. It is
significant that Madawela was not called to testify **. . .**

**135**

**. . .** we have no hesitation in rejecting Ramanayake's evidence in view of
the very definite evidence given by Gunaratne **. . .** "

That gives the impression that Ramanayake was the petitioner's witness,
although in fact he was called because the Commission wanted the Solicitor-
General to call him. While he was under cross-examination, it was the 3rd
respondent who raised the issue:

"Hon. Jayasuriya: Q. Was the seed paddy station ever set up?

A. Yes **. . .  
**  
Chairman: Q. How do you know that?  
  
A. One of my directors : **. . .** Madawela was in charge of it."

Thereafter the 1st and the 3rd respondents, alternately, questioned Ramanayake
five times about the matter. They expressed no doubt about his answers, nor
did they treat him as hostile.

The report does not refer to important aspects of Gunaratne's evidence as to
his knowledge of the facts. His evidence was that he had been working in the
Estate Management Services Division from 1981 to 1984; that he came to know of
Panikankulam only in about 1982, and left in 1984; and he had visited the land
three times. The impression he created on the 1st respondent when he gave
evidence appears from the following:

"Chairman: Mr. Marapana, you see the calibre of this witness: he says he's
Deputy Director; you asked. whether he's the subject clerk and he says yes.

Q : **. . .** You cant give a suitable answer to any of the questions asked of
you without referring to the files.  
  
A. Yes. Without any files l am unable to give evidence.

Q : Then why did you give evidence all this time?  
  
A : It was under my **. . .**  
  
Chairman: That is not the question you were asked Mr Gunaratne. You were asked
by Mr Premaratne whether there was a seed paddy farm?  
  
A : No Sir.

136

Chairman: You said no, now you say you can't say anything without a file, what
is the correct position? Is it that you cant say anything without a file or
are you in a position to say that there was no seed paddy farm?  
  
A : There was no seed paddy farm.  
  
Chairman: Mr. Gunaratne, the truth is that you are coming here to say that
there is no seed paddy farm because you have been asked to say so?  
  
A : As l served in that division the Chairman asked me to say anything I
know." (page 11856)

Certainly, the 1st and 2nd respondents could have disbelieved Ramanayake and
believed Gunaratne. But to characterize Gunaratne's evidence as
"uncontradicted" (when Ramanayake and at least one witness testified to the
contrary) and as "very definite" (despite the 1st respondent's own
contemporaneous observations as to its credibility) required some explanation,
and the interim report contains none. In contrast, to describe as "vague"
Ramanayake's answers in reply to the Commissioners, although they had then
made no adverse remark whatsoever about his evidence, required even more
explanation and reasons. Again, there was none. And in the circumstances the
comment that it was significant that the petitioner had failed to call
Madawela seems unfair, since Ramanayake was called because the Commission
wanted him called; and if the Commission had then any unexpressed doubt about
the replies he gave to them, it was the Commission which should, in the
interests of justice, have directed that Madawela be called and the relevant
files produced.

THE ATTEMPTED "SETTLEMENT"

I have referred to the facts, and the approach of the 1st and 2nd respondents
to the facts, not only because they are relevant to the question whether the
findings are vitiated by errors of law (by the failure to take into
consideration, and/or by the misconstruction of relevant oral and documentary
evidence), but also because of rather unusual attempts which the Commissioners
made to "settle" the dispute.

137

On 3.6.96, while the Chief Valuer was being re-examined, the Commissioners
realised that there had been no transfers of title, inter se. It is necessary
to refer in some detail to what happened:

"Hon. Jayasuriya : **. . .** the witness is seeking to assert that there is no
transfer.  
  
Mr. Marapana : Yes.  
  
Hon Jayasuriya : Without a transfer there cannot be a restrictive user?  
  
Mr. Marapana : Without a transfer I do not get any title at all **. . . .** I
have paid very good money and got nothing in return.  
  
Hon. Jayasuriya : So you return it back to get your own land?  
  
Hon. Jayasuriya : **. . .** If you give this back and take that everything
will end.  
  
Mr. Marapana : I do not mind.  
  
Hon. Jayasuriya : Are you prepared to do that?  
  
Mr. Marapana : Of course **. . .  
**  
Chairman : Why do you not consider this proposition?  
  
Mr. Marapana : Yes, My Lord, I will certainly **. . .  
  
**Hon. Jayasuriya : You have not got title yet?  
  
Mr. Marapana : Yes  
  
Hon. Jayasuriya : If you give back and take your land everything ends **. . .
.  
**  
Hon. Jayasuriya : Then we need not go into this any further, Mr. Premaratne?  
  
Mr. Premaratne : It is a matter for the Commission **. . .**  
  
Hon. Jayasuriya : If he is prepared to give it back and put the status quo
then everything is all right. Then we need not go into this matter any
further. Why do you not consider that?  
  
Mr. Premaratne : I have no stakes here; I am only assisting the Commission **.
. . .**  
  
Chairman : Shall we call this on some other day so that we can consider this
**. . .**  
  
Hon. Jayasuriya : Consider this seriously without wasting our time going into
this **. . .** " (pages 8834-6)

138

On 4.7.96 Mr. Marapana filed a document manifesting the petitioner's consent
to restoring the status quo, and inquired what the next step would be. The 1st
respondent said "then we will make an order giving directions to the LRC to
give effect to this" (page 9264).

The staff of the Commission delayed for six weeks to communicate that order to
the LRC. On 17.9.96 the Chairman, LRC, was present, on summons. The 1st
respondent expressed serious concern about the delay, and added: "We have made
an order to communicate our order to the LRC for implementation. It is very
unsatisfactory".

Later, the LRC seems to have reported that it would not be able to restore
possession of the Panikankulan land to the petitioner. The "settlement" was
not pursued any further, and the inquiry proceeded.

THE CHARGES AGAINST THE PETITIONER

The "allegation" set out at the commencement of the interim report and the
"charges" contained in the summary published in the Gazette are similar.
However, they differ from the show cause notice in subtle, though significant,
respects. The interim report and the summary state that the petitioner was
asked to show cause why he should not be found guilty of misuse or abuse of
power, in that, in substance, "the petitioner did directly or indirectly
induce [identified persons] to permit him to surrender the Panikankulam land
and obtaining in exchange [sic] the Mawatta land, thereby causing wrongful
loss to (named institutions]". The show cause notice alleges that he committed
or omitted to do one or more of the acts specified in six subparagraphs of the
notice, "which [acts] directly or indirectly induced [the same identified
persons] to permit the exchange of the Panikankulam land with the Mawatta
land, with the intention of causing wrongful gain to himself **. . .** and/or
wrongful loss to [the same named institutions]".

Straightaway, it is manifest that the show cause notice alleged a dishonest
intention, as defined in the Penal Code, on the part of the petitioner; it was
not enough therefore to establish that he did induce the identified persons to
permit the exchange; it had also to be proved that he had induced them to do
so with a dishonest

139

intention. The fact that a valuer, acting independently of the petitioner,
might have made an erroneous valuation was insufficient: for that would only
prove the fact of wrongful loss, but would be quite inadequate to prove a
dishonest intention. Nevertheless, the interim report incorrectly suggests
that the "allegation" set out therein was the same as that which the
petitioner was required to meet in the show cause notice, and the 1st and 2nd
respondents held "that the Allegation set out in the Show Cause Notice has
been established".

In order to clarify this matter, we called for written submissions after
judgment was reserved, and counsel on both sides have submitted that the show
cause notice was never amended. On behalf of the respondents, it was submitted
that "the Notice itself is wide enough to contemplate wrongful loss as well as
wrongful gain although the allegation relates to only wrongful loss **. . .**
since both these are elements of dishonesty, no prejudice would be caused to
the petitioner as there is no reference to the element of wrongful gain in the
allegation. In the circumstances **. . .** the Commission's finding is based
on the charge contained in the Notice **. . .** and the allegation which is
couched in general terms is merely a narrative of the gist of the said
Notice".

That submission fails to justify the total absence in the interim report of
either a finding that there was a dishonest intention as alleged in the
notice, or an explanation as to how the charge was held proved despite the
absence of such a finding. The finding that the petitioner took over a
different portion of land - even a better portion - did not by itself prove a
loss, for whether there was a loss or not depended on the subsequent
valuation; if there was a proper valuation, there would have been no loss; and
even if there was an undervaluation, that would only prove the fact of loss,
but not an intention of causing a loss (unless, of course, there was evidence
of impropriety on the part of the petitioner in causing or procuring such
undervaluation).

It is unnecessary, in the circumstances, to consider the further unexplained
difference, namely, that the show cause notice alleges inducement to permit
the exchange of the two lands, while the interim report alleges inducement to
permit the surrender of one land and obtaining in exchange the other land.

140

1\. JURISDICTION

Several distinct questions of jurisdiction arise:

(1) Did the 1st and 2nd respondents have jurisdiction - after 12.11.96 when
the 3rd respondent ceased to participate in the proceedings \- to proceed with
the inquiry and/or to make findings and recommendations?

(2) Did the Warrant establishing the Commission authorise the Commission to
inquire only into sales and leases (and not exchanges) of land belonging to
the LRC?

(3) Did the conduct of the Commissioners in regard to the attempted
"settlement" constitute an acknowledgement and/or representation by them that
the evidence disclosed neither misuse or abuse of power nor justification for
subjecting the petitioner to civic disability, with the consequence that they
were precluded from proceeding any further?

1\. Non-participation of the 3rd respondent

Findings and recommendations had been made in the same interim report in an
inquiry relating to another person, who applied for Certiorari, on the ground
that the report had not been signed by the 3rd respondent ( _Paskaralingam v.
Perera_ (2)). The following question was considered:

"Does the non-participation of Justice F. N. D. Jayasuriya render the interim
report one made without jurisdiction?"

This Court, by a majority decision, answered that question in the affirmative,
and quashed the findings and recommendations made by the 1st and 2nd
respondents. Mr. Wickremanayake, on behalf of the petitioner, relied on that
decision.

141

Mr. Kamalasabayson, PC, SG, stated that he was not seeking to canvass its
correctness, and I see no reason to decline to follow that decision. However,
in his counter-affidavit the 1st respondent pleaded that this application was
belated, and that because the subject-matter of this application was before
Parliament the petitioner was not entitled to any relief. Mr. Kamalasabayson
submitted that we should take into consideration the fact that the petitioner
was guilty of delay exceeding 12 months. He pointed out that the Order Paper
of Parliament for 7.10.97 contained notice of a resolution for the imposition
of civic disability on the petitioner under Article 81 of the Constitution
consequent upon the interim report, so that the matter was now before
Parliament; and therefore this Court should decline to entertain, hear or
determine the petitioner's application. He drew our attention to _Bandaranaike
v. Weeraratne_ (3) where this Court upheld a preliminary objection and
dismissed a similar application; quite properly, he indicated that there was a
distinguishing feature, for in that -case, by the time the application was
taken up for hearing Parliament had already passed the resolution.

Delay is never an absolute bar, particularly where the challenge is to
jurisdiction. In any event, a plea of delay must be considered on equitable
grounds: as for instance, whether the conduct of the petitioner indicates
acquiescence or a waiver of his rights, and whether any appreciable prejudice
had been caused to the adverse party by that delay. Nothing of that kind has
even been alleged.

As for pending Parliamentary proceedings, it is enough to say that Parliament
and the judiciary have distinct and defined roles. Article 4 of the
Constitution does not permit Parliament directly to exercise the judicial
power of the people "except in regard to matters relating to the privileges,
immunities and powers of Parliament wherein the judicial power of the people
may be exercised directly by Parliament". Apart from that single exception in
respect of what may be regarded as an internal jurisdiction intimately
connected with its legislative function, if Parliament desires to exercise
judicial power in any other case, it cannot do so directly; it must do so only
through courts, tribunals and institutions created and established by the
Constitution or by law. While it is undoubtedly true that Parliament can
refuse to

142

act on the findings and recommendations of a Commission, nevertheless
Parliament cannot subject them to judicial review or quash them \- for want of
jurisdiction, or breach of natural justice, or otherwise; it is only the
judiciary which can do so.

The application now before us is a legitimate invocation of the jurisdiction
of this Court to review the findings and recommendations of the Commission; it
seeks relief only in an area in which Parliament has no jurisdiction, and it
seeks no order or relief in respect of what Parliament has done or may do. In
Bandaranaike v. Weeraratne, this Court declined to inquire into the validity
of a resolution in view of the preclusive clause contained in Article 81(3).
We do not have to decide this case in the shadow of such a resolution. It is
true that in that case this Court also declined to review the findings of the
Commission, because it was of the view that to do so would indirectly affect
the resolution. Assuming, with respect, that that view is right, nevertheless
that would not affect in any way the exercise of our jurisdiction in a case
where no resolution had been passed.

I, therefore, hold that neither delay nor pending Parliamentary proceedings
constitute a bar to the grant of Certiorari, which must therefore issue to
quash the findings and recommendations of the 1st and 2nd respondents on the
ground of non-participation by the 3rd respondent.

2\. _Jurisdiction regarding exchange of LRC land_

Mr. Wickremanayake referred to the second limb of the first paragraph of the
Warrant, and submitted that the Warrant confines the jurisdiction of the
Commission: "more specifically in respect of the transactions, activities and
matters relating to such public bodies referred to in [the] Schedule", and
that it is item 17 which applies in the case of the LRC: "sales and leases of
land", and nothing else.

Mr. Kamalasabayson relied on the first limb of that paragraph: "the
management, administration and conduct of affairs of the public bodies
referred to in the schedule hereto", and submitted that an exchange of land
belonging to the LRC could be inquired into under that limb.

143

I agree that it is a possible interpretation that the second limb does not
restrict the amplitude of the first; and that accordingly the Commission did
have jurisdiction to inquire into the management (etc) of the LRC; and that in
the course of such inquiry it could have made findings and recommendations in
regard to either any aspect of such management (etc), or any "transactions,
activities and matters" referred to in item 17. But the question is whether
this particular inquiry by the Commission was into such management (etc), or
into one particular transaction.

The starting point of the inquiry was the show cause notice, and that
establishes that the inquiry was into a single transaction, and not into the
management (etc) of the LRC. Further, the interim report itself (page 228)
describes two inquiries as "Malpractices in the National Housing Development
Finance Corporation" and "Malpractices in the Customs Department", thereby
indicating that the Commission was acting under the first limb, whereas this
inquiry is titled "Exchange of NLDB/LRC Land Inquiry against Mr. Wijayapala
Mendis".

This was, therefore, an inquiry into one transaction, and although the alleged
exchange involved land belonging to the LRC, and even involved some aspects of
the procedures and practices of the LRC, that did not convert the inquiry into
one under the first limb.

An inquiry under the first limb would have involved direct and detailed
scrutiny - in general, and not just in respect of one transaction \- of
matters such as the policy and practice of the LRC in regard to decisions to
alienate land, the selection of land for alienation, the basis and procedures
for valuation, etc. Indeed, if this inquiry be regarded as one under the first
limb, it would have been invidious discrimination to have singled out only the
petitioner's transaction, ignoring all others; at least the other transactions
falling into the same relevant class - whether Ministers, Members of
Parliament, or politicians - should have been included if it were an inquiry
held under the first limb.

Upon a scrutiny of the second limb and the schedule, it is clear that the
warrant has carefully specified and restricted the matters which

144

could be inquired into. It said "transactions" in some instances (even
specifying a monetary limit); it specified particular types of transactions in
other cases - such as "purchase", "contracts", "tenders"; and in still other
cases, it referred to "activities". One form of "alienation" which the Land
Reform Law contemplates is "exchange". Nevertheless, in the case of
transactions involving the LRC, the warrant specified only "sales and leases
of land', although it would have been easy either to have expressly included
'exchange", or to have specified "alienations" instead. This careful choice of
words must be presumed to be deliberate.

I hold that the Commission had embarked upon an inquiry into an alleged
exchange of land belonging to the LRC, thereby exceeding the jurisdiction
which the Presidential warrant had conferred.

3. _Loss of jurisdiction resulting from attempted "settlement"_

It was the Presidential warrant alone which gave the Commission jurisdiction.
It authorised the Commission to inquire into and obtain information about
various matters, including the misuse or abuse of power in relation to any
"transaction, activity or matter"; and required the Commission to report its
findings and recommendations to the President. It did not authorise the
Commission to make orders or to take other action designed to remedy any
misuse or abuse of power, or to make good the loss caused thereby. If the
evidence before the Commission disclosed a misuse or abuse of power, all that
the Commissioners could lawfully and properly do was to report their findings
and recommendations; indeed, they were bound to do so.

On 3.6.96 the 3rd respondent expressed the view (affirmed by the 1st
respondent and acquiesced in by the 2nd respondent) that if the petitioner
restored possession of the Mawatta land to the LRC "everything will end",
"without wasting our time going into this". If the evidence then disclosed to
the Commissioners that the Petitioner was probably guilty of a misuse or abuse
of power, they would have been acting contrary to the Presidential warrant in
deciding to refrain from reporting the petitioner for misuse or abuse of power
(and, instead, "settling" the matter by procuring a retransfer of possession):
no amount of "restitution" or "reparation" at that point of time could have

145

retrospectively wiped out any misconduct which had actually taken place or
procured amnesty for it. Although the Commissioners have not said so, it is
theoretically possible that they had not assessed the evidence, and therefore
had not formed an opinion as to whether or not there was misconduct. But even
then they had before them an allegation in respect of which they themselves
had issued a show cause notice - suggesting a prima facie case. Their duty was
to inquire and report; not to mediate, conciliate or settle the dispute. It
was only if the evidence disclosed that the petitioner was not guilty of
misuse or abuse of power that it would have been lawful and proper for the
Commissioners to have refrained from reporting the petitioner.

The respondents did not explain their conduct in relation to the attempted
"settlement", either in the interim report or in the affidavits filed in this
Court.

It becomes necessary to determine on what basis the Commissioners acted in
attempting this "settlement". Should this Court presume that the evidence
disclosed to the Commissioners a misuse or abuse of power, but that
nevertheless (a) they decided that they would not report the petitioner to HE
the President; (b) the 3rd respondent considered it a waste of time to inquire
any further into such misuse or abuse of power, despite the provisions of the
warrant; and (c) the 1st respondent considered it proper to order the LRC, in
effect, to "cover up" such misuse or abuse of power? Or, on the other hand,
should this court presume that the Commissioners acted properly in indicating
to the petitioner that they would refrain from reporting because they honestly
believed that the evidence did not disclose a "reportable" misuse or abuse of
power? Especially in the absence of any allegation by anyone that the
Commissioners were acting contrary to the terms of the warrant, I hold that at
that stage the Commissioners did believe that there was nothing to report. In
any event, whatever the Commissioners may have thought, what they actually did
say would reasonably have conveyed to the petitioner that the Commissioners
were of the view that there was nothing to report. Nothing that transpired
thereafter changed that position.

146

The attempts which the Commissioners made to "settle" the dispute do not have
the slightest resemblance to attempts by Judges to settle civil disputes. It
is well to remember the caution administered in _Sabapathy v. Dunlop_ (4):

"This case conspicuously manifests the danger of Judges participating in the
discussion of terms of settlement and taking too active a part in seeking to
bring about a compromise. The terms of settlement should be left entirely to
the parties and their legal advisers who know best, or else there will always
remain the possibility of remarks or observations coming from the Judge in the
course of discussion being misunderstood and wrong interpretations put
thereon."

Judges dealing with civil and criminal disputes have a jurisdiction, albeit
limited, to sanction compromise; the Courts in which they function have
general jurisdictions, as well as inherent jurisdictions. Commissions of
Inquiry do not; their jurisdiction is statutorily limited. If there is a
misuse or abuse of power, they cannot initiate or sanction a "settlement" or
"compound" misconduct, by refraining to report it in obedience to the Law and
the Presidential Warrant.

I hold that the Commission had no jurisdiction to proceed any further in the
matter. Whether or not the Commission had jurisdiction, I further hold that in
any event the ultimate findings and recommendations of the 1st and 2nd
respondents were so completely inconsistent with the previous observations and
conduct of the Commissioners that those findings and recommendations are
perverse and unreasonable. I must add that this illustrates the gravity of the
non-participation of the 3rd respondent who initiated and expressed strong
views about the attempted "settlement". The other Commissioners should have
postponed their report to enable him to express his views on that matter.
Their failure to consider his views becomes all the more serious because they
have failed to explain their conduct.

147

II. NATURAL JUSTICE

As already noted, the 1st and 2nd respondents found the petitioner guilty on a
basis significantly different to that set out in the show cause notice, which
they have signally failed to justify, even in written submissions filed after
judgment was reserved. This is a fundamental breach of natural justice by the
1st and 2nd respondents who have found the petitioner guilty on a charge
materially different to that which they asked him to answer.

In other respects too there has been a failure of natural justice. The
proceedings of the Commission were not strictly adversarial in nature; the
Commissioners had a duty to ascertain the facts themselves. In several
instances, the Commission refrained from calling important witnesses:
including Madawela, the Assistant General Manager, NLDB, and the Assistant
Manager of Siringapatha estate. Further, the evidence showed that at every
stage Minister Thondaman had given approval: for the exchange of the Mawatta
land in principle (after 28.10.81), for the demarcation to be done by the NLDB
(in early January, 1982), and finally for the retention by the petitioner of
the portion which he had actually taken over (in March, 1982). There was no
evidence of pressure or influence vis-a-vis the Minister of Agriculture,
Minister Thondaman, the Chairman, LRC, the Chairman, NLDB, and Chandra
Bandara. Since Minister Thondaman was directly involved in those three
decisions, the question whether any of those decisions had been induced
"wrongfully and by undue means" (as alleged in the show cause notice) could
not have been fully and fairly investigated without the benefit of an
explanation or testimony from Minister Thondaman, but the Commission refrained
from asking Minister Thondaman to explain or to testify.

There is yet another unfortunate aspect. By the end of November, 1996, the 1st
and 2nd respondents were aware that the 3rd respondent's resignation had not
taken effect, and that he was therefore still a Commissioner. However, the
petitioner was not told at any time thereafter whether or not he would
participate in the proceedings: whether the order of the Commission would be
made by the other two Commissioners, or by all three, after the proceedings

148

were read by the 3rd respondent. Indeed, the record shows a degree of haste
which was not seemly. On 21.12.96 the petitioner was told that the Commission
had to send its report by the end of January. The judgment in Paskaralingarn
v. Perera shows that the period for submitting that report was due to expire
on 2.2.97; that on 31.1.97 it had been extended until 2.3.97; and again on
28.2.97 until 30.6.97. Considering that the sitting on 21.12.96 was the 276th
sitting of the Commission, a further short postponement, to enable the 3rd
respondent to participate, was only reasonable. The Commission had to submit
reports in eight inquiries; of these, three had been concluded as early as
September, November and December, 1995, respectively (long before the 3rd
respondent fell ill on 12.11.96). But even those reports were signed only by
the 1st and 2nd respondents. The audi alteram partem rule does not merely
entitle a party to a purely formal opportunity of placing his case before a
tribunal. Natural justice would be devalued if the tribunal - and, indeed,
every member of the tribunal - does not consider the evidence and the
submissions; and evaluate it properly and not in haste; and, in general, give
reasons for its conclusions. Here the 1st and 2nd respondents failed to take
enough time to enable its members to consider the petitioner's case, and, on
some important issues, to give reasons.

Natural justice is fairness in action. The inquiry against the petitioner
failed to reach the minimum standard of fairness demanded of a judicial or
quasi - judicial inquiry.

III. ERRORS OF LAW

I have referred extensively to some portions of the evidence not in any
attempt to review the findings of fact of the Commission, but in order to
identify serious shortcomings in the proceedings of the Commission, which
amount to errors of law.

The proceedings began with one charge, an essential ingredient of which was
mens rea - an intention to cause wrongful loss; but instead of a finding on
that issue the 1st and 2nd respondents concluded only that wrongful loss had
in fact been caused.

149

I have already dealt with the unexplained change of front by the Commissioners
in regard to the attempted "settlement".

There were two serious errors of law in regard to the proper basis of
valuation of the two lands: ignoring the practice of the LRC, of taking
agricultural value, and wrongly assuming the 1981 amendment to the Law to be
applicable, despite the lack of Ministerial approval given under that
amendment.

It is manifest from the summary of facts that some vital documents, and many
material items of oral evidence, were ignored, and others were misconstrued.

Although findings as to the credibility of witnesses would normally have been
outside the scope of review, the 1st and 2nd respondents accepted the evidence
of some witnesses, and rejected the evidence of others, not only ignoring
vital evidence relevant to credibility, but even their own contemporaneous and
recorded perceptions as to credibility. In this context, let me recall the
observations of this Court in _Senanayake v. de Silva_ (5)

" **. . .** Even witnesses who are able to stand their ground in the face of
the severest cross-examination at the hands of opposing counsel are, in view
of the deference with which they treat the Court, inclined to treat with the
greatest regard suggestions of this nature when they come from Court and are
couched in compelling language, and it is a rare witness who will steadily
maintain his version in the face of such questioning by the Court **. . .**

**. . .** One of the well-recognised limitations on the powers of Court [to
question witnesses] is that the Court must not question a witness in the
spirit of beating him down or encouraging him to give an answer **. . .**

**. . .** the concessions which the witness made were concessions under the
pressure of a view expressed by Court in terms suggesting that that was the
only reasonable view **. . .** It is remarkable however that although this
view has been so strongly

150

put to the witness in the course of the Court's questions to him, the Court
has in its judgment expressed a diametrically opposite view."

Those observations are applicable to the unexplained change of views by the
1st and 2nd respondents in relation to the attempted "settlement", as well as
to the manner in which they elicited answers from witnesses.

The summary of facts shows how the Chairman, NLDB, so readily fell in line
with suggestions strongly put to him by the Commissioners, even to the extent
of veering from one position to a diametrically opposite one - all of which
the interim report failed to mention. Nimal Gunaratne's evidence was accepted
without even a passing reference to the 1st respondent's rebuke that he was
merely coming to say what someone else had asked him to say; and Ramanayake's
evidence was rejected because of "the very definite evidence given by
Gunaratne", and was characterized as "vague" although none of the
Commissioners seem to have thought so at the time.

Considered in isolation, each of these is a serious error of law; taken
cumulatively, they are so extensive and so grave as to amount to a denial of a
fair inquiry.

IV. RECOMMENDATIONS

Since the findings of the 1st and 2nd respondents cannot stand for the several
reasons set out above, the recommendations are necessarily null and void. But
even if the findings were valid, the recommendations proceed on the assumption
- manifest from the use of the phrase 'we accordingly recommend" \- that the
automatic consequence of a finding that there was a misuse or abuse of power
must be a recommendation for the imposition of civic disability. They have
assumed that they had no discretion in the matter. They failed to consider,
for instance, the fact that there had been no transfer of title, that there
was no finding as to a dishonest intention, and that the two lands had been
valued in accordance with the procedure

151

prevailing at the time, including approval by the Chief Valuer. It can hardly
be argued that upon a proper consideration of those matters the same
recommendations might have been made, especially because of the strong views
expressed by the Commissioners in regard to the "settlement". Cogent reasons
would have been necessary to justify a recommendation for the imposition of
civic disability for alleged "misconduct", which the Commissioners had
seriously considered to be "compoundable".

I hold, therefore, that the recommendations were arbitrary and unreasonable.

ORDER

In view of the concession made, with characteristic fairness, by Mr.
Kamalasabayson, who appeared for the 1st and 2nd respondents, that he was not
canvassing the correctness of Paskaralingam v. Perera, Certiorari must
necessarily issue on the ground that the interim report had not been signed by
the 3rd respondent.

I hold, further, for the reasons set out in this judgment, that the findings
and recommendations of the 1st and 2nd respondents were vitiated, inter alia,
by want or excess of jurisdiction, breach of natural justice, and error of law
on the face of the record.

I direct the issue of a mandate in the nature of a writ of Certiorari to quash
the findings and recommendations made by the 1st and 2nd respondents (set out
in their interim report dated 2.3.97, Inquiry No. 5/97) against the
petitioner. In regard to costs, I cannot ignore the fact that in the course of
the proceedings the Commissioners themselves made observations which were
consistent only with the considered view that findings of guilt and
recommendations for the imposition of civic disability were not reasonably
possible. Accordingly, I direct the State to pay the petitioner a sum of Rs.
20,000 towards his costs before the Commission, and a sum of Rs. 20,000 as
costs in this Court.

**GUNAWARDANA, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNASEKARA, J.** \- I agree.

_Application allowed, certiorari issued._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/36.html_  

