##  Sunil Rodrigo (On Behalf of B. Sirisena Cooray) v. Chandananda De Silva
and Others - SLR - 265, Vol 3 of 1997 [1997] LKSC 36; (1997) 3 Sri LR 265 (19
August 1997)

**265**

**SUNIL RODRIGO (ON BEHALF OF B. SIRISENA COORAY)** ****

**v.** ****

**CHANDANANDA DE SILVA AND OTHERS  **

** **

SUPREME COURT.

AMERASINGHE, J.

WIJETUNGA, J. AND

GUNAWARDANA, J.

S. C. APPLICATION (FR.) 478/97

JULY 21 AND 22, 1997.



Fundamental Rights - Preventive detention - Order under Emergency Regulation
17 - Alleged conspiracy to assassinate the President \- Offence under E.R.
24(b) - Detenu arrested on unverified information and vague suspicion -
Validity of detention - Articles 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution.



The detenu was arrested by Police Officers on the 16th June 1997 acting on an
order of the Secretary, Ministry of Defence of the same date. In his order the
Secretary stated that he was acting by virtue of powers vested in him by
regulation 17(1) of the Emergency Regulations published in Government Gazette
(extraordinary) No. 843/12 of 4th November 1994. Regulation 17(1) states:



"Where the Secretary is satisfied upon the material submitted to him or upon
such further material as may be called for by him with respect to any person,
that with a view to preventing such person.



(a) from acting in any manner prejudicial to the national security or to the
maintenance of public order ...



(b) ...



(c) ...



It is necessary so to do, the Secretary may make order that such person be
taken into custody for a period not exceeding three months..."



The order of the Secretary did not specify the period. But by an amending
order dated 2nd July 1997 he sought to amend the order making it effective for
a period of three months from 16th June 1997.



In his affidavit to court the Secretary stated by way of justifying his order
that he was informed by the inspector General of Police and other Senior
Police

266



Officers that they had received reliable intelligence that the detenu had
discussed with others about assassinating the President of Sri Lanka or
causing physical harm to her and to create unrest in the country.



The information relied upon by the Secretary had not been verified either by
Police Officers or by the Secretary himself. The Secretary notified the
advisory committee under regulation 17 in writing of the fact of making the
detention order on the basis of information he had received. The Police
Officer who executed the order informed the detenu of the "purposes" of the
arrest as contained in the order. But he was not informed of the reason for
his arrest viz. . the grounds and particulars there for either at the time of
the arrest or during his interrogation by the Police. Nor could the detenu
hope, on the basis of the Secretary's notification, to receive from the
Chairman of the Advisory Committee, in terms of regulation 17(9), the
"grounds" and "particulars" relevant to the Secretary's decision.



**Held:**

** **

1\. The amendment of the original order of detention for specifying the period
of detention did not remedy the defect. Hence the detention from 16th June to
2nd July 1997 was unconstitutional.



2\. The court will not usurp the discretion of the Secretary and substitute
its own views for that of the Secretary. However, the Court must determine
whether on the material before him the Secretary was reasonably satisfied that
the detenu should be arrested and detained.



3\. In issuing the detention order the Secretary acted on unverified reports
of Police Officers that were vague and suspicious. He abdicated his authority
and mechanically signed the detention order. His decision was not only wrong
but unreasonably wrong. It was not his opinion. The arrest made in pursuance
of such an order was not according to procedure prescribed by law and
therefore contravened Article 13(1) of the Constitution and was unlawful and
invalid.



**Per Amerasinghe, J.**



"The decision whether certain activities of a citizen constitutes a threat to
national security is a matter for the Secretary and not of a Police Officer,
whatever his rank might be. The power of the Secretary given by regulation
17(1) concerns physical liberty of persons, including those who have not yet,

**267**



nor never, committed an offence. It is therefore an exceedingly great power,
indeed an awesome power, that must be exercised with corresponding degree of
responsibility".



4\. Conspiracy to murder the President is an offence under regulation 24(b),
and so there was an offence the detenu was supposed to have committed which
was the "reason" for his arrest and detention. He was not informed of that
reason as required by Article 13(1) of the Constitution.



5\. The detenu was not arrested under a procedure established by law. He was
arrested on vague suspicion in circumstances that showed a reckless disregard
for his right to personal liberty. In the circumstances by failing to produce
him before a judge the respondents transgressed his rights under Article 13(2)
of the Constitution.

** **

**Cases referred to:**

** **

1 _. Secretary of State for Education and Science v. Tarneside Borough
Council_ (1977) AC 1014.

_ _

2 _. Nakkuda Ali v. Jayaratne_ 51 NLR 457 (P.C.) (1951) A.C. 66 (P.C.)

_ _

3 _. Attorney-General of St. Christopher, Nevis and Anguilla v. Reynolds_
(1979) 3 All ER 129 (P.C.)

_ _

4 _. Director of Public Prosecutions v. Head_ (1959) A.C. 83, 110.

_ _

5 _. Dumbell v Roberts_ (1944) 1 ALL ER 326.

_ _

6 _. Muttusamy v. Kannangara_ (1951) 52 NLR 324.

_ _

7 _. Faiz v. Attorney-General_ (1995) 1 Sri L.R. 372.

_ _

8 _. Faurdeen v. Jayetilleke and Others_ S.C. Application 366/93 S.C. Minutes
8 September 1994.

_ _

9 _. Channa Pieris v Attorney-General_ (1994) 1 Sri L.R. 1, 51.

_ _

10 _. Siriwardena v Liyanage_ (1983) FRD (2) 310.

_ _

11 _. Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd., v Wednesbury Corporation_
(1948) 1 K. B. 223, 229

_ _

12 _. Short v Poole. Corporation-_ 1926 Ch. 66.

_ _

13 _. In re H (An Infant)_ 1971 A.C. 682, 700.

_ _

14 _. Secretary of State v. ASLEF_ (No. 2) (1972) 2 ALL ER 949.

_ _

15. _Joseph Perera v. Attorney-General_ (1992) 1 Sri L.R. 199. 



**268**



16 _. Wijewardena v. Zain_ S.C. Application 202/87 S.C. Minutes 24 July 1989.

_ _

17 _. Dissanayake v. Superintendent Mahara Prison_ (1991) 2 Sri L.R. 247.

_ _

18 _. Brogan v U.K. ECHR_ 29 November 1988 Ser. A. N. 145 B.

_ _

19 _. Fox, Campbell & Hartley v. U.K. UCHR _30 August 1990 Ser. A. No. 182.

_ _

20 _. Liversidge v. Anderson_ (1941) 3 ALL ER 338; (1942) A.C. 206

_ _

21 _. Ridge v. Baldwin_ (1963) 2 ALL ER 66, 76; (1964) A.C. 40 at 73.

_ _

22 _. Janatha Finance_ and _Investments v D. J. Francis Liyanage_ (1983) FRD
(2) 373.

_ _

_23\. Sasanasiritissa !hero_ and _Others v De Silva_ and _Others_ (1989) 2 Sri
L.R. 356.

_ _

_24\. Weerakoon v, Weeraratne_ S.C. Application 42/92 S.C. Minutes 16.
November 1992.

_ _

25 _. Somasiri v. Jayasena_ and _Others_ S.C. Application 147/88 S.C. Minutes
1 March 1991.

_ _

26 _. Kishori Mohan v. The State of West Bengal_ AIR 1972 S.C. 1749.

_ _

27 _. Mariadas v Attorney-General (1983) FRO (2) 397._

_ _

28 _. Selvakumar v. Douglas Devananda_ and _Others_ S.C. Application 150/93
S.C. Minutes 13 July 1994.

_ _

29 _. Shalini Soni and Others v._ The Union of India and Others (1980) 4 SCC
544.

_ _

30 _. Gunasekera v. De Fonseka_ (1972) 75 NLR 246.

_ _

31 _. Wickramabandu v Cyril Herath_ (1990) 2 Sri L.R. 348.

_ _

_32\. Munidasa v. Seneviratne_ S.C. Application 115/91 S.C. Minutes 3 April
1992.

_ _

33 _. Kumarasena v. Snyantha_ S.C. Application 257/93 S.C. Minutes 23 May
1994.

_ _

34 _. Christie v. Leachinsky_ (1947) A.C. 573.

_ _

35 _. Vijaya Kumaranatunga v. G. V. P Samarasinghe_ and _Others_ (1983) FRO
(2) 347 (1983) 2 Sri L.R. 63.

_ _

36 _. Shibban Lal Saksena v. State of_ U.P. AIR 1954 S.C. 179.

_ _

37 _. ICCU Devi Choria v Union of India_ (1980) 4 SCC 531, 539.

_ _

38 _. Mallawarachchi v Seneviratne_ (1992) 1 Sri L.R. 181.

_ _

39 _. Elasinghe v. Wijewickrama and Others_ (1993) 1 Sri L.R. 163.

_ _

40 _. Chandra Kalyanie Perera v. Siriwardena_ (1992) 1 Sri L.R. 251.

_ _

41 _. Lalanle and Nirmala v. De Silva_ and _Others_ S.C. Application 53/88
S.C. Minutes 6 April 1990.



**269**



42 _. Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam_ (1985) 1 Sri L.R. 100. Sund Rodrigo (on
behalf of B. Sirisena Cooray)



43\. Kumara v. Rohan Fernando and Others S.C. Application 22/90 S.C. Minutes
21 July 1994.

_ _

44 _. Ansalin Fernando v. Sarath Perera_ and _Others_ (1992) 1 Sri L.R. 411.

_ _

45 _. Weerakoon v. Mahendra_ (1991) 2 Sri L. R. 172.

_ _

46 _. Fernando v. Kapilaratne_ (1992) 1 Sri L.R. 305.

_ _

47 _. Joseph Silva_ and _Others v Balasuriya_ and _Others_ S.C. Application
112-115/87 S.C. Minutes 26 May 1988.

_ _

48 _. Gerstein v. Pugh_ 420 U.S. 103, 95 S. ct. 854, 43 L. Ed 2d 54 (1975).

_ _

49 _. Mohammed Faiz v. Attorney-General_ S.C. Application 89190 Minutes 19
November 1993.

_ _

50 _. Nallanayagarn v. Gunatilake_ (1987) 1 Sri L.R. 293.



**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.



_K. N. Choksy, P.C._ with _Desmond Fernando, P.C. Kosala Wijetilake, P.C. M.
D. K. Kulatunga, Hemantha Warnakulasuriya, S. Mahenthiran, Upul Jayasuriya,_
_Lakshman Ranasinghe, Sarath Kongahage, Methsiri Cooray_ and _Ronald Perera_
for the petitioner.

_ _

_C. R. de Silva, P.C. Additional S.G._ with _Kolitha Dharmawardena, D.S.G. S.
Samaranayake, S.C._ and _N. Pulle, S.C._ for the respondents.



_Cur. adv. vult._



August 19, 1997.  


**AMERASINGHE, J.**



This is a matter concerning the alleged infringement of certain fundamental
rights declared and recognized by the Constitution.  


**Locus standi.  
**  
The petitioner in this case, Mr. Sunil Kumara Rodrigo, is an Attorney-at-Law
appearing on behalf of Mr. Bulathsinghalage Sirisena Cooray. Article 126 (2)
of the Constitution states, inter alia, that where any person alleges that any
fundamental right relating to such person has been infringed, he may himself
or by an Attorney-at-Law, on his behalf apply to the Supreme Court by way of
petition praying for relief or redress in respect of such infringement.

# 270

#  

# Reliefs sought



The petitioner prays that this Court be pleased to:



(a) grant the petitioner leave to proceed with this application;



(b) declare that the fundamental rights of Mr. Cooray guaranteed by Articles
12(1), 12(2), 13(1), 13(2), 14(1) (c) and 14(1) (h) of the Constitution have
been violated by the 1st and/or 2nd respondents;



(c) direct that the said Mr. Cooray be released from custody and detention;



(d) direct the 1st and/or 2nd respondents to pay damages and/or compensation
to Mr. Cooray in a sum of rupees ten million;



(e) make an interim order pending the hearing and final determination of this
application releasing the said Mr. Cooray from custody and detention upon such
terms and conditions as may be imposed by Court;



(f) make interim orders pending the hearing and final determination of this
application permitting the said Mr. Cooray to be met by the petitioner and his
lawyers, and examined when necessary by his Doctors, upon such terms and
conditions as may be imposed by Court;



(g) for costs;



(h) for such other and further relief as to the Court shall seem meet.



# Leave to proceed



With regard to the prayer set out in paragraph (a) of the petition, the Court
(Fernando, Dheeraratne, Wadugodapitiya, J.J.) on the 24th of June 1997, after
hearing counsel, granted leave to proceed in respect of the alleged violations
of Articles 12(2), 13(1), 13(2), 14(1) (c) and 14(i) (h) of the Constitution.

#  

# 271

#  

# Interim relief for release from custody



With regard to the prayer set out in paragraph (e) of the petition, on the
24th of June 1997, after hearing counsel, the Court denied the relief claimed:
(S.C. minutes 24.06.97). Fernando, J. (Dheeraratne and Wadugodapitiya, J.J.
agreeing) stated:



"To grant prayer (e) would be, in effect, to grant the petitioner the
substantive relief to which he would be entitled if he ultimately succeeds.
Although the petitioner has established, prima facie, infringements of the
aforesaid Articles, it has not been established that very probably the
detention is void and will cause irreparable prejudice, and we do not consider
that an interim order in terms of prayer (e) should be made at this stage: an
early hearing would suffice."



# Interim relief for legal and medical assistance



With regard to the prayer set out in paragraph (f) of the petition, on the
24th of June 1997, after hearing counsel, the Court granted the relief
claimed: (S.C. Minutes 24.06.97). Fernando, J. (Dheeraratne and
Wadugodapitiya, J.J. agreeing) stated:



"In respect of prayer (f), Mr. Choksy submits that the detainee's lawyers have
been denied access to the petitioner up to date; but Mr. de Silva states that
an order has been made by the 1st respondent on 23.6.97, permitting access to
the detainee's lawyers. He submits that the 1st respondent has power, under
Emergency Regulation No. 17(4) to allow access to a detainee's lawyers.



Emergency Regulation 17(4) authorizes detention 'in accordance with
instructions issued' by the Secretary. Even assuming that this would extend to
allowing him to deny the right of access to a detainee's lawyers, in fact no
such instructions were either set out in the Detention Order or issued
thereafter. The detainee's lawyers should, therefore, not have been refused
access to him, particularly after this application was filed. Had the detainee
been detained in prison, it is common ground that under the Prison Rules, his
right of access to lawyers would have been respected. That is the norm; and it
is implicit in Emergency Regulation 17(4) that a person should not

**272**



be denied that right simply because he was detained elsewhere. Mr. de Silva
referred to the proviso to Emergency Regulation 17(4) which states that the
Secretary may direct that any provision of the Prisons Ordinance or the Rules,
which would otherwise apply to a detainee, would not apply to him. While the
Constitution recognises the power to make Emergency Regulations, overriding,
amending or suspending the provisions of any statute, it is doubtful whether
Emergency Regulations can confer on the Secretary any such power.



Mr. De Silva has no objection to the detainee having access to doctors.



The Court accordingly grants an interim order in terms of prayer (f). It is
the petitioner and the attorneys-at-law (including [the] instructing attorney)
who appeared for him today, who will have the right of access."



# Articles 12(2),14(1) (c), and 14(1) (h) not violated



Although leave to proceed had been granted for the alleged infringement of
Articles 12(2), 13(1), 13(2), 14(1) (c) and 14(1) (h) of the Constitution,
matters relating to the violation of the rights enshrined in Articles 12(2),
14(1) (c) and 14(1) (h) were not pressed by learned counsel for the
petitioner.



In the circumstances, I declare that the violation of Articles 12 (2), 14(1)
(c) and 14(1) (h) of the Constitution has not been established.



# The remaining matters for consideration



The remaining matters for consideration by this Court are whether the
fundamental rights of Mr. Cooray declared and recognized by Article 13 have
been violated, and if so whether any or some or all of the reliefs prayed for
in paragraphs (c), (d), (g) and (h) should be granted in the exercise of the
power of the Court under Article 126(4) of the Constitution "to grant such
relief or make such directions as it may deem just and equitable...".



# Article 13(1) of the Constitution



Leave to proceed was granted for the alleged infringement of Article 13(1) of
the Constitution. Article 13(1) states as follows:

**273**



"No person shall be arrested except according to procedure established by law.
Any person arrested shall be informed of the reason for his arrest."



There are two rights that are recognized and declared by Article 13(1):



* A person shall not be arrested except according to procedure established by law;



* A person arrested must be informed of the reason for his or her arrest.



In applying the law to the facts of the matter before me, I have therefore to
consider two matters in relation to the alleged violation of Article 13(1):



* Was Mr. Cooray arrested according to procedure established by law?  


* Was Mr. Cooray informed of the reason for his arrest?



# Was Mr. B. Sirisena Cooray arrested according to procedure established by
law?



The Detention Order was ex facie defective on the question of the duration of
detention.,



It is not in dispute that Mr. B. Sirisena Cooray was arrested by Police
Officers on the 16th of June 1997 acting on an order of the Secretary,
Ministry of Defence, dated the 16th of June 1997. In his order dated the 16th
of June 1997, the Secretary states that he was acting by virtue of the powers
vested in him by paragraph 17(1) of the Emergency (Miscellaneous provisions
and Powers) Regulations No. 4 of 1994 published in **Gazette Extraordinary**
No. 843/12 of the 4th of November 1994.



Regulation 17(1) states:



"Where the Secretary is satisfied upon the material submitted to him, or upon
such further additional material as may be called for by him with respect to
any person, that with a view to preventing such person

**274**



(a) from acting in any manner prejudicial to the national security or to the
maintenance of public order...



(b) ...  
  
(c) ...  
  
It is necessary so to do, **the Secretary may make order that such person be
taken into custody and detained in custody for a period not exceeding three
months... "**



The emphasis is mine.



Regulation 17(1) authorizes the Secretary to make an order **for a period**.
The Order in this case dated 16 June 1997 does not specify the period of
detention. The order is therefore not in accordance with the procedure
prescribed by law for the arrest and detention of persons on the orders of the
Secretary. Article 13(1) of the Constitution states that "No person shall be
arrested except according to procedure established by law". The arrest and
detention of Mr. Cooray on the 16th of June was therefore unconstitutional.



In paragraph 9 of his affidavit, the Secretary states as follows:



"... In view of the seriousness of the material contained in the intelligence
reports, it was my intention to detain the detenu initially for a period of
three months commencing 16 June 1997. Subsequently, I have by way of an
amendment to the said Detention Order P1, made Order stating that the Order
marked P1 referred to above would be effective for a period of three months
commencing 16th June 1997\. 1 produce a certified copy of the amending Order
and an affidavit from ; Abeyweera who served the said Detention Order on the
detenu marked 1 R 2(a)."



Mr. Abeyweera states in his affidavit that he served the amended order on Mr.
B. Sirisena Cooray and that Mr. Cooray accepted that order.



The amending order is dated 2nd July 1997. In it the Secretary states that he
amends the order dated 16 June 1997 "by stating that the said order is
effective from 16th June 1997 for a period of three

**275**



 months. This amendment is to be considered as forming part and parcel of the
said order dated 16 June 1997."



In my view, the effect of the amendment is merely to specify the period of
detention, as required by law. That was done belatedly on the 2nd of July
1997. By stating that the amending order was to be regarded as "forming part
and parcel" of the order, the defect in the order of the 16th of June does not
stand remedied. Therefore the detention from the 16th of June to the 2nd of
July 1997 was unconstitutional. I hold, however, that the Detention Order was
ex facie valid from the 2nd of July 1997 on the question of duration.



**The basis of the Secretary's decision required by Regulation 17(1).**



Regulation 17(1) requires the Secretary to arrive at his decision to order the
detention of a person 'upon the material submitted to him or upon such
additional material as may be called for by him'. What was



(1) the unsolicited material submitted to the Secretary or



(2) additional material called for by him that satisfied him that the order of
detention was necessary?



# The unsolicited material submitted to the Secretary



Initially, there were three unsolicited reports submitted to the Secretary.
The first was from the Inspector-General of Police (the

second respondent); the second was from the Director of the National
Intelligence Bureau; the third was from the Deputy Inspector General of
Police, Criminal Investigation Department.



# The first report



With regard to the first report, the Secretary, in his affidavit, states as
follows:



... on 9.6.97 I received information in writing from the 2nd Respondent that
certain persons who had been arrested in connection with a spate of armed
robberies in the Gampaha police

**276**



area had in the course of interrogation stated that members of a group
involved in the commission of dangerous criminal acts led by Arambalage Don
Ranjit Upali alias Soththi Upali (presently in remand) had been making
inquiries about the visit of Her Excellency the President to Nithambuwa
(Sic.), Horagolla and Attanagalla. I was also informed that Soththi Upali was
a close associate of {Mr. Cooray). The 2nd Respondent also informed me that
his intelligence unit had received reliable intelligence that the detenu has
had discussions with certain members of the said group about assassinating or
causing physical harm to Her Excellency the President and to create unrest in
the country."



About which visit of the President were the inquiries being made? From whom
had such inquiries been made? If the statements were made \- they have not
been produced before this Court - what sort of credibility should be attached
to statements made by a gang of robbers? How could Soththi Upali who had been
in prison custody for over a year be leading the group alleged to have been
"involved in the commission of dangerous criminal acts"? The Inspector-General
of Police had informed the Secretary that Soththi Upali was a close associate
of Mr. Cooray and that Mr. Cooray had had discussions with certain members of
Soththi Upali's group about assassinating or causing physical harm to the
President and creating unrest in the country. What was the evidence? What
steps were taken to check the accuracy of the information?



On the other hand, in his affidavit dated the 15th of July 1997, Mr. Cooray
has categorically denied that he had any connection whatever with any members
of the so called Soththi Upali group. He also states that the averment that he
was a close associate of Soththi Upali is "false and made without any basis".
He explains that he became acquainted with Soththi Upali as one of several
workers sent to him by the late President R. Premadasa to assist him as
Campaign Manager in connection with the Presidential and Parliamentary
elections of 1988 and 1989. However, he states: "I have had no dealings with
Soththi Upali and have not met or spoken to him since I ceased to be the
General Secretary of the United National Party in 1994." The respondents have
not challenged Mr. Cooray's averments either by way of affidavit or through
the submissions of their counsel.

# 277

#  

# The second report



With regard to the second report, the Secretary, in his affidavit, states as
follows:



... the Director of National Intelligence Bureau by report dated 11th June
1997 informed me that he had reliable intelligence that [Mr. Cooray] and three
persons viz. U. L. Seneviratne, Wathudula Bandulage Somaratne alias Malwatte
Some, Janaka Priyankara Jayamanne alias Sudu Mahatmaya and some other
unidentified persons have had discussions about assassinating or causing
physical harm to Her Excellency the President in the near future..."



The Secretary filed a copy of a letter dated the 3rd of July 1997 sent by him
to the Chairman of the Advisory Committee appointed under Regulation 17(5) to
enable the Chairman to communicate the "reasons" for the arrest and detention:
(Paragraph 11 of the Secretary's affidavit). In that letter, the Secretary
states that he had issued Detention Orders on Mr. B. Sirisena Cooray, Mr. U.
L. Seneviratne, Mr. W. B. Somaratne and Mr. J. P. Jayamanne. The Secretary
states as follows: "These Detention Orders have been issued by me after being
satisfied on the material submitted to me by the D.I.G., C.I.D. to the effect
that Mr. Sirisena Cooray has sought the assistance of certain persons to cause
harm or to assassinate Her Excellency the President. Some of the persons
allegedly identified are Upali de Silva, U. L. Seneviratne, W. B. Somaratne
and J. P. Jayamanne. Further it is reported that some persons have been
enlisted as Reserve Police Officers and given training in sophisticated
weapons. Whereabouts of some such persons trained in weapon use are not
traceable today. Any conspiracy to cause acts in furtherance of such a purpose
was considered a serious threat to national security."



In his affidavit, Mr. Cooray emphatically denies that he had "any discussions
with any person whomsoever about assassinating or causing harm to Her
Excellency the President. The said allegation is utterly and completely
false." What steps had the Director of the National Intelligence Bureau taken
to check the correctness of the information? What was the basis for regarding
the information as "reliable"? What is the connection between the Soththi
Upali group

**278**



and the persons mentioned in the second report? After all, the conspiracy was
supposed to be between Mr. Cooray and a gang of criminals led by Soththi Upali
who 'directly or indirectly' had acquired properties close to the ancestral
home of Her Excellency the President to harm or assassinate Her Excellency.
The other person who were supposed to have participated in discussions with
Mr. Cooray were said to be "unidentified", and so they could not be said to
belong to the Soththi Upali group. Mr. Cooray states in his affidavit that he
was questioned about his connections .with the persons mentioned in the
Director's report **after his arrest**. He states: "I was questioned about a
visit made to me at my residence after my return by U. L. Seneviratne, member
of the Western Provincial Council and ex M.M.C., and what we had discussed. I
stated that the said U. L. Seneviratne called on me once complaining bitterly
about his arrest and detention for a long period which he said was unlawful. I
was questioned whether I knew Sudu Mahattaya, to which I answered in the
negative. Subsequently, on 8th July I was asked whether I knew Malwatte Some.
I answered I did not know him by name but if I am shown him it may be that I
had met him casually." The respondents have not challenged Mr. Cooray's
averments either by way of affidavit or through the submissions of their
counsel.



# The third report



With regard to the third report, the Secretary, in his affidavit, states as
follows:



"I state that T. V. Sumanasekera Deputy Inspector-General of Police, Criminal
Investigation Department by a report dated 14.6.97 addressed to me informed me
that he had received reliable intelligence that [Mr. Cooray] had sought
assistance of certain members of a group involved in the commission of
dangerous criminal acts to cause harm to or assassinate Her Excellency the
President."



Which group was this? Was it Soththi Upali's group? If so why was it not
named?



# The Secretary's request for further information



The Secretary states in his affidavit that, by his letter dated the 14th of
June 1997, he "sought further clarifications from the Deputy



**279**



Inspector-General of Police, Criminal Investigation Department on certain
matters referred to in his report. I annex hereto marked 1R1 the said letter
dated 14.6.97." 1R1 states as follows:



"I refer to your letter dated 14th June on the above subject.



Please identify the manner in which the persons mentioned in your report would
be a threat to National Security."



Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that this letter was written
because the material furnished did not satisfy the Secretary that there were
grounds for arresting Mr. Cooray. Learned Counsel for the respondents stated
that Mr. Cooray had been a Mayor of Colombo and a former Cabinet Minister.
Therefore the Secretary was acting cautiously, and wrote 1R1. I shall refer to
this letter again, but I should like to dispose of one matter immediately. The
Secretary, in exercising his powers of arrest, should **always** act
cautiously, for the liberty of one citizen is no less important than that of
any other, whatever his station in life was, is, or expected to be.



# The response to the letter of the Secretary

** **

With regard to the response he received, the Secretary, in his affidavit,
states as follows:  


"[The] Deputy Inspector-General of Police, Criminal Investigation Department
by way of further report dated 16.6.97 confirming his earlier intelligence
report about [Mr. Cooray] ... brought to my notice that the said Soththi Upali
had either directly or through members of his group purchased lands in close
proximity to the Horagolla Walauwa, the ancestral residence of Her Excellency
the President and that two houses had already been constructed and another is
presently under construction in these lands. He also informed me that his
intelligence revealed that the said properties were acquired as part of a[n]
elaborate conspiracy to cause physical harm to Her Excellency the President."



The secretary in his affidavit adds as follows:

  
"... the investigations conducted by the Criminal Investigation Department has
now confirmed the correctness of the intelligence **  
 **

**280**



regarding the acquisition and construction of houses in the said land (sic.)
referred to above. Deputy Inspector-General of Police, Criminal investigation
Department in the said report among other details also brought to my notice
that he received reliable intelligence that [Mr. Cooray] was planning to
commit various acts of violence with the view of discrediting the Government
and in this connection he has sought the assistance of some retired service
personnel."



The author of the third report and the report of the 16th of June 1997, Mr. T.
V Sumanasekera, Deputy Inspector-General of Police, Criminal Investigation
Department, in his affidavit dated the 8th of July 1997, states that the
Inspector-General of Police, the author of the first report, had informed him,
of the matters set out in the first report; and that in response to the
directions given to him by the Inspector-General of Police, he instructed
Inspector of Police Jagath Fonseka, the Officer in Charge of the Central
Intelligence Unit of the Criminal Investigation Department to inquire into the
matter. He states that he also directed his intelligence unit "to gather
intelligence about the involvement of [Mr. Cooray] regarding a conspiracy to
assassinate or cause physical harm to Her Excellency the President." Mr.
Sumanasekera goes on to state as follows:



"7\. I state that my intelligence sources revealed that certain members of the
group involved in the commission of dangerous criminal offences headed [by]
... Soththi Upali (presently in remand) has had discussions with [Mr. Cooray]
about assassinating or causing physical harm to Her Excellency the President
... My inquiries also revealed that the said Soththi Upali had either directly
or through his relatives purchased properties in close proximity of the
Horagolia Walauwa, the ancestral residence of Her Excellency the President. I
annex hereto marked A2 the inquiry notes conducted by the intelligence
regarding the purchase of the land referred to above in close proximity to the
ancestral residence of Her Excellency the President. It has now transpired
that these properties are situated within 1 km. from the ancestral residence
of Her Excellency the President. I produce marked A3, A4 and A5 respectively
the reports forwarded to me by Inspector of Police Jagath Fonseka, Officer in
Charge of the Intelligence Unit and an affidavit from the said Jagath Fonseka
under confidential cover for perusal of Your Lordships Court.

**281**



8\. I state that on the intelligence and the information gathered by me I
submitted a report dated 14.6.97 to [the Secretary] and in response to certain
queries made by him I also submitted another report dated 16.6.97. I am
advised that the said reports are being produced by [the Secretary] under
confidential cover for your Lordships' perusal.



9\. I state that according to the intelligence I have received ... Soththi
Upali has masterminded and overseen a large number of murders, robberies and
disappearances of persons carried out through a group of criminals led by him.



10\. I state that my intelligence sources also revealed that Uswatta Liyanage
Seneviratne, Wathudula Bandulage Somaratne alias Malwatte Some and Janaka
Priyankara Jayamanne alias Sudu Mahattaya were also identified as being
persons concerned in the said conspiracy."



As we have seen, Mr. Cooray has, in his affidavit, (1) dealt with the question
of his alleged connections or discussions with the persons named by Mr.
Sumanasekera as "persons concerned in the said conspiracy"; and (2) denied
having had discussions with any person with a view to assassinating or causing
harm to Her Excellency the President. As I have observed, Mr. Cooray's
averments with regard to those matters have not been challenged in these
proceedings.



Although Mr. Sumanasekera in his affidavit states that the discussions about
the plot to harm or assassinate the President were held with "certain members"
of a group of criminals "headed ... by Soththi Upali", as I have observed,
according to the Secretary, there is no reference in his report dated the 14th
of June 1997 to either Soththi Upali or his group. Nor, according to the
Secretary, does he state in that report that the persons named as having had
discussions with Mr. Cooray were members of Soththi Upali's group. In his
affidavit Mr. Sumanasekera states that the persons named by him "were also
identified as being persons concerned in the said conspiracy", but he refrains
from stating that they were members of Soththi Upali's group.

**282**



Nor, according to the Secretary, is there a reference in Mr. Sumanasekera's
report dated the 14th of June 1997 to the question of the acquisition of
properties anywhere. However, as we have seen, the Secretary in his affidavit
states that Mr. Sumanasekera had in his report dated the 16th of June 1997
referred to the acquisition of properties by Soththi Upali "either directly or
through members of his group", "in close proximity to Horogolla Walauwa, the
ancestral residence of Her Excellency the President ... acquired as a part of
an elaborate conspiracy to cause physical harm to Her Excellency the
President."



Sketch plans and investigation reports of police officers deployed by Mr.
Jagath Fernando, Inspector of Police, on the instructions of Mr. Sumanasekera,
have been filed for the confidential perusal of the Court. There is nothing in
the material furnished to show that Soththi Upali "either directly or through
members of his group" purchased lands in close proximity to the ancestral
residence of the President. In any event, if the lands were purchased, as the
Secretary states he was told by Mr. Sumanasekera, "as a part of an elaborate
conspiracy", it would have been of crucial importance to state when the lands
were acquired - a matter that could easily have been ascertained by asking the
owners of the properties or by visiting the Land Registry. Mr. Cooray states
in his affidavit that (after his arrest) he was questioned by the Police as to
whether in his capacity as Minister of Housing and Construction he allotted
any land to Soththi Upali in Horogolla. He had replied that he had no
recollection of having done so. That again is a matter that could have been
easily ascertained by asking the Government authority concerned. In any event,
if a land had in fact been so allocated, how could that ever have been
evidence of a conspiracy to assassinate Her Excellency the President? When Mr.
Cooray was the Minister, Her Excellency the President had not yet been elected
to office. The conspiracy, according to the Secretary, was not to harm or
assassinate Mrs. Kumaratunga at the time when Mr. Cooray was a Minister: the
conspiracy was to assassinate Her Excellency the President.



The Deputy Inspector-General, Mr. Sumanasekera, in his affidavit states as
follows: "My inquiries also revealed that certain persons who had been
enlisted to the Reserve Police Force at the instance of [Mr. Cooray] when he
was a Cabinet Minister in the previous  


**283**



government had been given intensive training by the Special Task Force (STF).
I also received intelligence that some of the persons who were so recruited
had deserted their posts and their present whereabouts are unknown."



Mr. Cooray in his affidavit states as follows: "... during the period 1989 to
1991, there was severe threat to Cabinet Ministers and other persons holding
public office from the J.V.P. movement which was at its height. Accordingly,
security officers attached to my security, and I believe also to the security
of other high ranking personnel, were enlisted into the Reserve Police Force
and trained by the Special Task Force in order to provide adequate security. I
state that out of the eight security personnel recruited to the Reserve
Police, four have reverted to their substantive posts in the Colombo Municipal
Security Service, and four have retired ..."



The respondents have not challenged Mr. Cooray's averments either by way of
affidavit or through the submissions of their counsel. And so there was, after
all, nothing very alarming or mysterious about the former security staff of
Mr. Cooray. What was the relevance of the averments made by the Deputy
inspector-General to the conspiracy theory?



The Secretary stated in his affidavit that the Deputy Inspector General of
Police had in his report dated the 16th of June 1997 brought it to his notice
that he received reliable intelligence that "the detenu was planning to commit
various acts of violence with a view of discrediting the Government and in
this connection he has sought the assistance of some retired service
personnel." The allegation relates to acts aimed at **discrediting the
government** and not a conspiracy to assassinate or harm the President. The
Secretary states that he "formed the opinion" that it was necessary to detain
Mr. Cooray "having considered the matters referred to above and the material
contained in the reports referred to above **pertaining to a conspiracy to
assassinate or cause harm to Her Excellency the President and its grave
implications for National Security and Public Order. " **We are concerned in
these proceedings with the grounds upon which the Secretary ordered the arrest
and detention of Mr. Cooray; and those grounds, according to the Secretary,
related

**284**



to a conspiracy to assassinate or harm the President. In any event, Mr. Cooray
denies the allegation that he was planning to commit any acts of violence to
discredit the government. The respondents have adduced no evidence or offered
any submissions through their counsel on that matter.



# Information supplied for confidential perusal by the Court



In addition to the facts and information referred to in his affidavit, the
Secretary also placed the following documents before the Court for
confidential perusal:



(i) The report of the Inspector-General of Police dated 9 June 1997;  


(ii) The report of the Director of the National Intelligence Bureau dated 11
June 1997;

  
(iii) The report of the Deputy Inspector-General of Police, Criminal
Investigation Department dated 14 June 1997

  
(iv) The report of the Deputy Inspector-General of Police, Criminal
Investigation Department dated 16 June 1997.



The Secretary expressly states in his affidavit, that he was `satisfied' on
the basis of material contained in those reports.



Those reports do not materially add anything to the narration of their
contents in the affidavit of the Secretary.



# Was the Secretary "satisfied"?



Mr. Cooray was arrested and detained upon an order issued by the Secretary
under the powers conferred on the Secretary by regulation 17(1). The opening
words of the regulation state that such an order may be issued "where the
Secretary is satisfied." The Secretary has declared in his affidavit that he
was "satisfied and farmed the opinion that it was necessary to detain... B.
Sirisena Cooray to prevent him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the
national security and the maintenance of public order." The regulation is
framed in a subjective form. However, his own declaration is not

**285**



conclusive, for the decision does not relate merely to "a matter of pure
judgment" per Lord Wilberforce in Secretary of State for Education and Science
v. Tameside Borough Council(1) or to a matter where he had to be satisfied on
"a matter of pure opinion". (Per Lord Denning in Tameside at 1025 C.A.). The
opening words of regulation 17(1) "Where the Secretary is satisfied" do not,
in my view, confer an absolute discretion on the Secretary; they serve "as a
condition limiting the exercise of an otherwise arbitrary power: If the
question whether the condition has been satisfied is to be conclusively
decided by the man who wields the power, 'the value of the intended restraint
is in effect nothing.": per Lord Radcliff in Nakkuda Ali v M. F. de S.
Jayaratne(2). The words do not mean "Where the Secretary thinks"; nor do they
mean "Where the Secretary believes". They mean that the Secretary was
satisfied on reasonable grounds which were capable of supporting the
Secretary's decision; and (2) the Secretary should not have misdirected
himself on the law in arriving at his decision: Secretary of State for
Education and Science v. Metropolitan Borough of Tameside (Supra); Attorney-
General of St. Christopher, Nevis and Anguilla v Reynolds.(3)  
  
The Secretary had to be satisfied that it was necessary to detain Mr. Cooray
to prevent him from acting in a manner prejudicial to national security and
public order by causing harm to or assassinating Her Excellency the President.
It is open to Mr. Cooray to show that the Secretary was not legally entitled
to be satisfied. A person is legally entitled to be "satisfied" if he is
"reasonably" satisfied: Director of Public Prosecutions v Head.(4)



As Wade (p. 401) points out: "Taken by itself, the standard of
unreasonableness is nominally pitched very high: 'so absurd that no sensible
person could ever dream that it lay within the powers of the authority' (Lord
Greene MR); 'so wrong that no reasonable person could sensibly take that view'
(Lord Denning); 'so outrageous in its defiance of logic or of accepted moral
standards that no sensible person who had applied his mind to the question to
be decided could have arrived at it' (Lord Diplock). "Our task is not to find
whether the Secretary had taken leave of his senses, but whether he was
"reasonably satisfied".



In doing so, we must have regard to the scheme and purpose of the relevant
regulations made under the law for the time being **  
 **

**286**



relating to public security - the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and
Powers) Regulations No. 4 of 1994 in this case; the applicable provisions of
the general law of the land, including those contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure; and the "Supreme Law" \- the Constitution. We should remind
ourselves that Article 13(5) of the Constitution declares and recognizes that
"Every person shall be presumed innocent until he is proved guilty". We should
also bear in mind that "The principle of personal freedom that every man
should be presumed innocent until he is found guilty applies also to the
police function of arrest... For that reason it is of importance that no one
should be arrested by the police except on grounds which the particular
circumstances of the arrest really justified the entertainment of a reasonable
suspicion,": per Scott LJ in Dumbell v. Roberts,(5) followed in Muttusamy v.
Kannangara(6) per Gratiaen J; Faiz v. Attorney-General(7) per Perera J; and in
Faurdeen v. Jayetilleke and others(8) per Perera, J; Channa Pieris v.
Attorney-General.(9)  
  
A person is "reasonably satisfied" if his decision is reasonable, "or can be
supported with good reasons, or at any rate be a decision which a reasonable
person might reasonably reach": per Denning MR in Tameside cited with approval
in Siriwardene v. Liyanage(10). "if a judgment requires, before it can be
made, the existence of some facts, then, although the evaluation of those
facts is for the Secretary... alone, the court must inquire whether those
facts exist, and have been taken into account, whether the judgment has been
made upon a proper self-direction as to those facts, whether the judgment has
not been made upon other facts which ought not to have been taken into
account": per Lord Wilberforce in. Tameside at 1047 followed in Siriwardene at
328-329.



In Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation(11) at
229 Lord Green MR said:



"It is true that discretion must be exercised reasonably. Now what does that-
mean? Lawyers familiar with the phraseology used in relation to the use of
statutory discretions often use the word "unreasonable" in a rather
comprehensive sense. It has frequently been used as a general description of
the things that must be done. For instance, a person entrusted with a
discretion must, so to speak, direct himself properly in law. He must call his
own attention to the

**287**



matters which he is bound to consider. He must exclude from his consideration
matters which are irrelevant to the matters to what he has to consider. If he
does not obey those rules, he may truly be said, and often is said, to be
acting "unreasonably". Similarly, there may be something so absurd that no
sensible person could dream that it lay within the powers of the authority.
Warrington LJ in Short v. Poole Corporation(12) gave the example of the red-
haired teacher, dismissed because she had red hair. This is unreasonable in
one sense. In another it is taking into consideration extraneous matters. It
is so unreasonable that it might almost be described as being done in bad
faith; and, in fact, all these things run into one another." Commenting on
Lord Greene's famous passage, Wade (7th Ed. 400-401) states as follows: "it
explains how "unreasonableness", in its classic formulation, covers a
multitude of sins... Unreasonableness has thus become a generalized rubric
covering not only sheer absurdity or caprice, but merging into illegitimate
motives and purposes, a wide category of errors commonly described as
'irrelevant considerations', and mistakes and misunderstandings which can be
classed as self misdirection, or addressing oneself to the wrong question..."



On the other hand, the Court will not usurp the discretion of the Secretary
and substitute its own views for that of the Secretary. Indeed, as Lord
Hailsham observed: "Two reasonable persons can perfectly reasonably come to
opposite conclusions on the same set of facts without forfeiting their title
to be regarded as reasonable... Not every reasonable exercise of judgment is
right, and not every mistaken exercise of judgment is unreasonable. There is a
band of decisions with which no Court should seek to replace the individual's
judgment with its own.": In re H (An lnfant)(13). When the Secretary "honestly
takes a view of the facts or the law which could reasonably be entertained
then his decision is not to be set aside simply because thereafter someone
thinks that his view is wrong. After all this is an emergency procedure. It
has to be set in motion quickly, when there is no time for minute analysis of
facts or law. The whole process would be made of no effect if the
(Secretary's) decision was afterwards to be conned over word by word, letter
by letter, to see if he has misdirected himself. That cannot be right ...":
per Lord Denning in Secretary of State v. ASLEF (14). The prevailing situation
in the country will obviously be a matter that the Court will not ignore:

**288**



Cf. per Wanasundera, J. in Joseph Perera v. Attorney- General(15); per
Kulatunga, J. in Wijewardena v. Zain(16); Dissanayake v. Superintendent Mahara
Prison(17). The Court also appreciates the difficulties inherent in the
investigation and prosecution of certain offences, such as terrorist crimes or
conspiracies to assassinate political leaders, and the need for acting quickly
where national security or public order is involved. Yet, the exigencies of
dealing with such crimes cannot justify switching the notion of reasonableness
to the point where the essence of the safeguard secured by Article 13 (1) of
the Constitution may be abrogated: Cf. Brogan v. U. K. ECHR(18), Fox Campbell
& Hartley v U.K. European Court of Human Rights(19).



The question for determination is whether, on the material before him, the
Secretary was "satisfied" that Mr. Cooray should be arrested and detained. As
we have seen, there were many mistakes and misunderstandings based on
misleading advice as a result of which he misdirected himself. Moreover, the
grounds on which he was supposed to have formed his judgment did not exist:
What was the evidence that Soththi Upali was a 'close associate' of Mr. Cooray
- that the members of Soththi Upali's gang held discussions with Mr. Cooray
about assassinating the President \- that Soththi Upali had 'directly or
indirectly' purchased lands in close proximity to the ancestral home of the
President as a part of "an elaborate conspiracy" to harm or assassinate the
President? The police had their suspicions and hoped that some evidence might
turn up to make their suspicions reasonable. However, vague, general
suspicions and the fervent hope or even confident assumption that something
might eventually turn up to provide a reasonable ground for an arrest will not
do: Channa Pieris (Supra) at p.51. I hold that the Secretary was not legally
entitled to be satisfied.



**Other factors motivating the Secretary**



The material in the reports (as conveyed to us through the Secretary's
affidavit), as we have seen, did not provide grounds for the arrest. Why, then
did the Secretary come to form his opinion that it was necessary to arrest and
detain Mr. Cooray? The Secretary in his affidavit states as follows:

**289**



"... the Criminal Investigation Department, the National Intelligence Bureau
and the 2nd Respondent had on several occasions forwarded intelligence reports
regarding matters affecting the security of the State and Public Order. I also
state that most of the intelligence set out in these reports have been
subsequently found to be accurate.



:.. I had no reason to doubt the reliability of the intelligence reports
submitted to me regarding the matter in question.



:.. in the recent past there had been a number of political leaders including
Heads of State who had been assassinated. Investigations have revealed that
these offences had been committed in pursuance of carefully planned
conspiracies.



... I state that having considered the matters set out above and the material
contained in the reports referred to above pertaining to a conspiracy to
assassinate or cause physical harm to Her Excellency the President and its
grave implications for National Security and Public Order I was satisfied and
formed the opinion that it was necessary to detain the said B. Sirisena Cooray
to prevent him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the National Security
and the maintenance of Public Order. In the circumstances. t made (the) Order
which has been produced marked P1..."



# Self-misdirection

** **

Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the Secretary acted upon
material placed before him by senior responsible officers and therefore
believed in good faith that he had reasonable cause to believe that Mr. Cooray
was involved in a conspiracy. In Liversidge v. Anderson(20), the majority of
the House of Lords decided that the words "if the Secretary of State has
reasonable cause to believe" meant "if the Secretary of State thinks that he
has reasonable cause to believe" provided he acts in good faith. However, Lord
Atkin, in his celebrated dissenting speech, held that the words "if the
Secretary of State has reasonable cause to believe" meant what they said,
namely that they gave only a conditional authority to the Secretary to detain
any person without trial, the condition being that he had reasonable cause for
the belief which leads to the detention order. The decision

**290**



of the majority in Liversidge supports the submission of learned counsel for
the respondents, but as Lord Reid dissmissively ob served in Ridge v.
Baldwin(21) at 73, it was a "very peculiar decision" and is not regarded with
favour. However, although Lord Scarman said in the same case that the ghost of
the decision in Liversidge need no longer haunt the law, it seems to have now
made another appearance. And perhaps in the hope that this Court would not
exorcise that evil spirit, Mr. De Silva, whose arguments were all most
vigorously but fairly and ably presented, cited the decision of the Supreme
Court in Janatha Finance and Investments v. D.J. Francis Douglas Liyanage and
Others(22).



In that case, the Competent Authority appointed under the Emergency
(Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations No. 3 of 1982 made an order
under regulation 14(7) thereof sealing the petitioner's printing press. The
petitioner alleged that the order was null and void as it constituted an
infringement of Articles 12(1) and 12(2) of the Constitution which declare and
recognize the right to equality. Ranasinghe, J. (as he then was),
(Sharvananda, J. - as he then was - and Victor Perera, J. agreeing) at p. 396
said:



"The question that arises is whether the material so available to the 1st
respondent could be said to have been sufficient to justify the 1st
respondent's action in making the Order P2? Was it reasonable for the 1st
respondent to have decided to do what he did upon such material? It has to be
remembered that the material placed before the 1st respondent was so placed
before him by senior responsible officers, officers whose sense of
responsibility and bona fides the 1st respondent would have had no reason to
doubt. The 1st respondent could not himself have personally undertaken an
investigation. Time was a decisive factor. If meaningful action was to be
taken, it had to be speedy enough to prevent the mischief apprehended. Against
this background is it possible to say that the 1st respondent was wrong in
doing what he did ...? It may be that another might have waited for more
material before proceeding to act. The question, however, is whether the
decision of the 1st respondent to act in the way he did was such that no
reasonable person would have done what he did? Was his decision to act so very
unreasonable? Was his exercise of his judgment so hopelessly indefensible? Has
the exercise of the discretion vested in him been wholly unreasonable and
capricious? I

**291**



think not. May be another would not have done what the 1st respondent did; but
the 1st respondent cannot be said to have done what no reasonable person would
have ever done in such circumstances. The good faith of the 1st respondent,
though attacked on the grounds of political vengeance, improper motives,
failure to exercise his discretion, acting on the dictation of the President,
and partiality has not been shaken.



In this view of the matter, .I am of opinion that the Order P2 (and also P1)
is valid ..."



In my view, a decision of the Secretary, does not become **reasonable** merely
because the source of his information are the reports of senior police
officers. It is evident from the affidavit of the Secretary that he was aware
that those officers themselves had not personally gone into the matter;
despite the extraordinarily seriousness of the matter, but were merely
reporting that there was information from "reliable sources". The facts
established in these proceedings, which were easily ascertainable before or
soon after the arrest, show how unreliable they were. Are the so-called
informants of the "intelligence" services solely sneaks concerned with
furtively providing fault-finding information? Are there no police officers or
informants who are independent and straightforward who might provide other
information? How is it that in this ease a great deal of material that might
have been quite easily found out escaped the notice of the "intelligence" arm
of the police? Is the "intelligence" service concerned with fact-finding or
fault-finding? Be that as it may, the question in issue is not whether the
Secretary's decision was based on information furnished by senior police
officers; nor is it whether his decision was "hopelessly indefensible" or
"wholly unreasonable and capricious" or simply wrong: What has to be decided
by us is not whether the Secretary thought or sincerely believed that Mr.
Cooray was conspiring to harm or assassinate the President, but that he was
personally satisfied on reasonable grounds based upon the three initial
reports submitted to him and the additional report submitted to him, that it
was necessary to arrest and detain Mr. Cooray to prevent him from
assassinating or causing harm to Her Excellency the President and thereby
acting in a manner prejudicial to national security and/or public order.

**292**



Learned counsel for the respondents, Mr. De Silva, referred to the reasons
given in the affidavit of the Secretary and submitted that in the light of the
material contained in the reports, the Secretary was not only justified in
issuing the Detention Order, but that he would have been guilty of a
dereliction of duty had he refrained from doing so. On the other hand, learned
counsel for the petitioner, Mr. Choksy, submitted that the material placed
before the Secretary did not convince, and at any rate could not have
reasonably persuaded, the Secretary to be satisfied that it was necessary to
detain Mr. Cooray and that in the circumstances, the Secretary was not acting
according to the procedure prescribed by Regulation 17(1) and was therefore
acting in violation of Article 13(1) of the Constitution which states that no
person shall be arrested except according to procedure established by law.



I agree that the Secretary was not obliged to carry out the investigations
himself: But he had to satisfy himself, not merely on the material submitted
to him but also upon "such further additional material as may be called for by
him": (Regulation 17(1). He had the power to call for, and the duty to
consider additional material. He was obliged to make his decision upon a
proper self-direction of the facts upon which his judgment was based. He was
obliged to call his own attention to the matters he was bound to consider. He
failed to do so. It is of significance that whereas regulation 17(1) of the
1989 regulations states that "Where the Secretary to the Ministry of Defence
is of opinion ...... the corresponding current (1994) regulation states that
"Where the Secretary is satisfied upon the material submitted to him, or upon
such further material as may be called for by him ...". Admittedly, there was
nothing to prevent the Secretary calling for and considering additional
material under the earlier regulation. However, the 1994 regulation
specifically draws the attention of the Secretary to what he might do. The
possibility that there might be two sides to the story did not prompt the
Secretary to direct that Mr. Cooray's version be ascertained either from
"intelligence" sources or from Mr. Cooray himself.



The Secretary in his affidavit admits that Mr. Cooray was neither questioned
nor was his statement recorded prior to his arrest, but he adds that Mr.
Cooray's statement was recorded after the Detention

**293**



Order had been issued. Mr. Cooray was arrested on the 16th of June 1997 and he
was interrogated and his statements recorded on the 17th, 18th, 19th, 20th,
23rd and 24th June and on the 8th and 11th of July. He had been abroad from
the 24th of June 1996 and returned to Sri Lanka on the 28th of April 1997. He
was questioned about his family and his activities and movements after his
return. However, although he was arrested and detained because he was supposed
to have been involved in a conspiracy to assassinate the President, no
questions were put to him with regard to that matter until Mr. Cooray himself
had raised the matter with the officers interrogating him on the 23rd of June
1997.



He had read an article (produced and marked in these proceedings as document
P3) appearing on the front page (and continued on page 5) of the Sunday Times
of the 22nd of June under a banner headline stretching across the page "Plot
against the President in which the first four paragraphs state as follows:



"The detention of former UNP strongman Sirisena Cooray - in the headlines for
the past six days with widespread conjecture and speculation - took a
sensational turn last night when state television and radio announced that he
was being grilled regarding an alleged plot to kill President Kumaratunga.



Soon after the bombshell announcement, CID chief T.V. Sumanasekera told The
Sunday Times last night that they had received some information regarding an
alleged plot against the President and every aspect was being probed.



"There is a little bit of evidence and we are continuing investigations on
this line, " he said.



The state run media last night said Mr. Cooray had been arrested following
information about a plot to assassinate the President, but Mr. Sumanasekera
declined to confirm the state media reports."



The report goes on to speculate as to other reasons why Mr. Cooray was
arrested. It may or may not explain why the matter of the alleged conspiracy
was not pursued. I make no comment on that matter.

**294**



Mr. Cooray had also read an article (produced and marked in these proceedings
as document P3 (a)) appearing on the front page of the Daily News of the 23rd
of June under a banner headline stretching across the page "Plot will be
disclosed soon" in which it was stated as follows:



"The details of the alleged plot to harm President Chandrika Bandaranaike
Kumaratunga, uncovered recently, will be disclosed in the next few days," CID
sources said yesterday.



The evidence pertaining to this plot uncovered during CID investigations into
the activities of former UNP Minister B. Sirisena Cooray are now being put
together, these sources added.



Following the discovery of this plot, the CID also arrested another suspect
who is considered an expert marksman over the weekend. The CID said the
suspect was able to fire on target using two pistols simultaneously.



CID sources said evidence showed that attempts had been made to hire
underworld criminals to execute this plot.



Two other suspects said to be notorious underworld characters have also been
taken into custody in this connection and the CID was looking out for firearms
which had been in their possession.



CID sources said they were able to elicit more evidence from these two
suspects during interrogation following their arrest.



Police Headquarters sources said a UNP politician released from remand custody
had held a grand dinner which was attended by

several underworld criminals as well as some leading businessmen.



The CID had earlier received snatches of information regarding an alleged plot
to harm the President. The plot became more evident when the CID followed up.
The evidence gathered during interrogation of Mr. Cooray (sic.).



Informed sources said Mr. Cooray had been arrested on information about an
alleged political conspiracy. Mr. Cooray is alleged to have had meetings with
several suspects released from jail recently.

**295**



CID sources said they hoped to reopen investigations into several earlier
investigations, into several earlier incidents involving the underworld in an
effort to unravel the mystery behind those incidents. Several opposition
politicians too are to be questioned in this connection and two more
underworld characters, to be arrested soon, will be produced as prosecution
witnesses."



Mr. Cooray states in his affidavit \- and this has not been controverted -
that on the 23rd of June he drew the attention of the officers who were
interrogating him on that day to these two news reports.



During the afternoon of the 24th of June, and only upon that occasion, was Mr.
Cooray asked whether he was involved in a plot to assassinate or harm the
President. The petitioner denied any involvement in such a conspiracy and
requested specific particulars of the information alleged to have been
received by the police against him so that he might respond; but he was not
furnished with such information. The Court had earlier on that day granted the
petitioner leave to proceed in this matter. What is the explanation for this
extraordinary anxiety to be uninformed? Mr. De Silva submitted that it was a
matter of police "technique" to first ascertain peripheral matters and then
come to the relevant question. If those were his instructions, I must say
that, placing myself in the position of a "reasonable man", I am quite
surprised that it took over a week to get over the peripheral matters;. and
that it is a matter of amazement that when, according to the Secretary's
affidavit, the Director of the National Intelligence Bureau had in his report
of the 11th of June stated that the President was to be assassinated or
injured "in the near future", no question was put to Mr. Cooray until he
himself had raised the matter on the 24th of June. If the report in the Sunday
Times that Mr. Sumanasekera had said that there was no more than "a little bit
of evidence" is accurate, how does one reconcile that statement with what Mr.
Sumanasekera reported to the Secretary? He has not filed an affidavit
contradicting the accuracy of the Sunday Times report **which was an item of
evidence in this case.**



There were, as we have seen, many things said in each of the reports of the
police officers relied upon by the Secretary that were vague and suspicious.
The Secretary did not call for any clarification

**296**



on the report of the Inspector-General of Police, nor on the report of the
National Intelligence Bureau. With regard to the report of the Deputy
Inspector-General of Police dated the 14th of June 1997, however, he says he
sought clarification. But what did he ask?: "Please identify the manner in
which the persons mentioned in your report would be a threat to national
security." Surely, if the Secretary did believe the allegation that "the
detenu had sought [the] assistance of certain members of a group involved in
the commission of dangerous criminal acts to cause harm to or assassinate Her
Excellency the President", there should have been no doubt in his mind that
there was a threat to National Security? Why did he not also ask him whether
it would have been a threat to public order when in the Detention Order and in
his affidavit he states that the detention was ordered to prevent a threat to
both national security and public order? They are two different things
although they may co-exist. In his letter to the Chairman of the Advisory
Committee the Secretary states that the arrest was made because of an alleged
"threat to national security". There is no reference to public order. The
Secretary of the Ministry of Defence required no education on the issue
whether a conspiracy to assassinate or harm the President would affect
national security? Surely, there was no need for him to be instructed by any
person on that matter?. The decision whether certain activities of a citizen
constitutes a threat to National Security is a matter for the Secretary and
not for a police officer, whatever his rank might be. The power of the
Secretary given by regulation 17(1) concerns the physical liberty of persons,
including those who have not yet, nor ever, committed an offence. It is
therefore an exceedingly great power, indeed an awesome power, that must be
exercised with a corresponding degree of responsibility. There is public
respect for the independence and impartiality of the Secretary, albeit tinged
with latent reverential fear. The Secretary must fulfil public expectations
and be independent and impartial.



Obviously, in appropriate circumstances, as for instance, in the Janatha
Finance and Investments case (Supra), the Secretary may, rely upon the
opinions, conclusions and recommendations of senior police officers. Each
case, however, must depend on its own circumstances; but the cardinal,
invariable principle in each case is that the person making the order of
detention must be "satisfied".

**297**



It should be pointed out that in his letter dated the 3rd of July 1997 to the
Chairman of the Advisory Board appointed in terms of Regulation 17(5), to
enable the Chairman to inform the persons detained of the "reasons" for their
arrest, the Secretary states that the Detention Orders on Mr. Cooray and three
other persons "have been issued **after being satisfied on the material
submitted to me by the D.I.G., C.I.D.** to the effect that Mr. Sirisena Cooray
has sought the assistance of certain persons to cause harm to or to
assassinate Her Excellency the President." The representations or submissions
to the Advisory Committee made by a person arrested would be directed to
responding to the stated grounds for the arrest. The grounds to be challenged
would depend on the basis for the Secretary's order: The Secretary's letter
very clearly indicates that there was but one source of information he relied
on - the material submitted to him by the D.I.G., C.I.D. I am inclined to
think, upon a reading of the Secretary's narration of what was contained in
the reports referred to by him, that the Secretary was in fact persuaded by
the D.I.G., C.I.D. to issue the Detention Order and that the opinion formed
was not that of the Secretary.



In the matter before us, the Secretary in my view abdicated his authority and
mechanically signed the Detention Order. As I have pointed out, the
Secretary's decision was not reasonable in the sense that it was not supported
with good reasons, and therefore it was not a decision which a reasonable
person might have reasonably reached. His decision was not only wrong, but in
my view unreasonably wrong. This happened because he did not satisfy himself
but allowed himself to be misled. It was not his opinion: Malinda Channa
Pieris (Supra) at p. 58. The matter before us is a good illustration of what
Wade (p.401) describes as "self-misdirection" and therefore a case in which
the Secretary cannot be held to have been "satisfied".



Taking a person into custody and detaining him in pursuance of such a decision
is not in accordance with "procedure established by law" and it is therefore
in violation of Article 13(1) of the Constitution: Sasanasiritissa Thero and
others v be Silva and Others(23) Weerakoon v. Weeraratne(24) Somasiri v.
Jayasena and Others(25) Dissanayake v. Mahara Prisons (Supra) Channa Pieris v.
Attorney-General (Supra), at p. 59.

**298**



**The form and contents of Detention Order suggests it was mechanically
issued.**



The Secretary states in the Detention Order dated the 16th of June 1997 that
he was making the order 'being of opinion and with a view to preventing the
person specified and residing at the place mentioned in Column 1 of the
Schedule to this order from acting in any manner prejudicial to National
Security or to the maintenance of public order', it is necessary so to do ...



The order is set out in a standard, pre-prepared, form: the only variations
between one case and the other relate to information, furnished at the bottom
of the page of the order in a schedule, concerning (1) the date of the order;
(2) the name and address of the person to be detained; and (3) the place of
detention. The standard form used in this case follows the forms used when the
1989 Emergency Regulations were in operation when the Secretary was required
to be of the 'opinion' that the detention was necessary to prevent the person
ordered to be arrested and detained from acting in any manner prejudicial to
national security or to the maintenance of public order: The Regulations
introduced by **Gazette Extraordinary** 606/4 of 18 April 1990 substituted the
word 'satisfied' for the word 'opinion'. Due to judicial interpretation, there
may be no practical difference in the use of the terms: Channa Pieris and
Others v. Attorney-General and Others, (Supra) at p. 58. But, the retention of
the older term in the Form suggests a lack of spontaneity that one would
expect from an individual acting in accordance with the specific obligation of
being personally satisfied imposed on him by the provisions of the law he
invokes: the form used suggests that the Secretary was driven not by his own
thoughts but by the stimulus derived from an outside source: the letter to the
Chairman of the Advisory Committee indicates that the Secretary relied on the
report of the D.I.G. Moreover, the use of the words 'acting in any manner',
borrowed from Regulation 17, rather than the specific manner in which the
person ordered to be detained was suspected of being likely to act in a manner
prejudicial to the National Security or to the maintenance of public order,
raises doubts as to whether the Secretary did in fact give his mind to the
question whether the person ordered to be arrested and detained was likely to
act in a manner prejudicial to National Security or to the maintenance of
public order:

**299**



had he been convinced, what was the difficulty in specifically stating his
grounds, if he had any? In my view, he did not state any grounds because he
had no grounds. The Police officers who advised the Secretary might have been
hoping that some evidence might turn up; but at that stage all they had was
mere suspicion based on what Mr. Sumanasekera had described in his interview
reported in the Sunday Times of June 22 1997 - six days after the arrest in
pursuance of the Detention Order - (which was filed as evidence in this case
by the petitioner and not controverted) as "a little bit of evidence."



Regulation 17(1) empowers the Secretary to detain a person for the specific
purposes laid down therein including the prevention of persons from acting in
any manner prejudicial to the national security or to the maintenance of
public order. As pointed out in Kishori Mohan v. The State of West Bengal(26)
national security and public order are two different things. Admittedly, in
the circumstances of a particular case, the Secretary might be satisfied that
both national security and public order were in jeopardy. In such an instance,
he should clearly indicate that that was the case. However, where he states,
as in this case, that it was necessary to detain the person to prevent him
from acting in a manner "prejudicial to the national security **or** to the
maintenance of public order" (the emphasis is mine), the satisfaction of the
Secretary, in the words of Shelat, J. in Kishori Mohan (Supra), "was on the
disjunctive and not conjunctive grounds, which means that he was not
certain... If he felt the necessity to detain the (person) from the activities
described by him in the grounds of detention on the ground that those
activities affected or were likely to affect both the public order and the
security of the State he would, no doubt, have used the conjunctive "and" not
the disjunctive "or" in his order. But, as the order stands, it would appear
that he was either not certain whether the alleged activities of the (person
ordered to be detained) endangered public order or the security of the State,
or he did not seriously apply his mind on the question whether the said
alleged activities fell under one head or the other and merely reproduced
mechanically the language" of the regulations empowering detention.



On the face of it, the order suggests that the Secretary of the Ministry of
Defence was acting mechanically without due regard to  


**300**



the circumstances of the particular case in respect of which he was issuing
the order of detention. As we have seen, orders signed mechanically show that
the person making the order was not "satisfied" that the arrest was warranted.
If he is not "satisfied", the Secretary is not empowered to issue a Detention
Order. If he nevertheless issues such an order, an arrest made in pursuance of
such an order is not according to procedure established by law and, therefore,
contravenes Article 13(1) of the Constitution and is unlawful and invalid.



# Was Mr. B. Sirisena Cooray given reasons for his arrest?



Article 13(1) of the Constitution not only states that no person shall be
arrested except according to procedure established by law, but it also states
that "Any person arrested shall be informed of the reason for his arrest."



The petitioner in his affidavit states that (1) the Detention Order did not
state any reason for the arrest; (2) the Police Officers who made the arrest
did not give Mr. Cooray any reasons for his arrest; (3) the Police Officers
were not able to state any reasons upon being questioned; and (4) the Police
Officers declined to record a statement of Mr. Cooray to, the effect that be
inquired from them as to how he was said to be acting in a manner prejudicial
to the national security or the maintenance of Public Order. This is confirmed
by Mr. Cooray in his affidavit.



The Secretary in his affidavit states that (1) the Detention Order "sets out
the purposes for which [Mr. Cooray] was taken into custody and detained"; and
that (2) Superintendent of Police Sisira Mendis who served the Detention Order
has stated in his affidavit that he had informed Mr. Cooray of "the purpose"
for which he was taken into custody and detained. The Secretary later states
that he had by his letter dated the 3rd of July 1997 informed the Chairman of
the Advisory Committee appointed in terms of Regulation 17(5) of "the reasons
for the detention of [Mr. Cooray] to enable him inform [Mr. Cooray] of the
same in terms of Regulation 17(9) of the said Regulations. "As we have seen,
the information furnished to the

**301**



Chairman were not "reasons"; they were merely inferences. The letter to the
Chairman of the Advisory Committee relates to Detention Orders served on Mr.
Cooray and the three others who constituted a threat to national security by
conspiring to cause harm to or assassinate the President.



The Detention Order does indeed set out the **purposes** for which Mr. Cooray
was being arrested and detained: It states that the Secretary deemed it
necessary to take into custody and detain Mr. Cooray "being of opinion and
with a view to preventing ... [him] from acting in any manner prejudicial to
the National Security or to the maintenance of public order." Mr. Mendis who
executed the order also states that he informed Mr. Cooray of the "purpose" of
the arrest. Article 13(1) of the Constitution, however, states that "Any
person arrested shall be informed of the **reason** for his arrest." Arguably,
having regard to the letter of the Secretary to the Chairman of the Advisory
Committee, the Secretary appreciated the difference. However, he seems to have
assumed that the task of giving **reasons** was the duty of the Chairman of
the Advisory Committee when the arrest was one that was made in terms of
Regulation 17(1) and that it was sufficient for him and the officer making the
arrest to state the **purpose** of the arrest.



The whole scheme of the criminal law assumes it to be a basic need that an
accused should clearly understand what he is supposed to have done. Section
23(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CCP) states, inter alia, that "In
making an arrest the person making the same ... shall inform the person to be
arrested of the nature of the charge or allegation upon which he is arrested.
"Section 53 states that "the person executing the warrant of arrest shall
notify the substance thereof to the person arrested and, if so required by the
person arrested, shall show him the warrant or a copy thereof signed by the
person issuing the same." A magistrate holding a preliminary inquiry in a case
triable by the High Court is required by section 146 CCP "to read over to the
accused the charge or charges in respect of which the inquiry is being held."
If at the end of that inquiry the magistrate does not discharge him, section
150 CCP requires the magistrate to "read the charge to the accused and

**302**



explain the nature thereof in ordinary language." Section 164 CCP provides,
inter alia, that every charge shall state the offence with which the accused
is charged and that it should be "read to the accused in a language which he
understands." Section 165 CCP provides that particulars of the commission of
the offence must be so stated as to give an accused sufficient notice of the
matter with which he is charged. At a summary trial, the magistrate is
required by section 182 CCP to frame a charge and read such charge to the
accused. At a High Court trial, section 195 CCP requires that a copy of the
indictment be served on the accused, and sections 196 and 204 CCP require that
"the indictment shall be read and explained to the accused."



Article 13(1) of the Constitution elevates a principle that was a part of the
ordinary law to the status of a fundamental right. When the relevant provision
of the Indian Constitution were being discussed in the Constituent Assembly,
Dr. Ambedkar - the moving spirit behind the draft - explained to the Assembly
on September 15, 1949 that this was being done because the right to be
informed of the reasons for one's arrest was one of the "most fundamental
principles which every civilized country follows". Article 14 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights states that among the
"minimum guarantees" everyone is entitled to is the right "to be informed
promptly and in detail in a language which he understands of the nature and
cause of the charge against him."



Mr. S. Sharvananda, retired Chief Justice, in his treatise on Fundamental
Rights at page 141 (cited with approval in Channa Pieris v. Attorney-General
(Supra) at p.67) explains why it is necessary that reasons should be given and
why the reasons should be promptly given: He states as follows:



"The requirement that a person arrested should be informed of the reason for
his arrest is a salutary requirement. It is meant to afford the earliest
opportunity to him to remove any mistake, misapprehension or misunderstanding
in the mind of the arresting authority and to disabuse the latter's mind of
the suspicion which triggered the arrest and also for the arrested person to
know exactly what the allegation

**303**



or accusation against him is so that he can consult his attorney-at-law and be
advised by him: Mariadas v. Attorney-General(27). All the material facts and
particulars must be furnished to the arrested person because they are the
reasons or grounds for his arrest to enable the arrested person to understand
why he has been arrested ... The necessity to give reasons serves as a
restraint on the exercise of power and ensures that power will not be
arbitrarily employed."



It is insufficient for the person arrested to be given the purpose or object
of the arrest, such as those set out in Regulation 17(1) and reproduced in the
Detention Order in this case: Selvakumar v. Douglas Devananda and Others (28).
He must be given the reasons, i.e. the grounds - all the material and
pertinent facts and particulars that went to make up the mind of the Secretary
and not merely the inferences arrived at by the Secretary: Shalini Soni and
Others v. Union of India and Others(29). For it is then that the person will
have information that will enable him to take meaningful steps towards
regaining his liberty, e.g. by showing that there was a mistake or by
rebutting a suspicion or explaining a misunderstanding, with the result that,
perhaps after further inquiries, he may be saved from the consequences of
false accusations: Gunasekera v. De Fonseka(30); Wickramabandu v. Cyril
Herath(31) ; Munidasa v. Seneviratne(32); Channa Pieris v. Attorney-General
(Supra) at p. 68; Faurdeen v. Jayetilleke (Supra); Kumarasena v.
Sriyantha(33); Christie v. Leachinsky(34).



Mr. De Silva submitted that there Was no requirement under the Emergency
Regulations to give reasons for an arrest and in support of that view he cited
the dictum of Kulatunga, J. in Sasanasiritissa Thero and Others v. De Silva
and Others. (Supra) at 363-364 which followed the decision of this Court in
Vijaya Kumaranatunga v. G. V.P Samarasinghe and Others(35). In Kumaratunga,
Soza, J. (Ranasinghe, agreeing) observed: ** "The contents of the order 'A'
sufficiently apprised the petitioner that he was being arrested in
contravention of Regulations 23 and 24 of the Emergency Regulations. **Among
the offences specified in Regulation 24 there are the offences of arson and
theft which are offences under the Penal Code for which arrest without a
warrant is justifiable under the

**304**



Criminal Procedure Act. So here we have an arrest by a Police Officer **with
reasons given** and despite the fact that he was acting under the authority of
the detention order marked 'A', his action can be justified under the powers
vested in him under the Code of Criminal Procedure. Such an arrest is in
accord with the provisions of Article 13 (1)." The emphasis is mine. The
petitioner in that case, according to Soza, J. was given reasons in the
Detention Order. Soza, J. however, stated that Article 13(1) of the
Constitution was subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by law,
including the Emergency Regulations. These regulations, he said, "overshadow
the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 13(1) and (2) of the
Constitution. Soza, J. went on to state as follows:



"... the communication of the reasons for the arrest at the time of the arrest
is not imperative when the emergency regulations are in operation. This is
obviously because if reasons are disclosed at the time of taking a person into
custody, it may enable counteraction to be taken to frustrate the very purpose
of the arrest and hamper and hinder the steps taken by the Government to
protect the community and prevent grave public disorder. No doubt, a person
being arrested must know why he is arrested. During times of national
emergency, this requisite has to be satisfied in accordance with the Emergency
Regulations at a later stage and soon enough for the detenu to make
representations against his arrest and detention. According to Regulation
17(4) it is obligatory for one or more Advisory Committees to be set up
consisting of persons appointed by the President. Any person aggrieved by an
order made against him under Regulation 17 may make his objections to the
appropriate Advisory Committee. It is the duty of the Chairman of the
Committee to inform the objector of the grounds on which the order under this
regulation has been made and to furnish him with such particulars as are in
the opinion of the Chairman sufficient to enable him to present his case. It
is, therefore, always open to the detenu to apprise himself of the grounds of
arrest. The express provision in our Regulation stipulating that the Chairman
of the Advisory Committee should inform the detenu of the grounds of detention
implicitly makes a communication of reasons at the time of arrest
unnecessary."

**305  
 **

Mr. De Silva also referred to the judgment of Kulatunga, J. in Wickremabandu
v. Cyril Herath and Others (Supra).



Kulatunga, J. at P. 381 stated as follows:



"As a matter of principle the requirement in Article 13(1) that an arrested
person shall be informed of the reason for his arrest may no longer be limited
to a person accused of a crime. In the context of the freedom from arbitrary
arrest it can extend to a person arrested under any law for preventive
detention. However, at Common Law the right was given to a person accused of a
crime - Christie v. Leachinsky, (Supra); Muttusamy v. Kannangara, (Supra). The
information of the ground of the arrest or of the offence has to be given,
inter alia, to afford to the suspect an opportunity to show that there is some
mistake as to identity - Gunasekera v. Fonseka, (Supra). It is this right
which has been elevated to a fundamental right. Viewed in this background
there can be no objection to a restriction of this right in its application to
a person in preventive detention who is not arrested on suspicion for an
offence, even though a total denial of the right may be questioned. Presumably
for this reason laws for preventive detention including our Regulation 17 do
not insist on the requirement to notify the ground of suspicion at the time of
arrest ... Accordingly, I am of the view that Regulation 17 does not amount to
a denial of the fundamental rights enshrined in Article 13(1) of the
Constitution."



After setting out the provisions of the regulations relating to Advisory
Committees appointed under Regulation 17, Kulatunga, J. at pp. 384-385 states
as follows:



"Although there is no provision in Regulation 17 for serving on a detenu a
copy of the order at the time of his arrest I am of the view that the detenu
should at least be informed of the fact of his arrest on such order except
where the exigencies of the case preclude it. A copy of the detention order
should be given to the detenu. Under Article 22(5) of the Indian Constitution,
the duty to afford the detenu the earliest opportunity of making
representations against the order as well as to inform him of the grounds of
the order are in the Authority making the order. The Supreme Court has held
that in order

**306**



to make the right of making representations effective, the detenu should also
be furnished with particulars of the grounds of his detention sufficient to
enable him to make a representation: Shibban Lal Saksena v State of U.P (36).



Under Regulation 17(6) the duty of giving the grounds of the order and
sufficient particulars is placed on the Chairman of the Advisory Committee to
be complied with at a meeting to consider the detenu's objections. No doubt
this procedure would hamper the formulation of his objections but since the
regulation clearly contemplates the giving of such grounds and particulars at
the commencement of the inquiry, I do not think that it will lead to
injustice. If upon such communication the detenu applies for time to prepare
his case, the Advisory Committee should grant a postponement. Further the fact
that the sufficiency of particulars is made subject to the opinion of the
Secretary cannot be construed as giving the Chairman an arbitrary power to
withhold particulars which are vital to a fair hearing. However, the Secretary
may decline to furnish particulars which he cannot disclose in the public
interest."



Neither Soza, J. nor Kulatunga, J. stated that the communication of reasons
was unnecessary when a person was arrested under the Emergency Regulations:
what they did say was that the reasons need not be given at the time of the
arrest and could be given later. Article 22(1) of the Indian Constitution
states that "No person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without
being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest." Article
13(1) does not provide for a time. That aspect of the matter is governed by
the general law. Section 23(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure states as
follows: "In making an arrest the person making the arrest shall actually
touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested unless there be
submission to the custody by word or action and shall inform the person to be
arrested of the nature of the charge or allegation upon which he is arrested."
It is plain that the charge or allegation should be made known at the time of
the making of the arrest and not subsequently. The fact that at the time of
the hearing by the Advisory Committee the Chairman is required to inform the
person objecting to his detention of the grounds on which the order of
detention has been

**307**



made, does not carry with it the corollary that the person arrested should not
be informed of the charge or allegation at the time of his arrest: As we have
seen, judges in the criminal courts are required to explain the charges; but
that does not mean that the obligation to state the charge or allegation
prescribed by section 23(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure is to be
discarded. Soza, J. stated that "The express provision in our Regulations
stipulating that the Chairman of the Advisory Committee should inform the
detenu of the grounds of detention implicitly makes a communication of reasons
at the time of detention unnecessary". As I have pointed out, the fact that
the Chairman is required to communicate reasons does not lead to the
conclusion that the person arrested need not be informed at the time of his
arrest of the reasons for his arrest. They are matters apart. There are two
rights: (i) the Constitutional right to be informed of the reason for arrest
guaranteed by Article 13(1) of the Constitution; and (ii) the right to be
informed of the grounds of arrest given by Regulation 17. The first is to
enable a person arrested at the time of his arrest to obtain his freedom
immediately by showing good cause for his release. The second is to enable him
subsequently to make a case to the Advisory Committee for his release. They
are quite separate and distinct rights and the provision of the second does
not in my view wipe out or restrict the first.



Regulation 17(5) provides for the appointment of an Advisory Committee "for
the purpose", it is said, of "this regulation". Presumably, it means "for the
purpose of hearing objections to detentions made under this regulation", for
Regulation 17 deals with various matters, including matters other than those
concerned with Advisory Committees. Regulation 17(7) states that "Any person
aggrieved by an order against him under this regulation may make his
objections to such Advisory Committee". Regulation 17(8) states that "Any
person aggrieved by an Order under this regulation is entitled to be informed
of his right to make objections in writing to such Advisory Committee as
aforesaid." Naturally, every person who is imprisoned would be hurt in spirit
and have cause to complain of the infliction of wrong, oppression, or
distress, real or supposed, caused by the order of imprisonment. Was Mr.
Cooray informed of his

**308**



right? All that the Secretary states he did was to inform the Chairman of the
Advisory Board the "reasons" the Chairman could give Mr. Cooray for his
arrest. Assuming that a person detained necessarily feels aggrieved, what are
the objections he would want to make to the Advisory Committee in terms of
Regulation 17(7)? They relate to objections against the order of detention.
How could he make meaningful, specific, objections unless he knows the grounds
on which the Detention Order was issued? After stating that it is the duty of
the Chairman of the Advisory Committee to inform the person objecting to his
arrest of the grounds on which the order of detention was made, Soza, J.
states: "it is, therefore, always open to the detenu to apprise himself of the
grounds of arrest." With great respect, this is a non-sequitur: How is it
'always open' to a person arrested and detained to inform himself of the
reasons for his arrest merely because the Chairman of the Advisory Committee
is obliged to give him reasons? Reasons will be given only when the Committee
meets. The duty of the Chairman of the Advisory Committee to inform the person
detained arises when there is a meeting of the Committee held to consider the
objections of the person detained: Regulation 17(9). Meetings of the Committee
are held to hear objections: Regulation 17(9). How can the person detained
make meaningful objections unless he has before him the reasons for his
arrest? Kulatunga, J. did appreciate the problem, but His Lordship was of the
view that after the intimation of reasons, further time should be granted to
enable the person detained to prepare his case. That, with great respect, does
not solve the problem: Regulation 17(7) states that "Any person aggrieved by
an order against him under this regulation may make his objections to such
Advisory Committee. Regulation 17(9) states **" At any meeting **of an
Advisory Committee **to hear such objections as aforesaid** shall be presided
over by the Chairman. It shall be the duty of the Chairman to inform the
**objector** of the grounds on which his order under this regulation has been
made against him and to furnish him with such particulars as are in the
opinion of the Chairman sufficient to enable him to present his case." The
meeting is convened in the first place to hear the objections of the objector.
In order to make objections so that a meeting may be convened, the person
detained must have the grounds upon which the order was made.

**309**



In any event, could the Advisory Committee have at any time given Mr. Cooray
the reasons for his arrest? The Secretary did write a letter to the Chairman
of the Advisory Committee on the 3rd of July in which he refers to the
Detention Orders of Mr. Cooray and three others. He states: "These Detention
Orders have been issued by me after being satisfied on the material submitted
to me by the D.I.G., C.I.D. to the effect that Mr. Sirisena Cooray has sought
the assistance of certain persons to cause harm or to assassinate Her
Excellency the President. Some of the persons allegedly identified are Upali
de Silva, U.L. Seneviratne, W.B. Somaratne and J.P. Jayamanna. Further it is
reported that some persons have been enlisted as Reserve Police Officers and
given training in sophisticated weapons. Whereabouts of some such persons
trained in weapon use are not traceable today. Any conspiracy to cause acts in
furtherance of such a purpose was considered a serious threat to national
security. This letter is sent to you for the purpose of ER 17 (9) published in
Gazette Extraordinary No. 843/12 of 4.11.1994. "Assuming that this information
was communicated by the Chairman to Mr. Cooray (in fact it was not so done),
what could Mr. Cooray have done: Obviously, he was not going to have any
objection to the conclusion that a conspiracy to assassinate the President was
a threat to national security. But what could he say about "some persons" who
were supposed to have been enlisted as Reserve Police Officers and trained in
the use of sophisticated weapons? Who were these persons? How were they linked
to Mr. Cooray or to the conspiracy? How was Mr. Cooray responsible for the
fact that the whereabouts of those persons was not known? With regard to the
statement that Mr. Cooray had sought the assistance of the persons named and
others to harm or assassinate the President, Mr. Cooray could have baldly
denied it, but he was not placed in a position in which he could object to the
conclusion arrived at by the Secretary, for although the Secretary says that
he gave the-"reasons" for the arrest in his letter to the Chairman of the
Advisory Committee, he did not in fact do so. As we have seen, Kulatunga, J.
in Wickremabandu said that the Chairman should give the "grounds" and furnish
the "particulars" on which the Secretary's decision was made so that the
person detained could state his case. This is plainly stated in Regulation
17(9). When he stated that Mr. Cooray had conspired with certain persons to
harm or assassinate the President, the Secretary was stating his inference

**310**



from certain facts: His duty was not merely to state his inference but also
the grounds on which the inference was based.



In India, Article 22 (5) of the Constitution states: When any person is
detained in pursuance of an order made under any law for preventive detention,
the authority making the order shall, as soon as may be, communicate to such
person the grounds on which the order has been made and shall afford him the
earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order." There is
no corresponding provision in the Constitution of Sri Lanka. The procedure for
objection in Sri Lanka is set out in Regulation 17 (5) - (11). With regard to
Article 22 (5), in Shalini Soni and Others v. The Union of India and Others,
(Supra) the Supreme Court of India stated as follows:



"The Article has two facets: (1) the communication of the grounds on which the
order of detention has been made: (2) opportunity of making a representation
against the order of detention. Communication of the grounds presupposes the
formulation of the grounds and formulation of the grounds requires and ensures
the application of the mind of the detaining authority to the facts and
materials before it, that is to say pertinent and proximate matters in regard
to each individual case and excludes the element of arbitrariness and
automatism (if one may be permitted to use the word to describe a mechanical
reaction without a conscious application of the mind). It is an unwritten rule
of law, constitutional and administrative, that whenever a decision-making
function is entrusted to the subjective satisfaction of a statutory
functionary, there is an implicit obligation to apply his mind to pertinent
and proximate matters only, eschewing the irrelevant and the remote. Where
there is further an express statutory obligation to communicate not merely the
decision but the grounds on which the decision is founded, it is a necessary
corollary that the grounds communicated, that is, the grounds so made known,
should be seen to pertain to pertinent and proximate matters and should
comprise all the constituent facts and materials that went to make up the mind
of the statutory functionary and not merely the inferential conclusion ... The
matter may also be looked at from the point of view of the second facet of
Article 22 (5). **An opportunity to make a representation  
 **

**311  
 **

**against the order of detention necessarily implies that the detenu is
informed of all that has been taken into account against him in arriving at
the decision to detain him. It means that the detenu is to be informed not
merely, as we said, of the inferences of fact but of all the factual material
which have led to the inferences of fact.** If the detenu is not to be so
informed the opportunity so solemnly guaranteed by the Constitution becomes
reduced to an exercise in futility. Whatever angle from which the question is
looked at, it is clear that "grounds" in Article 22 (5) do not. mean mere
factual inferences but mean factual inferences plus. factual material which
led to such factual inferences. The "grounds" must be self-sufficient and
self-explanatory. In our view copies of documents to which reference is made
in the "grounds" must be supplied to the detenu as part of the "grounds".



The Court referred to the decision of the Supreme Court of India in ICCU Devi
Choria v. Union of India (37), where it was stated that "if there are any
documents, statements or other materials relied upon in the grounds of
detention, they must also be communicated to the detenu, because being
incorporated in the grounds of detention, they form part of the grounds and
the grounds cannot be said to be complete without them..." (per Bhagwati, J.
for the Court). In that case, it was held that if the requirement to give
grounds of detention and furnish the materials relied upon had not been
complied with, the continued detention of the detenu would be "illegal and
void".



The Secretary has not stated the grounds of detention. He has merely stated an
inference which he states was based on the report of the Deputy-Inspector
General of Police. In the circumstances, it was imperative that that report
should have been made available to Mr. Cooray. If the report contained
material that was not in the public interest to disclose, the Secretary was at
liberty not to give that report, provided that he did not state, as he did,
that that report was the sole basis for his inference. What he was obliged to
do was to state the grounds: he did not do that, but referred to the report as
his grounds. The failure to comply with the requirements of Regulation 17 with
regard to the matter of informing Mr. Cooray of the grounds of detention makes
his continued detention illegal and void and violates Article 13 (1) of the
Constitution.

**312**



Admittedly, the exercise and operation of the fundamental rights declared and
recognized by Article 13 (1) of the Constitution, including the right to be
informed of the reason for arrest, are "subject to such restrictions as may be
prescribed by law in the interests of national security, public order" and
certain other matters specified in Article 15 (7) of the Constitution. "Law",
for this purpose includes regulations made under the law for the time being
relating to public security and would, therefore, include the Emergency
Regulations. Soza, J. in Kumaranatunga v. Samarasinghe (Supra) at p. 359
stated that the Emergency Regulations "overshadow the fundamental rights
guaranteed by Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution". If he meant
that the Emergency- Regulations towered above the Constitutional rights
guaranteed by Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) and cast those rights into the shade
so as to obscure those rights with complete darkness, I would, respectfully,
disagree with him. It comes as no surprise that the Emergency Regulations do
no such thing. Why? Because it cannot do such a thing: An amendment or repeal
of Constitutional provisions can only be effected in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter XII of the Constitution. Emergency Regulations may, in
terms of Article 155 (5), override, amend or suspend the operation of any law,
**except the provisions of the Constitution.** On the other hand, if Soza, J.
meant that the Emergency Regulations overspread the Constitutional rights with
some influence by imposing certain **restrictions** on the operation and
exercise of such rights, I would then, respectfully, agree with him. However,
although such restrictions on fundamental rights may be imposed, they cannot
be restricted to a point of denial: per Kulatunga, J. at p. 380 and p.' 381;
cf. per H. A. G. de Silva, J. (Fernando, J. agreeing) at p. 359 in
Wickremabandu (Supra). Moreover, Emergency Regulations restricting the
exercise and operation of fundamental rights may be made only for the reasons
specified in Article. 15 (7) of the Constitution and must be confined to those
reasons in their construction and interpretation. "When provisions affecting
the liberty of the subject are in question inroads into them must be strictly
scrutinized and construed.": per Samarakoon, CJ in Kumaranatunga v.
Samarasinghe (Supra). As an organ of government, the role of the judiciary is
clear: Article 4 (d) of the Constitution states that "the fundamental rights
which are by the Constitution declared and recognized shall be respected,
secured

**313**



and advanced by all organs of government, and shall not be abridged,
restricted or denied, save in the manner and to the extent hereinafter
provided." Any restriction of the exercise and operation of the fundamental
rights declared and recognized by Article 13 (1) can only be made by "law":
Article 15 (7). We are obliged to respect, secure and advance fundamental
rights. We cannot impose restrictions on any fundamental right guaranteed by
the Constitution: Such restrictions may only be prescribed by law - by an Act
of Parliament or by regulations made under the law relating to public
security. No such restriction has been imposed: Channa Pieris v. Attorney-
General, (Supra) at p. 63.



In India, a distinction is drawn between ordinary arrests and arrests relating
to preventive detention. Article 22 of the Indian Constitution makes its
guarantee of the right to be informed of the grounds of arrest as soon as may
be, inapplicable to any person who is arrested or detained under any law
providing for preventive detention. There is no such distinction recognized by
our Constitution. And as far as I can see, there is no law (including
Emergency Regulations) that restricts the exercise and operation of the right
to be given the reason for arrest declared and recognized by Article 13 (1) of
the Constitution: Channa Pieris v. Attorney-General, (Supra) at p. 63. And
although the Emergency Regulations expressly make inapplicable certain
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, section 23 of that Code is not
one of those provisions. Therefore, persons who are arrested - whether under
the provisions of the ordinary law or under the Emergency Regulations - have a
Constitutional right to be informed of the reason for the arrest (Channa
Pieris v. Attorney-General, (Supra) at p. 63); and a statutory right at the
time of arrest to be informed of the nature of the charge or allegation upon
which he is arrested.



Mr. De Silva submitted that preventive detention related to cases in which no
offence had yet been committed, and that, therefore, no reasons could be given
in such cases and, therefore, the law was that in cases of preventive
detention no reasons were required to be given. He referred to the judgment of
Kulatunga, J. in Wickramabandu v Herath and Others (Supra). At page 381,
Kulatunga, J. states as follows: "The right of a person arrested to be brought
before the

**314**



judge of a competent court is much more associated with a person accused of an
offence for it is by such Court that he will be eventually tried. Such Court
would also have the power to enlarge him on bail. These considerations do not
apply to a person in preventive detention and hence such person may not be
brought before a judge of a competent court." With great respect, I am unable
to agree. The constitutional right of a person to be brought before the judge
of the nearest competent court according to procedure established by law has
no necessary connection with the Court that will **eventually** try him. The
Court that may eventually try him, will in respect of serious offences, be the
High Court. Nevertheless, in accordance with the procedure established by law,
after his arrest, a person would have to be brought before a magistrate,
regardless of the fact that, by reason of the nature of the offence, the
person may have to stand his trial in the High Court. Nor is the question of
bail relevant. For instance, in respect of the offence of waging war or
abetting the waging of war against the Republic (section 114 Penal Code), or
in respect of the offence of giving false evidence with intent to procure the
conviction of a person of a capital offence (section 191 Penal Code), or in
respect of the offence of murder (section 296 Penal Code), a magistrate (nor
for that matter a judge of the High Court) cannot release a person on bail
except with the sanction of the Attorney-General: Section 403 Code of Criminal
Procedure. Nevertheless, in accordance with procedure established by law,
after his arrest, a person would have to be brought before a magistrate,
regardless of the fact that, by reason of the provisions of law, including I
might say the Emergency Regulations, the magistrate has no power to release
the person on bail.



I am unable to agree with the submission of learned counsel for the
respondents that there is no requirement to give reasons for arrest to a
person ordered to be detained under Regulation 17 (1) because it is not
possible since he has not yet committed an offence. It would not be possible
to charge a person with the commission of an offence if no offence had been
committed, but it is both possible and necessary to inform him of the nature
of the **allegation** against him (Section 23 Criminal Procedure Code), and
the grounds on which the Secretary was satisfied that it was necessary to take
that person into custody: See the observations of the Supreme Court of India,

**315**



with which I respectfully agree, in Shalini Soni and Others v. Union of India
and Others cited earlier in my judgment. In this case, the Secretary states in
his affidavit that he did convey to the Chairman of the Advisory Committee the
"reasons" for the detention which he was expected to convey to Mr. Cooray in
due course. That was not really so - but that is another matter. At least he
stated his inference, which however Mr. Cooray did not know until, after he
had read the allegation reported in the newspapers, he was able to drag it out
of his interrogators. Mr. De Silva also overlooked the fact that regulation 24
(b) states that whoever, inter alia, " conspires to murder ... the President
... shall be guilty of an offence notwithstanding anything in any other law,
and shall upon conviction before the High Court be liable to be punished with
death or rigorous imprisonment for a period not less than five years and not
exceeding twenty years and shall forfeit all his property." And so there was
an offence he was supposed to have committed and there ought to have been
grounds for that conclusion.



Although the Secretary issued the detention order on the 16th of June 1997,
because he says he was satisfied that Mr. Cooray was involved in a conspiracy
to assassinate or harm Her Excellency the President, yet, as we have seen, it
was only on the 24th of June that he was asked about the alleged conspiracy,
and that too after Mr. Cooray had read about it in the newspapers and drawn
the attention of the police officers interrogating him to the news items. Even
assuming that the duty to give reasons does not include the duty to give
reasons at the time of arrest, the reasons must be given at the first
reasonable opportunity: Mallawarachchi v. Seneviratne(3; Elasinghe v.
Wijewickrama and Others(39) ; Chandra Kalyanie Perera v. Siriwardena(40);
Lalanie and Nirmala v. De Silva and Others (41). In my view, there. was a
failure in this case to give reasons at the first reasonable opportunity.



**The Alleged Violation of Article 13 (2) of the Constitution.**



The petitioner was granted leave to proceed for the alleged violation of Mr.
Cooray's rights declared and recognized by Article 13 (2) of the Constitution.

**316**



Article 13 (2) states as follows: "Every person held in custody, detained or
otherwise deprived of personal liberty shall be brought before the judge of
the nearest competent court according to procedure established by law, and
shall not be further held in custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty
except upon and in terms of the order of such judge made in accordance with
procedure established by law."



This Court has over and over again referred to that as a "salutary provision
to ensure the safety and protection of arrested persons": See the decisions
cited in Channa Pieris v. Attorney-General, (Supra) at p. 75.



It was not in dispute that Mr. Cooray had not been brought before a judge
after his arrest. Mr. De Silva submitted that Mr. Cooray had been detained on
a Detention Order made by the Secretary under Regulation 17 (1) of the
Emergency Regulations and that therefore there was no obligation to produce
him before a judge. He cited the following observations of Kulatunga, J. in
Wickremabandu v. Cyril Herath (Supra) in support of his submission: "if as I
have shown, rights under Article 13 (1) and (2) may be restricted by
regulation in the interest of national security or public order, the next
question is whether the provisions of Regulation 17 (1), (2) and (3) which by
necessary implication deny the right of the detenu to be brought before a
judge of a competent court or the provisions of Regulations 17 (4) and (5)
would result in a "denial" of his rights under Article 13 (1) and (2) which is
not permitted by Article 15 (7)."



If, as Article 15 (7) no doubt permits, the exercise and operation of the
rights under Article 13 (2) may be restricted by regulations made under the
law relating to public security, "the next question", in my view, is whether
there are such regulations restricting the rights declared and recognized by
Article 13 (2) of a person arrested on an Order of Detention issued by the
Secretary by virtue his powers under Regulation 17 (1). There were no such
restrictions imposed by the Regulations of 1989 which were applicable to the
decision in Wickremabandu (1990); nor are any such restrictions to be found in
the Emergency Regulations made on 04 November 1994 under which the Order of
Detention was issued in the matter before us.

**317**



(There are some differences between the provisions of Regulation 17 of 1989
and 1994; but for the purposes of considering the dictum of Kulatunga, J. it
is not necessary to go into those matters in detail).



Learned counsel for the respondents, citing the judgment of Kulatunga, J. in
Wickremabandu v. Herath and Others (Supra), submitted that the right of Mr.
Cooray to be produced before a judge in terms of Article 13 (2) of the
Constitution had been taken away. Kulatunga, J. said nothing to support such a
proposition: What he did say. (see pages 379-380) was that the regulations
applicable at the relevant time had not taken away the right of a person
detained under regulation 18 of the Emergency Regulations to be brought before
a judge.



This is also the position today under the Regulations applicable to the case
before us.



Kulatunga, J. however, did say (see page 379) that in terms of the decision in
Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam(42), "the right of an arrested person could be taken
away". Kulatunga, J. himself, however, seemed to be of the view, (see pages
380 and 381) and with that view, I respectfully, agree, that although
**restrictions** could be imposed by regulations, there could be no denial by
such regulations. However, Edirisuriya v Navaratnam did not state that "the
right of an arrested person could be taken away". Kulatunga, J. quotes the
following words of Wanasundera, J. in that case immediately before his
interpretation of the decision in that case:  


"If it is intended to restrict the requirement of 13 (2) - which undoubtedly
can be done by a suitable wording of the regulation so as to have a direct
impact on Article 13 (2) itself, when national security or public order
demands it - this must be specifically done. Article 13 (2) cannot be
restricted without a specific reference to it. But this has not been done.
Instead, we have a restriction imposed on the operation of sections 36-38 of
the Code. In the result, the constitutional requirement that a detained person
"shall be brought before the judge of the nearest competent court" remains
unaffected. Though it will continue to exist in a truncated form still being a
constitutional requirement: it must be complied with in a reasonable way
within a reasonable time."

**318**



Regulation 19 (1) states that the operation of sections 36, 37 and 38 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure Act shall not apply to and in relation to any
person arrested under Regulation 18. This does not mean that the procedures
set out in sections 36, 37 and 38 of the Code have been repealed with regard
to arrests made under Regulation 18. Even with regard to arrests made under
that regulation, the provisions of sections 36-38 of the Code "must be
complied with in a reasonable way within a reasonable time": Edirisuriya v
Navaratnam (Supra). What is a "reasonable way" and a "reasonable time" is a
matter for the Court to decide in the circumstances of a particular case.
Moreover, where, in the opinion of the Court, a **purported** arrest under
Regulation 18 cannot in law have been made under that Regulation, sections 36,
37 and 38 of the Code would be applicable.



In Channa Pieris v. Attorney-General, (Supra) at p. 102-104 the Court found
that the petitioners could not have been arrested under Regulations 17 or 18,
because there were no reasonable grounds, and that therefore the provisions of
the Code of Criminal Procedure were applicable. In the circumstances, the
failure to produce the petitioners before a judge within a reasonable time and
not later than twenty-four hours was in violation of the procedure established
by the Code, and consequently, a violation of Article 13 (2) of the
Constitution. The Court said (at pp. 103-104): "Even if a person has been
incarcerated following a procedure established by law, that does not
completely terminate his or her right to liberty. That is a very basic and
fundamental principle enshrined in the Constitution and supported by reason
and abundant precedent. In the matters before us, the petitioners were not
arrested under a procedure established by law; they were arrested on grounds
of vague suspicion, in circumstances that showed a reckless disregard for
their right to personal liberty, so that their right to be brought before a
judge was particularly urgent. In failing to comply with the salutary
provision relating to the production of the petitioners before a judge of the
nearest competent court in this way, the respondents transgressed the rights
conferred on them by Article 13 (2) of the Constitution."



In Kumara v. Rohan Fernando and Others(43), the respondents stated that the
petitioner had been arrested under Regulation 18\. (1)



**319**



for violating regulations 45 and 46. Regulation 45 created no offence.
Regulation 46 created an offence, but in terms of the respondents' affidavits,
the arrests had nothing to do with that offence. The Court held that in the
circumstances the arrests were not made in accordance with the procedure
prescribed by Regulation 18 (1). Perera, J. said: "The suspension of the
operation of the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure is conditional
upon the person being arrested under Regulation 18. Where a person is not
arrested and kept arrested in pursuance of Regulation 18, Regulation 19 has no
applicability. In such a case, the procedure established by law for the
purposes of Article 13 (2) of the Constitution is the procedure prescribed by
section 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure." Accordingly, it was held that
the failure to produce the petitioner before a magistrate within a reasonable
time but not exceeding twenty-four hours, was a violation of Article 13 (2) of
the Constitution.



In Ansalin Fernando v. Sarath Perera and Others(44), where a person was
purported to have been arrested under Regulation 18 (1) although the ground
for arrest was murder. Kulatunga, J. said that murder "as such" was not an
offence under the Emergency Regulations and that therefore "it was an offence
in respect of which an arrest can only be made under section 23 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure in which event the suspect has to be produced before a
Magistrate in terms of section 36 and within section 37 of the Code."



The question remains whether the rights declared and recognized by Article 13
(2) were, as suggested by Kulatunga, J. in Wickramabandu (Supra) at p.380 (see
also Weerakoon v. Mahendra(45); Fernando v. Kapilaratne(46), taken away by
"necessary implication" by the provisions of Regulation 17 (1), (3) - earlier
(2) - c and (4) - earlier (3). Regulation 17 (1) empowers the Secretary, if he
is satisfied - earlier "if he was of opinion" (I have already adverted to this
matter) - that in order to prevent a person from acting in one or more of the
ways specified it is necessary to do so, to order the detention of that
person. Regulation 17 (3) authorizes any police officer or member of the armed
forces to carry into effect an order made under Regulation 17 (1). Regulation
17 (4) provides that; any person so detained shall be deemed to be in lawful
custody and shall be detained at a place authorized by the Secretary (earlier,
the Inspector-General of Police).

**320**



With great respect, why, as a matter of 'necessary implication', do those
regulations take away the right of a person arrested to be produced before a
judge? In my view, the supposed restriction is neither involved in what is
expressed in the sub-paragraphs of regulation 17 of the 1989 regulations
referred to by Kulatunga, J., nor in the corresponding sub-paragraphs of the
Regulations applicable to the matter before us.



If restrictions are to be made on fundamental rights, they can only rest on
the authority of a law plainly expressed by Parliament, or in regulations made
under the law for the time being relating to public security. Such rights
cannot be swept away by "implication" ... Why? Because the Constitution state
in Article 15 (7) that restrictions on the exercise and operation of
fundamental rights declared and recognized by Article 13 (1) and 13 (2) may
only be those **prescribed by law**. "Constitutional guarantees cannot be
removed or modified except in accordance with the Constitution. That, I
believe, is a proposition that commends itself to general acceptance. I
believe it is still a well-established and universally conceded principle. One
might say that it is axiomatic":; Channa Pieris, (Supra) at p. 81. As judges,
we have our duties cut out for us: As an organ of government, the
Constitutional duty imposed on the judiciary by Article 4 (d) of the
Constitution is to respect, secure and **advance** fundamental rights. In
Wickramabandu, (Supra) at pp. 379-380, Kulatunga, J. states: "The restriction
of the requirement to produce the detenu before a Magistrate is presumably in
consequence of policy and not on account of any absolute right to production."
The right, as a matter of policy, may be restricted, but it has not been done.
As Wanasundera, J. observed in Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam, (Supra): "it is
intended to restrict the requirement of 13 (2) ... this must be specifically
done. Article 13 (2) cannot be restricted without a specific reference to it.
But this has not been done ... In the result, the Constitutional requirement
that a detained person shall be brought before the judge of the nearest
competent court remains unaffected ...". The Constitutional right to be
produced remains "untouched", as G. P. S. de Silva, J. (as he then was)
observed in Joseph Silva and Others v. Balasuriya and Others(47). What has
been done is to suspend the operation of sections 36, 37 and 38 in respect of
persons arrested under Regulation 18. Therefore, although a person must be
brought

**321**



before a Judge, he may be brought within a reasonable time, although that may
be in excess of the twenty-four hour limit prescribed by section 37 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure. If such rights are to be **restricted** , that, in
the homely words of a plain man, is not our business, for policy is not within
our purview.



Whereas the 1989 regulations empowered the Secretary to order the taking into
custody and the detention of a person, the current (1994) regulations go on to
qualify that power by stating that the Secretary may make order that the
person be taken into custody and detained "for a period not exceeding three
months and any such order may be extended from time to time for a period not
exceeding three months at a time. Provided however that no person shall be so
detained upon an order under this regulation for a period exceeding one year.
The period of detention of such person may be extended if such person is
produced before a magistrate prior to the expiration of his period of
detention, accompanied by a report from the Secretary setting out the facts
upon which the person is detained and the reasons which necessitate the
extension of such period of detention. Where the magistrate is satisfied that
there are reasonable grounds for extending the period of detention of such
person he may make order that such person be detained for a further period of
time as specified in such order, which period should not exceed three months
and may be extended by the magistrate from time to time." The following new
subsection (2) was added in the 1994 Regulations (resulting in the renumbering
of the subsections referred to above): "Where a person is produced before a
magistrate in compliance with the provisions of paragraph (1) the magistrate
shall examine the material placed by the Secretary in his report. The report
shall be prima facie evidence of its contents. The Secretary shall not be
required to be present or called upon to testify before the Magistrate."



Mr. De Silva submitted that the "procedure established by law" in the case of
a person arrested and detained on an order made by the Secretary under
Regulation 17 (1) was the procedure prescribed in Regulations (1) and (2).
Consequently, such a person need not be brought before a magistrate unless and
until it became necessary to extend the period of detention beyond one year.

**322**



I am unable to accept that submission: the provisions introduced in 1994 were,
in my view, intended to impose certain restrictions on the exercise of the
power of arrest and detention conferred by regulation 17 (1) on the Secretary:
the Secretary, in the first place, was empowered to make an order which had to
specify the period of detention. (As we have seen, the Secretary failed to do
so, but when he realized that he had issued a defective order, he issued an
amending order.) The Secretary is permitted to extend the orders from time to
time for a period not exceeding three months at-a time. That provision has the
effect of compelling the Secretary to keep the matter of a detention under
review so that if at any time he was satisfied that the detention was no
longer warranted, he could order the release of the person imprisoned. (In
this case the Secretary on the 3rd of July 1997 wrote to the Director of the
National Intelligence Bureau as follows with regard to the orders he had
issued in respect of Mr. Cooray and three other persons: "The Detention Orders
have been issued for a period of three months. But the question of continued
detention has to be kept under constant review. I would therefore like to have
a fortnightly report on the progress of investigations into all these four
Detention Orders, the first such report to be received preferably by Thursday
10th July 1997. Please make a note to send regular reports on the above basis
thereafter.") The new provisions limit to one year the period of detention
which the Secretary could eventually order. If in his opinion further
detention is required, that must be upon the order of a magistrate to whom the
Secretary must submit a report and before whom he must produce the person ;
detained. The procedure established by those provisions relate to the question
of **the extension of a person's period of detention beyond a year** and not
with the procedure established by law for producing a person before a judge in
accordance with the requirements of Article 13 (2) of the Constitution.



The purposes contemplated by Article 13 (2) are altogether different. The
scheme of the ordinary criminal law (e.g. see sections 32, 33, 35, 36, 37, 54,
58, 116 Code of Criminal Procedure) is that any person who is arrested should
be brought before a neutral person \- a judge - without unnecessary delay, so
that such a person may apply his 'judicial mind' to the information placed
before him and



**323**



make an impartial determination of what course of action is appropriate in the
light of the law applicable to the case: Channa Pieris v. Attorney-General,
(Supra) at pp. 75-76 citing Sharvananda, **Fundamental Rights** at p. 142;
Gerstein v. Pugh(48); the decisions of the European Court on Human Rights
reported in Vincent Berger's Case **Law of the European Court of Human
Rights** in the **Schiesser** case, ECHR Decision on 04.12.79, the
**Skoogstrom** case, ECHR Decision on 02.10.84 the **McGoff** case, ECHR
Decision on 26.10.84; and per Goonewardene, J. in Mohammed Faiz v. Attorney-
General (49). The right to be brought before a judge recognized by the Code of
Criminal Procedure was elevated to the status of a fundamental right. It
happened in this way: The makers of the Indian Constitution were under
pressure from certain groups to provide for "due process" in order to secure
the personal liberty of citizens. When the Indian Constitutional Adviser, Sir
B. N. Rau consulted Justice Frankfurter of the United States Supreme Court on
the matter, he was advised to use the phrase "procedure established by law",
because the phrase "due process" was imprecise, although in the context of the
USA, by judicial interpretation over a century, the principles had become well
established. The proposal of the Indian Drafting Committee to follow this
advice was not enthusiastically received. As a compromise, it was decided, in
the words of Dr. Ambedkar in his speech to the Constituent Assembly on
September 15, 1949, to provide for "the substance of due process". This was
done, as Dr. Ambedkar explained by "lift(ing) from the provisions of the
Criminal Procedure Code two of the most fundamental principles which every
civilized country follows as principles of international justice." The two
principles were the right to be informed of the reasons for arrest and the
right to be produced before a judge in accordance with procedure established
by law. Dr. Ambedkar said: "it is quite true that these two provisions ... are
already to be found in the Criminal Procedure Code and therefore probably it
might be said that we are really not making any fundamental change. But we
are, as I contend, making a fundamental change because what we are doing by
the introduction of Article 15 A is to put a limitation upon the authority
both of Parliament as well as of the Provincial Legislature not to abrogate
these provisions because they are now introduced in our Constitution itself.
It is quite true that the enthusiasts for personal

**324**



liberty are probably not content with the provisions of clause (1) and (2).
They probably want something more by way of further safeguards against the
inroads of the executive and the legislature upon the personal liberty of the
citizen. I personally think that while I sympathize with them that probably
this Article might have been expanded to include some further safeguards, I am
quite satisfied that the provisions contained in Article 15 A are sufficient
against illegal or arbitrary arrests." Article 13(1) and 13(2) broadly
followed the Indian model. The right to be produced before a judge, as
Wanasundera, J. observed in Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam, (Supra), "is more than
a mere formality or an empty ritual, but is recognized by all communities
committed to the Rule of Law as an essential component of human rights and
fundamental freedoms", and it "behoves us therefore to see that provisions
such as this, safeguarding human rights and freedoms, are exactly complied
with." In Nallanayagam v Gunatilake(50), Colin Thome, J. said: "Article 13 (2)
embodies a salutary principle safeguarding the life and liberty of the subject
and must be exactly complied with by the executive. In our view this provision
cannot be overlooked or dismissed as of little consequence or as a minor
matter." In Brogan v. The United Kingdom (Supra), in considering Article 5 (3)
of the European Convention - which deals with the right to be promptly
produced before a judge - in the context of terrorist cases, stated that the
Article "enshrines a fundamental human right, namely the protection of the
individual against arbitrary interferences by the State with his right to
liberty." The Court said that "Judicial control of interferences by the
executive with the individual's right to liberty is an essential feature of
the guarantee embodied in Article 5 (3) which is intended to minimize the risk
of arbitrariness." It stated that "Judicial control is implied by the rule of
law, one of the fundamental principles of a democratic society."



Neither the right to appeal to the Advisory Committee given by regulation 17,
nor the fact that in terms of regulation 18 (6) there is a duty on the
officer-in-charge of places of detention to ensure that every person detained
therein, otherwise than by an order of a Magistrate, to produce such persons
before a magistrate is what is contemplated by Article 13 (2) of the
Constitution.

**325**



A right granted by the Constitution can only be removed by the Constitution
and not by any other law. And so, in India, Clause 3 (b) of Article 22 of the
Constitution provides that the Constitutional right to be produced before a
judge is not available to a person who is arrested or detained under any law
providing for preventive detention. The makers of the Constitution of Sri
Lanka, however, did not write such an exception into its Constitution. That is
essentially a matter of policy. There is nothing intrinsically special about
preventive detention that makes it necessary to dispense with the requirement
of production before a judge. Article 5.3 of the European Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms states that "Everyone
arrested or detained in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 (c) of
this Article shall be brought promptly before a judge ...". Paragraph 1 (c)
deals with (1) the case of persons lawfully arrested or detained "for the
purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority on a reasonable
suspicion of having committed an offence"; and (2) a case in which a person
has been arrested and detained ., **when it is reasonably considered necessary
to prevent his committing an offence or fleeing after having done so**." The
emphasis is mine.



Admittedly, Article 15 (7) permits the **restriction** of the operation and
exercise of the rights guaranteed by Article 13 (2), in certain specified
circumstances, by law, including Emergency Regulations. Regulation 19 (1)
states: "The provisions of sections 36, 37 and 38 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 shall not apply to, and in relation to, any
person arrested under **Regulation 18**." Mr. Cooray was ordered to be
arrested and detained under **Regulation 17**. Sections 36 and 37 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure therefore remain applicable to him. Those sections
prescribe the procedure established by law that the officer carrying out the
Secretary's order should have followed. Section 36 states: "A peace officer
making an arrest without warrant shall without unnecessary delay and subject
to the provisions contained as to bail take or send the person arrested before
a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case." Section 37 states: "Any peace
officer shall not detain in custody or otherwise confine a person arrested
without a warrant for a longer period than under all the circumstances of the

**326**



case is reasonable, and such period shall not exceed twenty-four hours
exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to
the Magistrate." Mr. Cooray has been in detention from the 16th of June 1997
without being brought before a magistrate. This is in violation of his
fundamental right to be produced before a judge of the nearest competent court
guaranteed by Article 13 (2) of Constitution.



For the reasons set out in my judgment, I declare that Mr. Bulathsinghalage
Sirisena Cooray's fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 13 (1) and 13 (2)
of the Constitution have been violated and that his arrest and detention is
unlawful and illegal.



I direct the first respondent, the Secretary, Ministry of Defence, to
forthwith order the release of the said Mr. Bulathsinghelage Sirisena Cooray
from custody and detention.



The State shall pay the said Mr. Bulathsinhalage Sirisena Cooray a sum of Rs.
200,000/- as compensation and costs.



**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.



**GUNAWARDENA, J.** \- I agree.



_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/36.html_  

