##  Hatton National Bank v. Perera - SLR - 231, Vol 2 of 1996 [1996] LKSC 36;
(1996) 2 Sri LR 231 (11 October 1996)

**231**

**HATTON NATIONAL BANK**  
**v.  
****PEREIRA** ****

SUPREME COURT.  
G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.,  
RAMANATHAN, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S. C. APPEAL NO. 70/95  
H. C. L. T 914/93 & 917/93  
L.T 1 ADD 1/8348/90  
2ND AND 3RD SEPTEMBER, 1996.

_Industrial Disputes Act ‑ section 33 ‑Termination of Services ‑ Compensation
as alternative to reinstatement ‑ Quantum of compensation ‑ Discretion._

The applicant was employed as an executive under the Appellant ‑ Bank from
1974 to 1987\. His services were terminated on a charge of falsely absenting
himself from work from 20th to 27th July 1987 on the ground of alleged
illness, forwarding a telegram and two medical certificates dated 22.7.87 and
27.7.87. The telegram was received on the evening of the 20th. The Labour
Tribunal ordered that the applicant be reinstated with one year's salary for
the period of non‑employment. The tribunal also found that the

**232**

applicant had in failing to notify his illness by telephone in the morning of
the 20th had acted in an irresponsible manner causing inconvenience to the
management and others. The evidence also showed that cordial relations between
the applicant and the Bank had ceased to exist for quite sometime. The High
Court ordered reinstatement with full back wages for 67 months.

**Held:**

(1) In order to set aside the determination of facts by the tribunal that the
termination was unjustified the appellant must satisfy that there was no legal
evidence to support the conclusions of fact or that the finding is irrational
or perverse. This is a heavy burden.

(2) Where termination is unjustified the workman cannot as of right demand
reinstatement. The tribunal is required to make a just and equitable order.
The order must therefore be just and equitable to both parties. Consequently,
the tribunal has the discretion to order payment of compensation as an
alternative to reinstatement.

(3) The amount of compensation should not mechanically be calculated on the
basis of his salary till he reached superannuation.

(4) On the facts and circumstances of the case an order to pay the applicant 5
years salary as compensation in lieu of reinstatement is just and equitable.

**Cases referred to:**

1\. _The Caledonian (_ _Ceylon_ _) Tea and Rubber Estates Ltd_., _v. Hillman_
‑791 NLR 421

2\. _United Industrial Local Government and General Workers' Union v.
Independent Newspapers Ltd_., 75 NLR 529, 531 __

3. ___Ceylon_ _Transport Board v. Wijeratne_ 77 NLR 481.

**APPEAL** from the Judgment of the High Court.

_S. Sivarasa, P.C.,_ with _Shammil Perera_ and _Sampath Welgampola_ for
Employer‑Appellant.

_S. L. Gunasekera_ for Applicant‑Respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

11th October, 1996.

**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

**233**

The Applicant‑Respondent was employed at the Hatton National Bank in the
capacity of an executive in grade I. He made an application to the Labour
Tribunal alleging, inter alia, that his services were wrongfully,
unjustifiably and maliciously terminated by the Bank (Appellant). He sought
reinstatement with full backwages or in the alternative adequate compensation
for loss of career. His employment commenced on 14.9.74 and his services were
terminated on 14.12.87. The Bank filed answer and took up the position that
the Applicant was dismissed from service for misconduct after he was found
guilty at a domestic inquiry. After inquiry, the Labour Tribunal made order
reinstating the applicant in service with effect from 20.8.93 and directed the
Bank to pay him a sum of Rs. 61,200/‑ as one year's salary for the period of
non‑employment. Both the Applicant and the Bank appealed against the order of
the Labour Tribunal to the High Court. The appeal of the Bank was dismissed.
The appeal of the Applicant was allowed and the Bank was directed to pay the
Applicant back wages for a period of 67 months (full back wages). The Bank has
now preferred an appeal to this court.

R43 is the charge sheet served on the Applicant. The main charge upon which
the Applicant's services were terminated was charge No. 1 which reads as
follows: "You did absent yourself from work from 20th July 1987 to 27th July
1987 falsely on the ground of alleged illness, forwarding a telegram and two
medical certificates dated 22.7.87 and 27.7.1987". The week commencing 20th
July 1987 was the week during which the Applicant was required to handle the
safe keys. This was an important duty entrusted to the Applicant. During that
week he was required to report for work at 7.40 a.m. and send the cheques for
"clearing" by 8 a.m. If the cheques were not sent in time for "clearing", the
Bank would be shut out from "clearing" for that day. Admittedly, the applicant
did not come for work the whole of that week. He sent a telegram which reached
the Bank only at 5.30 p.m. on 20.7.87. Thereafter he submitted two medical
certificates (marked R 35 and R 36) dated 22.7.87 and 27.7.87 respectively.

In the previous month too, he was required to carry the safe keys. That was
for the week commencing from 19.6.87; the whole of that week he kept away from
work and submitted two medical certificates. The case for the Bank was that
the Applicant feigned illness, submitted

**234**

false medical certificates and absented himself from work when it was his turn
of duty to carry the safe keys. It was the evidence of the Assistant Manager,
Wijesekera, that on 26.4.87 he informed the applicant that he (i.e. the
applicant) along with two other executives would be "rostered" on a weekly
basis to carry the safe keys. The applicant did not agree to perform this duty
and according to Wijesekera "he protested vehemently and he told me that
despite his protest we are forcibly handing over the safe keys to him and as
such he will come either late or for some illness in the family (sic), so that
he would get out from the clearing. He said that it will open our eyes to
exempt him from ( _sic_ ) the carrying of the safe keys."

It was an important part of the case for the Bank that it was in pursuance of
the protest and threat uttered by the applicant in April 1987 in the presence
of Wijesekera, that the applicant deliberately absented himself from work on
the pretext of illness. It was an equally important part of the case for the
Bank that the medical certificates R35 and R36 (which sought to cover the
period 20th to 27th July 1987) were false. The belief or disbelief of the
testimony of Wijesekera was one of the crucial issues that arose for
consideration by the Labour Tribunal. Mr. S. L. Gunasekera for the applicant
contended that the first time Wijesekera reported to the Head Office, the
threat alleged to have been made by the applicant on 26.4.87 was only on
27.7.87 by letter R 32. On the other hand, Mr. Sivarasa for the Bank submitted
that Wijesekera in his evidence gave cogent reasons for the delay. Mr.
Wijesekera stated that he and the applicant were good friends and furthermore
he did not take the threat seriously. It was only in July that he realised
that the pattern of absence from duty had a significance in relation to the
threat uttered by the applicant.

As for the medical certificates R35 and R36, the Bank led the evidence of
witnesses Rowel, Emmanuel and Fernando in an effort to establish their
falsity. While the medical certificates stated that the applicant was
suffering from "acute viral fever", the evidence led on behalf of the Bank
established that he had taken his wife to a dentist and he had gone to the
Negombo branch of the Bank to deposit some cheques. It was also in evidence
that witness Emmanuel had in 1992 visited the same medical practitioner who
had issued R35 and R36 and obtained a "medical certificate" which purported to
state that

**235 __**

Emmanuel was suffering from viral fever when in fact Emmanuel was in good
health. On the other hand, Mr. S. L. Gunasekera submitted that the best and
obvious method of ascertaining whether the applicant was in fact sick was to
have taken steps to have the Applicant examined by a doctor selected by the
Bank. Witness Obeysekera called by the Bank admitted that this course of
action could have been taken.

It is unnecessary for me to consider in greater detail the factual aspects of
the case on which counsel addressed us at length. The concurrent findings of
both the Labour Tribunal and the High Court are against the Bank. It is to be
noted that an appeal from an order of a Labour Tribunal is only on a question
of law.

On a consideration of the findings of the Labour Tribunal (and affirmed by the
High Court), I find that the submissions of Mr. Sivarasa are not without
attraction. However, it cannot be said that the findings are unsupported by
the evidence; nor are the findings inconsistent with and contradictory of the
evidence. As observed by Sharvananda, J., (as he then was) in the case of _The
Caledonian (Ceylon) Tea and Rubber Estates Ltd., v. Hillman,_ (1) _. . ._ the
question of assessment of evidence is within the province of the Tribunal,
and, if there is evidence on record to support its findings, this court cannot
review those findings **even though on its own perception of the evidence this
court may be inclined to come to a different conclusion**. . . Thus in order
to set aside a determination of facts by the Tribunal, limited as this court
is only to setting aside a determination which is erroneous in law, the
appellant must satisfy this court that there was no legal evidence to support
the conclusions of fact reached by the Tribunal, or that the finding is not
rationally possible and is perverse having regard to the evidence on record.
Hence, a heavy burden rested on the appellant when he invited this court to
reverse the conclusions of fact arrived at by the Tribunal...........The
legislature has designated the Labour Tribunal as the proper tribunal to
determine the facts, and this court should not seek to substitute its own view
of the facts for that of the Tribunal.

I accordingly hold that there is no basis upon which this court could reverese
the finding of the labour Tribunal (affirmed by the High Court) that the
termination of the services of the applicant was "unjustified and wrongful."

**236**

However, there remains for consideration the issue whether the High Court and
the Labour Tribunal erred in law in failing to consider an order for
compensation in lieu of reinsatement. There is one significant finding reached
by the Labour Tribunal which has a direct bearing on this issue. The relevant
finding reads as follows: "The Applicant did not report for work on 20.7.87
due to illness. He had to do "chubb" safe keys duty that week commencing from
20th July. His absence would have caused considerable inconvenience to the
Bank in being unable to open the vault in time, to commence business. The
Applicant should have made all efforts to inform the Bank that he was not in a
fit condition to report for work from 20th July due to illness, to enable the
management to get the duplicate key and open the vault in time. The least the
applicant could have done was to have informed the Bank management by a
telephone message in the morning of the 20th July explaining his illness and
that he would not be reporting for work so that the management could have made
alternative arrangements . . . The applicant has not given a telephone message
to the management on the 20th July. But has instead sent a telegram which has
been received by the Bank at about 5.30 p.m. **By this negligence or
carelessness in not giving a telephone message he had acted in an
irresponsible manner and had caused inconvenience** **to the management and
others. The applicant as a senior executive should have acted In a more
responsible manner so as to cause the least amount of inconveninece ".
**(Emphasis added). Moreover, the evidence shows that cordial relations
between the Applicant and the Bank had ceased to exist for quite sometime. The
Applicant's services were terminated nearly 9 years ago. A Labour Tribunal is
required to make an order which is "just and equitable". The order must
therefore be fair and just by both parties.

On a consideration of the provisions of section 33 of the Industrial Disputes
Act, Siva Supramaniam, J., in the case of _United Industrial Local Government
and General Workers' Union v. Independent News­papers Ltd.,_ (2) stated:‑ "A
finding that the termination of service of a workman is unjustified will not,
therefore, entitle the workman to demand as of right his reinstatement; nor
will such an order be obligatory on the part of the Tribunal. The Tribunal is
vested with a discretion to decide whether payment of compensation should be
ordered as an alternative to reinstatement."

**237**

Having regard to the matters set out above, I am of the opinion that this is
not a fit case to make an order of reinstatement. I accordingly set aside the
order for reinstatement and the order for the payment of backwages made by the
Labour Tribunal and the High Court.

As regards the quantum of compensation in lieu of reinstatement, it was
pointed out to us by Mr. S. L. Gunasekera, that the applicant could have
remained in service for 15 years more had his services not been terminated.
Vythialingam, J. in _Ceylon Transport Board v. Wijeratne,_ (3):‑ __

"The amount however should not mechanically be calculated on the bais of the
salary he would have earned till he reached the age of superannuation. This
observation was cited with approval by Sharvananda, J. in _Hillman's_ case (
_supra_ at page 436). The finding of the Labour Tribunal referred to above
shows that the conduct of the applicant himself (a senior executive) was not
altogether free of blame. it seems to me that in the facts and circumstances
of this case it would be just and equitable to order the Bank (Appellant) to
pay the applicant a sum of Rs. 306000/­ representing 5 years salary as
compensation in lieu of reinstate­ment. I make order accordingly. The
aforesaid payment of compensation is without prejudice to the applicant's
rights, if any, to statutory claims. The Appellant Bank must deposit the
aforesaid sum of Rs. 306000/‑ with the Assistant Commissioner of Labour,
Colombo Central, Department of Labour, Colombo 5, on or before 30.12.1996. The
order for reinstatement with back wages amounting to 67 months' wages made by
the High Court is set aside.

In all the circumstances, I make no order for costs of appeal.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree

**WIJETUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.

_**The order for reinstatement with back wages set aside.** _

_Compensation in lieu of reinstatement ordered._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/36.html_  

