##  Rahuma Umma v. Berty Premalal Dissanayake - SLR - 293, Vol 2 of 1996
[1995] LKSC 36; (1996) 2 Sri LR 293 (13 March 1995)

**293**

**RAHUMA UMMA  
v.  
****BERTY PREMALAL DISSANAYAKE**

SUPREME COURT.  
G.P.S DE SILVA, C.J.  
KULATUNGA, J. AND  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
S. C. APPLICATION NO. 120/95.  
29TH DECEMBER 1995 AND 15TH JANUARY, 1996.Z

_Fundamental Rights ‑ Articles 14(1) (a) and 14(1)(b) of the Constitution
‑Executive or administrative action ‑ Article 126 of the Constitution ‑
Liberal or purposive approach._

The petitioner the Principal of a school had arranged a function at the school
for the opening of a newly constructed building for the school and for
awarding prizes to students. The Chief Minister and the Minister of Education
of the area had been invited to be the Chief Guest. The Petitioner complained
that before the function commenced the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents arrived in
the company of 4th to 6th Respondents who were Polices and disrupted the
meeting by pulling down the pandol put up to welcome the Chief Minister. The
1st Respondent is a Member of Parliament Anuradhapura and the Deputy Minister
of Industries. The 2nd Respondent is a former member of Parliament and the 3rd
Respondent is a Member of the Provincial Council,  North Central Province.
Thereafter the 1st Respondent himself presided at the function, gave away the
prizes and left the meeting. The 1st Respondent also made an entry in the log
book of the school directing the Deputy Director of Education to investigate
the Petitioner's conduct engaging in political activities within the school.
The 1st Respondent's position was that he visited the school on a request for
interven­tion made by the 2nd Respondent, to prevent a breach of the peace.

**Held :**

In considering whether the impugned acts constitute "executive or
administrative action" within the meaning of Article 126, a liberal or
purposive approach should be adopted; accordingly the acts of a public officer
acting under colour of office would constitute " executive or administrative
action" even if they involve abuse of power or exceed the scope of his
authority.

**Cases referred to:**

1. _Velumurugu v. A.G. Fundamental Rights_ decisions Vol. 1 180, 224.

**294** __

2.  _Sunanda_ _Deshapriya and another v. Municipal Council Nuwara ‑Eliya and Mayor of Nuwara Eliya S.C. _Application No.884/92 S.C. Minutes of 10th March 1995.

3\. _Upaliratne and Others v. Tikiri Banda and Others_ (1995) 1 Sri L.R.165.

4\. _Mohamed Faiz, Wild Life Ranger v. A. G. S.C._ Application No. 89/91 S.C.
Minutes of 19th November, 1993.

Preliminary objection to maintenance of fundamental rights application.

_D.S. Wijesinghe, P.C._ with _Ajith Wijesurendra_ for Petitioner.

_Faisz Musthapha, P.C._ with _Dr. J. Wickremaratne, N.M. Saheed_ and _Mahanama
de Silva_ for 1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents.

_Kolitha Dharmawardena, S.S.C.,_ for 4th to 8th Respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult_

8th March, 1996

**G.P.S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

Mr. Musthapha for the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents raised the preliminary
objection that the complaint of the Petitioner does not fall within the
meaning of the expression "executive or administrative action" in Article 126
of the Constitution. We invited Mr. D.S. Wijesinghe for the Petitioner and Mr.
Musthapha for the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents to make their submissions in
writing on the preliminary issue of liability. This is the only question that
presently arises for consideration before us.

The Petitioner who is the Principal of the Muslim Maha Vidyalaya Kekirawa,
complains in her Petition that her fundamental rights of freedom of speech and
expression and of peaceful assembly guaranteed by Article 14(1)(a), and
14(1)(b) have been violated by the Respondents. The 1st Respondent is the
Member of Parliament representing the Anuradhapura electoral district and is
presently the Deputy Minister of Industries. **The 2nd** **Respondent is a
former member of Parliament** who represented the Anuradhapura electoral
district. The 3rd respondent is a member of the Provincial Council of the
North‑Central province. The 4th to 6th Respondents are Police Officers
attached to the Anuradhapura Police Station.

**295**

The Petitioner avers in her Petition that arrangements had been made to have
the formal opening of a newly constructed building for the school on 13.3.95.
It had also been decided to have a meeting of the students, parents and
well‑wishers of the school at the school hall on the same occasion; in
addition there was to be a prize giving to award prizes for the scholarship
winners of the school. Mr. G. D. Mahindasoma, the Chief Minister and Minister
of Education of the Provincial Council of the  North Central Province and
other officers attached to the Divisional Education Office at Kekirawa were
amongst the invitees. These events were scheduled to be held at 3 p.m. that
day.

According to the Petitioner, events took an unexpected turn. While the final
arrangements for the formal ceremonies were being made at the school, at about
12.30 p.m., large crowd of persons led by the 1st Respondent and Police
officers in uniform suddenly invaded the school premises and proceeded towards
the Petitioner's office. The 1st Respondent was accompanied by the 2nd and 3rd
Respondents as well as the 4th to the 6th Respondents. The pandol at the
entrance to the school which was put up to welcome Mr. Mahindasoma, (Chief
Guest), was pulled down by the crowd. The 1st Respondent entered the
Petitioner's office and occupied her chair and demanded the Log Book of the
school. He then made an entry in the Log Book and thereafter proceeded towards
the new building, cut the ribbon which was meant to be cut at the formal
opening by the Chief Minister. The 1st Respondent along with the other
Respondents thereafter entered the new building, directed the persons present
to assemble at the school hall where the meeting and the prize giving were
scheduled to be held. The **1st, 2nd and 3rd** Respondents got on to the
stage, directed that the **prizes which were to be** awarded to be brought
onto the stage and proceeded to make speeches and distribute the prizes.
Thereafter, the entire group of persons "helped themselves to the refreshments
that were kept in one of the rooms." Having thus completed the events that
were scheduled for 3.p.m., the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents accompanied by the
4th to 6th Respondents left the school premises at about 1.30 p.m.

The Petitioner complains that as a result of the "mock" events that took
place, she was deprived of the right to hold the meeting at

**  296**

the school premises and to address the students, staff and well‑wishers of the
school, as previously arranged.

The position of the 1st Respondent may be summarized as follows: ‑ According
to him, on the 13th March 1995 at about 11 a.m. the 2nd Respondent had
informed him that there could be a serious breach of the peace at the school
premises and sought his intervention in the matter. Thereupon the 1st
Respondent along with the 2nd and 3rd Respondents had visited the school
around 12 noon. The 1st Respondent states that he observed a large group of
persons in the school premises and "there appeared to be tension." He had
noticed that the school premises had been decorated only in green flags and
banners of a political nature. The 1st Respondent along with 2nd and 3rd
Respondents had met the Petitioner at her office and had "clearly indicated to
her that it was not proper to have party politics in school affairs." It is
the position of the 1st Respondent that he participated at the opening
ceremony of the building and at the "prize giving" at the invitation of the
Petitioner herself and the purpose was to diffuse the prevailing tense
situation. Moreover, the Petitioner admits that he made an entry in the Log
Book.

The contents of the entry made in the Log-Book (P4) are not without relevance.
In the log‑entry the 1st Respondent had directed the Deputy Director of
Education, Kekirawa, to investigate and report to him (1st Respondent) the
conduct of the Petitioner who is engaging in political activities within the
school premises.

The principal submission of Mr. Musthapha was that "even if the Petitioner's
version is totally believed it is clear that the 1st Respondent did not have
even a vestige of authority **as far as the school is concerned.** The alleged
acts were **not even remotely related to the office of Deputy Minister of
Industrial Development.** As member of Parliament the 1st Respondent had no
executive authority at all ................The 2nd Respondent is only a former
member of Parliament. His actions are that of a private person. The 3rd
Respondent is a member of the North Central Provincial Council. He is a member
of the opposition in the Council. It is clear that he too has no executive
authority." While conceding that a public officer can be held liable **when
acting under colour of office.** Mr. Musthapha contended that "this doctrine
will

**297**

not apply where a public officer acts totally without jurisdiction and has no
vestige of authority". And the argument was that the 1st Respondent who was
the Deputy Minister of Industrial Development "had no authority whatsoever in
relation to the administration of the school."

In considering the preliminary objection, it seems to me that the correct
approach to be adopted was lucidly and cogently expressed by Sharvananda, J.,
(as he then was) in his dissenting judgment in _Velmurugu v. A.G. and Others_
(1) __ "In view of the vital nature of this constitutional remedy, it is in
accord with the aspirations of the Constitution that this court should take a
liberal view of the provisions of Article 126, so that a subject's right to
the remedy is in no manner constricted by finely spun distinctions concerning
the precise scope of the authority of State Officers and the incidental
liability of the State .........If the State invests one of its officers or
agencies with power which is capable of inflicting the deprivation complained
of, it is bound by the exercise of such power even in abuse thereof; the
official position makes the abuse effective to achieve the flouting of the
subject's fundamental rights...........The idea underlying Article 126 is that
no one by virtue of his public office or position should deprive a citizen of
his fundamental rights without being amenable to Article 126, even though what
the official did constituted an abuse of power or exceeded the limits of his
authority. This sweep of State action, however, will not cover act of officers
in the ambit of their personal pursuits, such as rape by a police officer of a
woman in his custody.......  such acts has no relation to the exercise of the
State power vested in him. The officer has taken advantage of the occasion,
but not his office, for the satisfaction of a personal vagary..........". It
is well to bear in mind that the court was here dealing with the conduct of a
police officer in relation to an allegation of the infringement of Article 11.
What is relevant for present purposes and what needs to be stressed is that
Sharvananda, J. adopted a liberal and "purposive" approach, in construing the
expression "executive or administrative action" in Article 126.

A decision which has a direct bearing on the issue before us is the judgment
of Fernando, J., in _Sunanda Deshapriya and Another v_. _Municipal Council,
Nuwara Eliya and the Mayor of Nuwara Eliya_ (2).

**298**

This was a case where the editor and proprietor of the newspaper "Yukthiya"
complained that their fundamental right guaranteed by Article 14(1)(a) was
infringed by the 2nd Respondent, the Mayoress of the Nuwara‑Eliya Municipal
Council‑The case for the Petitioner very briefly was that the 2nd Respondent
came to the newspaper stall which was near the entrance to the park on
10.10.92.at about 11 a.m. and forcibly took away the copies of the "Yukthiya"
which were in the stall at that time. The stall was owned by the Municipal
Council of Nuwara Eliya. It was the position of the 2nd Respondent that it was
her practice to tour the town accompanied by the officials "to ensure that the
town was kept in a clean and sanitary condition". The 10th of October was one
of those days when she was engaged in a tour of the town. She went to the
stall to buy a newspaper and observed that the stall was not in a clean
condition. She directed the occupant of the stall to clean up the place. She
denied the seizure of the newspapers. The finding of the court was that she
did seize the newspapers on that occasion. On the critical question whether
the seizure was by executive or administrative action, Fernando J., expressed
himself thus: ‑

" I hold that the 2nd Respondent did seize 450 copies of "Yukthiya" on
10.10.92; that she did so **while purporting to exercise her functions and
while acting under colour of her office,** as Mayoress **** of the Nuwara
Eliya Municipal Council. The seizure was therefore by executive or
administrative action." (The emphasis is mine.)

As rightly submitted by Mr. Wijesinghe, Counsel for the Petitioner, the
Mayoress had no official function whatever to perform in respect of the sale
of newspapers at the stall. What is more, the seizure of the newspapers was in
no way related to the office she held. Nevertheless, the finding was (rightly
in my view) that she was "acting under colour of her office as Mayoress of the
Nuwara Eliya Municipal Council". The decision in this case therefore runs
counter to the submission of Mr. Musthapha that the doctrine of "acting under
colour of office" does not apply where a public officer acts totally without
jurisdiction and has no vestige of authority".

In support of his submissions Mr. Musthapha relied also on the following
passage in the judgment of Amerasinghe, J. in _Upaliratne_

**299**

_and Others v. Tikiri Banda and Others_ (3)" ............. when a public
officer takes acts relating to his office, those actions should be considered
to be executive action even if they exceed the scope of his authority, for he
acts under colour of his office", Mr. Musthapha emphasized the words "relating
to his office". This part of the judgment refers to the conduct of the first
Respondent who was the Co-ordinating Secretary to "Hon, Colonel Anuruddha
Ratwatte, M.P., and Minister of Irrigation, Power and Energy and Deputy
Minister of Defence............  "The finding of the Court was that in all the
circumstances "it seems more probable than not that Mr. Tikiri Banda (i.e. the
1st Respondent) played a key­ role in the unlawful eviction of the Time
Keepers who were members of the Central Bus Workers Co‑operative Society and
in placing other persons in substitution." (at page 185) His conduct had no
relation whatever to any matter pertaining to the subjects of Irrigation,
Power, Energy and Defence. This was a dispute which concerned the Transport
Ministry of the Central Provincial Council and the Central Province Private
Bus workers Co‑operative Society. Nevertheless the court held that he was
acting under "colour of his office". When the judgment is read as a whole in
the light of the established facts, it seems to me that this case too does not
support Mr. Musthapha's contention. On the other hand, it is in accord with
the view taken by Fernando, J., in _W M. Sunanda Deshapriya's_ case _(supra)._

Finally, the answer to Mr. Musthapha's contention that the acts of the 2nd and
3rd Respondents are acts of private individuals (and therefore does not fall
within the provisions of Article 126) is found in the reasoning of Fernando,
J. in his judgment in _Mohamed Faiz, Wild Life Ranger v. A. G.,_ (4) __
"Article 126 speaks of an infringement by executive or administrative action;
it does not impose a further requirement that such action must be by an
Executive Officer. It follows that the act of a private individual would
render him liable if in the circumstances that act is 'executive or
administrative'. The act of a private individual would be executive if such
act is done with the authority of the Executive; such authority transforms an
otherwise purely private act into executive or administrative action; such
authority may be expressed, or implied from prior or concurrent acts
manifesting approval, instigation, connivance, acquiescence, participation,
and the like ......... "

**300**

For these reasons the preliminary objection is overruled.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.

**KULATUNGA, J.** ‑ I concur with the order proposed by my Lord the Chief
Justice, in particular for the reason that as a matter of principle it is
necessary to decide the preliminary objection in the light of the particular
facts and circumstances of the case and in a manner that would advance
fundamental rights.

In the instant case, the acts complained of were done by the 1st and 3rd
Respondents, a Deputy Minister and a member of the North Central Provincial
Council respectively, each of whom has the status of a public authority. The
4th to 6th Respondents provided them with security. They acted under colour of
office. Hence the overall picture is that the acts complained of constitute
"executive or administrative actions" within the meaning of Article 126(1) of
the Constitution.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

_Preliminary objection overruled._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/36.html_  

