##  Farook v. Siriwardena, Election Officer and Others - SLR - 145, Vol 1 of
1997 [1994] LKSC 36; (1997) 1 Sri LR 145 (16 November 1994)

### **145**

### **FAROOK**

**v.**

**SIRIWARDENA, ELECTION OFFICER AND OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT.

AMERASINGHE, J.,

KULATUNGA, J. AND

WADUGODAPITIYA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 81/95

C.A. APPLICATION NO. 826/94

OCTOBER 5, 1995.



_Writ of Certiorari ‑ Member of Local Authority ‑ Vacation of office on
expulsion from membership of recognized political party ‑ Notice by Election
Officer declaring vacancy ‑ Local Authorities Elections Ordinance, Sections
10A and 65A (2)._

_ _

The appellant was a member of the Colombo Municipal Council. After calling for
his explanation, the recognized Political Party to which he belonged expelled
him from the membership of the Party by writing. A copy of the Communication
addressed to the appellant was sent to the Election Officer who gazetted the
requisite notice of vacancy in the membership of the Council, in terms of
Section 10A (1) (a) of the Local Authorities Election Ordinance. Consequently,
the recognized political Party nominated a new member in terms of Section
65A(2) of the Ordinance.

**146**



**Held:**



(1)     There was no duty on the Election Officer to hold an inquiry before he
published the vacancy in the Gazette.



(2) The failure to make the new member a party to the application is fatal to
the validity of the application.



**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.



A.      _P. Niles_ with _U. A_. _Mawjooth_ for appellant.

_S. Sri Skandarajah,_ S.S.C. for 1st respondent.



_M. I. Waffir_ for 2nd respondent.



_N. R. G._ _Samarsinghe_ for 4th respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._



October 05, 1995  


**KULATUNGA, J.,  **



This is an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 11.05.95. By
that judgment, the Court of Appeal dismissed the application made by the
appellant who had been a member of the Municipal Council, Colombo to quash a
notice published by the 1st respondent (Election Officer for the Colombo,
Municipal Council) declaring that a vacancy had arisen in the membership of
the Council by reason of the cessation of the membership of the appellant in
the Sri Lanka Muslim Congress (a recognized political party) to which he
belonged.



Briefly, the facts are that on 13.07.94 the 2nd respondent who is the General
Secretary of the Sri Lanka Muslim Congress, addressed a letter to the
appellant calling upon him to show cause why he should not be expelled from
the membership of the Party on the grounds set out in that letter which has
been produced marked R1. It would appear that R1 was sent under registered
cover to the appellant's address and has been returned undelivered with the
remark "refused to accept". It was dispatched again by registered post on
which occasion also, the letter was returned undelivered with the same remark.
The relevant envelopes have been produced marked R2 and R3. Besides, there was
a further effort by the Secretary to the Party on 28.08.94 to have a copy of
the letter R1 communicated to the appellant. On that occasion, it has been

147



forwarded to the appellant through the Colombo Municipal Council. The covering
letter of the Secretary of Council is marked R4. However, the appellant takes
up the position that the fact of the said communication has not been proved by
admissible evidence.



In the end, by his letter dated 14.09.94 ‑ A2 signed by the 2nd respondent on
behalf of the Party the appellant was informed that in view of his conduct and
failure to respond to the charge sheet, he has been expelled from the
membership of the Party. This communication (A2) was copied to the Election
Officer ‑ the 1st respondent whereupon the 1st respondent by his letter dated
20.10.94 addressed in terms of Section 10A(2) of the Local Authorities
Elections Ordinance informed the appellant that upon the expiry of 21 days
specified in that section, he would take steps to publish in the Gazette a
notice declaring that a vacancy had arisen in the membership of the Council.
The said letter has been produced marked 1R1. Next on 14.11.94 the 1st
respondent made the requisite notice under Section 10A(1) (a) of the Ordinance
‑ (1R2). It was then gazetted in the Gazette No. 8456 dated 15.11.94 ‑ (1R3).
At the same time, further action was taken by the 1st respondent by his letter
dated 16.11.94 (R5) to call upon the 2nd respondent to nominate a member in
place of the appellant. On 16.11.94, the 2nd respondent nominated one T. K.
Azoor as the new member, in terms of Section 65A(2) of the Ordinance. The 2nd
respondent by his letter dated 16.11.94 (R6) forwarded to the 1st respondent
the nomination together with the requisite oaths under Article 157A and
Article 165 of the Constitution, signed by the new member.



The submission of the appellant is that in the circumstance of this case, the
1st respondent had no power under Section 10A(1) (a) of the Ordinance to have
published the notice declaring that a vacancy in the membership of the
Municipal Council had arisen without first holding an inquiry as to whether
the appellant had been validly removed. The question of the validity of the
appellant's expulsion is presently before the District Court of Colombo, in
D.C. Colombo case No. 4170/Spl, which the appellant has filed, challenging his
removal from the membership of the Party.



We are of the opinion that whilst there may be circumstances e.g. where it is
alleged that the letter of expulsion is a forgery or that it

148



was fraudulently procured in which event the Election Officer may come under a
duty to make a decision regarding such allegation, in the circumstances of the
case before us, there was no duty on the part of the 1st respondent to have
acted otherwise than as he has done namely, to publish the vacancy in the
Gazette.



There is another point, although it had not been previously raised namely,
that T.K. Azoor who had been nominated by the Party as its new Member of the
Municipal Council and whose rights are affected in these proceedings, had at
no stage been made a party to the application made to the Court of Appeal.
This itself is fatal to the validity of the application.



For the foregoing reasons, we see no reasons to interfere with the judgment of
the Court of Appeal. We accordingly dismiss the appeal and affirm the judgment
of the Court of Appeal, but without costs.



**AMERASINGHE, J.** ‑ I agree.



**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** ‑ I agree



_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/36.html_  

