##  Chandrasiri v. Gen. Cyril Ranatunga and Others - SLR - 104, Vol 1 of 1993
[1993] LKSC 36; (1993) 1 Sri LR 104 (3 February 1993)

**104**

**CHANDRASIRI** **  
v.** **  
GEN. CYRIL RANATUNGA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J., KULATUNGA, J. AND RAMANATHAN, J.  
SC APPLICATION NO. 138/92.  
03 FEBRUARY, 1993.

_     Fundamental rights - Emergency Regulations - Detention Order under
Regulations 19 (2) and 17 (1) - Order for Rehabilitation._

The petitioner, a field officer on the Andipana Estate was arrested by army
officers and detained in terms of an order made under Regulation 19 (2) of the
Emergency Regulations. The petitioner was thereafter kept in continued
detention under a preventive detention order made under Regulation 17 (1). He
was thereafter released after rehabilitation.

**Held**

1\. There was no material to justify the detention made under Regulation 19
(2) or to satisfy the Court that the Secretary entertained the opinion that it
was necessary to detain the petitioner under Regulation 17 (1).

2\. The detention of the petitioner was invalid ; and the order for
rehabilitation based on such invalid detention was also invalid, and Violative
of the petitioner's rights under Articles 13 (2) and 13 (4).

**APPLICATION** for violation of fundamental rights.

_R. K. W. Goonesekera with K. Tiranagama_ for petitioner _._

  
_Hector Yapa, D.S.G_. for respondents.  
  
February 03, 1993.

**KULATUNGA, J.**

This Court granted the petitioner leave to proceed with his application in
respect of the alleged violation of Articles 13 (2) and 13 (4) of the
Constitution.

The petitioner states that he had been employed as a Field Officer on the
Andipana Estate at Morawaka, drawing a salary of Rs. 1,500 per mensem. At the
time of the filing of this application he was 30

105

years of age. He alleged that he was arrested by officers of the Heegoda Army
Camp on 19.03.1990 and he was detained there. When that camp was closed down,
he was handed over to the Urubokka Police Station on 27.06.1990 to be
transferred to the Weerawila Detention Camp and he was so transferred on
29.06.1990.

The petitioner further states that the Officer-in-Charge of the Urubokka
Police Station, by his letter dated 08.11.1991 (P1), addressed to the lawyers
for Human Rights and Development, informed that on 04.11.1991 he had
recommended the release of the petitioner as the evidence did not disclose any
charges against him. However, the petitioner was not released and was kept in
continued detention at the Detention Camp, Weerawila until 07.01.1992 when he
was sent for a period of six months' rehabilitation at the Aesthetic Centre,
Madiwela and was thereafter released. The petitioner in his affidavit filed on
16.11.1992 states that he was released after rehabilitation on 16.06.1992.
However, according to the respondents he was officially released after
rehabilitation on 10.06.1992. Learned Deputy Solicitor General explained that
if there had been any delay in the actual release of the petitioner from the
Rehabilitation Centre this may have been due to some delay in arranging for
the handing over of the petitioner to a relation, which is the usual practice.

On the above facts, the petitioner alleges that his detention was unlawful and
violative of Articles 13 (2) and 13 (4).

As regards the date of the petitioner's arrest, according to the petitioner he
was arrested on 19.03.1990, whereas according to the respondents he was
arrested on 27.06.1990. Learned Counsel for the petitioner drew our attention
to the documents 1 RI and 2R1 and submitted that those documents support the
petitioner's version that he was in fact arrested on some date anterior to
27.06.1990. 1R1 is a Detention Order under s. 19 (2) in terms of which it was
directed that the petitioner be detained at the Weerawila Detention Camp. 2R1
is a letter dated 12.10.1991 addressed by the O.I.C., Urubokka Police Station
to the 2nd respondent, the Chairman, Committee for Arrest, Separation,
Classification, Rehabilitation and Release of Detainees. Both these documents
indicate that the petitioner had been handed over to the Urubokka Police
Station for the purpose of being transferred to the Weerawila Detention Camp.
In 2R1 the

106

O.I.C., Urubokka Police Station specially affirms to this fact. In these
circumstances, there is sufficient material to indicate that the petitioner
had in fact been arrested prior to 27.06.1990. The respondents have not urged
any reason as to why the petitioner should have falsely asserted that he had
been arrested on 19.03.1990, if the truth is that he was arrested in June that
year. We therefore, hold that the petitioner was in fact arrested on
19.03.1990 as stated by him. The effect of this conclusion would be that after
his arrest the petitioner was detained at the Heegoda Army Camp until
28.06.1990 without any Detention Order to justify such detention. Such
detention would be unlawful and violative of the petitioner's rights under
Article 13 (2).

The 1st respondent (Secretary, Ministry of Defence) and the 2nd respondent
have filed affidavits in defence of the impugned detention commencing with the
Detention Order 1R1 dated 28.06.1990.

It is the case for the respondents that the petitioner was arrested on
27.06.1990 on suspicion of subversive activities and that this was confirmed
by investigations carried out by the Urubokka Police. A Detention Order under
Regulation 19 (2) of the Emergency Regulations (1R1) was obtained authorising
the detention of the petitioner at the Weerawila Detention Camp for ninety
days. This was followed by a Detention Order under Regulation 17 (1) dated
23.09.1990 (1R2). Thereafter on the recommendations of the O.I.C., Urubokka
Police Station (which he made by his letter dated 12.10.1991 - 2R1) the
petitioner was sent for rehabilitation for six months after which he was
released on 10.06.1992. I have already referred to the complaint as regards
the delay in releasing him after rehabilitation and the explanation offered by
the learned Deputy Solicitor General.

A Detention Order under regulation 19 (2) is competent in respect of a person
who is arrested on suspicion of an offence under the Emergency Regulations -
Regulation 18\. However, the Detention Order 1131 does not refer to any such
offence, but authorises the petitioner's detention to prevent him from acting
in any manner prejudicial to the national security or to the maintenance of
public order (which are in fact grounds for making a preventive detention
order under Regulation 17 (1). The validity of a detention under Regulation 19
(2) for which a valid arrest under Regulation 18 is a

107

condition precedent has to be judged objectively on the basis of material
placed before this Court. Whilst the Detention Order relied upon itself does
not assist us in regard to the lawfulness of the arrest for any offence under
the Emergency Regulations, the respondents have not placed any other material
before this Court in that regard. Thus, they have failed to furnish to this
Court notes of investigation, if any, which had been carried out by the
Police. Learned Deputy Solicitor General informed us that there were certain
information and intelligence reports on the basis of which the Detention Order
was made. If that were so, copies of such information or reports have not been
made available to this Court ; nor has any excuse for such failure been
tendered. In these circumstances, the Detention Order 1R1 cannot be justified.

As regards the Detention Order under Regulation 17 (1), the 1st respondent
was, no doubt, competent to make such an order if he was of the opinion that
it was necessary to do so to prevent the petitioner from acting in any manner
prejudicial to the national security or to the maintenance of public order.
However, on the available material, we are not satisfied that in fact he
entertained such opinion. We are of the view that this is a case in which the
1st respondent should have placed some material before this Court to so
satisfy us on that matter even though he was competent to make the Detention
Order on his subjective satisfaction as to the existence of the pre-conditions
for making such order.

In this connection, it is relevant to note that the O.I.C., Urubokka Police
Station, states in his letter 2R1 that the Detention Order under Regulation 17
(1) was obtained as the investigations had not been completed, which is not a
valid ground for the making of a Preventive Detention Order; so that one finds
that the averment contained in the 1st respondent's affidavit that he made the
Detention Order 1 R2 to prevent the petitioner from acting in any manner
prejudicial to the national security or to the maintenance of public order, is
contradicted by the document 2R1, which had been addressed to the 2nd
respondent by the O.I.C., Urubokka Police Station. In these circumstances, we
hold that the Detention Order 1 R2 was also not validly made.

As regards the Order for rehabilitation which according to the 1st respondent
was made on the recommendations of the O.I.C., Urubokka Police Station
contained in the letter 2R1, it is observed that the said

108

letter refers to forty six detainees. However, the letter 2R1 does not refer
to the petitioner by name. On the other hand the letter P1 written by the same
police officer states that he had recommended the release of the petitioner as
there was no material to frame charges against him. Hence, the statement of
the 2nd respondent that such rehabilitation was recommended by the O.I.C. is
an assumption which cannot be justified. In any event, an order of
rehabilitation is competent if there is a valid detention. We have found the
petitioner's detention to be invalid ; as such the order for rehabilitation
was also invalid.

For the above reasons, we hold that the detention of the petitioner for over
two years was unlawful and violative of his rights under Articles 13 (2) and
13 (4). The petitioner states that by reason of such detention, he has been
deprived of his employment. He had been without employment during the period
of his detention, and as a result of his unlawful detention, he has now been
deprived of his employment and perhaps prospects of future employment. In the
circumstances, we consider it just and equitable to direct the State to pay to
the petitioner a sum of Rupees Fifty Thousand (Rs. 50,000) as compensation and
a sum of Rupees One Thousand Five Hundred (Rs. 1,500) as costs.

_Detention declared unlawful.  
_  
_Compensation ordered._



**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C. J.** \- 1 agree.  


**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/36.html_  

