##  Alexander v. Gnanam and Others - SLR - 274, Vol 1 of 2002 [2002] LKSC 36;
(2002) 1 Sri LR 274 (11 February 2002)

**274**

**ALEXANDER  
v.  
GNANAM AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA, CJ.,  
EDUSSURIYA, J. AND  
YAPA, J.  
SC APPEAL NOS. 67/2001 AND 68/2001  
HC LTA NOS. 1444/97 AND 1453/97  
LT COLOMBO NO. 13/11590/89  
11 FEBRUARY, 2002  
  
_Industrial Dispute - Labour Tribunal order justifying the termination of
services - Order for payment of compensation notwithstanding such termination.  
_  
Where the Labour Tribunal held that the termination of services of the
appellant-workman (the workman) was justified in view of a series of lapses
during a period of 7 years and that his conduct was contemptuous of the
management and fell far short of the expected standard but granted
compensation in a sum of Rs. 57,000-  
  
**Held :  
**  
The facts did not warrant the award of compensation to the workman.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court.  
  
_Rohan Sahabandu_ for appellant.  
  
_D. S. Wijesinghe, PC_ with _Neville Joseph_ and _T. M. S. Nanayakkara_ for
respondents.

**275**

February 11, 2002  
  
**S. N. SILVA, CJ.  
**  
This is an appeal from the judgment of the High Court dated 07. 06. 1999. By
that judgment the High Court affirmed the order of the Labour Tribunal that
the termination of the appellant's services was justified. The High Court has
in these circumstances set aside the order of the Labour Tribunal granting the
appellant a sum of Rs. 57,000 being the equivalent of one year's salary as
compensation. The appellant has been granted leave to appeal on two questions.
They are:  
  
(1) Did the High Court err in law in failing to enhance the compensation
awarded to the applicant by the Labour Tribunal, and in dismissing the
applicant's appeal without reasons?  
  
(2) Did the High Court err in law in setting aside, without reasons the award
of compensation made in favour of applicant by the Labour Tribunal?  
  
It is to be noted that leave has not been granted by this Court on the
question whether the termination of the appellant's services is justified.
Accordingly, we have to consider this appeal on the basis that the termination
of the appellant's services is justified and that findings to this effect on
matters of fact made by the Labour Tribunal and the High Court are correct.
The limited issue before this Court is whether assuming that the termination
is justified, the appellant is nevertheless entitled to compensation.  
  
The Labour Tribunal has carefully considered the evidence and has made a
series of findings against the appellant. It is clear that the appellant's
services were not terminated in respect of a single incident of misconduct.
The termination is on the basis of a series of incidents of misconduct from
1982 up to 1988. These incidents

**276**

of misconduct are borne out by the documents that have been produced. The
Labour Tribunal has accepted in its entirely the eviÂ­dence as to the acts of
misconduct. On this basis the Tribunal has commented that the conduct of the
appellant whilst in employment and even when giving evidence, is
"contemptuous" of the management of the employer respondent company. Several
incidents have been cited by the Tribunal to justify the conclusion that the
conduct of the appellant throughout the period fell far short of the conduct
expected from an employee of his level. The High Court has affirmed these
findings. In the circumstances we are confronted with the situation where -  
  
(1) the termination of employment is justified;  
  
(2) the termination is so justified not with reference to a single incident
but with regard to a series of lapses that span a period of nearly 7 years;  
  
(3) the workman's conduct was contemptuous of the management and it fell far
short of the expected standard.  
  
Such a situation does not in our view warrant the award of compensation to the
workman who was at fault.  
  
Accordingly, we see no basis to interfere with the judgment of the High Court.
The appeal is dismissed. No costs.  
  
**EDUSSURIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**YAPA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/36.html_  

