##  Prins Gunasekera v. The Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. - SLR - 122,
Vol 3 of 2000 [2000] LKSC 37; (2000) 3 Sri LR 122 (28 April 2000)

**122**

**PRINS GUNASEKERA  
v.  
THE ASSOCIATED NEWSPAPERS OF CEYLON LTD**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA C. J.,  
BANDARANAYAKE J, AND  
ISMAIL J.  
SC (SPL) L. A. NO. 11 /2000  
CA NO. 174/94  
DC COLOMBO NO. 3583/SPI  
21ST MARCH, 2000  
  
_Enforcement of judgement - Reciprocal Enforcement of Judgments Ordinance -
Judgment of a Superior Court in the United Kingdom - Objection to
jurisdiction.  
_  
The petitioner obtained an ex-parte judgment against the respondent Company
(the respondent) from the High Court of England for damages for the
publication of an alleged defamatory statement published in a newspaper
printed by the respondent and distributed in England by an English Company.
The respondent did not appear or subscribe to the jurisdiction of the High
Court of England. The respondent was not ordinarily resident in United
Kingdom. Thereafter, the petitioner sought to enforce the judgment in Sri
Lanka under the Reciprocal Enforcement of Judgments Ordinance by registering
it under Section 3(1) of the Ordinance on an Order of the District Court of
Colombo. The respondent objected to the jurisdiction of the Court to register
the judgment on the ground that Section 3(2) (b) of the Ordinance prohibits
registration inter alia, if the judgment - debtor was neither carrying on
business nor ordinarily resident within the jurisdiction of the original
Court.  
  
**Held :  
**  
In view of the denial by the respondent the petitioner should have led
evidence to satisfy the Court that the respondent was carrying on business in
the United Kingdom. The petitioner had failed to discharge that burden.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
_1\. Sfeir & Co. u. National Insurance Co. of New Zealand (1964) 1 QB 330.  
  
2\. Vogel u. R. & A Kohnstram Ltd. (1971) 2 All ER 1428.  
 _

**123**

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_R.  K. W. Goonesekera with Mrs. Shiranthi Jayatilleke _for petitioner.  
  
_Faisz Musthapa, P. C., with Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

April 28, 2000.  
  
**S. N. SILVA, C. J.  
**  
This is an application for Special Leave to appeal from the judgment dated
8.12.1999 of the Court of Appeal.  
  
The Petitioner Appellant being a Sri Lankan resident in the United Kingdom
instituted proceedings against the Respondent (as the 2nd Defendant) and
another party in the High Court of England and Wales, claiming damages in a
sum of 150, 000 sterling pounds in respect of an alleged defamatory statement
published in the Daily News on 17.05.1990. It appears that the other party
viz: Samco Agencies Ltd., of London, was sued as the 1st Defendant on the
basis that the company was the distributor of the Respondents newspapers in
that country. Samco Agencies Ltd, was discharged on the application of the
Petitioner who elected to proceed ex-party against the Respondent. The
Respondent did not appear or subscribe to the jurisdiction of the High Court
of England which entered judgment against the Respondent in the full sum of
150,000 sterling pounds claimed by the Petitioner. Thereupon the Petitioner
moved for enforcement of the judgment in Sri Lanka by instituting the
proceedings in the District Court of Colombo under the Reciprocal Enforcement
of Judgments Ordinance No. 41 of 1921. The District Court made order in favour
of the Petitioner which would have resulted in the enforcement of the Judgment
against the Respondent. The Court of Appeal by the judgment referred to above
reversed that order.  
  
Section 3(1) of the said Ordinance provides for the registration in Sri Lanka
of a judgment obtained in a Superior Court in the United Kingdom within 12
months of such

**124**

judgment. According to section 3(2)(b) such a judgment shall not be registered
inter alia if the judgment-debtor was neither carrying on business nor
ordinarily resident within jurisdiction of the Original Court. Therefore, in
order to surmount the bar in this provision to register the said judgment in
Sri Lanka for enforcement, the Petitioner must establish either that the
Respondent was carrying on business or was ordinarily resident in the United
Kingdom. It was agreed by both parties that the Respondent was not resident in
the United Kingdom and the only question that arose for consideration was
whether the Respondent was carrying on business in the United Kingdom at the
relevant time.  
  
The Respondent in his application made by way of summary procedure to set
aside the registration that was ordered initially by the District Court
clearly objected to the jurisdiction, of the court to register the judgment on
the grounds set out in Section 3(2)(b) of the Ordinance. The provision is
similar with regard to the matter at issue to Section 9(2)(b) of the
Administration of Justice Act 1920 of England.  
  
The Court of Appeal has come to a finding on the law with reference to two
cases decided in England Sfeir & Co. v. National Insurance Co, of New
Zealand(1) and Vogel v. R & A Kohnstram Ltd.,(2) that the burden of proving
that the Respondent carried on business within the jurisdiction of the High
Court of England was on the Petitioner. Learned Counsel for the Petitioner did
not seek to challenge this finding which is a correct statement of the
applicable law.  
  
Learned Counsel for the Petitioner however contended that the Court of Appeal
applied the law incorrectly when it observed that it was "not enough' to
establish that the Respondent was carrying on "some business in the. United
Kingdom," and that, Petitioner had to establish that the Respondent carried on
the business which the Petitioner alleged, which was the sale of the
newspaper, "Daily News". In

**125**

this instance the Court of Appeal appears to have pitched the proposition too
high. There is no requirement in Section 3(2)(b) that Petitioner should prove
the precise form of the business carried on to the extent of showing that it
coincides with the cause of action. But, except for the single statement
referred to above, in the rest of the judgment which runs into several pages,
the Court has stated the proposition correctly. In the final paragraph of the
Judgment the Court has observed that in the light of the denial by the
Respondent, the Petitioner should have led evidence to satisfy the court that
the Respondent carried on "business in the United Kingdom". And, concluded
that the Petitioner has not been able to place before Court evidence that the
Respondent has been carrying on business in the United Kingdom. Thus in the
light of the finding that there is no evidence of any business being carried
on by the Respondent in the United Kingdom, the statement in the judgment,
referred to by learned Counsel for the Petitioner, is devoid of significance.  
  
Learned Counsel for the Petitioner further submitted that the finding as to
the absence of evidence on this issue is untenable. He relied on three matters
to establish a finding in his favour -  
  
(i) The objects clause 3(b) of the Memorandum of Association of the Respondent
Company which states as one of its objects "to carry on in Great Britain and
in the Island of Ceylon and in any part of the world the business of Newspaper
... Publishers . . ."  
  
(ii) The Agreement with Samco Agencies Ltd., (X2)  
  
(iii) Certain newspapers that refer to one Reggie Fernando as the
correspondent in London for the Respondent.  
  
As regards the matter referred to in (i) above, it has to be noted that the
objects clause in the Memorandum is only an empowerment of the Company to do
business in Great Britain or in any part of the world. What is in issue is not
a question

**126**

of empowerment but whether in fact the Respondent carried on business within
the jurisdiction of the High Court of England.  
  
Item (ii) is an item of evidence adduced by the Respondent to negative the
claim of the Petitioner that Samco Agencies Ltd., carried on business of the
Respondent in London. The Agreement refers only to purchase of the
Respondent's newspapers in Sri Lanka by an agent of Samco Agencies Ltd., and
makes no mention of their sale in England. Learned Counsel seeks to construe
this agreement in the light of an affidavit said to have been produced in the
High Court of England. Section 91 of the Evidence Ordinance clearly precludes
such an exercise. In any event the affidavit has not been properly adduced as
evidence before the District Court.  
  
Item (iii) relates to certain publications that are said to form part of the
proceedings in the High Court of England. It is noted that when these
documents were sought to be produced in the District Court, Counsel for the
Respondent objected to it on the basis that it would be hearsay and Counsel
for the Petitioner has not pursued the matter thereafter (vide proceedings of
26.10.93).  
  
It is thus seen that the finding of the Court of Appeal as to the absence of
evidence to establish that the Respondent was carrying on business within the
jurisdiction of the High Court of England, is correct.  
  
The application for Special Leave to Appeal is accordingly dismissed. No
costs.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J**. - I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Special Leave to Appeal refused._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/37.html_  

