##  Samarakoon Banda v. Board of Directors, Co-Operative Wholesale
Establishment - SLR - 386, Vol 1 of 1991 [1991] LKSC 37; (1991) 1 Sri LR 386
(5 April 1991)

**386**

**SAMARAKOON BANDA  
V.  
BOARD OF DIRECTORS, CO-OPERATIVE WHOLESALE  
ESTABLISHMENT**

SUPREME COURT,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.,  
AMERASINGHE, J, &  
DHEERARATNE, J.,  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 18/88,  
S.C. SPL L.A. NO. 141/87,  
CA. APPEAL NO. 404/82,  
LT. NO. 1/ADDL 2523/79,  
APRIL 05, 1991.  
  
_Industrial Dispute - Political activity of employee contrary to Rules -
Condonation -Compensation.  
_  
The appellant had taken part in political activities in favour of the Sri
Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) contrary to the Rules of a circular operative at
the Co-operative Wholesale Establishment where he worked but no action was
taken against him so long as the SLFP was in power. After the 1977 elections
when the Government changed, charges were framed against him and he was
dismissed.  
  
**Held:  
**  
The employer was aware of the political activities of the appellant, yet kept
him in service with knowledge of his misconduct during several years and
condoned his wrongful activities so long as the SLFP were in power. It was not
open to the Board, on a change of Government, retrospectively to enter upon a
reconsideration of the matter and arrive at a totally different conclusion.
The hatchet once buried should not be unearthed again and again. The appellant
should be compensated for the financial loss.  
  
Per Amerasinghe J - "The characterization of the appellants conduct by the new
Board as behaviour that brought discredit to the employer and being in breach
of trust was no more than a subterfuge to justify the dismissal of the
appellant and to avoid condemnation and censure. One does need to be astute or
remarkably sagacious to see really why the appellant's services were
terminated. Victimization may be a simple yet accurate way of explaining the
reason for his dismissal."  
  
**Case referred to:**  
  
1\. State V. Mansinghrao AIR 1958 Madya Hadest 413, 415  
  
**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal  
  
_L.V.P. Wettasinghe_ for the petitioner  
  
_H.M.P. Herath_ for the respondent.

**387**

05 April 1991  
  
**AMERASINGHE , J.  
**  
The appellant was employed by the respondents in 1971 as a Personal Assistant
to the General Manager (Administration). He served as a Management Trainee
from 1 February 1975 and was confirmed as a Manager with effect from 1
February 1976.  
  
In terms of the rules set out in a Circular issued by the General Manager of
the Co-operative Wholesale Establishment, (CWE), in 1967, staff grade officers
were prohibited from participating in certain types of political activity.  
  
The appellant had engaged in political activities before he became a staff
grade officer in 1976 and continued to do so after he became a staff grade
officer. Among other things, he had as a Branch Secretary of the Sri Lanka
Freedom Party signed notices informing members of the public that the Minister
responsible for the CWE would preside at certain meetings of the party.
Although, as the President of the Labour Tribunal observed in his Order, the
employer "could not have but known that the workman was employed in politics
during the period 1975 to 1977", no action was taken against him for acting in
contravention of the rules.  
  
Following the defeat of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party at the General Elections
in July 1977, there was according to the President of the Labour Tribunal, "a
change in the administration of the employer establishment."  
  
On 1 August 1977 the appellant was sent on compulsory leave and on 12
September 1977 he was interdicted. In October 1977 he was issued with a Charge
Sheet alleging that by participating in politics, the appellant had "breached
the administrative regulations of the Establishment", and that by convening
political meetings and by his activities in the Kotonnawe Electorate (the
electorate of the Minister responsible for the CWE), the appellant had brought
the CWE "into the public discredit" (sic.) and that he had not only brought
the CWE into discredit, but also "betrayed the trust" placed in him by his
employer and thereby "forfeited the right to continue as an employee of the
Establishment."

**388**

An inquiring officer appointed by the employer found the appellant guilty of
these charges. When these matters were communicated to the Board together with
the recommendation of the Assistant General Manager Administration that the
appellant should be dismissed (Board Paper 300/79 marked as R 13 in the Court
of Appeal Brief), the Board of the CWE decided to dismiss the appellant (R
14).  
  
After hearing the appellant's complaint and the explanation of the CWE, the
President of the Labour Tribunal on 31 May 1982 held "since no action was
taken against him, the employer must be deemed to have condoned the acts of
the workman. Even if the employer was unaware of this fact, termination of
services was too drastic a punishment. The termination of the workman's
services was, according to the President of the Labour Tribunal, "therefore
unjustified." Stating that the appellant was entitled to relief, the President
of the Labour Tribunal ordered that it was in his opinion "just and equitable"
that the workman should be re-instated without break in service with three
years back wages or in the alternative that he be compensated for wrongful
termination by payment of a sum equivalent to five years salary.  
  
On 18 September 1987 the Court of Appeal set aside the decision of the
President of the Labour Tribunal. Having spent much time in deciding a matter
that was not in issue, namely whether the respondent in that Court was a
"workman" within the meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act, the Court of
Appeal, without explaining why, arrived at the conclusion that there was no
evidence of condonation and quashed the Order of the President of the Labour
Tribunal. With great respect, being laconic may sometimes be admirable but
never when it makes brevity as in this case, the cause of injustice.  
  
The employer was, in my view, aware of the political activities of the
appellant, yet kept him in service with knowledge of his misconduct during
several years and condoned his wrongful activities. The fact that the SLFP,
for whose benefit the appellant acted in breach of the rules, held the reins
of Government at the time did not make his activity less wrongful from the
employer's point of view. But it was conduct that was at less pardoned, if
pardon were necessary for conduct which might at that time have not only been
acceptable but also welcomed and perhaps even praised and encouraged. Those
who by succession, later came to have a different view, because they were

**389**

more conscious of their duties or simply because they belonged to a different
political party, could not, in my view, retrospectively enter upon a
reconsideration of the matter and arrive at a totally different conclusion. As
observed in State v, Mansinghrao (1) "the hatchet once buried, should not be
unearthed again and again."  
  
Mr. Wettasinghe urged that the order of dismissal was harsh and excessive and
that although the President of the Labour Tribunal had described the response
of the employer as being "too drastic a punishment", this aspect of the matter
had been ignored by the Court of Appeal.  
  
Willful, deliberate and intestinal disobedience of orders (whether they be
specific and personal orders addressed to and applicable to particular
individuals, or general orders applicable to an ascertainable class of persons
which, for reasons of convenience, are set out in rules, regulating, standing
orders, circulars, printed notices and so on) could, in certain circumstances,
justify the dismissal of a workman. Each case must depend upon circumstances
of equity and its substantial merits. Although the Charge Sheet in this case
characterized the appellant's conduct as having brought the CWE into "public
discredit" and amounting to a "betrayal of trust" reposed in him, I do not
think he did anything of the kind. The Board Paper on the basis of which he
was dismissed (300/79) R13, clearly suggests that the conduct of the appellant
became blameworthy only because and after he became a staff grade officer.
Anything that would have belonged to the undoubtedly objectionable class of
bringing discredit to the institution or being in breach of trust must surely
have been independent of the temporary status of the appellant? Wanting in
prescience, the appellant supported the Sri Lanka Freedom Party and the
Minister in charge of his establishment who belonged to that party. At that
time neither he nor his Board of Directors required him to unscramble the
conflicting duties he owed in terms of the Circular and to his Minister. The
general election brought a rival political party into the seat of Government
and a new Board into the CWE. The appellant had then to face the consequences
of his misjudgment. That is what happened. The characterization of the
appellant's conduct by the new Board as behavior that brought discredit to the
employer and being in breach of trust was no more than a subterfuge to justify
the dismissal of the appellant and to avoid condemnation and censure. One does
not need to be astute or remarkably sagacious to see really

**390**

why the appellant's services were terminated. Victimization may be a simple
yet accurate way of explaining the reason for his dismissal.  
  
For the reasons stated, I am of the view that the appellant was unfairly
dismissed and the judgment of the Court of Appeal is set aside. The appellant
should be compensated for the financial loss caused by the employer's wrongful
decision to dismiss him. I order that five years salary (Rs. 720 x 12x5) with
legal interest from 31 May 1982 (which is the date of the Order of the
President of the Labour Tribunal), up to and including the date of this Order,
namely, 5 April 1991, (changes of legal rates of interest if any during the
period referred to being taken into account), be paid by the Co-operative
Wholesale Establishment to the appellant. The amount so determined shall be
deposited with the Commissioner of Labour, on or before 31 May 1991. The
amount so deposited with the Commissioner of Labour may at the appellants
request be with drawn by the appellant.  
  
The appeal is allowed with costs fixed at Rs. 5500.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J. - I agree.  
  
DHEERARATNE, J. - I agree  
  
_Appeal allowed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/37.html_  

