##  Podinona v. Premadasa - SLR - 191, Vol 2 of 1996 [1989] LKSC 37; (1996) 2
Sri LR 191 (3 November 1989)

**191**

**PODINONA  
v.  
PREMADASA**

SUPREME COURT.  
G.P.S. DE SILVA, C.J.  
KULATUNGE, J.  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. 1 /96,  
S.C. SPLA 348/95,  
CALA 211/92  
D.C. KEGALLE 22333/P  
FEBRUARY 13, 1996.  
JUNE 3, 1996.

_Partition ‑ Partition Law No. 21 of 1977 ‑ S.32, S.42 Special Leave under
S.48 (4) ‑ Anytime not later than 30 days ‑ Meaning._

The Appellant (10th Defendant) failed to appear at the Trial. Evidence was led
and judgment was delivered on 30.9.87, and the Interlocutory Decree entered.
On 10.2.89, the 10th Defendant made an application under S48 (4) __ for
special leave to establish her Right, Title and Interest to the land. The
District Court dismissed the application on the ground that it was filed
prematurely inasmuch as it was filed before the date on which the return of
the Surveyor under S.32 was received by Court. The Surveyor made his return on
3.11.89. On appeal, the Court of Appeal held that, the application is
premature and dismissed the appeal, on appeal.

**Held:**

(1) It would appear that once the Court enters the interlocutory Decree the
aggrieved party could make the application for relief "at any time", subject
however to the qualification that the application has to be made "Not later
than 30 days" after the return to the Commission under S.32 (or S.42).

(2) The section specifically sets out the last day for filing the application
for relief. A final date for making the application has to be specified for
otherwise, there would be no finality to the Interlocutory Decree itself.

The purpose of the reference to the return of the Surveyor in the section is
to determine the last day on which the application could be filed. The
refer­ence to the return does not postulate the commencement of the time after
which the application could be filed.

**192**

(3) The grievance of a party arises upon the entering of the Interlocutory
Decree and that would constitute the commencement of the time for filing the
application. It is the Interlocutory Decree which could extinguish or
prejudice the rights of the party.

**AN APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

**Case referred to:**

1 _. Perera v. Perera_ ‑ 1978‑79 2SLR ‑ 191(CA)

_N. R. M. Daluwatte, PC._ with _Gamini Silva_ for 10th Defendant‑Appellant.
_R. K. S. Suresh Chandra _for Plaintiff‑Respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 13, 1996.

**G.P.S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

This is a partition action and the date of trial was 18.8.87. The 10th
Defendant who is the Appellant failed to appear at the trial. Evidence was
led, and judgment was delivered on 30.9.87; interlocutory decree was entered
accordingly. On 10.2.89 the 10th Defendant made an application under section
48 (4) of the Partition Law No. 21 of 1977 "for special leave" to establish
her right title or interest to the land which formed the subject matter of the
interlocutory decree. The District Court dismissed the application on the
ground that it was filed prematurely inasmuch as it was filed before the date
on which the return of the surveyor under section 32 was received by the
Court. The surveyor made his return to the commission only on 3.11.89.

The 10th Defendant applied to the Court of Appeal for leave to appeal against
the order of the District Court. The Court of Appeal, agreeing with the view
of the District Court stated, "it is quite clear that the Petitioner has filed
the papers 9 months prior to the return of the Commission. Therefore the
application is premature. "The 10th Defendant has now preferred an appeal to
this Court against the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

The material part of section 48(4) reads thus :‑

**193**

"Whenever a party to a partition action............... being a party who has
duly filed his statement of claim and registered his address, fails to appear
at the trial and in consequence thereof the right title or interest of such
party to or in the land which forms the subject matter of the interlocutory
decree entered in such action has been extinguished or such party has been
otherwise prejudiced by the interlocutory decree, such party ..............
may at any time, not later than 30 days after the date on which the return of
the surveyor under section 32. is received by the Court, apply to the Court
for Special Leave to establish the right title or interest of such party to or
in the said land notwithstanding the interlocutory decree already entered.

The short point that arises on this appeal is whether the application for
"special leave" under section 48(4) can be filed only after survey has made
his return to the Commission under section 32. It seems to me that the view
taken by the Court of Appeal (and the District Court) is not in accord with
the plain meaning of section 48(4). It would appear that once the court enters
the interlocutory decree the aggrieved party could make the application for
relief **" at ** **any time ", **subject, however, to the qualification that
the application has to be made **" not later than 30 days" after **the return
to the Commission under section 32 (or section 42). In other words, the
section specifically sets out the **last day** for filing the application for
relief. As submitted by Mr. Daluwatte, a final date for making the application
has to be specified, for otherwise, there would be no finality to the
interlocutory decree itself. The purpose of the reference to the return of the
surveyor in the section is to determine the last day on which the application
could be filed. It is by reference to the return of the surveyor that the last
day for filing the application is calculated. The reference to the return does
not postulate the commencement of the time after which the application could
be filed. I agree with the contention of Mr. Daluwatte that the "grievance" of
a party arises upon the entering of the interlocutory decree and that would
constitute the commencement of the time for filing the application. It is the
interlocutory decree which could "extinguish" or "prejudice" the rights of the
party. The case of _Perera v Perera_ (1) __ which was cited by the Court of
Appeal is if no assistance as the question before us did not arise for
consideration in that case.

I accordingly hold that the Court of Appeal and the District Court

**194**

were in error when it took the view that the application of the 10th Defendant
was "premature". The appeal is allowed, the judgment of the Court of Appeal
and the order of the District Court are set aside. The District Court is
directed to inquire into the 10th Defendant's application under section 48(4)
on its merits, without delay. In all the circumstances, I make no order as
costs of appeal.

**KULATUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.

**_Appeal allowed_.**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/37.html_  

