##  Warnakulasinghe v. Subramaniam - SLR - 415, Vol 1 of 1986 [1986] LKSC 37;
(1986) 1 Sri LR 415 (2 April 1986)

**

415

WARNAKULASINGHE  
v.  
SUBRAMANIAM

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA. C.J., COLIN-THOME, J. AND ATUKORALE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 66/84.  
C.A. (S.C.) APPEAL No. 41/84.  
D.C. TRINCOMALEE CASE No. 9834.  
FEBRUARY 13,1986.

_

Landlord and Tenant-Subletting of portions of house without landlord's prior
written consent-Sections 10(l) and 10(5) of Rent Act No. 7of 1972 -Letting of
portions of premises for wedding-receptions-Does it constitute subletting
under the Rent Act?

_

The sole test for determining for the purposes of the Rent Act the question
whether there is, in law, a letting or subletting of a part of the premises is
to be found in subsection (1) of s. 10 of the Rent Act. Subsection (1) of s.
10 postulates two criteria for determining whether in taw there is a letting
or subletting of a part of premises. They are firstly, that the occupant must
be in exclusive occupation of the part in consideration

**416**

of the payment of rent and, secondly, that the part must be a defined and
separate pan of which the landlord or tenant (as the case may be) has for the
time being relinquished his right of control. If these two criteria are
satisfied the law deems the existence of a letting or subletting. Where a
portion of a house is given in consideration of a payment for exclusive use
and occupation for a wedding reception to be held these criteria are
satisfied.

**

Cases referred to:

**

(1)  _Swami Sivagnananda v. The Bishop of Kandy-(1953) 55 NLR 130.

_

(2)  _Booker v. Palmer-[1942] 2 All ER 676.

_

(3)  _Errington v. Errington and Woods-[1952] lKB 290._

(4)  _Marchant v. Charters-[1977] 3 All ER 918.

_

(5)  _St. Aubyl v. Attorney-General-[1952] AC 53.

_ **

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

H. L. de Silva, P.C._ with _M. Devasagayam_ for appellant.

_

A. Mahendrarajah, P. C._ with _Siva Rajaratnam_ and _S. Mahenthiran_ for
respondent.

April 2, 1986. **  
ATUKORALE, J.

**

The premises in suit consists of a very large house bearing assessment No. 26,
George Street, Trincomalee and is governed by the provisions of the Rent Act,
No. 7 of 1972. The respondent (the landlord) filed this action for the
ejectment of the appellant (his tenant), now deceased, on the ground that the
latter was in arrears of rent and that he had sublet parts of the premises
without his prior written consent. In regard to the first ground the learned
District Judge held that although the appellant was in arrears of rent for the
requisite period prior to the date of the notice to quit (P4), yet he had paid
all such arrears before the institution of the action and that therefore the
respondent's claim for ejectment on that ground must fail. No question arises
before us in respect of that finding to establish the other ground of
ejectment, namely sublettings of portions of the premises without his prior
consent in writing, the respondent relied on two categories of subletting. One
category comprised of 3 acts of subletting parts of the premises to 3 persons,
namely, Mahroof, Suppiah and Maheswaran. The learned District Judge found that
there was sufficient proof to establish such acts of subletting by the
appellant but ruled that as those acts of subletting had commenced at

**417**

a date prior to and continued after the coming into operation of the Rent Act
the respondent was not entitled in law to an order for ejectment on the basis
of those acts of subletting. This ruling of the learned District Judge has not
been canvassed before us. The other category of subletting relied upon by the
respondent consisted of alleged acts of subletting by the appellant of parts
of the premises for the purpose of holding special functions such as wedding
receptions. The learned District Judge found that the wedding receptions of
Chitravelu's second son (Kankeyan), of John Britto Shanmuganathan, of
Kalimuttu Selliah and of David Gnanapragasam took place on different dates
after the commencement of the Rent Act in portions of the premises in
consideration of the payment of specified sums of money by them to the
appellant or his agent. The learned Judge held that these acts constituted
acts of subletting within the meaning of s. 10(1) of the Rent Act and since
the appellant had not obtained the prior consent in writing of the respondent,
he entered decree for the appellant's ejectment from the premises in terms of
s. 10(5). The Court of Appeal to which the appellant appealed from this order
affirmed the same and he has now appealed to this court therefrom.

At the hearing before us the findings of facts of the learned District Judge
were not sought to be challenged by learned counsel for the appellant. Thus
the legal issue that arises for our determination in this appeal is whether
the acts of the appellant by which he permitted the four persons
aforementioned to hold at different times their respective wedding receptions
in a part of the premises in suit on payment of specified sums of money to him
or his agent by them constituted sublettings of parts of the premises within
the meaning of s. 10 (1) of the Rent Act: Learned counsel for the appellant
submitted that the said four persons were not sub tenants but only licencees.
He contended that even assuming that they had exclusive user of parts of the
premises for their functions on payment of money, still their occupancy was
not in consequence of a contract of tenancy or sub tenancy but was in
pursuance of a licence given to them by the appellant falling short of a
letting or subletting. He contended that the decisive test, under the common
law, was to ascertain the true intention of the parties to the contract did
they or did they not intend to create the legal relationship of landlord and
tenant? He urged that the facts and circumstances of this case disclosed that
what was paramount in the minds of the parties was the temporary character and
duration of the occupancy of the four persons for a specific

**418**

purpose. These factors, it was submitted, tend to negative any intention on
the part of the four persons and the appellant to enter into a contract of
tenancy or sub tenancy. In support of this submission learned counsel for the
appellant referred us to certain English decisions, some of which have been
considered in the local case of _Swami Sivagnananda v. The Bishop of Kandy_
(1) __ in which Gratian, J. in the course of his judgment stated as follows:

The question whether or not the parties to an agreement intend to create as
between themselves the relationship of landlord and tenant must in the last
resort be a question of intention-per Lord Greene, M. R. in _Booker v. Palmer_
(3) __ Similarly Denning, L. J. said in _Errington v. Errington and Woods_
(3):

Although a person who is let into exclusive possession is prima facie to be
considered to be a tenant, nevertheless he will not be held to be so if the
circumstances negative any intention to create a tenancy. Words alone may not
suffice. Parties cannot turn a tenancy into a licence merely by calling it
one. But if the circumstances and the conduct of the parties show that all
that was intended was that the occupier should be granted _a personal
privilege with no interest in the land,_ he will be held to be a licensee
only.'"

In _Marchant v. Charters_ (4) __ the question was whether the appellant who
occupied a furnished bed-sitting room on a weekly payment was a tenant or only
a licensee. A tenant of a furnished dwelling house was given security of
tenure under the English Rent Act, 1974 whilst a licensee had no such
security. After examining the more recent decisions of the English courts,
Lord Denning, M. R. said:

"Gathering the cases together, what does it __ come to? What is the test to
see whether the occupier of one room in a house is a tenant or a licensee? It
does not depend on whether he or she has exclusive possession or not. It does
not depend on whether the room is furnished or not. It does not depend on
whether the occupation is permanent or temporary. It does not depend on the
label which the parties put on it. All these are factors which may influence
the decision but none of them is conclusive. All the circumstances have to be
worked out. Eventually the answer depends on the nature and quality of the
occupancy. Was it intended that the occupier should have a stake in the room
or did he have only permission for himself personally to occupy the room.
Whether under a contract or not, in which case he is a licensee?"

**419**

In my view the English decisions cited by learned counsel for the appellant
are not of any assistance to determine the question that we have to determine
in this case. The statutory provision considered in them is different from the
one that arises for our consideration in the instant case. Those decisions
deal with the question whether the room or rooms in question have been let to
the occupants as a separate dwelling, in which event the letting is a
protected one. The relevant statutory provisions in our Rent Act, to which
there is no similar provisions in the English Rent Acts, are contained in s.
10 and read as follows:

10\. (1) For the purposes of this Act, any part of any premises shall be
deemed to have been let or sublet to any person, if, and only if, such person
is in exclusive occupation, in consideration of the payment of rent, of such
part, and such part is a defined and separate part over which the landlord or
the tenant, as the case may be, has for the time being relinquished his right
of control, and no person shall be deemed to be the tenant or the subtenant of
any part of any premises by reason solely of the fact that he is permitted to
use a room or rooms in such premises.

(2)  Notwithstanding anything in any other law, the tenant of any premises-

(a)  ..............

(b) shall not sublet any part of the premises to any other person -

(i) without the prior consent in writing of the landlord;

(ii) .............

Subsection (i) to s. 10 sets out plainly and explicitly the circumstances
under which, for the purposes of the Act, a part of any premises shall be
deemed to have been let or sublet to an occupant. It postulates two criteria
for determining whether in law there is a letting or a subletting of a part of
premises. They are firstly, that the occupant must be in exclusive occupation
of the part in consideration of the

**420**

payment of rent and, secondly, that the part must be a defined and separate
part over which the landlord or the tenant (as the case may be) has for the
time being relinquished his right of control. If these two criteria are
satisfied the law deems the existence of a letting or a subletting, as the
case may be. The word 'deemed' is often used to embrace a compehensive
description "that includes what is obvious, what is uncertain and what is, in
the ordinary sense, impossible"-per Lord Radcliffe in _St. Aubyn v. Attorney-
General_ (5) _._ But in __ subsection (1) the word 'deemed' read in
conjunction with the expression 'if and only if' is, in my view, definitive of
what, for the purposes of the act, constitutes a letting or subletting of a
part of premises. In other words, the sole test for determining, for the
purposes of the Rent Act, the question whether there is, in law, a letting or
subletting of a part of the premises is to be found in subsection (1) itself .
Thus, in my opinion, in so far as a letting or a subletting of a part of the
premises is concerned, the intention of the parties is immaterial, although no
doubt it would be of paramount importance in determining whether or not there
has been a letting or subletting of the entirety of the premises.

Applying the above test to the facts and circumstances of this case I am of
the view that the trial court and the Court of Appeal were both correct in
concluding that the appellant sublet portions of the premises in suit to the
aforesaid four persons for the purpose of holding their respective wedding
receptions. The oral evidence led on behalf of the respondent establishes that
on each of those occasions a defined and distinct part of the premises was
given by the appellant to each person for his exclusive user and occupation in
consideration of the payment of money for the same. There was no service
provided by the appellant for the benefit of any of those persons. The
appellant exercised no control over any part of the portions that were given
out by him. In fact the substantial defence taken up by him at the trial was
that he did not ask for or receive any rent from any of the four persons. This
defence has been rejected by the learned District Judge as totally false. At
no stage did the appellant maintain that he or any one on his behalf retained
any form of control of the parts in which the receptions were held. The appeal
is therefore dismissed with costs.

**

SHARVANANDA, C.J.** \- I agree.

**

COLIN-THOME, J.** \- I agree. _  
  
Appeal dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/37.html_  

