##  Kiri Puncha v. Kiri Ukku and Others - SLR - 341, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC
37; (1981) 1 Sri LR 341 (1 April 1981)

**341**

**KIRI PUNCHA  
v.  
KIRI UKKU AND OTHERS**

**SUPREME COURT  
ISMAIL, J., WANASUNDERA. J.,  
AND WIMALARATNE. J.,  
S. C. APPEAL NO. 44/79  
C. A. APPEAL NO. 736/75(F), CA (LA) 73/79(SC)  
D. C. KURUNEGALA NO. 2353/L  
MARCH 2, 1981.  
**  
_Declaration of Title - Succession -Paraveni property-Rights of illegitimate
children -S. 10(31.. & proviso to s. 10(1) of Kandyan Law Declaration and
Amendment Ordinance.  
_  
When the deceased did not leave behind legitimate children or a widow or
parents his brothers and sisters are entitled to succeed to his property. This
was the principle of succession prior to the enactment of the Kandyan Law
Declaration and Amendment Ordinance and the Ordinance has not affected any
change in the position. The proviso to s. 10(1) of the Ordinance is
declaratory of the then existing law and has not effected a change in the law.
The words 'child or descendant' in the proviso includes an illegitimate child
or descendant.  
  
The general principle of Kandyan Law is that an illegitimate child was not
entitled to inherit the Paraveni property so long as there were other heirs
howsoever remote and Paraveni was always understood to mean property which a
deceased person was entitled to by succession to another.  
  
Illegitimate children are entitled to succeed to their father's acquired
property. It was also the position in the general Kandyan Law that an
illegitimate child cannot inherit the property of his grandfather. If his
father had predeceased the grandfather, he would not be in a better position
than if his father had survived and the property would still descend as
paraveni.  
  
As the property which is the subject matter of the action constitutes paraveni
it would devolve on the deceased's paternal heirs and not on his illegitimate
children.  
  
Appuhami v. Lappaya (1905)8 NLR 328 disapproved and not followed.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
_(1) Sonnadara v. Dingiri Etana (1956) 57 NLR 333.  
  
(2) Rankiri v. Ukku (1907) 10 NLR 129.  
  
(3) Appuhami v. Lapaya (1905) 8 NLR 328.  
  
(4) Ukku v. Horathala (1948) 50 NLR 243.  
  
(5) Punchi Banda v. Nagasena (1963) 64 NLR 548.  
  
(6) Tammitta v. Palipane (1965) 70 NLR 520.  
  
(7) Dullewe v. Dullewe (1968) 71 NLR 289.  
  
(8) Sujatha Kumarihamy v. Dingiri Amma (1969) 72 NLR 409._

**_342_**

_(9) Mohideen v. Punchi Banda (1947) 48 NLR 318.  
  
(10) Setuwa v. Sirimalie (1947) 48 NLR 391.  
  
(11) Ausadahamy v. Tikiri Banda (1950) 52 NLR 314.  
  
(12) Wimalawathie v. Punchi Banda (1955) 57 NLR 73.  
_  
**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_Everard Ratnayake with P. Samararatne_ for plaintiff-appellant  
  
_N. R. M. Daluwatte with K. S. Tillekeratne_ for 4th defendant-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

April 1, 1981.  
**WANASUNDERA, J.  
**  
This is an action for declaration of title and ejectment filed by the
plaintiff-appellant against the 1st to 4th defendants-respondents to an
undivided 1/4th share of a land called Kadjugahamulla Kumbura. This 1/4th
share was originally owned by one Kirimudiyanse, who sold it in 1941 to Sala.
Both the plaintiff and the defendants trace their title to Sala. Sala died in
1946, leaving two children \- a son, Sevranga and daughter, Sudhathi. Sudhathi
went out in diga during her father's lifetime and had a son Siriya who, by
deed P3 of 1958 which recites title by way of maternal inheritance,
transferred this undivided 1/4th share to the plaintiff. Sala's son Sevranga,
though he had married, died leaving behind only four illegitimate children,
the 1st to 4th defendants. The above facts have been established at the trial,
and it is also common :ground that, as the parties are Kandyans, their rights
of succession are governed by the Kandyan Law, more particularly by the
Kandyan Law Declaration and Amendment Ordinance (Cap. 59).  
  
The real issue in this case is whether or-not Sevranga's paternal relations,
from whom the plaintiff claims title, are entitled to succeed to Sevranga's
property in preference to Sevranga's illegitimate children, the 1st to
4th.defendants. The learned District Judge, apparently following earlier
decisions, held that, as the property which is the subject matter of the
action constitutes paraveni, it would devolve on Sevranga's paternal heirs and
not on his illegitimate children. The Court of Appeal, relying on the proviso
to sub-section (1) of section 10 of the Ordinance, disagreed with this view
and, in the face of numerous decisions which both expressly and impliedly take
a different view, has given judgment for the defendants.  
  
Mr. Ratnayake for the plaintiff-appellant submitted that the general principle
of Kandyan Law is that, in a situation such as

**343**

this, when the deceased did not leave behind legitimate children or a widow or
parents,-his brothers and sisters are entitled to succeed to his property.
This was the principle of succession prior to the enactment of the Kandyan Law
Declaration and Amendment Ordinance (Cap. 59) and the Ordinance has not
affected any change in the position. He has submitted that it is settled law
that the proviso to section 10(1); on which the, defendants rely, is only a
restatement of the general Kandyan Law that existed prior to the enactment and
that in the case of succession by ancestors or collaterals of the deceased,
like in this case, a special rule converting or transmuting paraveni property
into acquired property comes into play to make as equitable as possible the
distribution of the deceased's property among heirs on both the paternal and
maternal sides. If however the normal rule regarding the devolution of
paraveni were to apply, it would result in such' paraveni property devolving
entirely on the heirs on the paternal side.  
  
Although the overriding principle in Kandyan Law is that lands must revert to
the source from which it came, Kandyan Law found it possible in refining that
principle to draw a valid distinction between real ancestral property forming
part of the family estate and paraveni property which was recently acquired by
the deceased's father. There is no question that the former must devolve on
the heirs on the paternal side, but the question was asked why the latter too
should be dealt with in the same way. Hence the principle that in such
situations recently acquired paraveni is deemed to be acquired property to
enable maternal heirs also to make a claim. Mr. Ratnayake has therefore
submitted that the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 10 must be
interpreted in the light of the above background and can have no wider
application than to that peculiar. situation. His submissions, may say do not
lack substantial support from the case law and the writers of Kandyan Law.  
  
Hayley,, in his Laws and Customs of the Sinhalese, at page 221, has declared
the prevailing law on this topic in the following words  
" . . . it would seem that the term 'acquired property' has a relative
signification, varying in accordance with the classes of heirs who claim a
share; for whereas any property descended from a man's father is inherited
property for the purpose of distribution amongst his widow and children, when
the contest is between maternal uncles and paternal uncles, the former are
entitled to the deceased's acquired property, which in that case includes
property, newly acquired by the deceased's father

**344**

which has descended to the deceased (Niti. 103; P.A. 46-7). This modification
is a logical one; for when such heirs as the father's brothers succeed to part
of the estate, on the ground not so much of true succession, but rather by
virtue of the principle that lands must revert to the source whence they came,
there is no reason for assigning to them an interest in property which was
acquired separately by their deceased brother and never formed part of the
family lands of themselves or their father."  
  
In Sonnadara v. Dingiri Etana (57 N.L.R. 333) (1) Gratiaen, J., held that "the
proviso to section 10(1) of the Ordinance is in truth declaratory of the
earlier law."  
  
It would thus appear that this principle of conversion of paraveni to acquired
property has limited application and was never intended to apply to a case
such as the present, which involves the devolution of such property to an
illegitimate child. Where an illegitimate child: is concerned, the general
principle of Kandyan Law is that an illegitimate child was not entitled to
inherit the paraveni property so long as there were other heirs howsoever
remote, and paraveni was always understood to mean property which a deceased
person was entitled to by succession to another.  
  
Illegitimate children are however entitled to succeed to their father's
acquired property, and Rankiri v. Ukku (10 N. L. R. 129) (2) settled any doubt
that may have existed on this matter. When the Court of Appeal. relied on this
decision, it probably overlooked the fact that the acquired property in this
case was acquired property in the normal and usual sense and not in the
extended sense contained in the proviso.  
  
It was also the- position in the general Kandyan Law that an illegitimate
child cannot inherit the property of his grandfather. Even if his father had
predeceased the grandfather, he would not be in a better position than if his
father had survived and the property would still descend as paraveni. Hayley,
page 391.  
  
Armour, referring especially to such a case stated -  
  
"Therefore in case that man died before his parents, his children by that
woman will have no right to any share of his parent's estate, the said
children will be entitled to inherit only such property as their father had
himself acquired by purchase or other means of acquit (P.S.8)."

**345**

The case of Appuhami v. Lapaya (8 N.L.R. 328)(3) cited by the Court of Appeal,
constitutes a departure from the above principles. In this case., dealing with
the rights of an illegitimate child of the deceased person called Rattarana
who had predeceased his own father, Wendt, J. sitting alone, said -  
  
"He. succeeds directly to his grandfather; the property does riot come
'through' his father Rattarana in the sense that the father ever had any
interest in it, and there is therefore no reason for the argument that when it
reached Wattuwa it was Rattarana's paraveni property".  
  
This view is clearly not in accordance with the principles of Kandyan Law.
Hayley at page 392 of his. book shows by reference to the passage from Armour
and other institutional writers on Kandyan Law that Wendt, J. had overlooked
certain basic features of the Kandyan Law in coming to this conclusion. Hayley
observes -  
  
"If his Lordship's. attention had been drawn to it, his decision would perhaps
have been different. In allowing the appeal, Wendt, J. relies mainly on the
proposition that the property descended to the grandchild directly in its
character of acquired property. Such a view; however, disregards the general
principle of representation on which the rights of grandchildren are based,
and also fails to take account of the fact that illegitimacy itself usually
arose from the refusal of the grandparents to recognize the marriage, for
which very reason the issue of such' marriage was debarred from inheriting any
property descending from them."  
  
It may be added that Wendt, J. had not resorted to the principle of the
conversion of paraveni into acquired property, which he probably knew did not
apply to the case, but sought to create new law on the fiction of a, direct
succession of the grandchild to the acquired property of the grandfather. Such
a basis is totally unknown to the Kandyan Law and the solution he has offered
stands out as a novelty quite out of character with the general principles of
Kandyan Law.  
  
The Court of Appeal was also of the view that the proviso to section 10
embodies the recommendations of the Kandyan Law Commission which are contained
in paragraphs 125 and 133 of their Report, and those paragraphs have
recommended a change in the law. It is a cardinal principle of interpretation
that in constru-

**346**

ing the words of a statute we must look to the statute itself for an answer.
Courts however have thought it permissible when the wording of a statute was
ambiguous to ascertain the previous state of the law and the reasons which led
to the enactment of the legislation and have for this purpose looked at
Reports of Commissions which led to the legislation. Vide Ukku v. Horathala 50
N L R 243) (4), Punchi Banda v. ,Naqasena (64 N L R 548) (5) Thammitta v.
Palipane (70 NLR 520)(9) Dullewe v. Dullewa (71 NLR 289)(7) and Sujatha
Kumarihamy v. Dingiri Amma (72 NLR 409) (8).  
  
I am at a loss to understand how the Court of Appeal could have arrived at
that conclusion when paragraphs 125, 130 and 133 have set out the intention of
the Commissioners in the plainest terms. If they left any room for doubt,, the
express reference in these paragraphs to the passage from Hayley, which I have
quoted earlier, would have made that intention doubly certain that the
Commission wished to have the law restated in the same terms as it was then
existing and did not venture to advocate a change of the, law. Accordingly our
courts have hitherto found no difficulty in holding that the proviso to
section 10(1) was declaratory of the then existing law and has not effected a
change in the law.  
  
So much for the background to the: legislation. Let me now. turn to the actual
task of interpreting the provisions of section 10 of the Ordinance. Section 10
seeks to define the expression 'paraveni property.' Section 10 sub-section (1)
contains the following proviso:  
"Provided, however, that if the deceased shall not have left him surviving any
child or descendant, property which had been the -acquired property of the
person from whom it passed to the deceased shall be deemed acquired property
of the deceased."  
  
The plaintiff's case is that the words "any child or descendant" in the
proviso must be construed to include both a legitimate and illegitimate child.
or descendant, while it has been contended for the defendants that that
expression takes in only the legitimate children and not the illegitimate
children.  
  
In Mohideen v. Punchi Banda (48 N.L.R. 318)(9), the then Supreme Court was
called upon to decide this same question, namely whether or not the words
"child or descendant" in the proviso to section, 10(1) included an
illegitimate child or descendant. Keuneman, A. C J., in a careful judgment
after scrutinising the provisions of sections 10; 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and
18, and

**347**

Chapter V (and not merely sections 16 and 18, as the Court of Appeal seems to
suggest), held that "where the draftsman of the Ordinance used the word
'child' or 'descendant' he meant a wider class than the legitimate issue, and
that these wards cover both the legitimate- and illegitimate issue."  
  
In Setuwa v. Sirimalie (48 N.L.R. 391) (1 0), W Wijeyewardene, S.P.J.; added
his authority having independently arrived at the same conclusion. -
Wijeyewardene, S.P.J., too considered the wording of sections 8, 11, 15, 16,
18, 21 and 23 and subjected. them to a detailed analysis. He has rightly
linked the proviso to section 10(1) with the special situation relating to the
conversion of paraveni to acquired property mentioned by Hayley and stated
that the proviso appears to have been inserted to give effect to the "relative
signification" of. the term 'acquired property' under the Kandyan Law referred
to in Hayley's Laws and Customs of the Sinhalese, page 221, which he has
quoted with approval.  
  
It may be added that in both these cases the Judges had approached the issue
with due regard to the proper canons of statutory interpretation and was
mindful of the rule that a reference to children or descendant in a law or
instrument should prima facie have the meaning of legitimate children or
descendant unless a contrary intention . is expressed or is deducible by
necessary inference.  
  
These two decisions have been accepted as correctly stating the law, and had
been followed by the courts of this country for nearly a third of a century.
Vide also Ukku v. Horathala (supra). The Court of Appeal has not succeeded in
pointing out any error or fault in the method of approach or reasoning in the
judgments of these two Judges and has only been able to make some observations
on section ;18 about which there can hardly be a difference of views:  
  
In fairness to the Court of Appeal I have taken the liberty of reconsidering
those. two judgments and after a careful consideration of the relevant
provisions I find that there is little I could usefully add to the cogent
reasoning and conclusions of these two eminent Judges. These decisions have
also indicated that some of the other sections of the Ordinance would be
unworkable if the word 'child' in the' proviso to section 10(1) is given the
meaning contended for by the defendants:  
  
The Court of Appeal would not have misdirected itself had it understood the
true import of section 10. This section is 'a defini-

**348**

tion. section and does not purport to set out a devolution of title as, for
example, section 15 which deals with the rights of illegitimate children. It
would be noted that in section 15 the draftsman has been careful to describe
the word 'child' as 'illegitimate,' While on the other hand there is the
absence of such an adjective in the proviso to section 10(1). If the proviso
also had the word 'legitimate' or illegitimate', then there may have been some
justification for. connecting up the proviso with the provisions of section
'15 even in some remote way but as presently worded there is no room for it to
function in any other way except as a defining section.  
  
Another matter worthy of attention is that in defining the two expressions
paraveni property' and 'acquired property,' the Ordinance proceeds in the
first instance to define the term 'paraveni' in a detailed manner, and then
states in negative terms that all property which. is not paraveni is deemed to
be acquired property, - section 10(3). As against this,. the proviso to
section 10 (1) and section 10(2) appear to deal with certain intermediate
situations which are in the nature of exceptions to the general division
referred to earlier. Prima facie then the primary meaning of acquired property
as contained in sub-section (3) of section 10 should be assigned to that
expression whenever it occurs in the body of Ordinance. As Nagalingam, J.
pointed out in Ausadahamy v. Tikiri Banda (52 N.L.R. 314)(11), the term
'acquired property' in the proviso to section 10(1) cannot have the same
meaning as that term has in sub-section (3) of section 10, and the expression
'acquired property' in the proviso to sub-section (1) of the Section 10 must
be limited to the special situation which the Legislature had in mind. What
then was this special situation ? As shown earlier ,. this is the situation
referred to by Hayley at page 221 of his book and which was cited by the
Kandyan Law Commission. There. could be little doubt as to the connection
between the two and the meaning that should be given to the proviso.  
  
The judgment of the Court of Appeal leaves one with the impression that it
proceeded under the misconception that the whole of the Kandyan Law is to be
found within the four corners of this Ordinance and accordingly disposed of
the issue in the case in a narrow and technical manner. The decisions of our
courts show that they have always approached such matters differently. and it
is relevant to have regard to the accepted principles of general Kandyan Law
in matters as this - Wimalawathie v. Punchi Banda (57 N.L.R. 73) (12). Such an
approach was absolutely necessary in the present case, for there are ample
grounds to show that the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 10 was merely
declaratory of the then existing law.

**349**

For these reasons I am of the view; that this appeal must succeed. The
judgment of the District Court is restored. The Plaintiff appellant would be
entitled to costs, both here and in the Court of Appeal.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. - I** agree.  
  
**WIMALARATNE, J. -1** agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_  

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/37.html_  

