##  Wimaladasa v. Somadasa, Police Constable, Bribery Commissioner'S
Department and Others - SLR - 53, Vol 1 of 2000 [1999] LKSC 37; (2000) 1 Sri
LR 53 (6 December 1999)

**53**

**WIMALADASA  
v.  
SOMADASA, POLICE CONSTABLE, BRIBERY COMMISSIONER'S  
DEPARTMENT AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
SC APPLICATION 577/97 (FR)  
21st OCTOBER, 1999  
  
_Fundamental rights - Bona fide arrest and detention on a warrant - Articles
13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution - Liability of Police Officer.  
_  
The petitioner who was a witness in a bribery case before the High Court
failed to attend court on 12.5.1997; whereupon the High Court issued a warrant
for his arrest. On 4.6.1997 he had a motion filed in the High Court through an
Attorney-at-Law and obtained an order cancelling the warrant. Being unaware of
such cancellation, the 1st respondent a police officer attached to the
Commission to Investigate Bribery and Corruption executed the warrant, on
14.6.1997. The petitioner told the officer that the warrant had been cancelled
but could not produce any proof of cancellation. The petitioner was detained
at the police station overnight and produced before the Magistrate on
15.6.1997 when he was remanded by the Magistrate until 16.6.1997 on which date
he was produced before the High Court. The petitioner complained of violation
of his fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 13(1) and 13(2) of the
Constitution.  
  
**Held:**  
  
The respondent bona fide believed that the warrant handed over to him was in
force; and no malice was attributed to him. In the circumstances, there was no
violation of the fundamental rights of the petitioner.  
  
**Cases referred to:**  
  
1\. Moramudalige Podiappuhamy v. Diananda Liyanage and others, SC Application
446/93 SC minutes of 31 May 1994 (distinguished)

**54**

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
P. K. Prince Perera for petitioner.  
  
P. G. Dep, DSG for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

December 06, 1999  
**DHEERARATNE, J.  
**  
The petitioner is a retired clerk. He was a witness in bribery case no.
1179/96 pending in the High Court of Colombo. He was also suspect in bribery
case no. 8696/97 pending at the Magistrate's Court Colombo. In connection with
the latter case he was in the remand jail Colombo from 25.3.97 to 30.5.97. The
bribery case in which he was a witness was fixed for trial on 12.5.97.
Sometime before that date the petitioner informed the officials of the remand
jail that he has to be present as a witness in the High Court on 12.5.97.
However, the officials informed him that in the absence of a Court order, they
could not make arrangements to take him to Court on 12.5.97. When the
petitioner was released from custody on 30.5.97 he went to meet the Registrar
of the High Court of Colombo to inquire after the case in which he was a
witness. The Registrar informed him that as he was absent from Court a warrant
was issued against him by Court on 12.5.97. On 4.6.97 he filed a motion in the
High Court through an Attorney-at-Law and sought to get the warrant against
him cancelled. The High Court judge of Colombo made order cancelling the
warrant.  
  
The petitioner states that when he was at his residence at Mahiyangana on
14.6.97, two officers of the Bribery Department came to his home about 6.20
pin. and wanted to take him into custody, as a warrant had been issued by the
High Court of Colombo. One of these officers is identified as the 1st
respondent. The petitioner informed the officers that the warrant issued
against him was already cancelled. In spite of what he told the officers they
arrested him and took him to the Teldeniya police station about 8.00 prn. and
he was kept at the

**55**

police station till 10.30 am. of 15.6.97. He was first taken to the residence
of the Magistrate Teldeniya and as he was not there he was produced before the
Magistrate Attanagalle about 2 pm. on the same day. The Magistrate Attanagalle
remanded the petitioner till 16.6.97 although he told him that the warrant
issued against him was cancelled. Ultimately on 16.6.97 he was produced before
the High Court about 9.30 am. The petitioner complains that the 1st respondent
and the other unknown person violated his fundamental rights guaranteed under
Articles 13(1) and 13(2).  
  
The position of the first respondent is that an open warrant issued against
the petitioner on 12.5.97 for not appearing in the High Court of Colombo was
forwarded on 23.5.97 to the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery
and Corruption (the Commission) for execution. The Commission handed over the
warrant to the 1st respondent for execution on 13.6.97. The 1st respondent
then proceeded to No. 408/4, Dutugemunu Mawatha, Thalangama, the address
provided by the petitioner as his residence. The 1st respondent discovered
that the said address has never been the residence of the petitioner and a
boutique was being run at those premises. After several inquiries as he could
not find the whereabouts of the petitioner, he found out the address of D. L.
Sunil who had stood surety for the petitioner in one of his cases. The 1st
respondent being unable to trace the surety at his address at Bandarawela had
to proceed to Mahiyangana where the surety was said to be residing. Finally,
when the 1st respondent was able to locate the house of the surety at
Mahiyanagana, he found the petitioner there; the petitioner was married to the
surety's sister.  
  
When the 1st respondent informed the petitioner that he came to arrest him on
an open warrant issued against him, the petitioner told him that the warrant
was cancelled but he could not produce any proof of such cancellation to the
satisfaction of the 1st respondent. The 1st respondent further stated that he
genuinely believed that the petitioner was attempting to avoid arrest and
abscond.

**56**

Learned counsel for the petitioner drew our attention to the case of
Moramudalige Podiappuhamy v. Diananda Liyanage and others(1). In that case
action had been filed in the Magistrate's Court in Panadura against one Sugath
Perera in a complaint made by the petitioner. When the case came up for trial
the petitioner was absent and the police moved for a warrant of arrest against
the petitioner. Although the Magistrate ordered that a summons be issued on
the petitioner erroneously the police officer entered the letters WT against
the name of the petitioner in the register maintained by the police,
suggesting that a warrant had been issued. The police officers, on the
strength of that entry in the register, proceeded to arrest the petitioner in
that case. This Court held that the arrest was not in accordance with sections
32 and 33 of the Criminal Procedure Code relating to arrest without warrant
and that there was therefore a violation of Article 13(1).  
  
I fail to see an analogy between the facts of the present case and that of
Podiappuhamy. In the present case the fact that the warrant was recalled was
not informed by the High Court to the Commission. The petitioner was unable to
provide any proof to the 1st respondent of the cancellation of the warrant
issued for his arrest by the High Court. The 1st respondent had no reason to
believe that the warrant was recalled. He bona fide believed that the warrant
handed over to him was in force and no malice is attributed to him. I am
unable to say in the above circumstances that there is a violation of the
fundamental rights of the petitioner. For the above reasons the petition is
dismissed but without costs.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/37.html_  

