##  Jayasinghe v. Sub Inspector of Police, Jayakody and Others - SLR - 204,
Vol 2 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 37; (1998) 2 Sri LR 204 (19 March 1998)

**204**

**JAYASINGHE  
v.  
SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE, JAYAKODY  
 AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
PERERA, J. AND  
SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 66/97  
22ND JANUARY AND 6TH FEBRUARY, 1998.  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Unlawful arrest and detention - Torture of a suspect
Police custody - Articles 11, 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution.  
_  
The petitioner was arrested by a Sub Inspector of Police on 22.12.1996 for
alleged attempt to rob a motor bicycle; but the petitioner was not informed of
the reason for the arrest. The Sub Inspector threatened the petitioner with a
pistol and ordered a police constable to remove him to the Marawila Police
Station. At the police station, the petitioner was handcuffed after which he
was slapped by the Officer

**205**

in Charge of the Police Station. Thereafter, the petitioner was stripped, hung
on a beam on the orders of the OIC, chillie powder was applied on his nose and
private parts after which two other police officers assaulted the petitioner
with a club. He was asked whether he knew about a robbery. The petitioner
denied the allegation. He was detained at the Police Station until 26.12.1996
when he was produced before a Magistrate and remanded. A self serving entry
was made in the police book stating that the petitioner was arrested on
26:12.1996. Whilst on remand the petitioner was admitted to the Base Hospital,
Negombo and treated for abrasions and contusions all over his body. He was
also vomitting and had difficulty of breathing. He was discharged on
06.01.1997. The respondent police officers claimed the injuries to have been
caused during the arrest by the use of "minimum force".  
  
**Held:**  
  
The petitioner had been unlawfully arrested on 22.12.1996 and detained
illegally in Police custody. The petitioner had also been subjected to torture
whilst in police custody. The respondents had thereby infringed the
petitioner's rights under Articles 13 (1), 13 (2) and 11 of the Constitution.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
1\. _Ansalin Fernando v. Sarath Perera and others_ (1992) 1 Sri L.R. 411.  
  
2\. _Weerasinghe v. Premaratne and others_ S.C. Application No. 477/96 S.C.
Minutes 31st October, 1997.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_A. A. de Silva with Jayalath Hissella_ for petitioner.  
  
_J. C. Weliamuna_ for 1st to 4th respondents.  
  
_S. Rajaratnam,_ S.C. for 5th respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

19th March, 1998  
  
**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
**  
The petitioner alleges that his fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles
11, 13 (1) and 13 (2) were violated by the 1st to the 4th respondents. Leave
to proceed was granted in respect of the alleged infringement of Articles 11,
13 (1) and 13 (2).

**206**

According to the petitioner, around 10 p.m. on 22.12.1996 he went to see the
carnival held at the Dammissara Maha Vidyalaya, Nattandiya. When the
petitioner was close to the said school, the 1st respondent had arrested him.
When the petitioner inquired from him as to the reason, the 1st respondent had
informed him that it is in order to meet a friend. Near the school gate, the
1st respondent had held his service pistol to the petitioner's head and had
told a Police Constable to bring the Police Jeep. The petitioner was taken to
the Marawila Police Station, where he was handcuffed and put into a cell. A
few minutes later the petitioner was taken before the 2nd respondent, who
asked the petitioner whether he knows him and whether the petitioner had heard
about him.  
  
When the petitioner answered in the negative for both questions, the 2nd
respondent had stood up and had slapped the petitioner 4 to 5 times which
caused minor injuries to the petitioner's lips and the eye brows. Thereafter
the 1st respondent took the petitioner to the police barracks and the 2nd
respondent followed them. The 1st respondent had asked the petitioner whether
he is Lionel to which the petitioner answered in the negative. The petitioner
was forced to remove his clothes and the 1st respondent, on the orders of the
2nd respondent, tied the petitioner's hands and hung him on a beam. While he
was hanging from the beam, chillie powder was applied on the nose and on his
private parts which caused excruciating pain. While this was done, the 3rd and
the 4th respondents assaulted the petitioner with hands and club on the
instructions of the 1 st and 2nd respondents.  
  
The 2nd respondent inquired from the petitioner whether he possesses a T56 gun
and whether he had any knowledge of the robbery. of the Rural Bank at
Bingiriya, which allegations the petitioner denied. Around 11.30 p.m., the 1st
respondent came with a man and a woman and the petitioner was shown to them.
Later the petitioner got to know that they were Mohamed lqbal and Kumudini
Antonita, respectively.  
  
An hour later, the petitioner was released from the 'hanging position' but a
little later it was repeated by the 1st and 2nd respondents while questioning
the petitioner whether he went to steal the motor cycle owned by Libel. The
petitioner was thereafter handcuffed to two beds and was kept naked. The 4th
respondent trampled the petitioner's chest and threatened that if the
petitioner does not admit the theft of the motor cycle, the petitioner would
be killed.

**207**

On 26.12.1996, the petitioner was shown to the said Iqbal and Kumudini and was
brought before the DMO, Marawila. In the afternoon of the 26th, he was
produced before the Acting Magistrate, Dankotuwa and was remanded until
08.01.1997. On the 08th, he was further remanded until 13.01.1997 and was
granted bail. on 13.01.1997.  
  
According to the respondents, one Mohomed lqbal had made a statement to the
Police stating that on 20.12.1996, there was an attempt to rob a motor bicycle
at gun point at Dunkannawa. The suspects had used a T56 and had fired a few
shots. Iqbal had described the suspect and had said that he could identify
him, if he sees him again (1R1). During this period there had been several
robberies in the area and the Police had been alerted on possible crimes
(affidavit of the 1st respondent). The investigations had continued thereafter
and several statements were recorded. Based on these investigations there was
no doubt that the aforesaid attempted robbery had taken place on 20.12.1996.
While being on duty on 25.12.1996, the 1st respondent had received information
from a private informant about a suspect to the said robbery. The said
informant showed the suspect to the 1st respondent, and he arrested the
petitioner, who was the suspect.  
  
While the petitioner avers that he was arrested on 22.12.1996, the
respondents' position is that the petitioner was arrested only on 25.12.1996.
According to the respondents, after the arrest, the petitioner's statement was
recorded (1 R5) in which he has denied any involvement in the robbery, and he
was produced before the Magistrate on 26.12.1996. The Magistrate had ordered
an identification parade and the parade was held on 13.01.1997. Two witnesses
had identified the petitioner at the parade as the person who attempted to rob
the motor bicycle (1 R8). The case is now pending in the Magistrate's Court,
Marawila.

The petitioner's position is that, while he was in custody, the respondents
had forced him to remove his clothes, assaulted him and had kept him
handcuffed on several occasions even when he was allowed to sleep. While the
petitioner was in remand, he was admitted to Prison Hospital in Negombo on
27.12.1996 and was transferred to Base Hospital, Negombo, on 29.12.1996. He
was hospitalized until 06.01.1997. The respondents aver that the 1st
respondent had to use minimum force to arrest the petitioner. In the process,
the 1st respond

**208**

ent had to obtain the support of the people who were in the vicinity.
According to the notes of the arrest (1 R4), in the process the 1st respondent
had to hold the petitioner's left hand tightly and the people who were around
had done similarly. The 1st respondent further states that the petitioner's
hand had hit the car and due to this there are external wounds and a wound on
his knee.  
  
The Diagnosis Ticket issued by the Base Hospital, Negombo (P4) indicates that
the petitioner was admitted on 29.12.1996 and discharged on 06.01.1997. The
details given in the Diagnosis Ticket are reproduced below:

 Assaulted by police 1152 ago |

 Soft tissue contusion  
+  
---|---  
 Difficulty in breathing  |

L . . . nerve . . .  
 Difficulty in . . . movements  |

L upper limp  
both ankles  
  
L upper arm weakness +  
  
LOC +  
  
Vomitting +  
  
Referred to surgery on 10.02.1997  
  
Abrasions and contusions all over the body  
  
Tender soft tissue  
  
R/G clinic in 2/52 time to remove back slab  
  
Back slab to upper arm  
  
The submission of the learned counsel for the 1st to 4th respondents is that
there is no evidence to establish any violation of Article 11. His position is
that the petitioner's version that he was hung or brutally assaulted is not
supported by medical evidence. The learned counsel for the 1st to 4th
respondents further submit that the Dignosis Ticket (P4) is the only medical
evidence and that it does not give

**209**

any conclusion or any medical opinion to the effect that the injuries, if any,
were due to the assault by the respondents and no other'. I am unable to agree
with this submission. In my view, the medical evidence could reveal various
aspects regarding the injuries, the physical health of a person, the
approximate time of the assault and the type of violence that had taken place.
While agreeing with the submission of the learned counsel for the 1st to the
4th respondents, that medical evidence is relevant in proving torture, there
are instances where (depending on the circumstances), an allegation of
violation of Article 11 had been proved even in the absence of medical
evidence (Ansalin Fernando v. Sarath Perera and others(1), Weerasinghe v.
Premaratne and others(2). I am not inclined to accept the position of the
respondents that the injuries sustained by the petitioner were due to the
'minimum force' used to arrest the petitioner. The injuries set out in the
Diagnosis Card are consistent with the details given by the petitioner as to
the inhuman and degrading treatment meted out to him by the respondents.
Accordingly I hold that the respondents have violated the petitioner's rights
enshrined in Article 11 of the Constitution.  
  
According to the respondents, the petitioner was taken into custody on
25.12.1996. While the 1 st respondent was on duty, controlling traffic in the
area, an informant had told him that one of the 3 suspects who tried to rob a
motor bicycle on 20.12.1996 is in the vicinity. Acting on this information,
the 1st respondent had arrested the petitioner, using 'minimum force', on the
25.12.1996 at 8.00 p.m. (1 R4). The petitioner in his petition has averred
that he was taken into custody on 22.12.1996 around 10.00 p.m. while he was
proceeding to the carnival held at Dammissara Maha Vidyalaya, Nattandiya. The
petitioner has further averred that the 1st respondent who was in uniform
stopped his motor bicycle near the school gate and told the petitioner to come
with him as there is a friend to meet. The petitioner's version that he was
taken into custody on 22.12.1996 is supported by affidavits from several
persons. R. M. D. U. C. Appuhamy (P5) and W. M. Padmalal (P5A) have averred in
their affidavits that they saw the petitioner being taken into custody on
22.12.1996 around 10.00 p.m. There is no reason to reject this evidence. The
respondents have submitted the 16 extracts relevant to the arrest. The 1st
respondent has made notes on 25.12.1996, that he had taken the petitioner into
custody on that day (1 R4). He had made a note on 20.12.1996 on the attempted
robbery of a motor bicycle. However, it appears that,

**210**

he has entered this only on 25.12.1996 at 7.15 a.m. (1 R2). The petitioner's
statement was recorded, according to the IB extracts submitted by the
respondents on 26.12.1997 at 8.40 a.m. (1 R5). The IB extracts are documents
of a self serving character and little credence could be attached to entries
made therein in the circumstances of this case. The petitioner in his
statement has stated that on 22.12.1996, around 1.00 p.m. he had gone to
Nattandiya and after returning home he had slept for a while. Around 9.00 p.m.
he came to Nattandiya and thereafter Police Inspector Jayakody brought him to
the Police Station (1 R5). I hold that the petitioner has proved that he was
arrested not on 25.12.1996 as stated by the respondents but on 22.12.1996 and
he was not informed of the reason for his arrest. The petitioner was produced
before the Acting Magistrate on 26.12.1996. Accordingly the 1st to 4th
respondents had kept the petitioner illegally in their custody from 22.12.1996
to 25.12.1996 and I hold that 1st to 4th respondents have violated the
petitioner's fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2).  
  
I direct the 1 st and 2nd respondents to pay the petitioner a sum of Rs.
3,500/- each as compensation and Rs. 1,000/- each as costs; the 3rd and 4th
respondents to pay a sum of Rs. 1,500/- each as compensation and Rs. 500% each
as costs; the state will pay the petitioner Rs. 2,000/- as compensation and
Rs. 1,000/- as costs. In all the petitioner will be entitled to Rs. 12,000% as
compensation and Rs. 4,000/- as costs.  
  
The Registrar of the Supreme Court is directed to send a copy of this judgment
to the Inspector General of Police.  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ. - I agree.  
  
PERERA, J. - I agree. **  
  
_**Relief granted.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/37.html_  

