##  Suranganie Marapana v. The Bank of Ceylon and Others - SLR - 156, Vol 3 of
1997 [1997] LKSC 37; (1997) 3 Sri LR 156 (27 November 1997)

156

SURANGANIE MARAPANA

**v.** ****

**THE BANK OF CEYLON AND OTHERS  **

** **

SUPREME COURT.

DHEERARATNE, J.

WIJETUNGA, J. AND

ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.

S.C. APPLICATION 749/96 (FR.)

JUNE 17 AND 30, 1997.



Fundamental Rights - Extension of Service - Employer's power to refuse an
Extension - Duty to act fairly - Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

_ _

The petitioner had an unblemished record of 25 years of service at the Bank of
Ceylon. She was fully qualified and had received special training in Banking
Law and practice and allied subjects in London, Italy and Singapore. She was
the Chief Legal Office of the Bank from 1.11.88 during which period she had
enhanced the efficiency and streamlined the functions of the Legal Department.
As she was to reach the age of 55 years on 27.11.96 she applied to the Bank on
25.5.96 for an extention of service for an initial period of one year. Her
application was recommended by the Personnel Department in its draft Board
Minute, under exceptional circumstances. The Board of Directors took four
months to decide on the application and after lapse of a further month, the
petitioner was informed on 22.10.96 that her application had been rejected and
she would be retired from 27.11.96. Officers who were of a comparable grade
had been granted extentions. But she was refused for no reason. The Board
failed to submit to Court its decision. The Chairman of the Bank stated in his
affidavit that the refusal to extend her services was done bona fide and
unanimously after a careful evaluation of her application and the need of the
Bank to increase the efficiency of its Legal Department.



**Held:**

** **

The Board failed to show the Court that valid reasons did exist for the
refusal to grant the extension which was recommended by the corporate
management. Instead, a veiled suggestion was made that the efficiency of the
Legal Department was not up to expectations. This insinuation was baseless and
unwarranted. Hence, the refusal to grant the extension of services sought was
arbitrary, capricious, unreasonable and unfair. It was also discriminatory and
violative of the petitioner's right to equal protection of the law under
Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

**157**



**Cases referred to:**

** **

1. _Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food_ (1968) A.C. 997.



2\. Wijepala v. Jayawardene, S.C. Application 89195 S.C. Minutes 30 June 1995.

_ _

3 _. Manage v. Kotakadeniya_ , 1997 1 SLR. 264.

_ _

4 _. Silva v. Upasena S.C._ Application 472/96 S.C. Minutes 27 June 1997.



**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.



_L. C. Seneviratne, P.C._ with _S. Mahenthiran_ for the petitioner.

_ _

_E D. Wickremanayake_ with _L. V. P. Wettasinghe_ for 1st to 8th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._



August 28, 1997  


**WIJETUNGA, J.**

** **

The petitioner who was the Chief Legal Officer of the 1st respondent ('the
bank') complains of the violation of her fundamental rights guaranteed by
Articles 12(1) and 12(2) of the Constitution, by reason of the bank's refusal
to grant her an extension of service for an initial period of one year from
27.11.96, on reaching the age of 55 years. Leave to proceed has been granted
in respect of the alleged infringement of Articles 12(1) and 12(2).



The petitioner is an Attorney-at-Law enrolled on 2.2.66 and is also a
Solicitor of the United Kingdom. She joined the service of the bank as an
Assistant Law Officer on 1.12.71 at the age of 30 years and was confirmed in
service on 1.12.72. She was promoted to the grade of Senior Assistant Law
Officer on 9.6.78 and as Legal Officer on 1.8.82. She became the Chief Legal
Officer on 1.11.88, having already functioned as the head of the Legal
Department since 1986, upon the retirement of the officer holding that post.
She had acted for the Chief Legal Officer on several occasions even prior to
1986.



During her service at the Legal Department of the bank, she had undergone
training in Banking Law and Practice at Farrar & Co.,



158



Solicitors in London in 1984, at the IDLI, Italy in 1990 and the Euro Money
Financial School in Singapore in 1992.



The Legal Department of the bank, the petitioner states, consists of 33 Legal
Officers and other support staff and also has provincial and branch legal
units outside Colombo. In addition to being responsible for instituting legal
action on behalf of the bank, the Legal Department has to advise the bank on
all aspects of the working of the bank, particularly on changes in the law and
its implications on banking operations, on disciplinary and industrial
relations, on international transactions, in particular in the Foreign
Currency Banking Unit, the Treasury and the International Division, and on the
Bank Committees. It is also responsible for the training of the bank staff on
legal aspects of banking operations and the training of the legal officers in
their functions and duties in the Legal Department both locally and abroad.



The petitioner further states that since she commenced her duties as Chief
Legal Officer, she has been responsible for the establishment and functioning
of a number of schemes which have been set out in detail in paragraph 4(vi) of
the petition.



She claims that during her period of service since December, 1971, she has
never been found wanting in the performance of her duties and has an
unblemished record of service with the bank.



The petitioner says that she is entitled to apply for an extension of service
on reaching the age of 55 years under Finance Ministry Circular No.
MF/EB/100(1) dated 8.2.79 (P2). Although in terms of the agreement (P1) dated
1.12.71 the petitioner was required to retire from the service of the bank on
attaining the age of 55 years, the Circular (P2) aforesaid enables her to
continue in service up to the age of 58 years.



As the petitioner was to reach the age of 55 years on 27.11.96, she applied to
the bank through its General Manager, by letter dated 24.5.96 (P6), for an
extension of service for an initial period of one year. The bank, by letter
dated 22.10.96 (P4), replied through its General Manager declining her request
and intimated that it had

**159**



been decided to retire her from service from 27.11.96. No reason for such
refusal was given.



She claims that it was the established practice of the bank to grant
extensions of service to officers who sought such extensions on reaching the
age of 55 years and has cited a number of instances where such extensions have
been granted, including those of officers of comparable rank in the bank's
service. In view of her unblemished and extensive record of service and the
aforesaid established practice of the bank, she claims that she had a
legitimate expectation that her application would be favourably considered and
the extension would be granted. As there were no valid or justifiable reasons
for the Board of Directors to discriminate against her, she believes that the
reason for such unequal and discriminatory treatment accorded to her is based
on political grounds in identifying her as a supporter of the United National
Party.



In this regard, she refers to an earlier instance in 1995 where the Minister
for Livestock Development and Rural Industries appointed her as Chairperson of
the Handicrafts Board by (P5), when the Sri Lanka Freedom Party Lawyers'
Association sent petitions against the said appointment to the President, in
her capacity as Minister of Finance and the Ministry of Finance refused the
secondment of the petitioner to function as Chairperson of the said Board by
(P6).



The Chairman of the Bank (2nd respondent) filed an affidavit dated 10. 12.96
on behalf of himself and the 1st and 4th to 8th respondents. He stated that
the 3rd respondent was out of the Island. He admits the fact of the Finance
Ministry Circular (P2) and that the petitioner is in the category of a Deputy
General Manager, but denies the other averments in paragraph six of the
petition. It is his position that no reasons for refusing an extension of
service need be given. As regards the time taken to reply the petitioner's
request for an extension of service, he states that it was "because it took
time to carefully examine, evaluate and decide on her request".



Answering paragraph 11 of the petition where the petitioner gave particulars
of eight officers, (two of whom were of a comparable grade but had joined the
bank's service after the petitioner), who had been granted extensions of
service, the 2nd respondent states that

**160**



"the applications for extension made by each of the several employees referred
to therein were separately considered by the Board of Directors and in each of
the said cases the Board decided that there were exceptional circumstances
warranting the extensions". He has annexed marked (2R6) (a) to (i) the
memoranda addressed to the Board of Directors in respect of each of the said
applications and has drawn the attention of the Court to the fact that all the
said applications were considered and decided on the basis of a Board decision
dated 13.2.89, in terms of which extension of service beyond the age of 55
years "would be considered by the Board only under exceptional circumstances,
depending on the merits of each case ..." The memorandum relating to the
petitioner has been produced marked (2R6) (j).



Further answering the averments in the petition, he states that the Circular
(P2) which permitted extensions up to the age of 58 years on the basis of
annual extensions from the age of 55 years is not binding on the bank, by
reason of Finance Ministry Circular (2R1) (annexed to his affidavit dated
24.11.96) which had "conveyed a decision made by the Government to (a) exempt
the Bank of Ceylon and the People's Bank from the provisions of Part II of the
Finance Act No. 38 of 1971 and from all Treasury and Public Administration
Circulars; and (b) grant these banks 'operational autonomy' to enable them to
conduct their business on a commercial basis."



He further avers that "when the petitioner applied to be released to accept an
appointment as Chairperson of the Sri Lanka Handicrafts Board for a period of
three years, she opted out of serving as the Chief Legal Officer with effect
from May, 1995, which is even before her 55th date of birth." While
reiterating that the 1st to 8th respondents had nothing to do with the refusal
to release the petitioner from the service of the bank to accept this
appointment, he states that they had no political bias whatsoever for or
against the petitioner. He asserts that the bank had the right to terminate
the services of the petitioner at the age of 55 years after a bona fide
consideration of her application for an extension of service. He claims that
"the refusal to extend her service was done bona fide and unanimously after a
careful evaluation of her application and the need of the bank to increase the
efficiency of its Legal Department at the present time".

**161**



In support of the bank's contention that it has been exempted from Treasury
and Public Administration Circulars, the bank has by motion dated 25.6.97
tendered to Court, marked (2R7) (a) to (2R7) (d), copies of correspondence
between the then General Manager of the bank and the Ministry of Finance. It
appears that by (2R7) (b) dated 4.5.92, clarification had been sought by the
General Manager of the bank from the State Secretary for Finance in regard to
the implementation of Treasury Circular No. EA 02/BC/PB/01 on Restructuring of
the Bank of Ceylon and the People's Bank (2R1), annexing thereto a list of 13
matters of the Personnel Department referred to the Ministry of Finance for
approval (2R7) (c). Item No. 1 thereof relates to extension of service of
employees beyond the age of 55 years in the grade of Assistant General
Managers and above.



The State Secretary for Finance, by his letter dated 20.5.92 (2R7) (a), states
that he had discussed this matter with the Secretary to the Treasury and that
"the thirteen personnel items mentioned by you should also be handled by the
Board of Directors of your Bank other than item two where official travel by
employees overseas for conferences, seminars, training etc. for which Ministry
and Government approval should be obtained as at present."



It would be relevant at this stage to consider the manner in which the Board
of Directors had granted extensions of service beyond the age of 55 years. It
appears from (2R6) (a) to (2R6) (i) that the practice was for the Personnel
Department to submit a memorandum to the Board of Directors under the hands of
the Asst. General Manager, Personnel and the Deputy General Manager, Human
Resources setting out the relevant material for the consideration of the
Board, together with the bio data submitted by the officers concerned. Where
an extension of service was recommended, such a memorandum included a 'draft
minute' in these terms: **" DRAFT MINUTE - **Considered the Memorandum of the
Assistant General Manager (Personnel) and the Deputy General Manager (Human
Resources) dated (...) and decided that the Board will not exercise its option
to retire (...) from the Bank's service but to extend his/her service for a
further period of one year with effect from (...) under exceptional
circumstances."

**162**



The memorandum submitted in respect of the petitioner by the Personnel
Department dated 12.9.96, (2R6) (j) also contains the identical draft Board
Minute.



In respect of an officer referred to in the memorandum (2R6) (d) dated 5.1.94,
who had been granted three annual extensions of service beyond the age of 55
years, but the Personnel Department did not recommend an extension of service
beyond the age of 58 years, the draft Board Minute was in the following terms:
"Considered the memorandum of the Assistant General Manager (Personnel) and
Deputy General Manager (Human Resources) dated 5th January 1994 in regard to
the extension of service of (name and designation of officer) and the Board
decided to exercise its option to retire (name of officer) from the Bank's
service with effect from 07.03.1994."



It is significant that the Board of Directors had consistently followed the
recommendations of the Personnel Department in exercising its option to grant
or refuse an extension to any officer, and was guided by the memorandum
submitted to the Board and the draft Board Minute appehded thereto. But, in
regard to the petitioner, for reasons best known to the Board of Directors, it
had departed from this established practice and decided not to grant her an
extension of service beyond the age of 55 years, (being the very first
extension applied for), though the extension had been recommended by the
Personnel Department in its draft Board Minute, **under exceptional
circumstances.** The Board did not assign any reason for such an unusual step
being taken.



Undoubtedly, the Board of Directors is not bound to accept each and every
recommendation of the Personnel Department and can in appropriate
circumstances take a decision contrary to such recommendation. But, as stated
in de Smith's 'Judicial review of administrative action' 4th edition, page 238
et seq., it is a long settled principle governing the exercise of discretion
that persons exercising such power must act fairly. In general, it means a
duty to observe the rudiments of natural justice in the exercise of
administrative functions. Not only should there be a fair evaluation of the
matter before it, but it also imposes a duty to be impartial and not to
discriminate on unacceptable grounds. Such power must necessarily be exercised
reasonably.

**163**



Although the 2nd respondent has produced certain decisions of the Board of
Directors in support of some of the averments in his affidavit, curiously,.
the most vital decision of the Board pertaining to this matter, viz. the
grounds of refusal of an extension of service to the petitioner, has not been
produced, though the 2nd respondent states that it was a decision unanimously
reached after a careful evaluation of the petitioner's application.



In that context, the sequence of events which culminated in the refusal of the
extension assumes significance. The petitioner applied to the bank through its
General Manager of an extension of service on 24.5.96 (P3). The Board of
Directors arrived at the decision to refuse the said application for extension
of service four months later on 27.9.96. The General Manager (8th respondent)
took a further one month almost to convey that decision to the petitioner by
letter dated 22.10.96 (P4), leaving the petitioner barely one month to retire
from the bank, an institution which she had served for almost twenty five
years. This inordinate delay has not been satisfactorily explained by the
bank.



It is the petitioner's position that it has been the established practice of
the bank to grant extensions of service to officers who had reached the age of
55 years, if they applied for extensions. The bank does not deny, and the
documents furnished support, the petitioner's position that extensions have in
fact been granted to certain officers even up to the 58th year. The bank seeks
to justify the refusal by stating that the task of determining whether or not
there are exceptional circumstances is entirely a matter for the Board of
Directors.



But, the question arises whether, in a situation such as this, where the
granting of an extension is in the discretion of the Board of Directors, it is
obligatory for the Board to give reasons in the event of its refusal to grant
such extension; more so, in the circumstances of the present case where the
Personnel Department had, in keeping with the established practice,
recommended the grant of the extension sought by the petitioner, as is
evidenced by the draft Board Minute (2R6) (j).

**164**



What was the fresh material available to the Board to take a contrary view? If
there was new material which justified the Board's conclusion that there were
no exceptional circumstances to grant the petitioner an extension of service,
from which source did the Board obtain such material? If, on the other hand,
the Board relied on the same material as contained in the 'Memorandum to the
Board', did the Board assign any reasons for rejecting the recommendation of
the Corporate Management? Why has the Board refrained from submitting a copy
of that decision to the Court? Despite a surfeit of other material placed by
the bank before Court, these questions still remain unanswered!



The bank's contention that the petitioner's appointment as Chairperson of the
Sri Lanka Handicrafts Board and the request for her release from the services
of the bank on a secondment basis indicate that the petitioner herself thought
that the bank could dispense with her services even long before she reached
the age of retirement, without the bank's Legal Department suffering a serious
handicap, is without merit. The question here is not whether her services were
indispensable. Her selection for a higher appointment under another Ministry
indicates that her services were sought after even elsewhere. If the Legal
Department could have managed without any serious handicap in the event of her
temporary release, it is indeed a tribute to the sound footing on which the
petitioner had placed that Department. There is nothing unusual in an officer
agreeing to accept an appointment on a secondment basis, which would better
her prospects. But, what the Corporate Management had to consider was whether
there were exceptional circumstances to retain her services at the stage when
she applied for an extension.



In fact, the bank has even granted an extension of service beyond the age of
56 years to an officer of a grade comparable to that of the petitioner (2R6)
(a), though that officer had held an appointment abroad, on no pay leave, for
a considerable length of time. If that was no bar to being granted an
extension of service, one fails to see how the petitioner's selection for
appointment as Chairperson of the Handicrafts Board on secondment could have
been viewed with disfavour by the bank, in considering her application for an
extension of service.

**165**



It was the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner that the
contention of the respondents that the bank was conferred autonomous powers by
the Circular (2R1) cannot be sustained for the reason that a plain reading of
that Circular makes it evident that it was issued not for the purpose of
granting the bank autonomous powers in respect of its administration, but to
grant autonomy in regard to its commercial activities. He relied inter alia on
the documents produced in these proceedings relating to the question of
release of the petitioner to take up the post of Chairperson, Sri Lanka
Handicrafts Board, in support of this proposition. He submitted that the
letter (2R4) from the 2nd respondent to the Secretary, Ministry of Finance,
which contains the decision of the bank to recommend the release of the
petitioner on a secondment basis, (2R5) by which the 2nd respondent informs
the petitioner that her release from the bank's service will be recommended to
the Ministry, and the letter (P6) from the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury
refusing the petitioner's release to take up the aforesaid appointment,
clearly show that the decision to release the petitioner is one that is taken
by the Ministry and not by the Board, which only has the power to recommend.
He therefore submitted that these factors alone militate against the
contention that the Circular (2R1) vested unfettered powers in the Board of
Directors with regard to its administration. It was his position that (2R1)
does not revoke the Circular (P2), nor can the Board decision (2R3) supercede
that Circular and hence the attempts by the bank to bypass the Circular (P2)
should be rejected.



However, the letter (2R7) (b) dated 4.5.92 by the then General Manager of the
bank, together with the annexures (2R7) (a) to (2R7) (d), and the response of
the Ministry of Finance through the State Secretary for Finance by his letter
dated 20.5.92 (2R7) (a), deal specifically with Treasury Circular No.
EA/02/BC/PB/01, i.e. (2R1). In (2R7) (a) the State Secretary for Finance
prefaces the decisions conveyed thereby with the statement that he discussed
this matter with the Secretary to the Treasury, thus indicating that those
decisions had been taken in consultation with the Secretary to the Treasury.



I do not consider it necessary for the purposes of this case to decide whether
the Circular (P2) continued to apply to the bank or whether the bank enjoyed
unfettered autonomous powers under the

**166**



Circular (2191). The decision of this case rests on **whether the petitioner
had a legitimate expectation** of being granted an extension of service. The
power to grant an extension under either Circular is discretionary, though the
degree of discretion may vary.



The bank had, by its Board decision (2R3), recognised that extensions of
service beyond the age of 55 years would be considered, but only under
exceptional circumstances, depending on the merits of each case. So, the Court
has to examine whether there had been a proper exercise of that discretion.



Having sought clarification and guidance with regard to (2R1) from the
Ministry of Finance, the bank was obliged to follow the instructions contained
in (2R7) (a), which had the stamp of authority of that Ministry, under whose
purview the bank was. The position therefore was that, when the petitioner's
application came to be considered by the Board, extensions of service beyond
the age of 55 years of employees in the grade of Assistant General Manager and
above were to be handled by the Board of Directors of the bank, and Ministry
or Government approval was not necessary therefore.



That the petitioner had a legitimate expectation that her application for an
extension of service would be considered fairly and on its merits is beyond
question. As stated above and as is evidenced by the draft Board Minute (2196)
(j), the Personnel Department recommended that the petitioner's service be
extended for a period of one year with effect from 27.11.96 **under
exceptional circumstances**. If, therefore, the Board of Directors thought
otherwise, it should have done so only for valid reasons and on reasonable
grounds. Even though Public Administration Circular No. 27/96 dated 30.8.96
(P8), which was an amendment to Chapter 5 of the Establishments Code, does not
have any direct application to the matter before us, it clearly sets out the
attitude of the State in regard to the question of extension of service of
public sector employees, when it states that where extensions of service of
State employees are refused "there should be sufficient reasons to support
such decisions beyond doubt." Even if the bank failed to give the petitioner
the reasons for the refusal of her application for an extension of service, it
undoubtedly became obliged in law to provide such reasons to this Court when
the decision of the Board was challenged by the petitioner.

**167**



Wade & Forsyth: Administrative Law, 7th edition, dealing with the principle of
reasonableness states at page 390 that it "has become one of the most active
and conspicuous among the doctrines which have vitalised administrative law in
recent years ... Its contribution to administrative law on the substantive
side is equal to that of the principles of natural justice on the procedural
side."



Having referred to a number of authorities relevant thereto, the authors go on
to say at page 391 that "the common theme of all the authorities so far
mentioned is that the notion of absolute or unfettered discretion is rejected.
Statutory power conferred for public purposes is conferred as it were upon
trust, not absolutely - that is to say, it can validly be used only in the
right and proper way ..."; and at page 393 that "there should in principle be
no such thing as unreviewable administrative discretion, which should be just
as much a contradiction in terms as unfettered discretion."



On the aspect of abuse of discretion, the authors refer to the case of
Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food(1) and state at page
413 that "there could scarcely be a better example that statutory powers,
however permissive, must be used with scrupulous attention to their true
purposes and for reasons which are relevant and proper." They further state
that "the House of Lords also rejected the Crown's argument that the minister
need have given no reasons and that therefore such reasons as he volunteered
to give could not be criticised. Going still further, the House declared that
if in such a case he refused to give any reasons, the court might have to
assume that he had no good reasons and was acting arbitrarily, In other words,
the minister may not be able to disarm the court by taking refuge in silence.
In this way the court would have power to impose, in effect, an obligation to
give reasons for discretionary decisions."



To my mind, these dicta apply with equal force to the decisions of the Board
of Directors of the bank. As pointed out earlier, the bank has failed to
submit to this Court the decision of the Board pertaining to the refusal of an
extension of service to the petitioner, despite that decision being challenged
in these proceedings. The 2nd respondent Chairman's averment in paragraph 21
of his affidavit dated 10.12.96 that "the refusal to extend her services was
done

**168**



bona fide and unanimously after a careful evaluation of her application ..."
is no substitute for the Board decision, which presumably would have
incorporated the reasons therefore. The bank was duty bound to disclose the
reasons to Court; and the best evidence perhaps of the 'careful evaluation' to
which the petitioner's application had been subjected, (incidentally over a
period of two months), would have been the minutes of such Board meeting. The
Board having failed to discharge its obligation to give reasons, the Court is
well entitled to assume that it had no good reasons for such decision and was
acting arbitrarily. Having regard to the unusual step taken by the Board in
acting contrary to the recommendation of the Corporate Management without
assigning any reasons, such an inference becomes irresistible.



I would, in this context, refer to some of the recent decisions of this Court
which have a bearing on the matter under consideration.



In Wijepala v. Jayawardene(2) where the petitioner who was the Chief Valuer
complained that his fundamental right under Article 12(1) had been violated
because the Executive did not permit him to enjoy an extension of service
which had been duly granted to him, Fernando, J. held that the decision was
arbitrary and capricious and directed the State to permit the petitioner to
function as Chief Valuer and also awarded him arrears of salary, compensation
and costs.



In the course of that judgment, Fernando, J. stated inter alia as follows:
"The petitioner insisted, throughout, that established practice unquestionably
entitled him at least to his first extension, and that there was no relevant
reason for the refusal of an extension ... Although openness in administration
makes it desirable that reasons be given for decisions of this kind, in this
case I do not have to decide whether the failure to do so vitiated the
decision. However, when this Court is required to review such a decision, if
the petitioner succeeds in making out a prima facie case, then the failure to
give reasons becomes crucial. If reasons are not disclosed, the inference may
have to be drawn that this is because in fact there were no reasons - and so
also, if reasons are suggested, they were in fact not the reasons which
actually influenced the decision in the first place."

**169**



Again, in Manage v. Kotakadeniya and others(3), where a Post Master's
application for an extension of service upon reaching the age of 55 years was
refused, Amerasinghe, J. having noted that though the Chief Post Master,
Nugegoda and the Divisional Superintendent of Posts, Colombo had recommended
the extension of the petitioner's service, the 1st respondent had retired the
petitioner from service, dealt with the circumstances relevant thereto and was
of the view that "the refusal to extend the services of the petitioner was not
based on adequate grounds". Accordingly, he quashed the order of retirement
made by the 1st respondent, observing that the petitioner had been the victim
of unequal treatment and discriminatory conduct, and awarded him compensation
and costs.



I cannot accept the 'reasoning' of the bank when it states in its written
submissions that "the petitioner who was the Chief Legal Officer knew that an
extension of her service could be granted only if the Board of Directors
decided that there existed exceptional circumstances warranting an extension.
So, she and all others aware of this requirement must necessarily know that if
an extension is not granted it is because the Bank does not see exceptional
circumstances. Her application for an extension of service contained an
account of her performance. Therefore, the communication of an inability to
extend her services necessarily carries with it the implication that the Board
of Directors think that there are no existing exceptional circumstances."



This submission merely states the obvious. But, the matter in issue is 'Why
did the Board of Directors think so?' The Corporate Management, in the normal
course, having considered the petitioner's application for an extension of
service, had recommended to the Board that she be granted such extension. The
Board had, in all the instances cited by the petitioner, followed the
recommendation of the Corporate Management both for granting as well as for
refusing extensions of service. No material has been placed before us to the
contrary by the bank. The departure from this usual and accepted practice
makes it obligatory for the Board to

**170**



show the Court that valid reasons did exist for the refusal to grant the
extension that was recommended by the Corporate Management. The failure to do
so indicates either that there were no reasons, or no valid reasons for such
refusal. The question at that stage is not whether the Board had the power,
which indeed it had, but how the Board exercised that power in coming to the
conclusion that there were no exceptional circumstances, when the Corporate
Management had in no uncertain terms recommended otherwise.



For the Board to take a contrary view, surely there should have been cogent
reasons which justified it. Administrative fairness and transparency require
that, in those circumstances, a contemporaneous record of the reasons and the
material on which such decision is based, be made; and when such a decision is
challenged in proceedings of this nature, a full and fair disclosure of all
the attendant circumstances be made to Court. In the matter before us, the
bank has regrettably failed in its aforesaid duty.



Its feeble attempt to justify the decision makes the position even worse. As
if to add insult to injury, the Chairman of the bank in his affidavit dated
10.12.96 states in paragraph 21 that "the refusal to extend her services was
done bona fide and unanimously after a careful evaluation of her application
**and the need of the Bank to increase the efficiency of its Legal Department
at the present time. " **Implicit in the words in italics is the veiled
suggestion that the efficiency of the Legal Department was not up to the
expectations of the Board and its efficiency could not be increased so long as
the petitioner remained as Chief Legal Officer. But, not an iota of evidence
has been placed before Court in support of this suggestion, which thus remains
a hollow statement.



But the petitioner, on the other hand, has by her counter affidavit dated
17.12.96, sought to refute this suggestion effectively. She states that the
Board of Directors and the Management have not raised any query about the
alleged lack of efficiency of the Legal Department and reiterates that she has
had an unblemished record of service and a successful career as the Chief
Legal Officer. Quite

**171**



unlike the 2nd respondent Chairman, she supports her position with copies of
memoranda addressed to the General Manager, marked (P13), (P14) and (P15),
which demonstrate the initiative taken by her from about 1995 to enhance the
efficiency and streamline the functions of the Legal Department. Those
memoranda deal not only with the urgent problems relating to the cadre
position of that Department, (which she bemoans had not received due
consideration of the Management, despite her requests for high priority), but
they also contain valuable suggestions as to how the bank's customer service
as well as its recovery procedures could be improved. She has thereby amply
demonstrated her concern for safeguarding the bank's interests, while at the
same time ensuring that her staff remain contented, so that they would be
motivated to give of their best to the bank.



Even when meeting the Board's attempt to discredit her, she has displayed a
high degree of professionalism, befitting the office that she held. In
fairness to the petitioner, it should be placed on record that the Chairman's
insinuations as regards her lack of efficiency are baseless and unwarranted.



For the reasons aforesaid, I have no hesitation in holding that the decision
of the Board of Directors not to grant the extension of service sought by the
petitioner was arbitrary, capricious, unreasonable and unfair. It was also
undoubtedly discriminatory, as the bank has not been evenhanded in the
exercise of its discretion in respect of the petitioner. The impugned decision
is, therefore, violative of the petitioner's fundamental right to equality
before the law and the equal protection of the law, enshrined in Article 12(1)
of the Constitution.



Learned President's Counsel for the petitioner did not seriously press the
allegation of discrimination on the ground of political opinion. In any event,
the material placed by the petitioner is quite insufficient to come to a
finding that the Board of Directors of the bank was biased against the
petitioner on political grounds. I, therefore, hold that the petitioner has
failed to establish the alleged infringement of Article 12(2).

**172**



This brings me to the question of relief. The petitioner has been deprived of
her legitimate expectation of continuing in service as the Chief Legal Officer
of the bank, initially for a period of one year from 27.11.96, on attaining
the age of 55 years. She was at the zenith of her career in the Legal
Department which she had served loyally and without any blemish for about 25
years. The bank has been unable to adduce any reason for rejecting the
recommendation of the Corporate Management in this regard.



Learned counsel for the bank and its Board of Directors gave the following
undertaking to Court on 26.11.96, (when this matter came up for an interim
order seeking to restrain the respondents from retiring the petitioner from
service:



"The respondents will not make a permanent appointment to the post of Chief
Legal Officer until the final determination of this case; also, in the event
of the petitioner succeeding in the application, she will be restored to the
post for a period of one year from 27.11.96, together with all backwages and
other remuneration. Until the final determination of this case, the petitioner
will not function in the post of Chief Legal Officer."



Learned President's Counsel for the petitioner wished to add the following:



"That the foregoing is without prejudice to the rights of the petitioner to
make a further application for the extension of service from 27.11.97."



The Court made order accordingly.



As the petitioner has succeeded in her application, I direct the 1st
respondent to restore her to the post of Chief Legal Officer forthwith, for a
period of one year from 27.11.96, together with all backwages and other
remuneration. This would be without prejudice to her right to make an
application for a further extension of service from 27.11.97.

**173**



There is no dispute between the parties that the petitioner's all inclusive
salary is Rs. 29,577.48 p.m. But, they seem to be at variance as regards her
entitlement to the Entertainment Allowance of Rs. 800.00, Managerial Allowance
of Rs. 1745.12 and Fuel Allowance of Rs. 10,000.00. As, in terms of the
aforementioned undertaking, the petitioner has to be **restored** to the post
of Chief Legal Officer with effect from 27.11.96 (for a period of one year)
together with 'all **backwages and other remuneration',** she is **deemed to
have held** that post during the relevant period. Her **inability to function
in the** post was due to the bank deciding that she should not function as
Chief Legal Officer until the final determination of this case. In those
circumstances, I am of the view that the term 'other remuneration', as used in
the terms of settlement, encompasses all allowances payable to the holder of
such post, irrespective of whether she functioned in the post or not. I,
therefore, hold that the petitioner is entitled to the Entertainment
Allowance, Managerial Allowance and Fuel Allowance as well, from 27.11.96 for
a period of one year and direct the 1st respondent to pay her all such arrears
of salary and allowances forthwith.



Her restoration to the post with backwages and other remuneration does not in
any way disentitle her to be adequately compensated for the infringement of
her fundamental right under Article 12(1). Having regard to the above order
for restoration to the post, with payment of backwages and other allowances, I
direct the 1st respondent to pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 100,000/- as
compensation.



The petitioner will also be entitled to costs in a sum of Rs. 25,000/- payable
by the 1st respondent.



**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.



**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.** \- I agree.



_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/37.html_  

