##  Nadarajah v. Janatha Estates Development Board - SLR - 314, Vol 2 of 1998
[1996] LKSC 37; (1998) 2 Sri LR 314 (21 March 1996)

**314**

**NADARAJAH  
v.  
JANATHA ESTATES DEVELOPMENT BOARD**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 40/94

C.A. NO. 359/86  
LT. NO. 9/13507/85

DECEMBER 12TH, 1995

_Industrial Dispute - Employer's right to transfer an employee - Change of
management - Continuation of service under new employer \- Employer's
liability to transfer in the new situation._

The employee served as Estate Dispenser on Stonycliff group of estates. He was
first employed by the Ceylon Tea Plantations Company (CTPC). When the estate
was taken over by the Land Reform Commission, he was employed by the Janatha
Estates Development Board (JEDB), with his consent, on the same terms and
conditions enjoyed by him at the time of the take-over of the estate. After
the employee had served on 'Stonycliff for 22 years, the JEDB transferred him
to Ingestre Group, whereupon the employee applied to the Labour Tribunal for
relief.

**Held:**

The original appointment of the employee was to Rosita estate which was later
amalgamated with Stonycliff. . According to the terms of that appointment, his
employment was on that estate only. The employer's implied right to transfer
was thereby excluded. He was then employed by the JEDB on the same terms and
conditions. He was therefore, not liable to be transferred to Ingestre.

**Cases referred to:**

_Ceylon Estates Staffs Union v. Superintendent Meddecumbura Estate (1971) 73
NLR 278._

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_S. Mahenthiran for appellant.  
  
S. M. Fernando, PC with Kenneth Perera and Hamilton Amerawickrema for
respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

315

March 21, 1996.  
**  
FERNANDO, J.**

Two questions are involved in this appeal: whether the 2nd employer appellant-
respondent (the 2nd respondent) was entitled, under the contract of
employment, to transfer the applicant-respondent-Appellant (the applicant),
and, if so, whether the applicant had vacated his post by his failure to
comply with the impugned transfer order.

The applicant died while this appeal was pending, and his widow applied for
substitution. She is accordingly substituted in his place.  
  
In June, 1962, the applicant applied for a post of Dispenser on one of the
estates owned by the Ceylon Tea Plantations Company Ltd. (CTPC). On 27.7.92
the Superintendent of Rosita Estate, owned by CTPC, sent him a telegram:
Report for duty August 1st. Letter of confirmation follows. By letter dated
1.9.62, the applicant was informed:

This letter serves the purpose of confirming your appointment as Dispenser on
this estate on the following terms:

1\. Your salary commences at Rs. 240 per mensem . . .

2\. Quarters are provided for you next to the Dispensary and you will occupy
these quarters . .. .

3\. . . . . .

Your duties will be as follows:

Monday           :  |  Rosita and Charing Cross Divisions  
---|---  
Tuesday          :  |  Lochiel Division  
Wednesday     : |  Wooton Factory Division  
Thursday         : |  Rosita and Charing Cross Divisions  
Friday             : |  Lochiel Division  
Saturday         : |  Wooton Factory Division  
  
Sunday           :

|  Nothing  
  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . .

316

Regarding the duties mentioned in this letter, except where specially
mentioned, they only apply to Rosita estate and not Wooton; any special
instructions that the Wooton Estate Superintendent may have for you, he will
inform you himself.

It is common ground that later CTPC acquired Stonycliff estate. Rosita and
Stonycliff estates were amalgamated, and known as Stonycliff Group
(Stonycliff). Stonycliff was later taken over by the Land Reform Commission.
On 22.3.76 the Superintendent of Stonycliff informed the applicant that the
management of the estate would be transferred to the Janatha Estates
Development Board, the 2nd respondent; that he would be informed of the terms
and conditions of employment which would be effective from 1.1.77; and that he
would be given a reasonable time to decide whether he would like to join the
2nd respondent on those terms. On 28.6.77, the 2nd respondent offered him
employment on the same terms and conditions enjoyed by [him] at the time of
the take-over of the estate; the applicant accepted. The applicant thus served
on Stonycliff for 22 years until December, 1984, when the 2nd respondent
sought to transfer him.

By letter dated 11.12.84, the Superintendent of Stonycliff, the 1st
respondent, conveyed the 2nd respondent's instructions to the applicant, that
he has been transferred to Ingestre Group, Dickoya, with effect from 15th
January, 1985 on the same terms and conditions enjoyed by [him] at present.
The applicant replied on 20.12.84. While reserving the right to question the
legitimacy of the transfer, he inquired whether the terms and conditions
enjoyed by him on Stonycliff could be offered to him on Ingestre. He specified
some of those facilities; in particular, his living quarters, and its
electricity supply and extent of home garden, gross salary and additional
allowances, and the CTPC special facilities regarding service over 25 years as
he had completed 22 1/2 years. Instead of replying to this request, the 1 st
respondent asked him to forward a certified copy of the original of the letter
of appointment issued to him saying that the letter (presumably, of 1.8.62)
sent by the Superintendent appeared to be only certain instructions that were
given to [him] on confirmation of [his] appointment. The applicant replied
that he had been unable to find any letter other than that sent by the
Superintendent.

By letter dated 4.1.85, the 2nd respondent told the applicant that it was
unable to consider the claim made in his earlier letter, and

317

advised him to comply with the transfer order of 10. 12.84. Since that claim
made by the applicant was for comparable facilities, this letter indicated
uncertainty, if not unwillingness, about affording such facilities. The
applicant replied on 7.1.85 that the terms and conditions of his contract
could not unilaterally be changed, and that they did not provide for a
transfer as proposed by the 2nd respondent. He said that he was unable to
comply with the transfer order, adding that he would regard enforcement of
that order as constructive termination of his services. On 24.1.85 the
Superintendent of Ingestre wrote to him that, because he did not assume duties
on Ingestre, he was being treated as having vacated his post. The applicant
replied that he had no contract with the Superintendent of lngestre, and
informed the respondents that he continued to be willing to serve on
Stonycliff. He then applied to the Labour Tribunal.

The applicant was not informed of the reason for the transfer order. The
circumstances leading up to that transfer were these. Shortly before, the 2nd
respondent had ordered one Jeevanadhan, the Medical Assistant on Chrystlers
Farm Estate, to go on transfer to lngestre as Medical Assistant; this transfer
was cancelled; and thereafter two transfer orders were issued, to the
applicant to go to lngestre, and to Jeevanadhan to take his place at
Stonycliff. The applicant had, by August, 1984, completed a three-month course
of training, including intra-uterine contraceptive device (IUCD) insertion.
The respondents claimed that Jeevanadhan's transfer to lngestre was a routine
transfer, and that the question whether lngestre had IUCD facilities was not
considered; that immediately thereafter health issues were discussed, and it
was decided to transfer the applicant to lngestre; however, no decision had
been taken to provide IUCD facilities at lngestre. On the other hand, the
documentary evidence showed that immediately after the applicant had completed
his training, an application had been made to the Family Health Bureau for
approval of a family planning clinic at Stonycliff with IUCD services. In that
application it was stated that the Estate Medical Assistant would conduct the
clinic, indicating beyond doubt that this was the applicant, whose special
training was mentioned. The Bureau by letter dated 5.11.84 had approved the
Stonycliff family planning clinic. It appeared that Jeevanadhan had no

318

IUCD training. Thus although the impression sought to be given was that the
transfer was intended to make the best use of the applicants services, and
that the applicant was the most suitable for Ingestre, the evidence was that
the population of both estates was similar; that the necessary instruments
were available on Stonycliff; and Jeevanadhan was not qualified to provide
IUCD services.

The learned President of the Labour Tribunal held that although the applicant
was transferable, the 2nd respondent had failed to justify the transfer order;
that the termination of his services was wrongful and unjustified; and ordered
the 2nd respondent to reinstate the applicant with back wages in a sum of Rs.
21,567.70, or as an alternative to reinstatement to pay a further sum of four
years salary as compensation, amounting to Rs. 86,270.40.

On appeal, the Court of Appeal held that the 2nd respondent was entitled to
transfer the applicant; that it was a routine transfer; that the order of the
Tribunal requiring the management to inform the applicant of the reason for
the transfer was perverse; and set aside the order of the Tribunal.

RIGHT TO TRANSFER

It was held in Ceylon Estates Staffs Union v. Superintendent, Meddecombra
Estate, (1971) 73 NLR 278, that even if the contract of employment is silent,
an employer has an implied right to transfer the employee. It is not
necessary, for the purposes of this case, to consider whether that implied
right is subject to some limitation or qualification: whether it extends to
new situations not contemplated by the parties when the contract of employment
was entered into.

However there can be no doubt that the implied right to transfer can be
excluded, and in my view excluded either expressly or by necessary
implication. Mr. S. M. Fernando, PC, on behalf of the 2nd respondent cited
Misconduct in Employment, by B. R. Chaiye, in which the following passage
occurs:

319

It is generally held that the right to transfer an employee is an implied
right of the employer and, therefore, no express term in the contract is
necessary. The right exists even in the absence of contract unless there is a
contract to the contrary ... However, when during the same period the employer
used two different forms of appointment letter, in one of them there is a
condition, then it will give rise to a strong inference that an employee who
has been given the appointment letter without the condition of being
transferred is not liable to be transferred because it follows by necessary
implication that there was; a contract of not being transferred. Where the
contract of apprenticeship was that the apprentice will work as an apprentice
in the company's Manjumalai Estate for a period of three years this militated
against. any right of the employer to transfer him during the currency of the
agreement from that estate to another . . . In one case an employee of a sugar
factory was transferred to another sugar factory which was not in existence at
the time of appointment of an employee. When at the time of appointment the
employer was running only one factory and at that time there was no intention
to purchase another factory or to extend its activities in the same line at
different places or in any case the employees had no knowledge of any such
intention then it would not be right to imply any such term between the
parties. (pages 238-239).

This does not help the 2nd respondent. The appointment of the applicant as
Dispenser on this Estate prima facie suggests that his employment was on that
estate only, and that therefore he was not transferable; there is nothing in
the other provisions of the letter of appointment to rebut this. I therefore
hold that the employer's implied right to transfer was thereby excluded.

Even if I were to assume that the letter of appointment did not exclude the
implied right to transfer, it would still be necessary to ascertain whether
the impugned transfer was within the scope of that right. At the time when
that letter was issued the parties could be treated as having had in mind the
possibility of transfer to other estates then owned by the 2nd respondent; and
perhaps even to other estates

320

which the 2nd respondent might have acquired in the future. If, however, the
2nd respondent had become the owner of an estate in Indonesia or Kenya, I
doubt whether the implied right to transfer would extend to a transfer abroad.
In the present case, when the CTPC estates vested in the Land Reform
Commission, the applicant continued in employment on the same terms and
conditions enjoyed . . . at the time of the take-over of the estate. If at
that time the applicant was transferable, he was transferable to other estates
owned by CTPC, but it is doubtful whether, when he became an employee of the
2nd respondent, his liability to transfer became more extensive making him
subject to transfer not only to those estates which were formerly owned by
CTPC, but also to the much wider category of all estates owned (or managed) by
the 2nd respondent. That was an ambiguity in the new contract which resulted
from the 2nd respondent's offer. Since that was an offer made by the 2nd
respondent, that ambiguity must be resolved contra proferentem and in favour
of the applicant, particularly because the 2nd respondent was then in a
superior bargaining position.

I therefore hold that the applicant was not liable to be transferred to
Ingestre. That finding makes it unnecessary for me to review the finding of
fact that there was no justification for the transfer.

The appeal is allowed, the judgment of the Court of Appeal is set aside, and
the order of the Labour Tribunal is affirmed. The 2nd respondent shall pay the
substituted appellant the sum of Rs. 107,838. 10, with interest at 20% per
annum from the date of the Labour Tribunal order up to the date of payment,
and a sum of Rs. 20,000 as costs in this court and the Court of Appeal.

**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/37.html_  

