##  Sangadasa Silva v. Anuruddha Ratwatte and Others - SLR - 350, Vol 1 of
1998 [1995] LKSC 37; (1998) 1 Sri LR 350 (29 June 1995)

**350**

**SANGADASA SILVA  
 v.  
ANURUDDHA RATWATTE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
GUNAWARDANE, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 251/95 (F.R)  
JANUARY 22ND AND FEBRUARY 11TH, 1998.  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Termination of agreement for dealership in petroleum
products - Unjust or Arbitrary termination - Political motive - Articles 12
(1) and 12 (2) of the Constitution.  
_  
The petitioner was a dealer in petroleum products for many years on the basis
of an agreement with the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation, the second respondent.
On 26.6.95 persons claiming to be from the Corporation visited the petrol
station with a letter and asked the petitioner's son who was the manager to
vacate the premises and hand it over to them. The petitioner's son declined to
do so in

**351**

the absence of the petitioner and temporarily closed the petrol station. The
same evening, according to the petitioner, a group of thugs arrived and took
over the petrol station forcibly. According to the Area Manager of the
Corporation, he took over the premises with the assistance of the Police.
Thereafter, the business was handed over to the 3rd respondent Company which
had been incorporated only on 09.06.95 and whose Directors were ail government
supporters. The petitioner had been a close friend of late R. Premadasa, the
former President and a strong supporter of the United National Party. The
Marketing Manager of the Corporation, who was not a member of the Board of
Directors of the Corporation, averred that the petitioner's dealership was
cancelled by a letter dated 26.6.95 (2R9) issued by him pursuant to a special
resolution of the Board of Directors of the corporation for alleged violations
of the dealership agreement. But the relevant Board paper and the decision of
the Board were not produced to Court; nor did the Chairman or any of the
Directors file an affidavit explaining the reasons for the termination of the
petitioner's dealership. Besides 2R9 was never served on the petitioner, nor
was any evidence of a decision to award the dealership of the petrol station
to the 3rd respondent company produced to Court.  
  
**Held:  
**  
1\. The action taken by the respondent Corporation to terminate the
petitioner's dealership amounted "executive or administrative action" within
the meaning of Article 126 of the Constitution.  
  
2\. The action of the 2nd respondent Corporation to terminate the petitioner's
agreement and to appoint the 3rd respondent in hrs place were arbitrary,
capricious and discriminatory it was also politically motivated and violative
of the petitioner's rights guaranteed by Articles 12 (1) and 12 (2) of the
Constitution.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
1. _Dahanayake v. de Silva_ (1978 - 79 - 80) 1 Sri LR 47.  
  
2. _Kuruppuge Don Somapala Gunaratne et al v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation et al_ SC Application 99/96 SC Minutes 31 July, 1996.  
  
3. _Wickrematunge v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation_ et al 1998 1 Sri LR 201.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Romesh de Silva PC with Geethaka Gunawardane_ for petitioner.  
  
_K. Sripavan D.S.G_ for 1st and 4th respondents.  
  
_P. A. D. Samarasekera, P.C with Keerthi Sri Gunawardana, Sanjeewa Jayawardena
and Palitha Silva_ for 2nd respondent.  
  
_Percy Wickramasekera, with Henry Seneviratne and Mrs. Shanthi Silva_ for 3rd
respondent.

**352**

April 3. 1998.  
**  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.**  
  
In 1952, the Shell Company of Ceylon Ltd. appointed the petitioner as a dealer
in petrol, diesel and other petroleum products at premises No. 291, Dr.
Dannister de Silva Mawatha, Colombo 9. Although after nationalisation, he
continued the said business under the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation, the
petitioner states that in 1973, the above premises was taken over, allegedly
due to political reasons, but handed back to him in late 1977. He thereafter
continued to operate the petrol station at the above premises till 26.6.95, on
which day it was taken over by the 2nd respondent.  
  
The petitioner states that on 31.5.95 the 2nd respondent sent him a letter
(marked "A") stopping his credit facility and asking him to make all payments
in cash. He complied, but adds that in the morning of 26.6.95, some unknown
persons had come to the premises with a letter saying they were from the 2nd
respondent Corporation and had asked that the premises be vacated and handed
over to them. The petitioner's son who was the Manager had said that as his
father, the petitioner, had gone out of Colombo, he could not do so, and
temporarily closed the petrol station. He thereafter made a complaint to the
Dematagoda Police (marked "C").  
  
However, the petitioner complains that on the same afternoon at about 3.00
O'clock, a group of thugs armed with crowbars arrived and forcibly took
possession of the premises. Since the Dematagoda Police refused to record his
statement saying they had orders from "higher authorities", the petitioner
went to the Borella Police station with the same result. The petitioner says
that he then contacted some high Police official and it was only thereafter,
that his son was able to make a complaint (marked 'D') back at the Dematagoda
Police station, at about 7.30 p.m. on the same day.  
  
This complaint sets out that a group of unknown persons had arrived at the
premises, broken open the padlocked office of the petrol station and were now
preventing him from entering it, saying that the petrol station was taken
over.  
  
The petitioner states that he has been informed orally that the 2nd respondent
had on 26.6.95 decided to terminate his dealership and

**353**

take possession of the premises. He adds that this decision has been
politically motivated, inasmuch as the Chairman and all the Directors of the
2nd respondent Corporation are political appointees appointed by the 1 st
respondent after the present Government came into power. He says that he is a
strong supporter of the opposing United National Party (letters marked F1, F2,
F3 and G), and a close friend of the former President, the late R. Premadasa
and his wife. He has filed several photographs (marked E1 to E4) showing his
close association with them.  
  
The petitioner further states that the 2nd respondent Corporation found fault
with him for violating the terms and conditions of his agreement by issuing
petrol in bulk contrary to regulations. The petitioner's reply is that he did
this only in respect of the Department of the Government Printer, which
Department required petrol in barrels for the use of its printing machinery
and other equipment. He adds that after the Government Printer himself made
representations to the 2nd respondent Corporation, the petitioner was given
permission by the 2nd respondent to issue petrol to the Government Printer in
barrels. (Letters marked H1, H2 and H3).  
  
The petitioner complains that having terminated his dealership, and having
forcibly taken over the petrol station on 26.6.95, the 2nd respondent handed
it over on the same day, to the 3rd respondent, which he says is a Company
which was incorporated only on 9.6.95 solely for the purpose of obtaining his
dealership. He says that all eight Directors of the 3rd respondent company are
supporters of the Government and that one of them was even appointed by the
present Government as Chairman of the Gas Company on or about 1.10.94.  
  
The petitioner also states that the 3rd respondent commenced operations on
29.6.95 with an opening ceremony which was attended by two Members of
Parliament belonging to the People's Alliance.  
  
The petitioner states that he has suffered the following consequential loss :  
  
(i) a stock of approximately 500 gallons of diesel; and  
  
(ii) a stock of approximately 300 gallons of kerosene oil left in the tanks
when the premises was taken over by the 2nd respondent on 26.6.95; and

**354**

(iii) a sum of Rs. 259,978.53 which the petitioner had deposited with the 2nd
respondent Corporation on the morning of 26.6.95 (the day of the take over),
being payment for a consignment of petrol which was to be delivered to the
petitioner by the 2nd respondent Corporation the same day. This consignment,
was of course, not delivered to the petitioner.  
  
The petitioner's allegation is that the 1st respondent caused the 2nd
respondent Corporation to terminate his dealership and take over the premises
for political reasons.  
  
Leave to proceed with this application was granted in respect of the alleged
infringement of Articles 12 (1) and 12 (2) of the Constitution.  
  
The 1 st respondent replied to the petitioner by his affidavit, stating that
he was in no way involved in this matter and that he personally knows nothing
of the incident complained of. This position of the 1 st respondent was not
challenged or contested in any way by learned president's counsel for the
petitioner. In the circumstances, I have no reason to disbelieve the 1st
respondent and I therefore accept what he says. I therefore hold that the 1st
respondent is not guilty of any violation of the petitioner's fundamental
rights.  
  
The 3rd respondent company made answer through its Chairman and Managing
Director, who filed his objections by way of an affidavit. He admits that he
and some of the other Directors of the 3rd respondent company are, in fact,
supporters of the People's Alliance, but that they had done nothing whatsoever
to oust the petitioner from his dealership of the petrol station in question.
He adds that the Regional Manager of the 2nd respondent Corporation handed
over the petrol station to the 3rd respondent Company on 26.6.95 in response
to an application made by it, not for the petitioner's petrol station, but for
a petrol station. He admits that the 3rd respondent company was incorporated
in June, 1995, but denies that it was incorporated only for the purpose of
obtaining the petitioner's dealership. Paragraph 2 of the written submissions,
filed on behalf of the 3rd respondent Company, says that it is correct that
the 3rd respondent company has, amongst its primary objects, the distribution
of fuel and lubricants, but adds that it is also a distributor of gas, and, in
addition, has other lines of business. The Chairman of the

**355**

3rd respondent Company has filed an inventory of stocks handed over to him
(marked 3R1) as follows :

2 Star petrol - 454 litres at Rs. 39.59  |

Rs. 17,973.86  
---|---  
Lanka kerosene - 908 litres at Rs. 9.28  |

Rs.   8,426.24  
Lanka auto diesel - 4,781 litres at Rs. 12.20  |

Rs. 58.328.20  
Total  |

Rs. 84.728.30  
  
The answer on behalf of the 2nd respondent Corporation was made by Saliya
Unamboowe, Manager, Marketing. He says in his affidavit that, he is "the
Manager, Marketing, of the 2nd respondent Corporation on whose behalf I have
been authorised to depose to in this affidavit". It should be noted that no
affidavit has been filed either by the Chairman or by any of the Directors of
the 2nd respondent Corporation. These matters become relevant later.  
  
Saliya Unamboowe states in his affidavit that the petitioner was in fact
appointed a dealer on 13.3.78 (letter of appointment marked 2R1); that the 2nd
respondent entered into a dealership agreement . with the petitioner dated
22.7.82 (2R2), and that on 14.9.82, the petitioner was granted written
authority to "sell, supply and distribute" petroleum products (2R3).
Continuing, he states that he "issued a formal letter dated 26.6.95,
cancelling the written authority granted to the petitioner" (marked 2R9). This
letter 2R9 stated that the Board of Directors of the 2nd respondent
Corporation had by a special resolution decided to terminate the petitioner's
dealership with immediate effect and directed the petitioner to hand over
possession of the petrol station to the bearer of the said letter, forthwith.  
  
The first thing that strikes me, is that in his letter 2R9, Mr. Unamboowe
gives no reasons whatsoever for the termination of the petitioner's
dealership. It is noteworthy also, that the petitioner was not warned that his
dealership was about to be terminated by the 2nd respondent Corporation. The
termination was to be with immediate effect and no notice whatsoever was given
to the petitioner to quit and deliver possession. I must also mention that
this letter of termination (2R9) was never served on the petitioner.  
  
Most importantly, the letter 2R9 specifically mentions the fact that the Board
of Directors of the 2nd respondent Corporation had passed a special resolution
to terminate the petitioner's dealership. Mr. Unamboowe states in his
affidavit that, a Board Paper was

**356**

submitted by him to the Board of Directors of the 2nd respondent recommending
the termination of the dealership agreement with the petitioner. This Board
Paper was not produced, and so, this court was not apprised of what the actual
recommendation was and what reasons Mr. Unamboowe gave for such
recommendation. I shall refer to this later. Mr. Unamboowe specifically
states, in paragraph 17 of his affidavit that the Board of Directors took
cognizance of the recommendation made by him and passed a resolution to
terminate the dealership of the petitioner. This resolution too was not
produced.  
  
The position then is that neither the Board Paper said to have been submitted
by Mr. Unamboowe to the Board of Directors of the 2nd respondent Corporation,
and said to contain the recommendation of Mr. Unamboowe, nor the special
resolution said to have been passed by the Board of Directors of the 2nd
respondent Corporation, nor, at the lowest, any minute made by the Board of
Directors in connection with its decision to terminate the petitioner's
dealership has been produced before us. Nor has the Chairman or any of the
members of the Board of Directors filed an affidavit in this case setting out
the reasons which moved the Board to terminate the petitioner's dealership,
and what the resolution, if any, was that they are said to have passed. Mr.
Unamboowe is not a member of the Board of Directors of the 2nd respondent
Corporation and therefore cannot give evidence as to why the Board in fact as
it did. In the circumstances, this Court has been kept totally in the dark,
and is therefore quite unaware as to what material, if any, was placed before
the Board of Directors to enable it to arrive at a decision to terminate the
petitioner's dealership, and what reasons the Board in fact had for deciding
that the petitioner's dealership should be terminated. Although this Court
repeatedly drew attention to this serious short­coming, learned President's
counsel for the 2nd respondent was unable to furnish the requisite material to
this Court. Thus, no one knows why the 2nd respondent passed its special
resolution or what the transgression was, that led to and resulted in the
extreme penalty of termination of the dealership of the petitioner.  
  
I must here make mention of the fact that both Mr. Unamboowe (in his
affidavit), and learned President's counsel for the 2nd respondent (in his
submissions made before us), have referred to several transgressions alleged
to have been committed by the petitioner, since the commencement of his
dealership on 13.3.78.

**357**

Besides the fact that they have been explained and/or rectified and/ or
settled by negotiation, it does not appear that any of them actually
occasioned the ultimate penalty of termination, for, as I mentioned earlier,
not a word is forthcoming from the Board of Directors of the 2nd respondent
Corporation, as to what material, if any, was placed before it for its
consideration and what reason it had for terminating the dealership. One is
therefore not able to ascertain whether any single one of the alleged
transgressions was even brought to the notice of the Board of Directors of the
2nd respondent Corporation. Mr. Unamboowe has very painstakingly listed in his
affidavit, in great detail, a series of transgressions alleged to have been
committed by the petitioner over the years, but has significantly failed to
produce the Board Paper said to contain the recommendation he made to the
Board of Directors of the 2nd respondent Corporation or the reasons he gave
for making such recommendation. Nor has he mentioned, in his lengthy affidavit
the material which he placed before the Board or the material, if any, the
Board had before it. The only conclusion possible in the circumstances, is
that the alleged transgressions of the petitioner enumerated by Mr. Unamboowe
as being the reason for the termination of the petitioner's dealership, merely
constitute material painstakingly collected and set out for the purpose of
meeting the averments of the petitioner and for the purpose of defending this
action. It is not possible to conclude, in the absence of any material to the
contrary, that these alleged transgressions of the petitioner were ever
brought to the notice of the Board of Directors of the 2nd respondent
Corporation when it passed its special resolution, Mr. Unamboowe says it
passed, terminating the petitioner's dealer­ship. This material now presented
before us cannot be said, on the evidence before us, to constitute the
material which moved the Board of the 2nd respondent to act as it did, and is
therefore not relevant. It is therefore not necessary for me to repeat here,
the list of alleged transgressions said to have been committed by the
petitioner since the commencement of his dealership. What Mr. Unamboowe seems
to be attempting to do by setting out the series of alleged transgressions of
the petitioner, is in fact to ask this Court to consider and, assess them and
arrive at a decision as to whether the termination was justified or not. I do
not think it is our function at all, to hold such an inquiry. What this Court
wanted to know, and made repeated requests for, was the material upon which
the Board acted when it passed its special resolution terminating the
petitioner's dealership. No answer was forthcoming and no material at all was
made available to this Court, and so, necessarily, the

**358**

question as to why this Court has been deprived of such material looms large
in our deliberations, for, is it not reasonable to suppose that the Board of
Directors did act on material placed before it, and if such material is not
forthcoming, is it not reasonable to conclude that the Board of Directors of
the 2nd respondent Corporation arbitrarily cancelled the petitioner's
dealership, thus violating the fundamental rights?  
  
In this connection, I must also reiterate that Mr. Unamboowe himself (despite
filing a lengthy affidavit) has failed to produce the Board Paper containing
his recommendation which he says he submitted to the Board. Nor has he given
any explanation as to his inability to have done so. To my mind it would have
been the easiest thing for him to have produced a copy of his own Board Paper,
which presumably would have contained his recommendation and all the material
in support. His not doing so leads to serious doubts as to whether such Board
Paper in fact exists.  
  
The further questions that arise are, if such a Board Paper does exist, was it
in fact submitted to the Board of Directors by Mr. Unamboowe? Did the Board in
fact act on it, or is it possible that the Board may have acted on some other
criteria or on no criteria at all? It is quite clear that from the material
available from the affidavit of Mr. Unamboowe, that no presumption can be
drawn that he in fact submitted his Board Paper (mentioned therein) to the
Board of Directors; neither can any presumption be drawn that the Board of
Directors actually acted upon it, for as I just said before, the Board could
have acted on some other criteria or on none at all.  
  
Further, if the Board Paper mentioned in Mr. Unamboowe's affidavit, which must
necessarily incorporate its supportive material, was in fact submitted to the
Board and was in its possession, the presumption that may be drawn in terms
off illustration; to section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance (where material
said to be in the possession of the Board is not produced by the Board) would,
in the circumstances of this case, be adverse to the 2nd respondent.
Illustration (/) to section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance states :  
  
"The Court may presume that evidence which could be and is not produced would
if produced, be unfavourable to the person who withholds it."

**359**

Thus, it appears that if the Board did have in its possession any Board
minutes, and/or the Board Paper, and/or the special resolution of the Board
relating to the termination of the petitioner's dealership and did not produce
any of the said documents, it would be legitimate to draw the presumption that
any such material, if produced, would be unfavourable to the 2nd respondent
Corporation.  
  
On the other hand, if there is, in fact, no such material in the possession of
the Board, it would substantiate the position of the petitioner, that the
termination of his dealership was entirely arbitrary, and thus violative of
the petitioner's fundamental rights.  
  
At this point I must consider the other half of this incident, which is the
handing over of the petitioner's dealership to the 3rd respondent, immediately
upon the petrol station in question being taken over by the 2nd respondent.
Mr. Unamboowe has annexed to his affidavit, a copy of the report (marked 2R11)
made by the Area Manager who was sent to take over the petitioner's petrol
station. In 2R11, the Area Manager says, inter alia, that he went to the
premises with 3 other officers; that he "would like to stress the fact that we
went unarmed, without carrying any implements such as crowbars, iron rods,
etc.; that the dealer was not present, but four of his sons were; that the
latter were "very co-operative and cordial" but "refused to take over the
letter (of termination, 2R9) in the absence of the dealer"; that the sons
locked up the buildings on the premises and left; that having made an entry at
the Dematagoda Police Station, he returned to the petitioner's petrol station
with a posse' of policemen including a Sub-Inspector of Police who "supervised
the opening of the sales room, compressor room and the other room by a
locksmith", and that, "then the outlet was handed over to 'Slipto Agencies
(Pvt) Ltd." (i.e. the 3rd respondent).  
  
A preliminary matter which aroused my curiosity was, why the Area Manager
should "stress in fact that we went unarmed without carrying any implements
such as crowbars, iron rods, etc." ! This apart, the first important matter to
be noted is that the letter of termination (2R9) was never served on the
petitioner who was in fact the dealer whose dealership was to be terminated.
It seems quite natural that the dealer's sons refused to accept 2R9. It also
does not appear that this letter of termination 2R9 was served on the
petitioner even subsequently. The petitioner himself states in paragraph 24 of
his

**360**

petition that he "has now been orally informed that the 2nd respondent had
decided on or about 26th June, 1995, to terminate the petitioner as a dealer
and to take possession of the premises". Therefore the situation appears to be
that the petitioner's dealership was terminated and his petrol station taken
over by the officers of the 2nd respondent without his ever being served with
any letter of termination, and further, that having done so, the officers of
the 2nd respondent immediately handed over the petrol station to the 3rd
respondent.  
  
The next question of no less importance is, on what authority was the petrol
station handed over to the 3rd respondent? Mr. Unamboowe makes answer on
behalf of the 2nd respondent and says that in order not to deprive the public
of petrol and petroleum products, it was imperative, upon termination of the
petitioner's dealership, for the 2nd respondent to resume operation of the
petrol station; that the 3rd respondent "had been desirous of obtaining a
dealership, and had satisfied the 2nd respondent of its wherewithal and
capacity to conduct the operation successfully," and that, "the awarding of
the dealership to the 3rd respondent was not motivated by political
considerations". The important consideration here is that once again, this
Court is faced with the situation where the 2nd respondent has not produced
any material at all to substantiate or support its actions. The 2nd
respond­ent has failed to produce any material showing how it satisfied itself
of the "wherewithal and capacity" of the 3rd respondent to run the petrol
station successfully. More importantly, the 2nd respondent has failed to
produce the Board minutes and/or the Board Paper and/or the resolution of the
Board of Directors regarding its decision to award the dealership to the 3rd
respondent. In this connection, it must not be forgotten; that the petitioner
avers (and this is not denied by Mr. Unamboowe) that the 3rd respondent was
incorporated only on 9.6.95 and the dealership was handed over to the 3rd
respondent on 26.6.95. It is, in fact, not known how the 3rd respondent
arrived on the scene. Neither learned President's Counsel for the 2nd
respondent nor learned Counsel for the 3rd respondent was able to assist Court
on this matter with any substantial material.  
  
The Chairman and Managing Director of the 3rd respondent company has filed an
affidavit in which, inter alia, he says, that it is correct that the 3rd
respondent company was incorporated in June, 1995, but not for the sole
purpose of obtaining the dealership in question; that the dealership was
handed over to the 3rd respondent on 26.6.95

**361**

"in response to an application made by the company not for this particular
petrol station, but for a petrol filling station; that he and some of the
other Directors of the 3rd respondent are, in fact, supporters of the People's
Alliance, but that the 3rd respondent did nothing whatsoever to oust the
petitioner from his dealership. He has filed (marked 3R1) a copy of an entry
he made at the Dematagoda Police Station together with handwritten copies of
the inventory of goods and products taken over by him, but significantly, has
failed to file a copy of the application which he says he made to the 2nd
respondent for the grant of a dealership to him. This he could well have done
at least to show his bona fides. Then again, he might have told this Court as
to what documents he produced to show his worth and whether he was even
interviewed by the Board or anyone on its behalf before he was found suitable.  
  
Thus, where the 3rd respondent is concerned, this Court does not have the
benefit of either the application said to have been made to the 2nd respondent
by the 3rd respondent for a dealership, or any minute or Board Paper or
resolution of the Board of Directors of the 2nd respondent containing or
referring to any decision regarding the capability and suitability of the 3rd
respondent to handle a dealership and containing any decision to award the
dealership in question to the 3rd respondent. The presumption to be drawn in
terms of Illustration (f) to section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance must
necessarily be drawn in this instance too.  
  
The basis of the relationship between the petitioner and the 2nd respondent is
the agreement (marked 2R2) entered into on 22.7.82. The relationship between
them is thus contractual. Nevertheless, the action taken by the Board of the
2nd respondent Corporation (to terminate the petitioner's dealership and to
appoint the 3rd respondent in his place) constitutes "executive or
administrative action" within the meaning of Article 126 of the Constitution,
and is not contractual in character. This is now well settled \- vide
Dahanayake v. de Silva(1) per Samarakoon, C.J., where His Lordship said : "I
hold that the termination of the petitioner's dealership by the 2nd respondent
was 'executive or administration action' although it involved a contract, and
was in violation of Article 12 (1)." This was followed in Kuruppuge Don
Sompala Gunaratne et al v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation et el (2) and in
Wickrematunga v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation et al (3). In this connection we
must not be unmindful of the fact that the 2nd respondent Corporation enjoys
the exclusive monopoly of carrying on

**362**

the business, inter alia, of supplier and distributor of petrol, diesel and
petroleum products as agent of the State.  
  
Clause 12B of the said agreement (2R2) enumerates three ways in which a
dealership can be terminated. The first is where the General Manager of the
Corporation is of opinion that the petitioner has defaulted in the ways set
down. The second is after giving three months' notice either way. The third
method is the one adopted by the 2nd respondent, and this method states that,
"the Board of Directors may by a resolution passed at a meeting of the Board
of Directors terminate the agreement without notice and without assigning any
reason whatsoever".  
  
Firstly, in terms of the agreement (2R2) it was the Board of Directors that
was vested with the power to arrive at a decision to terminate the agreement
with the petitioner, and this was to be done by a resolution passed at a
meeting of the Board of Directors. As set out earlier, no resolution by the
Board was produced before us and so, it is not possible for this Court to
speculate whether any resolution was ever passed by the Board in respect of
this petitioner, or whether, if passed, the contents of such resolution would
if produced, have turned out to be unfavourable to the Board, if it is the
former, then the 2nd respondent is in breach of clause 12B of the agreement
and is guilty of a wholly arbitrary act. If the latter, then this Court is
entitled to draw a presumption adverse to the 2nd respondent in terms of
illustration (f) to section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance. According to the
affidavit of Mr. Unamboowe there was a resolution, which for some undisclosed
reason, we have not been shown. The question that arises is, why was this
method of summary termination of the petitioner's agreement resorted to in
such haste? Did this amount to the arbitrary use of a power vested in the
State?  
  
As Fernando. J, stated in Kuruppuge Gunaratne's case (supra), "it is now well
settled that powers vested in the State, public officers and public
authorities are not absolute or unfettered, but are held in trust for the
public, to be used for the public benefit, and not for improper purposes. Even
assuming that the Board of the 1st respond­ent was not obliged initially to
disclose the reasons for its decision, nevertheless when that decision is
being reviewed in the exercise of the fundamental rights jurisdiction of this
Court, the burden is on the respondents to establish sufficient cause to
justify that decision, and this Court can scrutinize the grounds for the
decision."

**363**

On a consideration of the entirety of the evidence placed before us, it is
clear, as set out above, that there is no material whatsoever to indicate why
the Board had decided to terminate the petitioner's agreement and appoint the
3rd respondent in his place. In these circumstances no conclusion is possible
other than the action of the Board of the 2nd respondent is violative of the
petitioner's fundamental rights under Article 12 (1) which prohibits
arbitrary, capricious and/or discriminatory action.  
  
The petitioner's complaint is that the sudden termination of his dealership
without warning or notice and without reasons being given, was on account of
discrimination on the grounds of political opinion. Thus he alleges that he
was treated the way he was, on account of political opinion, because, firstly,
the Chairman and all the Directors of the 2nd respondent Corporation are
appointed by the 1st respond­ent, the Minister of Irrigation, Power and
Energy, (which fact only is admitted by Mr. Unamboowe in his affidavit) and
secondly, the Chairman and all the Directors are all political appointees who
are politically aligned to the present Government of the People's Alliance.
The petitioner also alleges that the Chairman and some of the Directors of the
3rd respondent company to whom the petitioner's petrol station was handed over
are themselves supporters of the People's Alliance.  
  
This is in fact admitted by the Chairman of the 3rd respondent company in his
affidavit. In addition the petitioner says that one of the Directors of the
3rd respondent Company was appointed Chairman of the Gas Company by the
present Government on or around 1.10.94.  
  
On the other hand, the petitioner says that he is a strong and long serving
supporter of the opposition United National Party (letters marked F1, F2, F3
and G) and that he has been a close friend of the former President, the late
R. Premadasa. The petitioner adds that one of his children was a flower girl
at the wedding of the late R. Premadasa. He has produced several photographs
marked E1 to E4 in which he is shown in close association with the late
President. Further, the petitioner states in paragraph 35 of his petition,
that the widow of the late President, Mrs. Hema Premadasa, had been employed
by the petitioner prior to her marriage. He therefore states that his
dealership was terminated solely on political grounds.

**364**

If I may repeat myself, it is seen that there is no Board Paper or resolution
by the Board to counter this allegation, and I am of the view that these facts
taken in their entirety would lead to the conclusion that the Board of the 2nd
respondent Corporation was motivated by political considerations when it
terminated the petitioner's dealership. The arbitrariness with which the Board
acted also lends credence to this view.  
  
Taking into consideration all the circumstances of this case, I am of the view
that it has been established that the agreement with the petitioner was
terminated by the Board of the 2nd respondent Corporation on account of
political opinion and therefore, I hold that the 2nd respondent has violated
the petitioner's fundamental right guaranteed by Article 12 (2) of the
Constitution.  
  
As regards the violation of Article 12 (1) of the Constitution, I must stress
once again, that the Board of the 2nd respondent Corporation has placed no
material whatsoever before us to justify termination. As set out in detail
earlier in this judgment, the several transgressions set out in detail by Mr.
Unamboowe, in his affidavit, were actually meant for the purposes of the 2nd
respondent's defence in this court and there is nothing whatever to suggest
that this material was ever presented before the Board. I am therefore of the
view that the Board could not have taken into consideration the litany of
transgressions said to have been committed by the petitioner, as enumerated by
Mr. Unamboowe.  
  
In the result, this Court is totally unaware of the Board's reasons for the
termination, and I can therefore discover no basis at all for the termination
of the petitioner's dealership other than political con­siderations. The 2nd
respondent has totally failed to establish that its decision to terminate was
in conformity with the terms of the Agree­ment (2R2). On the contrary, it was
in total violation of clause 12B of the agreement. Therefore, the allegation
made by the petitioner that the 2nd respondent had not only acted in a wholly
arbitrary manner, but also that it had discriminated against him on account of
political opinion has not been countered by the 2nd respondent.

**365**

I would therefore hold that the Board of the 2nd respondent Corporation was
not entitled to terminate and not justified in terminating the petitioner's
dealership, and therefore the petitioner is entitled to a declaration that his
fundamental right under Article 12(1) has been infringed by the arbitrary
termination of his dealership.  
  
I therefore grant the petitioner a declaration that his fundamental rights
under Article 12 (1) as well as under Article 12 (2) have been violated by the
2nd respondent.  
  
In his prayer the petitioner prays for damages and/or compensation in a sum of
Rs. 25 million. He also claims a large sum of money as commission which he
lost as a result of the termination. He adds that he ran no other business,
and had no income other than what he earned from the petrol station. As set
out earlier in my judgment, the petitioner says that when he vacated the
petrol station, he left behind a stock of approximately 500 gallons of diesel
and 300 gallons of kerosene oil. In addition, on the very morning of the take
over, he had deposited Rs. 259,978.53 with the 2nd respondent Corporation for
a consignment of petrol, which payment is admitted.  
  
On the other hand according to the written submissions on behalf of the 2nd
respondent, the stocks left behind were, 454 litres of petrol, 4,781 litres of
diesel and 908 litres of kerosene all of which were valued at Rs. 84,728.00
and this together with the abovementioned deposit, totals to Rs. 344,706.53.
However, the 2nd respondent says that the petitioner owes the 2nd respondent
Rs. 360,702.27 in respect of purchases made, and outstanding electricity and
water bills, and that therefore, a balance is still due to the 2nd respondent
from the petitioner.  
  
I am of the view that these are accounting matters which must be checked by
persons competent to do so and the account settled accordingly. It is not the
function of this Court to audit accounts, so to speak.  
  
In conclusion, for the reasons set out in this judgment, I declare:  
  
(i) that the 1st respondent has not violated any of the petitioner's
fundamental rights ;  
  
(ii) that the 2nd respondent has violated the fundamental rights guaranteed to
the petitioner under Articles 12 (1) and 12 (2) of the Constitution; and

**366**

(iii) that the Order dated 26.6.95 terminating the petitioner's dealership of
the petrol station situated at No. 291, Danister de Silva Mawatha, Colombo 9,
and contained in the letter marked 2R9 is null and void and of no effect in
law.  
  
I make order and direct the 2nd respondent Corporation to reinstate and take
all such steps as are necessary to reinstate the petitioner as dealer of the
petrol station situated at No. 291, Dr. Danister de Silva Mawatha, Colombo 9,
under and in terms of the agreement between the 2nd respondent Corporation and
the petitioner dated 22.7.82 and marked 2R2 in these proceedings, within one
month of the date of this order. The implementation and carrying out of this
order, would necessarily mean that the 3rd respondent will have to be
displaced.  
  
Taking into consideration all the facts and circumstances of this case, I
would consider it just and equitable that the 2nd respondent Corporation
should pay to the petitioner a sum of Rs. 100,000 as compensation together
with Rs. 25,000 as costs.  
  
I make order accordingly.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J. - I agree.  
  
GUNAWARDANA, J. - I agree.  
  
_  Relief granted._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/37.html_  

