##  Tillekeratne v. Officer In Charge, Pugoda Police Station - SLR - 7, Vol 1
of 1997 [1994] LKSC 37; (1997) 1 Sri LR 7 (30 May 1994)

**7**

**TILLEKERATNE  
v.  
 OFFICER-IN-CHARGE, PUGODA POLICE STATION**

SUPREME COURT.  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ,  
KULATUNGA, J. AND  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 1/94  
H. C. GAMPAHA NO. 4/91  
M.C. PUGODA NO. 8677/P  
MARCH 30, 1994.  
  
_Penal Code - Offences of giving false evidence and in Magistrate - Sections
190 and 223 of the Penal Code - Deprivation of a fair trial - Validity of
conviction.  
_  
Whilst the appellant who was a witness in a case was under cross examination,
he was charged with offences under Sections 190 and 223 of the Penal Code, on
the order of the Magistrate who proceeded to try him forthwith. The appellant
was undefended: and he was convicted "on his own plea" and sentenced to three
months rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 1,500/-.  
  
**Held:  
**  
In view of the fact that the charge sheet contained no particulars of the
alleged offence and the appellant was not given an opportunity of defending
himself, he` had been deprived of a fair trial: hence proceedings taken
against him were invalid.

**8**

**Cases referred to:**  
  
1\. _In re De Silva_ 50 NLR 517.  
  
2\. _Jayawardena v. The Queen_ 73 NLR 307.  
  
3. _Subramaniam v. The Queen_ 57 NLR 409 (PC).  
  
4. _Daniel Appuhamy v The Queen_ 64 NLR 481 (PC).  
  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of Vie High Court, Gampaha.  
  
_H. M. Jayatissa Herath_ with _Mrs. W J. R. Herath,_ and _Sarath Weerakoon_
for appellant.  
  
Respondent absent and unrepresented.

_  Cur. adv vult. _

May 30, 1994.  
  
**KULATUNGA, J.**  
  
This is an appeal against the judgment of the High Court dismissing the
appellant's appeal against his conviction and sentence by the Magistrate,
Pugoda for certain offences on two counts, namely (1) giving false evidence in
Primary Court case No.400/L (which was being inquired into by the said
Magistrate), punishable under Section 190 of the Penal Code, and (2)
intentionally insulting the Magistrate in the course of the same proceedings
punishable under section 223 of the Penal Code. Neither the reports to Court
nor the charge sheet gives any particulars of the acts said to have
constituted the alleged offences.  
  
The appellant states that on 27.08.91 he testified as the respondent in case
No. 400/L and was under cross examination. At that stage and around 5.30 p.m.,
the Magistrate ordered the Court Officer (Police Constable 8131) to charge the
appellant with offences under the aforesaid Sections of the Penal Code, which
was immediately done by the said constable who filed a report to Court under
Section 136 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act and a charge sheet
specifying the alleged offences. The record shows that the Magistrate has
proceeded to try the appellant forthwith whereupon, according to the appellant
he pleaded 'not guilty'. But

**9**

the Magistrate found him guilty and imposed a sentence of three months
rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs.1500/- in default three months rigorous
imprisonment.  
  
The plea of the appellant has been recorded by means of the rubber stamp which
is not decipherable as to the plea. However, according to the certified copy
of the proceedings produced by the appellant, the Magistrate had proceeded to
convict the appellant 'on his own plea'. So it seems that the Magistrate had
acted on the basis that the appellant pleaded guilty.  
  
Before the High Court it was urged on behalf of the appellant that the
conviction is invalid; firstly on the basis that the appellant had pleaded
'not guilty' and hence he could not have been convicted without a trial; and
secondly the charge against the appellant contains no particulars as to the
acts constituting the alleged offences. It was also submitted that the
proceedings which culminated in the conviction are unlawful in that the
appellant was not given a fair opportunity to meet the allegations against
him; nor has the Magistrate come to any finding as to the evidence on the
basis of which the appellant could be convicted of the alleged offences.  
  
Learned High Court Judge having examined clear samples of two types of rubber
stamps used in the Pugoda Magistrate's Court found that there is one rubber
stamp for recording the plea of 'guilty" and another for recording plea of
'not guilty'. He then compared the decipherable part of the appellant's plea
with the rubber stamp used for recording a plea of 'guilty' and held that in
the instant case the rubber stamp used is the one for recording a plea of
'guilty'; hence the appellant had in fact pleaded guilty to the charges
against him.  
  
On the submission that the charges are defective for want of particulars,
learned High Court Judge said that these submissions need not to be considered
and dismissed the appellant's contention with the observation ". . . if he had
pleaded not guilty, as his Counsel says he did, he must have been reasonably
informed of the nature of the charges".  
  
In the circumstances, the Court did not consider any of the decisions cited by
learned Counsel for the appellant.

**10**

There is no basis for the above inference made by the High Court. In the
absence of a record of what transpired in Court, it could not be inferred from
the appellant's plea that he had been informed of the particulars of the
charges, where the charge sheet itself contains no particulars. The decision
which the High Court failed to consider due to the wrong approach adopted by
it are as follows:  
  
In the case of In re De Silva(1), it was held that a District Judge or a
Magistrate should not punish a witness summarily for giving false evidence
under Section 11(1) of the Oaths Ordinance without giving the witness an
opportunity of reconciling his contradictory statements; nor should action be
taken under that section until the conclusion of the case. It was also held
that it is not open to the Court to convict a witness under Section 11(1)
summarily merely because he has made a contradictory statement. The Court
should make up its mind which statements it holds to be false and which it
does not hold to be false. This decision was followed in Jayawardena v. The
Queen (2).  
  
In Subramaniam v. The Queen (3), it was held that the summary power conferred
by Section 440 (1) of the Criminal Procedure Code is one which should only be
used when it is clear beyond doubt that a witness in the course of his
evidence in the case being tried has committed perjury.  
  
In Daniel Appuhamy v. The Queen(4), it was held that it is not necessary in
proceeding under Section 440(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code (to sentence a
witness summarily "as for a contempt of Court") that the accusation of giving
false evidence should be stated with the particularity required in a count of
an indictment. If the Court is of the opinion that the whole of the witnesses'
evidence is false, it may be sufficient just to say that. But when it is not
suggested that the whole of a witnesses' evidence is false, it is essential
that the witness be left in no doubt as to which parts are alleged to be
false. The Court should before sentencing a witness, give the witness an
opportunity of explanation and possibly of correcting misapprehension as to
what had been in fact said or meant. In that case the Jury brought a rider
that the witness had given false evidence. On being asked by the Commissioner
whether the witness

**11**

had any cause to show, witness begged his Lordship's pardon whereupon, he was
sentenced to three months rigorous imprisonment. That sentence was quashed
upon appeal to the Privy Council.  
  
In the instant case the proceedings taken against the appellant are not
proceedings for summarily punishing him for contempt. A report to Court has
been made alleging certain offences; and the Court has proceeded to try the
appellant then and there as though it was a case fit for summarily punishing
the appellants for contempt. The appellant was undefended and was promptly
convicted and sentenced. The above decisions applicable to the cases where
proceedings for summarily punishing a witness have been taken, apply with even
greater force to the instant case and the submission that the proceedings
taken against the appellant are invalid must succeed in view of the following
facts.  
  
(i) the charge sheet contains no particulars of the alleged offence;  
  
(ii) the record does not show that the appellant was given any further
information or an opportunity of defending himself;  
  
(iii) even a perusal of the appellant's evidence in case No.400/L does not
enable us to gather the facts material to the charges.  
  
For the above reasons, we are of the view that the impugned proceedings are
invalid. The appellant who was charged with serious offences by the report
made in terms of Section 136 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act has been
deprived of a fair trial, in terms of the relevant provisions of the Act. We
accordingly allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the High Court, the
conviction and sentence entered against the appellant by the Magistrate and
acquit the appellant.  
  
**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree.  
  
**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/37.html_  

