##  Bandara and Another v. Premachandra, Secretary, Ministry of Lands,
Irrigation and Mahaweli Development and Others - SLR - 301, Vol 1 of 1994
[1993] LKSC 37; (1994) 1 Sri LR 301 (16 August 1993)

**301**

**BANDARA AND ANOTHER** ****

**v.** ****

**PREMACHANDRA, SECRETARY, MINISTRY OF LANDS, IRRIGATION** ****

**AND MAHAWELI DEVELOPMENT AND OTHERS**  



SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

PERERA, J. AND

WIJETUNGA, J.

S.C. APPLICATION NO.213/93

JUNE 8TH, 9TH AND 23RD, 1993.



_Fundamental Rights - Probation - Course for Bachelor's Degree in Surveying -
Trade Union Action - Misconduct - Tender of sick notes \- Vacation of Post -
Termination of Services - Applicability of Establishment Code - Constitution,
Article 55(1) - Discrimination \- Constitution, Article 12._

_ _

The 22 petitioners along with 15 others were selected to follow a four-year
residential course leading to the award of a Bachelor's degree in the
Surveying Service. Only Class III, Grade III Surveyors were eligible to follow
this course. The 1st respondent issued letters of appointment appointing them
as Surveyors in Class II Grade III on probation for a period to be notified
(but not notified). Shortly thereafter the petitioners became members of the
Government Surveyors' Association, a Trade Union. The Annual General Meeting
of the Association was held on 26.09.92 and the petitioners attended this
meeting with some difficulty. Thereafter the Union embarked on a work-to-rule
campaign and sent in sick notes for their absence. The petitioners joined in
this: a vacation of post notice was served on them. Later the petitioners
submitted a petition to the 1st respondent pleading excuses for having
complied with the decision of the Union. The 2nd

**302**



respondent interviewed the petitioners and indicated willingness to reinstate
them, if they furnished a written undertaking:



(i) to refrain from participating in Trade Union activities during the four
year training period; and



(ii) to devote themselves exclusively to educational activities.



The petitioners gave this undertaking by letter which specifically referred to
the 2nd respondent's request for such an undertaking. The 2nd respondent did
not reply or deny the statement attributed to him. However in his affidavit to
court he denied the statement but the court did not accept the denial.

** **

**Held:**



(1) It was on account of participation in trade union activity that the 2nd
respondent (Surveyor-General) informed the petitioners that their services had
been terminated.



(2) The misconduct of the petitioners was such that it had to be dealt with
under the Establishments Code.



(3) The 'pleasure principle' in Article 55(1) of the Constitution is subject
to the equality provision of Article 12 and mandates fairness and excludes
arbitrariness.



(4) The power to make rules under Article 55(4) is subject to the provisions
of the Constitution, including Article 12 and the Constitution rests on the
rule of law. The conditions on which powers of the Cabinet have been delegated
are contained in Chapter 11, Section 11 of the Establishments Code. In the
Establishments Code "without assigning any reason" only means that no reason
need be stated to the officer but that a reason, which in terms of the Code
justifies dismissal, must exist; and when the law requires disclosure of such
reason, it will have to be disclosed - and, if not disclosed legal
presumptions will be drawn. The Cabinet has delegated a power to dismiss for
cause, and according to the procedure prescribed.



(5) Where others have been treated differently the burden on the respondents
was to establish not just any difference between the petitioners and other
groups or classes but a rational basis for differences in treatment. If the
other officers were leniently treated, the petitioners should have been
subjected to a much lesser punishment than dismissal; and dismissal was
unreasonable, arbitrary and discriminatory.



(6) The petitioners had not been dismissed by the proper authority; that the
2nd respondent improperly deprived them of their right under Chapter V,
Section 7:4

**303**



(of the Establishments Code). The petitioners were improperly and unlawfully
prevented by the respondents from resuming their studies and work; Action was
taken against them not for misconduct but for participating in trade union
activity (and not because such activity was considered unlawful or improper).
The fundamental rights under Article 12(1) have been violated. They are
entitled to reinstatement and to resume their course of studies forthwith,
retaining seniority over students subsequently admitted to that course of
studies.



**Per Fernando, J.:**



"The State must, in the public interest, expect high standards of efficiency
and service from public officers in their dealings with the administration and
the public. In the exercise of constitutional and statutory powers and
jurisdictions, the Judiciary must endeavour to ensure that this expectation is
realised."

** **

**Cases referred to:**

** **

1 _. Abeywickrama v. Pathirana_ [1986] 1 Sri LR 120, 139, 149.

_ _

2 _. Chandrasiri v. A. G._ [1989] 1 Sri LR 115.

_ _

3 _. A. G. v. Keyser's Royal Hotel_ [1920] AC 508,526, 539, 554, 562.

_ _

4 _. Perera v. Jayawickrama_ [1985] 1 Sri LR 285.

_ _

5 _. De Alwis v. Gunawardena _ SC 7/87 - SC Minutes of 28.3.88.

_ _

**APPLICATION** for infringement of fundamental rights.



_H. L. de Silva P .C._ with _Elmo Perera_ and _M. M. Musafer_ for the
petitioners.

_ _

_Shibley Aziz P.C. Solicitor-General_ with _A. S. M. Perera D.S.G. for the
respondents_ _._  

Cur. adv. vult.





August 16th, 1993  


**FERNANDO, J.**



On 30.7.92, the 22 Petitioners, together with 15 others, were selected (on the
basis of G.C.E. (A.L..) performance) to follow a four year residential course
leading to the award of a Bachelor's Degree in Surveying Science, by the
Institute of Surveying and Mapping, Diyatalawa ("ISM"), a Degree-Awarding
Institute. Only Class III, Grade III Surveyors were eligible for that course,
which commenced on 24.8.92. The 1st Respondent, the Secretary, Ministry of
Lands, Irrigation and Mahaweli Development; issued letters of appointment

**304**



(P3) dated 24.8.92 to each Petitioner, appointing him as a Class III Grade III
Surveyor in the Sri Lanka Surveyors' Service; appointment was stated to be on
probation for a period to be notified (but this was not done); and was subject
to termination with one month's notice for -



(a) failure to pass the degree examination of the ISM:



(b) failure to obtain the required number of marks at the end of each quarter;



(c) unsatisfactory conduct during probation; or



(d) inefficiency during probation.



It was expressly stated in P3 that if the required language proficiency was
acquired, and if service during probation was satisfactory, the appointment
would be confirmed in terms of Chapter II, Section 11, of the Establishments
Code, which provided:



"11\. Probation



11:1 Every appointment to a Permanent post will be on probation for a period
of three years.



11:2 Appointment on probation implies that the officer may, before
confirmation, count on being admitted to the permanent establishment if he
carries out the obligations imposed by his letter of appointment and proves by
conduct and efficient service, his suitability for permanent retention in the
Public Service. Appointment on probation makes possible the -" elimination of
a person against whom definite misconduct cannot be urged and who, for
temperamental and other defects, should be released from the Public Service,
before it s too late for him to find other employment.



11:2:1 The following procedure should be followed in the case of an officer
appointed on Probation:-

**305**



He should be regarded as being on Probation with a view to learning work and
being tested for his suitability for permanent retention.



He should not only be given all facilities for acquiring experience in his
duties, but also be under continuous and sympathetic observation and guidance.



If during his period of probation, he shows any tendencies which render
doubtful his suitability for permanent retention, he should at once be warned
and given such assistance as may be possible to correct his failings. Any
admonition administered for any serious act or omission or any fault of
conduct or character which, if persisted in, may prevent his confirmation,
should be communicated to him in writing and an acknowledgement obtained, so
that no question may subsequently arise as to whether the officer was warned
of his failing and given an opportunity of improvement.



11:4 During the period of Probation the Appointing Authority will have the
power to terminate the officer's appointment without assigning any reason.



11:5 If at the end of the period of probation . . . the officer's work and
conduct are judged to have been satisfactory, and if he has fulfilled all the
requirements for confirmation in that appointment, he should be confirmed in
his appointment by the appropriate authority.



Shortly thereafter, the Petitioners became members of the Government
Surveyors' Association ("the Union"), a duly registered trade union, and with
some difficulty obtained leave to attend the Annual General Meeting held in
Colombo on 26.9.92; leave having been refused by the 3rd Respondent, the
Director, ISM at the last moment, the 2nd Respondent, the Surveyor-General,
granted such leave. That Union thereafter embarked on trade union action, in
support of certain demands, commencing with a work-to-rule campaign from
7.12.92. Quite in appropriately, the initial stage of the

**306**



work-to-rule was an abstention from work for two weeks by all members, after
submitting applications for sick leave for that fortnight. The Petitioners say
that the first part of their course (a three month intensive English Course),
had been completed by the end of November, 1992, and that the next stage was
due to commence in January 1993, so that there was no work scheduled for them
in December. Apart from a general denial by the 2nd Respondent, there was not
even a suggestion by the Respondents that there were any lectures, practical,
field-work, or other activities scheduled for December. It is not disputed
that the disciplinary rules required the Petitioners to get written permission
from their lecturer-in-charge in order to leave the ISM. The Petitioners say
that in accordance with the prevailing practice, they made entries in a leave
register maintained for the purpose; they also sent telegrams requesting leave
on the ground of illness, and these were received before 11.12.92; they sent
medical certificates, which were all received long after 11.12.92. It is
virtually a certainty that none of the Petitioners were in fact ill, and that
medical certificates had been obtained from medical practitioners who were
either dishonest or deceived.



Learned President's Counsel for the Petitioners contended, with little
enthusiasm, that submitting false sick-notes and medical certificates was
legitimate trade union action, as part of a work-to-rule campaign. I have
equally little hesitation in rejecting that contention. This Court will not
condone the conduct of an employee who lies to,. or otherwise deceives, his
employer as to the reason, for his failure to work, whether individually or
collectively; that it was "trade union action" aggravates rather than
mitigates such misconduct. An employer would be justified in taking
disciplinary action in respect of such misconduct. But for the fact that the
Petitioners have already suffered considerably by a six-month interruption in
their course of studies, I would have expressly reserved to the Respondents
the right to take this misconduct into account, in determining whether they
should be confirmed upon completion of probation. However, without dealing
with the Petitioners for that misconduct, it seems to me (for the reasons I
have set out later in this judgment) that the 1st and 2nd Respondents chose
instead to take action against them for participation in trade union activity.

**307**



**The Termination of the Petitioners' Services  
**  
By letter dated 11.12.92 (P4) the 2nd Respondent informed the Petitioners that
the 1st Respondent had terminated their services, and their course of studies,
with effect from 7.12.92: no reason was stated. The Petitioners contended that
the 1st Respondent had not in fact decided to terminate their services,
pointing out that there was no document or affidavit from the 1st Respondent
stating or suggesting that he had taken such a decision. The learned Solicitor
General submitted, in reply, that there was a record of a discussion at which
the 1st and 2nd Respondents were present, and that the 1st Respondent had
decided to dismiss the Petitioners, and had directed the 2nd Respondent to so
inform the Petitioners. Learned President's Counsel stated that he would not
object to the production of that document, if the Petitioners were permitted
to produce a photocopy of a letter dated 29.1.93 from the 1st Respondent to
the Secretary to the President. The learned Solicitor-General had no
-objection. Accordingly, a letter dated 16.12.92 from the Assistant Secretary
(Administration) of the Ministry of Lands, Irrigation and Mahaweli
Development, to the 2nd Respondent, and the annexed minutes of the discussion
held on 11.12.93 was produced as 1R1 and 1 R1A; and the letter dated 29.1.93
was produced as P38. According to 1 R1 A, the absence of Surveyors after
submission of sick-notes, and their demands, was discussed; thereafter, the
participation of the ISM students in this trade union action was considered.
It was then decided to withdraw State vehicles from the Surveyors; and to
entrust urgent work to private Surveyors. In regard to the students it was
decided (I will assume, by the 1st Respondent) "to terminate their services
and training with immediate effect if they do not attend lectures". The
learned Solicitor-General made a valiant effort to convince us that the
Sinhala phrase  
  
must be taken, in context, to refer to their **past** conduct in being absent
from the ISM without leave; and that the reference to **lectures** was a mere
misdescription. These are explanations which the 1st and 2nd Respondents and
the marker of 1R1A have not chosen to place before this Court by affidavit.
The plain meaning of 1R1 A is that there was no immediate termination of
services, but that, if the students did not attend lectures after 11. 12.92,
their services should then be immediately terminated.

**308**



Copies of P4, and presumably also of 1R1 and 1R1A, had been sent to the 1st
Respondent. However, in P38 the 1st Respondent gave quite a different version
of the decision taken on 11.12.92. Having referred to the terms and conditions
of P3, and the liability of the Petitioners to termination for breach, he
stated that because they had not behaved with the responsibility expected of
those in the public service, and had set a bad example, they were deemed to
have vacated post with effect from 7.12.92. Here again I am unable to accept
the learned Solicitor-General's contention that in a comprehensive report to
the Secretary to the President, a senior public officer holding the post of
Secretary to a Ministry used the Sinhala equivalent of "deemed to have vacated
post" loosely, when all he meant to say was "terminated". I can well
understand why the 1st Respondent prudently refrained from tendering an
affidavit to this Court putting forward such an implausible explanation.
Further, if it was vacation of post, the reference to 7.12.92 was quite
appropriate, for that was the day on which the Petitioners commenced keeping
away from work. But if the decision was to terminate, then 7.12.92 was
inappropriate; especially as P3 required one month's notice.



According to P4, the service of the Petitioners had been terminated with
effect from 7.12.92; according to 1R1A, the decision was to terminate if the
Petitioners did not attend lectures (i.e. in the future); but according to the
1st Respondent himself, as he stated in P38, he decided that they be deemed to
have vacated post. I hold that the 1st Respondent's decision was not to
dismiss the Petitioners, but to treat them as having vacated post.



Chapter V, Section 7:1, of the Establishments Code provides that .an officer
who absents himself from duty without leave will be deemed to have vacated his
post from the date of such absence and he should be informed accordingly at
once." Section 7:4 enables the officer to submit an explanation; such
explanation must be considered by the Disciplinary Authority, although
ultimately it may or may not be accepted by that Authority; thus a vacation of
post notice does not at once result in a final and irrevocable severance of
the employment relationship, but leaves the employee a chance of being
reinstated. There is no similar provision applicable to the termination of an
appointment. By incorrectly informing the Petitioners that their

**309**



services had been terminated, the 2nd Respondent deprived the Petitioners of
their right to submit an explanation in respect of their "vacation of post",
which might have been accepted by the Disciplinary Authority.



I have now to consider the real reason for the purported dismissal of the
Petitioners, which the events of the next few weeks revealed. The Petitioners
submitted a petition dated 16.12.92 to the 1st Respondent, through the 2nd
Respondent, pleading that, without a proper understanding of the gravity of
the matter and without an opportunity of obtaining advice from. their parents
and elders, they had complied with the decision of the Union. They reported
for work on 21.12.92, but were not allowed to do so. On 5.1.93 two Petitioners
interviewed the 2nd Respondent, who, according to them, indicated his
willingness to reinstate them, if they furnished a written undertaking:



(i) to refrain from participating in Trade Union activities during the four
year training period; and



(ii) to devote themselves exclusively to educational activities.



The Petitioners gave this undertaking by letter dated 6.1.93 (P10), which
specifically referred to the 2nd Respondent's request for such an undertaking.
The 2nd Respondent did not reply to P10 or deny the statement attributed to
him. However, in his affidavit sworn on 24.5.93, he stated that he did not
request any such written undertaking, but that the Petitioners on their own
tendered such an undertaking. I cannot accept his version in view of his
failure promptly to contradict P10. On 10.1.93, the "Sunday Observer" carried
a report of a press interview In which the 2nd Respondent had stated that the
Union had dragged 37 students into its campaign "and their future is bleak
because all of them have been discontinued"; and that the Union had "forced
them to extend support to the [Union] campaign". He did not suggest that
discontinuance was because they had submitted false sick notes or medical
certificates, or for any other misconduct. Thereafter, on 3.2.93, parents and
guardians of the Petitioners met the Minister, who indicated that a settlement
would not be possible so long as the

**310**



trade union action continued, and that they should "create an environment
favourable to . . . a settlement". Presuming that the Minister meant a
cessation of the Union's trade union action, the parents requested the Union
to call off their campaign. By letter dated 5.2.93, the Union informed the
Minister that they had suspended the work-to-rule for 10 days from 10.2.93;
and, subsequently, until 10.3.93. It is quite clear that it was on account of
participation in trade union activity that the 2nd Respondent informed the
Petitioners that their services had been terminated.



**Applicability of the Establishments Code  
**  
Although the learned Solicitor-General contended that a probationary
appointment could be terminated under Chapter II, Section 11:4, and Chapter V,
Section 6:2, of the Establishments Code "without any reason being assigned",
at the same time he submitted that other provisions of the Code (especially
Chapter Il, Section 11:2:1) were inapplicable to the Petitioners because of
the gravity of their misconduct; and accordingly their services could have
been terminated without the guidance, admonitions, and warnings provided for
in Section 11:2:1. There may perhaps be some extremely serious, persistent and
flagrant acts of misconduct which demonstrate that the culprit is so
completely beyond redemption, that guidance, warnings and opportunities for
reform would be futile. If rebels and insurgents can be rehabilitated and
reinstated in public employment why not youth who engage in improper strike
action? While in an appropriate case I would be prepared to consider the
possibility of such an exception to the Code, the misconduct of the
Petitioners is certainly not of that nature; Section 11:2:1 was intended to
apply even to "serious acts, omissions, and faults . . . which if persisted in
would prevent confirmation." The Petitioners' misconduct does not suffice to
justify the recognition of an exception which would introduce anomalies,
discrepancies, and uncertainties into a Code, one principal objective of which
was to ensure uniformity and certainty.



**Article 55 (1) of the Constitution**



The learned Solicitor-General submitted that the Petitioners held office "at
pleasure" within the meaning of Article 55(1) of the

311



Constitution; that the Government cannot by rules made under Article 55(4), or
by contract, restrict or override its constitutional prerogative of dismissal
at pleasure (Abeywickrema v. Pathirana,(1) which I followed in Chandrasiri v.
A.G.(2) in considering the scope of the much wider provisions of section
106(5) of the 1972 Constitution); that Chapter II, Section 11:4, and Chapter
V, Section 6:2, of the Establishments Code recognise that the Appointing
Authority was entitled to terminate a probationary appointment "without
assigning any reason", i.e. at pleasure; and that any such termination could
not be questioned in these proceedings.  


**Article 55 provides:**



"(1) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the appointment, transfer,
dismissal and disciplinary control of public officers is hereby vested in the
Cabinet of Ministers, and all public officers shall hold office at pleasure."



"(4) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the Cabinet of Ministers
shall provide for and determine all matters relating to public officers,
including the formulation of schemes of recruitment and codes of conduct for
public officers, the principles to be followed in making promotions and
transfers, and the procedure for the exercise and the delegation of the powers
of appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of public
officers.



"(5) Subject to the jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court under
paragraph (1) of Article 126 no court or tribunal shall have power or
jurisdiction to inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner call in
question, any order or decision of the Cabinet of Ministers, a Minister, the
Public Service Commission, a Committee of the Public Service Commission or of
a public officer, in regard to any matter concerning the appointment,
transfer, dismissal or disciplinary control of a public officer."



These are proceedings under Article 126(1); the question whether the purported
dismissal of the Petitioners was a violation of Article 12(1), 14(1) (c) or
14(1) (d) can be examined in those proceedings; and it is therefore
unnecessary to consider the precise scope of the preclusive clause contained
in Article 55(5).



312



It may well be that in the United Kingdom the prerogative in regard to office
held at pleasure was very wide. However, any such prerogative recognised or
conferred under a written Constitution, such as ours, with a separation of
functions, must necessarily be subject to limitations. Article 55(5) makes the
"pleasure principle" subject to the fundamental rights and the language
rights; Article 55(1) makes it "subject to the provisions of the
Constitution", so that other limitations may be found elsewhere in the
Constitution. The concept of holding office at pleasure suggests, prima facie,
that dismissal may be for a reason - good, bad, or indifferent - or without
any reason. However, "since Article 55(1) is subject, inter alia, to Article
12, dismissal, even by the Cabinet of Ministers, cannot be for a reason which
involves a denial of equal protection, violative of Article 12(1), or an
infringement of Article 12(2). Even if the reasons for dismissal are not
stated, upon a challenge under Article 12, a consideration of those reasons
becomes almost inevitable; an assertion that there were no reasons would
amount to an admission that it was arbitrary; and a refusal to disclose
reasons would tend to confirm a prima facie case of discrimination made out by
the Petitioners. Thus the "pleasure principle" contained in Article 55(1) is
necessarily subject to significant limitations, which were lacking in section
107(1) of the 1972 Constitution. The subjection of Article 55 (1) to the
equality provision of Article 12 mandates fairness and excludes arbitrariness.
Powers of appointment and dismissal are conferred by the Constitution on
various authorities in the public interest, and not for private benefit, and
their exercise must be governed by reason and not caprice; they cannot be
regarded as absolute, unfettered, or arbitrary, unless the enabling provisions
compel such a construction.



Further, even in the United Kingdom, it has been recognised that where a
matter that could be dealt with under the prerogative is covered by statute,
the statute prevails; statutory conditions and restrictions apply to the
exercise of the prerogative; and the prerogative is to some extent superseded
(AG v. de Keyser's Royal Hotel) (3). While section 107 was not subject to any
limitation, Article 55(1) is "subject to the provisions of the Constitution";
and hence has to be read with Article 55(4), which authorises the making of
rules relating to "all matters relating to public officers", and regarding the
Bandara and Another v. Premachandra, Secretary, Ministry of Lands,

**313**



procedure for the exercise of the power of dismissal; the grounds and the
procedure for dismissal appear to be included.



If a public officer is appointed by the Cabinet, under and in terms of rules
made under Article 55(4) (or under a contract or letter of appointment issued
in terms of such rules), it seems to me that several, as yet unresolved,
questions arise:



(a) Is the Cabinet in exercising the "pleasure principle" obliged to abide by
such rules (or the contract)?



(b) Even if those rules are not binding on the Cabinet, can they be regarded
as void? Or is it that the Cabinet would have an option, in regard to
dismissal, either to rely on the "pleasure principle" (in which event the
dismissal would be partially excluded from review under Article 55(5), or to
act under and in terms of the rules (or the contract)?



(c) If the Cabinet opts to act under the rules (or the contract), must any
issue arising for determination be decided on the basis of such rules (or the
contract), and if the dismissal cannot be justified on that basis, is the
State then precluded from falling back on the "pleasure principle"?



(d) Even if an exercise of the prerogative, in a manner contrary to the
provisions of the rules (or the contract), would result in a valid dismissal
and an effective severance of the employment relationship, would the employee
nevertheless be entitled to compensation or other relief, short of
reinstatement?



However, here the Respondents rely on a purported dismissal by the 1st
Respondent, and not by the Cabinet. Counsel assumed, for the purposes of
argument, that the power of appointment had been duly delegated to the 1st
Respondent, and that accordingly the power of dismissal was also vested in
him. The 1st Respondent could therefore have no greater power of dismissal at
pleasure than the Cabinet of Ministers, and accordingly, his acts must
necessarily be subject to review to the same extent. Further, his powers would
be limited by the terms of the delegation, and hence we asked the learned
Solicitor-General whether he had been delegated the plenary

**314**



power of dismissal at pleasure, or a lesser power. His reply was that the
conferment of a power, under Chapter II, Section 11:4, and Chapter V, Section
6:2, to dismiss "without any reason being assigned" constituted a plenary
delegation of the Cabinet's power to dismiss at pleasure. I cannot accept this
contention. The power to make rules under Article 55(4) is subject to the
provisions of the Constitution, including Article 12; and the Constitution
rests on the Rule of Law. Rules made under Article 55(4) must be interpreted
so as to avoid inconsistency with Article 12 and the Rule of Law, even if
dismissal "without any reason being assigned" might, at other times or in
other contexts, have been equated to "dismissal without any reason". I hold
that the conditions on which powers have been delegated are contained in
Chapter II, Section 11. Sections 11:2 and 11:5 confer an entitlement to
confirmation, upon fulfillment of certain conditions; Section 11:2 makes the
public officer liable to termination for misconduct and other "defects"; all
this is inconsistent with any discretion to authorise dismissal "at pleasure".
It is in that context that Section 11:4 must be interpreted.



I am of the view that in the Establishments Code "without assigning any
reason" only means no reason need be stated to the officer, but that a reason,
which in terms of the Code justifies dismissal, must exist; and when the law
requires disclosure of such reason, it will have to be disclosed - and, if not
disclosed, legal presumptions will be drawn. I hold that the Cabinet has only
delegated a power to dismiss for cause, and according to a procedure
prescribed (e.g. Chapter 11, Section 11:2:1).



In any event, it was not the Respondents' case, according to the documentary
evidence, that the 1st Respondent acted on the "pleasure principle"; P38 shows
that he acted on the contract of employment, and perhaps also the
Establishments Code. He cannot now seek to fall back on the "pleasure
principle".  


**Discrimination contrary to Article 12(1)**



The 2nd Respondent incorrectly informed the Petitioners that the 1st
Respondent had decided to terminate their services. They were deprived of
their right to submit an explanation under Chapter V

**315**



Section 7:4, of the Establishments Code. On 21.12.92 they were not permitted
to resume their work and studies. Such treatment denied them the equal
protection of the law, as the Establishments Code was intended to afford
uniform treatment to public officers. I do not think it necessary that in
order to prove discrimination the Petitioners should have adduced proof of
instances in which other public officers who were absent without leave were
deemed to have vacated post, for that is a matter of common occurrence,
demanding judicial notice; and I would have regarded Perera v.
Jayawickreme(4), as inapplicable. However, in this case, the Petitioners rely
on additional matters to prove discriminatory treatment without a rational
basis for differentiation:



1\. In 1989, 1990 and 1991, trainee surveyors, while on probation, indulged in
similar trade union action, and the only consequence they suffered was the
suspension of their training programmes for two weeks;



2\. In December 1992,



(a) about 80 Class 111, Grade III Surveyors on probation, not being students
at IMS, and



(b) about 1,000 other officers (confirmed and permanent),  
  
participated in the same trade union campaign, but no disciplinary action
whatsoever was taken against them.



The learned Solicitor-General seeks to justify the difference in treatment on
the basis that -



1\. Unlike trainees in previous years, the Petitioners were admitted to the
ISM course enjoying the benefits of a monthly salary and residential
accommodation, and without having served the Department for even a day;



2\. the Petitioners' acts of indiscipline were extremely serious, especially
because they were committed while still on probation;



**316**



3\. the Petitioners were not entitled to expect that acts of indiscipline
would continue to be treated as leniently as in the past; and



4\. unlike the Petitioners who were merely following a course of studies, the
other officers had duties to perform in relation to the public; their
dismissal would have caused serious disruption and inconvenience to the public
and the public service.



The burden on the Respondents was to establish not just any difference between
the Petitioners and the other groups or classes, but a rational basis for
differences in treatment. I entirely agree that the Petitioners were not
entitled to expect that unlawful acts would continue to be condoned or
leniently treated; and that an employer may be justified in assuming that
probationers guilty of indiscipline during probation (i.e. a period when they
know they are being closely observed), are likely to be more in disciplined
after confirmation. However, there is no doubt that the other groups were also
guilty of acts of indiscipline; even senior officers, of much greater
experience, maturity and responsibility were guilty of the same act; further,
some of them were the instigators of the campaign, while the students were
"dragged in" and "forced to extend support"; and the 1st and 2nd respondents
described the conduct of the senior officers in the "Sunday Observer"
interview in these terms:



"Some of the demands are outside our purview. Some are trivial, parochial,
ridiculous and irresponsible ...  


this kind of unethical and irresponsible behaviour will take them nowhere."



The learned Solicitor-General admitted that in the case of the students their
absence from work did not prejudice the public or interfere with their
studies; and that in the case of the other officers, inconvenience to the
public was inevitable. He contended, however, that it was not practicable to
dismiss them. It seems to me that the justification, if any, for treatment
meted out to the Petitioners was discipline. Even if I assume that dismissal
was both appropriate and proportionate, Article 12 required, also in the
interests of discipline, that disciplinary action be taken against all others
who were guilty of

**317**



similar misconduct. Even if I assume further that the conduct of the others
was not more serious, and that the maintenance of services to the public made
their dismissal impracticable, yet **some** disciplinary action was
imperative, especially against the instigators. However, here, no disciplinary
action whatsoever was taken against the other officers (and I do not regard
the withdrawal of a facility, such as State vehicles, as a punishment). To put
in another way, if the other officers were so leniently treated, the
Petitioners should have been subjected to a much lesser punishment than
dismissal; and dismissal was unreasonable, arbitrary and discriminatory.



I therefore hold that there was no rational basis for the difference in
treatment.

  
**Article 14 (1) (c) and14(1) (d),**

  
Although leave to proceed was granted only in respect of Article 14(1) (d),
the learned Solicitor-General consented to the Petitioners rights under
Article 14 (1) (c) being considered. It is quite clear that the purported
dismissal of the Petitioners was on account of their participation in trade
'union action, and not on account of any misconduct or considerations
therewith. Learned President's Counsel submitted that the right to form and
join a trade union should not be narrowly interpreted, and that it includes
the concomitant right freely to engage in lawful trade union activity de Alwis
v. Gunawardena (5), However, Article 14 (1) (c) is of general application to
all forms of associations, including trade unions; and not only to the initial
act of forming or joining an association, but to continuing membership and
participation in the lawful activities of the association.



Had the Petitioners been dealt with for engaging in lawful and proper trade
union activity. I would have had no hesitation in granting them relief. But
here their conduct has been tainted with misconduct or impropriety. Since I
hold that they are entitled to relief under

Article 12 (1), I refrain from granting them relief under Article 14 (1) (c)
and (d).



I hold that the Petitioners had not been dismissed by the proper authority;
that the 2nd Respondent improperly deprived them of their right under Chapter
V, Section 7:4; that the Petitioners were improperly and unlawfully prevented
by the Respondents from

**318**



resuming their studies and work; that such action was taken against them, not
for misconduct, but for participating in the trade union activity (and not
because such activity was considered unlawful or improper); and that their
fundamental rights under Article 12(1) have been violated. I order their
reinstatement with effect from 7.12.92, with arrears of salary from 21.12.92;
they will be entitled to resume their course of studies forthwith, retaining
seniority over students subsequently admitted to that course of studies.



The State must, in the public interest, expect high standards of efficiency,
service and fairness from public officers in their dealings with the
administration and the public. In the exercise of constitutional and statutory
powers and jurisdictions, the Judiciary must endeavour to ensure that this
expectation is realised. We are here dealing with provisions of the
Constitutions and rules thereunder, embodying safeguards intended to ensure
that the administration reciprocally extends to public officers, like
standards of just, equitable, and fair treatment in order to enable them to
serve the public as they should, without being unfairly troubled about their
tenure and prospects. Those standards we have to enforce even in regard to
errant public officers. The conduct of the Respondents has fallen short of
those standards, not through mistake or inadvertence, but wilfully. The relief
awarded to the Petitioners must reflect our disapproval of that conduct. I
direct the State to pay each Petitioner compensation in a sum of Rs. 2,000/-
in respect of the infringement of Article 12 (1).



The 2nd Respondent was mainly responsible for the purported dismissal, the
denial of an opportunity to submit an explanation, and the failure to
reinstate the Petitioners, despite receiving the undertaking sought by him. He
was thus responsible for this litigation, and it would have been just and
equitable to have required him to pay the costs incurred by the Petitioners.
However, in this instance I refrain from making such an order solely because
of the Petitioners own lapses

.

**PERERA, J. -** I agree.

** **

**WIJETUNGA, J -** I agree.



_Relief ordered._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/37.html_  

