##  Sarath Amunugama and Others v. Karu Jayasuriya, Chairman, United National
Party and Others - SLR - 172, Vol 1 of 2000 [2000] LKSC 38; (2000) 1 Sri LR
172 (3 February 2000)

**172**

**SARATH AMUNUGAMA AND OTHERS  
V.  
KARU JAYASURIYA, CHAIRMAN,  
UNITED NATIONAL PARTY AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, ACTG. CJ.,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
SC SPL.(E) NO. 4/99 WITH  
SC SPL.(E) NO. 5/99  
SC SPL.(E) NO. 6/99  
SC SPL.(E) NO. 7/99  
SC SPL.(E) NO. 8/99  
26th AND 27th JANUARY, 2000  
  
_Expulsion of members of a recognized political party who are Members of
Parliament -Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution - Validity of the expulsion
- Procedural justice -Audi alteram partem rule.  
_  
Five petitioners (whose cases were heard together) were Members of Parliament
representing the United National Party which is a recognized political party.
They were summarily expelled from the membership of the Party on a decision of
the Working Committee of the Party. The immediate ground of expulsion was that
the petitioners had met President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga and
assured her of winning the Presidential Election 1999 when in fact the United
National Party had nominated its leader Ranil Wickremasinghe as a candidate at
that Election. Two more allegations made especially against petitioner
Amunugama were (1) announcing to the national media about the formation of a
national government without a mandate from the Party and (2) that he had told
the BBC that he would leave the UNP if the Party failed to respond to his
national government concept.  
  
No explanations were called for from the petitioners, no charge sheets were
served and no inquiry was held giving an adequate opportunity to the
petitioners to defend themselves. The Working Committee took the decision for
immediate expulsion on the basis that the petitioners' conduct adversely
affected the election campaign, much damage had been done to the Party and an
urgent decision had to be taken to protect the welfare of the Party and to
ensure the unity of its members.

**173**

**Held:**  
  
1\. There was no mandatory requirement that disciplinary proceedings shall
only be conducted by a Disciplinary Committee (other than the Party Working
Commitee) appointed by the Party Working. Committee.  
  
2\. There was no justification for the failure of the respondents to observe
the principles of natural justice and grant the petitioners a hearing before
they were expelled. The expulsions of the petitioners were, therefore,
invalid.  
  
Per Amerasinghe, Actg. CJ.  
  
"I am of the view that the respondents have failed to establish that the
expulsions fell within the category of extraordinary, urgent circumstances
recognized by courts of law."  
  
**Cases referred :  
**  
1\. Gamini Dissanayake v. M.C.M. Kaleel and Others (1993) 2 Sri LR 135,
155-164, 186  
2\. Stevenson v. United Road Transport Union (1997) 2 ALL E. R. 941, 951  
3\. Lau Liat Mena v. Disciplinary Committee (1968) A.C. 391  
4\. Board of Trustees of Maradana Mosque v. Badi-ud-din Mahmud, Minister of
Education (1967) 1 A.C. 13; (1966) 68 N.L.R. 217  
5\. Hanson v. Church Commissioners for England (1978) Q.B. 823, 838  
6\. R v. Thames Magistrates' Court, ex p. Polemis (1974) 1 W.L.R. 1371, 1375,
1378.  
7\. R v. Pharmaceutical Services Committee ex. p. Gordon D. Conway Ltd the
Times, November 7. 1970.  
8\. Morris v. Lawrence (1977) R.T.R. 205  
9\. Russet v. Duke of Norfolk (1949) 1 ALL E.R. 109,118  
10\. R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p. Doody (1994) 1
A.C. 531, 560, 563  
11\. Premaratne v. Srimani Athulathmudali and others S. C. (SPL) 1 /96 S.C.
Determination of 27 February 1996  
12\. Ridge v. Baldwin (1964) A.C. 40  
13\. A.G. v. Ryan (1980) A.C. 718  
14\. Abbott v. Sullivan (1952) 1 K.B. 189,198  
15\. Cooper v. Wandsworth Board of Works (1863) 14 C.B. (N.S.) 180

**174**

16\. R v. Chancellor of the University of Cambridge (1723) 1 Str. 557, 567  
17\. R v. Justices of West Riding of Yokshire, ex p. Thornton (1837) 7 Ad. on
E. 583, 589  
18\. R v. Wilson (1835) 2 ad. on E. 817, 826  
19\. Wood v. Wood (1874) L. R. 9 Ex 190,196  
20\. Board of Education v. Rice (1911) A. C. 179, 182  
21\. R v. Leman Street Police Station Inspector, ex p. Venicof (1920) 3 K.B.
72  
22\. Nakkuda Ali v. Jayaratne (1950) 51 NLR 457; (1951) A.C. 66  
23\. Hounslow L.B.C. v. Twickenharn Garden Developments (1971) Ch. 233, 258  
24\. R v. Aston University Senate ex p. Roffey (1969) Q. B. 538, 552  
25\. John v. Rees (1970) Ch. 345, 382. 402  
26\. General Medical Council v. Spackman (1943) A. C. 627, 644  
27\. Ramamoorthy and Rameshwaran v. Douglas Devananda and Others (1998) 2 Sri
LR 278, 285  
28\. Anamunthundo v. Oilfield Workers Trade Union (1961) A.C. 945, 956  
29\. Chief Constable of Police v. Evans (1982) 1 W.L.R. 1155. 1160  
30\. R v. Secretary of State for the Environment, ex p. Brent L.B.C. (1982)
Q.13. 593,734  
31\. R v. Secretary of State for Education, ex p. Prior (1994) C. R. 877  
32\. R v. Sussex JJ., ex p. Mc Carthy (1924) 1 K. B. 256, 259  
33\. Altco Ltd v. Sutherland (1971) 2 Lloyd's Rep. 515  
34\. Maxwell v. Department of Trade (1974) 1 Q.B. 523.540  
35\. Fullbrook v. Berkshire Magistrates' Courts Committee (1971) L.G.R. 75,97  
36\. Scott v. Aberdeen Corporation (1976) S.L.T. 141  
37\. Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service (1985)
A.C. 374  
38\. Lloyd v. McMahon (1987) A.C. 625,702  
39\. Durayappah v. Fernando (1966) 69 NLR 265, 267 (1967) 2 A.C. 337,345  
40\. Pratt v. Wanganui Education Board (1977) 1 N.Z.L.R. 476, 485  
41\. Earl v. Stater & Wheeler (Airlyne) Ltd. (1973) 1 W.L.R. 51  
42\. Tilak Karunaratne v. Mrs Sirimavo Bandaranaike and Others (1993) Sri L.R.
90

**175**

**APPLICATION** in terms of Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution challenging
expulsion from the United National Party.  
  
_E. D. Wickremanayake with Gomin Dayasiri, Nigel Hatch and U. Abdul Najeem_
for the petitioners in Nos. 4 - 7/99.  
  
_D.S. Wijesinghe, P.C. with Asoka Somaratne, Dr. Jayamapthy Wickremaratne and
C. Samaranayake_ for the petitioner in No. 8/99.  
  
_Tilak Marapana, P.C. with Dulinda Weerasuriya, Nalin Ladduwahetty, Jayantha
Fernando, Anuja Premaratne, DhammikaJayanetthi and Janaka Marapana_ for 1st to
4th respondents in Nos. 4 and 7/99.  
  
_Shibly Aziz P.C. with Daya Pelpola, S.J. Mohideen, A. P. Niles, R. L. Perera,
Ronald Perera and S. Dayaratne_ for the respondents in Nos. 5 - 6/99.  
  
_Daya Pelpola with Anil Rajakaruna, Luxman Perera and Ronald Perera_ for
respondents in No. 8/99.

_Cur. adv. vult_

3rd February, 2000  
**AMERASINGHE, ACTING C.J.  
**  
It was agreed by the Counsel for the petitioners in this matter that all five
cases should be heard together since they essentially related to similar
issues.  
  
The fifth respondent is the Secretary-General of Parliament and has been made
a party for the purposes of notice only. A reference to "respondents"
hereinafter means and includes only the 1st to 4th respondents.  
  
The petitioners are Members of Parliament. They were members of the United
National Party, a recognized political party. At the time of becoming Members
of Parliament their names appeared on the nomination papers of the United
National Party. In a letter dated the 8th of November 1999, the General
Secretary of the United National Party (the second respondent) wrote to each
of the petitioners as follows:  
  
"The Working Committee of the United National Party at its meeting held on
21st October 1999 having considered the Proclamation issued by H. E. the
President under Art.31

**176**

(3A)(a) (i) of the Constitution declaring her intention of appealing to the
People for a mandate to hold office by election for a further term, decided to
oppose the mandate so sought, by nominating a candidate to contest at the said
election with a view to securing the election as President of Sri Lanka a
member of the United National Party.  
  
The Working Committee further resolved that the Leader of the Party Hon. Ranil
Wickremesinghe MP, should be the Party's candidate.  
  
The aforesaid decisions of the Party Working Committee were ratified at a
Special Convention of the Party held on 31st October 1999 and also by the
Party Parliamentary Group and received publicity in the print and electronic
media.  
  
The Working Committee at its meeting held today (8th November 1999) at 9.00
a.m., took note of the fact that you have nevertheless, without prior
authority or sanction of the United National Party, attended a meeting at
Temple Trees on 5th November 1999 at which were present H. E. Chandrika
Bandaranaike Kumaratunga (who is the rival Presidential candidate of the
People's Alliance) and several of her Party colleagues. At this meeting you
signified your intention and willingness to support her candidature at the
forthcoming election as against that of our Party candidate. You had also
participated in discussion of policy issues such as formation of a national
government without prior discussion within or a mandate of the Party.  
  
The said meeting and your presence and the statements thereat and the pledge
to support her as against the Party's candidate received wide publicity in the
daily press, the state controlled electronic media as also other electronic
media.  
  
The Working Committee notes additionally that you have acted as above despite
your being a United National Party Member of Parliament ...

**177**

Your aforesaid conduct is a serious and flagrant violation of Party loyalty
and discipline and a violation of your duty to act according to and uphold the
Constitution of the United National Party.  
  
In view of the above, the Working Committee of the Party at its said meeting
held today and acting under the powers vested in it under Article 6.3(a) read
with Article 7.15 of the Constitution of the United National Party resolved
that you be expelled with immediate effect from membership of the Party in as
much as your aforesaid conduct is a gross violation of the provisions of
Articles 3.3(a), (b), (c) and (d) read with Article 2.1 and 2.2 of the
Constitution of the Party."  
  
On the 6th of December 1999, three of the petitioners filed applications (E)
4/99 - (E) 7/99 in the Supreme Court in terms of Article 99(13)(a) of the
Constitution. On the7th of December 1999, the fourth petitioner filed a
similar application (E) 8/99.  
  
Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution states as follows  
  
"Where a Member of Parliament ceases by resignation, expulsion or otherwise to
be a member of a recognized political party or independent group on whose
nomination paper (hereinafter referred to as the "relevant nomination paper")
his name appeared at the time of his becoming such Member of Parliament, his
seat shall become vacant upon the expiration of a period of one month from the
date of his ceasing to be such member  
  
Provided that in the case of the expulsion of a Member of Parliament his seat
shall not become vacant if prior to the expiration of the said period of one
month he applies to the Supreme Court by petition in writing, and the Supreme
Court upon such application determines that such expulsion was invalid. Such
petition shall be inquired into by three Judges of the Supreme Court who shall
make their determination within two months of the filing of such petition.
Where the Supreme Court determines that expulsion was valid the expulsion
shall occur from the date of such determination."

**178**

The petitioners pray that the Court declares their expulsion from the
membership of the United National Party invalid and of no legal effect; sets
aside the order and/or decision of the Working Committee of the United
National Party expelling them from the Party; and declares that the
petitioners remain members of the United National Party.  
  
The reliefs claimed are based, among others, on the averment that the
expulsions were in contravention of the mandatory provisions of the Party
Constitution and/or Disciplinary Rules of the Party. The petitioners allege
that:  
  
(i) although under the Party Constitution the Working Committee mandatorily
has to appoint a disciplinary committee to inquire into allegations of
misconduct or indiscipline against party members, and it is only such a
committee that could conduct any inquiry into any allegations of misconduct or
indiscipline, no notice of the appointment of such a commitee was given, and
in fact no such committee was appointed;  
  
(ii) they were not notified that complaints had been made against them and/or
that disciplinary proceedings had been initiated against them;  
  
(iii) no explanation was called for from the petitioners;  
  
(iv) no charge sheet was served on them;  
  
(v) the date, time and place of inquiry were not notified to the petitioners
and they were not called upon to attend such an inquiry;  
  
(vi) no inquiry was held against the petitioners.  
  
The petitioners submitted that it was a recognized condition of the membership
of the Party that disciplinary action would be taken in accordance with the
procedures prescribed by the Party's "Guidelines." The petitioners state that
they

**179**

were expelled in contravention of the Party Guidelines. Therefore the
expulsions were unreasonable and/or arbitrary and in contravention of their
"legitimate expectations". Consequently, the expulsions were invalid and of no
effect  
  
The decision to expel the petitioners was taken at a meeting of the Working
Committee on the 8th of November, 1999. Article 6.3(a) of the U.N.P.
Constitution empowers the National Executive Committee "to enforce the
Constitution, standing orders and rules and the code of conduct of the Party,
and to take any action it deems necessary for such purpose, whether by way of
disciplinary action including expulsion or suspension against any individual
member or an office bearer or otherwise. . ." Article 7.15 states that "The
Party Working Committee shall have the power to exercise the powers, functions
and duties vested in it by the National Executive Committee . . ." Admittedly
in terms of paragraph 01 of the U.N.P. "Guidelines for the conduct of
disciplinary inquiries", "The General Secretary of the Party should write to
the member concerned informing him that a complaint had been received and
notifying him of the Panel of Party Members appointed by the Working Committee
to inquire into and report through the Disciplinary Committee on the
complaint." Article 7.13 of the U.N.P. Constitution states that "The Party
Working Committee shall appoint a Disciplinary Committee." However, in my
view, there was no "mandatory" requirement that disciplinary proceedings shall
only be conducted by a Disciplinary Committee (other than the Party Working
Committee) appointed by the Party Working Committee. The decision to expel the
petitioners cannot be assailed on the ground that the Working Committee lacked
authority. Cf. per Fernando, J. in Gamini Dissanayake v. M.C.M. Kaleel and
Others,(1).  
  
With regard to the averment that there was no inquiry, assuming that the
Working Committee itself conducted the investigation on the 8th of November
1999, such investigation did not proceed on the basis of the Guidelines which
provide as follows

**180**

"05.The inquiry should commence with the Panel briefly outlining to the member
the nature of the evidence the Committee has available. . . The Committee
should then question the complainant, if any further clarification is
necessary, in the presence of the member. Also, any other witnesses. The
member should be given the opportunity to cross-examine the complainant and
the witnesses.  
  
06\. Unlike a Court of Law, a panel conducting a domestic inquiry is entitled
to take steps on its own initiative to obtain information and documents etc.
relevant to the charges. However, if the Panel intends taking into
consideration any such material, it must inform the member concerned during
the inquiry, and give him an opportunity of explaining the same.  
  
07\. The Panel has the flexibility to adopt its own procedure on which the
above-stated guidelines (text obscure) ... What is important however is to
provide the member a fair hearing and a fair chance to explain or controvert
the evidence against him.  
  
08\. The member concerned will be entitled to give evidence on his own behalf
or to call relevant witnesses and produce documents. The Panel will be
entitled to question the member or his witnesses to obtain any clarification.  
  
09\. It will be advisable to maintain notes of the main matters transpiring in
evidence etc. at the inquiry. These notes should be signed by the Chairman of
the Panel. . ."  
  
According to the minutes of the meeting of the Working Committee, pursuant to
which the letters of expulsion were issued, as far as the matters under
consideration were concerned, what took place, was as follows  
  
"Presidential Election 1999"  
  
The General Secretary of the Party referred to the Presidential election.
Since Her Excellency the President Chandrika

**181**

Bandaranaike Kumaratunga had sought election for a further term of six years,
the United National Party had decided that its party leader, Mr. Ranil
Wickremasinghe, should be its candidate at that election. There is a
pronouncement that on the 5th of November 1999 eight gentlemen (who are named
and include the petitioners) met the President and assured her of winning the
election. Their pronouncement has been conveyed to the public through the
radio, television and printed means of communication. The relevant newspaper
reports were tabled. The conduct of these gentlemen violate Articles 2(i),
2(ii) and 3:3(a) (b) (c) (d) of the Party Constitution. Notice of the meeting
taking place today has been given to Mr. Nanda Matthew, Mr. Susil Moonesinghe
and Dr. Stanley Kalpage and they have by Fax stated that they are unable to be
present.  
  
Further, it was stated that a letter dated 03/11/99 had been sent to Mr.
Sarath Amunugama requiring him to show cause why he should be excused for
announcing to the national media about the formation of a national government
without the permission of the leader of the Party and of its Working
Committee.  
  
Mr. John Amaratunga, M.P., observed that some of the people concerned were
officials of the U.N.P. and members of its Working Committee and that at this
time the misconduct of these people would adversely affect the election
campaign and confuse the minds of voters. Because of wide publicity, much
damage had been done to the Party. Moreover, he said, they had violated the
rules of the Party and the conditions of their .membership. An urgent decision
had to be taken to protect the welfare of the Party and to ensure the unity of
its members. He proposed the immediate expulsion of the eight persons.  
  
Mr. Gamini Lokuge, M.P., spoke in support of the proposal, and the members of
the Working Commitee unanimously voted in favour of the proposal. Mr. Ranil
Wickramasinghe abstained from voting. It was decided that the Secretary-
General of Parliament be informed of the expulsion of five Members of
Parliament.

**182**

A Committee of six persons was appointed to deal with other members who worked
against the Party.  
  
The U.N.P. Guidelines provide that where a complaint is received against a
member of the Party,  
  
"O1.The General Secretary of the Party should write to the member concerned
informing him that a complaint had been received and notifying him of the
names of the Panel of Party Members appointed by the Working Committee to
inquire into and report through the Disciplinary Committee on the complaint
...  
  
02\. The Panel should examine the complaint made, and the Chairman of the
Panel should write to the member concerned requesting his explanation, in the
first instance. A copy of the complaint should be forwarded to the member. A
period of seven/ten days could be allowed for the submission of the member's
explanation.  
  
03\. If the explanation submitted is unsatisfactory or unacceptable, and the
Panel is of the view that further inquiry is necessary, a charge-sheet should
then be prepared by the Panel and forwarded to the member ...  
  
04\. The Panel should notify the complainant also to be present at the
inquiry."  
  
Admittedly as far as the petitioner in Application (E) 4/ 99, Dr. Sarath
Amunugama, is concerned, a letter dated the3rd of November 1999 had been sent
to him by the General Secretary of the U.N.P. (Mr. Gamini Atukorale, the
second respondent). That letter stated as follows  
  
"The Daily News in its publication of Monday 1st November 1999, under the
headline Sarath Amunugama tells BBC he will quit U.N.P. has stated "he will
definitely leave the U.N.P. if there is no proper response from the Party for
his National Government concept." It is further noted that there has been

**183**

no denial by you as to the making of this statement or the accuracy of the
contents of the article under reference. (Copy of the article enclosed).  
  
You have thus acted in breach of the Party Constitution, Party Discipline and
contrary to the conduct required of a U.N.P. Member in Parliament and the
decision of the Parliamentary Group at its meeting held on 22-10-99, that no
member makes any statements to the media without prior approval of the Party.  
  
I would be grateful to have your immediate explanation and response to the
aforesaid to reach me not later than Sunday 7th November 1999."  
  
On the 5th of November, 1999, Dr, Amunugama responded as follows  
  
"Without prejudice to my rights to proffer a fuller response, I wish to inform
you that you have failed to inform me to what provisions of the Party
Constitution I have contravened or what aspect of party discipline and/or the
conduct required of a U.N.P. Member in Parliament that I have allegedly acted
in breach of. Your said letter is accordingly vague and incomplete as regards
material particulars. You have also failed to afford me sufficient time to
respond to your said letter, and in the circumstances as I require time to not
only collate information in order to respond to your said letter but also be
furnished with the above mentioned information, I request that you inform me
of what precise provision/s I have breached and send me a copy of the Party
Constitution and all other documents you rely on in connection therewith, and
afford me at least a week therefrom to respond. I also wish to reiterate that
I remain a member of the U.N.P."  
  
According to the minutes of the Working Committee, the two letters tabled
related to Dr. Amunugama's activities

**184**

concerning the formation of a national government. He had asked for
clarification of the charges against him. He had wanted to know what
provisions of the Party Constitution he had violated and called for a copy of
the Constitution and all other documents relied upon in support of the charge,
and he asked for time to submit his defence. Sometimes "A case may be of so
uncomplex a character and the issues may be so well known to all parties
concerned that no more particular notice of any charge may be required." Per
Buckley, L.J. in Stevenson v. United Road Transport Union,(2). The case
against Dr. Amunugama was complex and the issues were far from clear. He had a
legal right to know the precise charge he had to meet. The charge should have
been distinctly stated. He was expelled for two reasons : (1) Participation in
the discussion of policy issues such as the formation of a national government
without prior discussion of mandate of the Party, and (2) supporting H.E.
Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga. The sole charge in the letter to Dr.
Amunugama was that he had told the BBC that he would leave the U.N.P. if there
was no response from the Party for his National Government concept and that he
had thereby acted in breach of the "Party Constitution, Party Discipline and
contrary to the conduct required of a U.N.P. Member in Parliament and the
decision of the Parliamentary Group at its meeting held on 22/10/1999 that no
Member makes any statements to the media without prior approval of the Party.
That was somewhat different to the charge relating to the matter of a national
government as set out in the letter conveying the decision to expel him.  
  
Even assuming that he had notice of the first charge, Dr. Amunugama had no
notice of the second, and therefore as a matter of law, he could not have been
expelled. Eg. See Lau Liat Mena v. Disciplinary Commitee,(3), where notice was
given of proposed action on ground X but action was taken on ground Y of which
no notice, or inadequate notice, had been given. In Board of Trustees of
Maradana Mosque v. Badi-ud din mahmud, Minister of Education (4), the Privy
Council held that there had been a breach of natural justice where the
Minister told the

**185**

managers of a school of one allegation against them to which they prepared a
defence but, in his decision, made it plain that he was taking over the school
in reliance on a breach of a statutory provision of which the managers had no
notice at all.  
  
Dr. Amunugama had asked for time to respond. As a matter of law, he was
entitled to sufficient time to have the opportunity of presenting an effective
answer or defence: Hanson v. Church Commissioners for England,(5); R v. Thames
Magistrates' Court, ex p. Polemis( ); R v. Pharmaceutical Services Committee,
ex p. Gorden D. Conway Ltd.(7); Morris v. Lawrence(8). He received no response
whatever to his letter whether on the question of time or the other matters
raised by him. In the circumstances, did his failure to respond to the charge
made against him, namely of supporting or sponsoring the concept of a national
government, before the meeting held on the 8th of November make him guilty of
conduct warranting expulsion, or for that matter any other form of discipline,
on the 8th of November? The `show- cause' letter had been dated the 3rd of
November 1999. According to paragraph 02 of the U.N.P. Guidelines, a period of
seven/ten days should be allowed for a member's explanation. In any event, if
the Working Committee was on the 8th of November 1999 acting as a disciplinary
committee, Dr. Amunugama was not invited to that meeting.  
  
Mr. Nanda Matthew (the petitioner in (E) 5/99) and Mr. Susil Moonesinghe (the
petitioner in (E) 7/99) were invited to attend the meeting of the Working
Commitee as Members of that Committee, but without any intimation that the
agenda of the meeting included disciplinary action against them. They did not
attend the meeting due to prior engagements. Indeed, the disciplinary
proceedings are reported in the minutes of the meeting under the caption
"Presidential Election 1999". Mr. Wijepala Mendis and Mr. Chula Bandara, not
being members of the Working Committee, were not invited to attend the meeting
and did not have even a remotely possible, albeit inadequate, opportunity of
defending themselves.

**186**

Both Dr. Amunugama as well as the other petitioners ought, in my view, to have
had a reasonable opportunity of presenting their cases and making
representations on their own behalf. See per Tucker L.J. in Russell v. Duke
Norfolk,(9). This was distinctly contemplated by the Party Guidelines.
Procedural fairness generally requires that persons liable to be directly
affected by a decision of a person or a body of persons be given adequate
notice of what is proposed so that they may be in a position to make
representations on their own behalf. This has been described as a proposition
of common sense. See per Lord Mustill in R. u. Secretary of State for the Home
Department, ex p. Doody,(10).  
  
The petitioners' averments that no explanations were called for, no charge-
sheets were served, no notice of the date, time and place of inquiry were
given, and that the petitioners were not called upon to attend the inquiry,
were not disputed at the inquiry by this Court. In fact, the petitioners had
no opportunity for contradicting, correcting or explaining anything
prejudicial to their views. They were expelled summarily.  
  
On the face of the evidence on record. I hold that the averment that the Party
Guidelines in respect of disciplinary inquiries were not observed has been
established.  
  
In deciding to expel the petitioners there was a failure on the part of the
respondents to follow the usual, salutary procedural steps laid down by the
political party to which the petitioners belonged. The Guidelines of the Party
prescribed a process for disciplinary action to ensure fairness, and as a
condition of membership it was to be expected that the usual process would be
duly followed.  
  
In the absence of proof of circumstances permitting such failure, the failure
to. follow the prescribed procedures of the political party of the petitioners
would ordinarily, make an expulsion invalid since, as far as the petitioners
are concerned, it is unlawful, null and void and of no force or avail in fact
or

**187**

in law. Premaratne v. Srimani Athulathmudali and Others, (11); Cf. Ridge v.
Baldwin,(12); A-G., . v. Ryan,(13); Paul Jackson, Natural Justice, 1979, p.
194. The respondents ought not to have condemned the petitioners without
giving them an opportunity of being heard. in their own defence. Cf. Abbott v.
Sullivan,(14).  
  
The petitioners allege that their expulsions were also invalid because the
respondent failed to comply with the principles of "natural Justice." "Natural
Justice" is an ambiguous phrase, and consigned from time to time to the lumber
room as a term "sadly lacking in precision". E.g. see Paul Jackson, op. cit.,
pp. 1-22; Those who decline to accept any form of justice as natural may take
their choice from a wide range of alternative phrases, including, "substantial
justice", "fair play in action", "fair play written large and juridically". De
Smith, Woolf and Jowell, Judicial Review of Administrative Action, (1995), pp.
377-378. Whatever the uncertainty inherent in the phrase, "natural justice"
connotes, above all, the maxim audi alteram partem.  
  
What is the fuss about natural justice and the right to a fair hearing about?
The right to a hearing has been accepted as a basic principle in many
civilizations and over many years. In Greece, the requirement of hearing both
sides before reaching a conclusion formed a part of the Athenian judicial oath
and is referred to by Aristophanes, Euripedes and Demosthenes. The Greeks
inscribed the precept that no man was to be judged unheard upon images in
places where justice was administered. The Romans too accepted the principle.
Seneca in Medeareferred to the injustice of reaching a decision without a full
hearing - Qui statuit aliquid parte inaudita altera, aequum, licet statuerit,
haud aequus fuerit; and the Digest contained a prohibition on a paterfamilias
killing his son without a hearing. As might be expected, in Sri Lanka too
matters were adjudicated after hearing both sides: "ubhaya paksayen ma adyanta
asa ganna dadek da', says the Saddharmarathnavaliya365. Only Rhadamanthus, the
cruel judge of Hell, it seems punished before he heard.

**188**

Indeed, having regard to the widespread acceptance of that basic principle, G.
Del Vecchio in Justice went so far as to suggest that it belongs "rather to
the common consciousness of mankind than to juridical science." The rule has
been described as being of "universal application and founded on the plainest
principles of justice". Per wiles, J. in Cooper v. Wandsworth Board of
Works,(15). (On the historical development of the concept of "natural
justice", see de Smith, Woolf & Jowell, op. cit. pp. 377-399; H.W.R. Wade &
C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law, (1995) pp. 497-578).  
  
As far as the law is concerned, we have in Sri Lanka in this area closely
followed the common law which, from very early times, recognized the right to
a fair hearing. In R. v. Chancellor of the University of Cambridge,(16),
support for the right to a hearing was based by Fortescue J. on the events in
the Garden of Eden; "I remember to have heard it observed by a very learned
man upon such an occasion, that even God himself did not pass sentence upon
Adam, before he was called upon to make his defence. `Adam', says God, `where
art thou'? 'Hast thou not eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that
thou shouldst not eat?' And the same question was put to Eve also".  
  
Throughout the nineteenth century the English courts freely, and sometimes
vigorously, imputed an obligation to observe the rule. Two dicta of Lord
Denman illustrate the importance attached to the right to a fair hearing
during that era. "No rule is more invariable than that a person shall not be
prejudiced in any manner without being heard." R. v. Justices of West Riding
of Yorkshire, ex p. Thornton,(17). "It is implied by nature justice ... that
no one ought to suffer any prejudice ... without having first an opportunity
of defending himself." R v. Wilson,(18).  
  
The rule was not confined to the conduct of strictly legal tribunals but was
said to be "applicable to every tribunal or body of persons invested with
authority to adjudicate upon matters involving civil consequences to
litigants." Per Kelly, C.B. in Wood v. Wood,(19).  
  


**189**

The rule continued to be liberally applied in the early part of the twentieth
century. Thus Lord Loreburn in Board of Education v. Rice,(20), said that to
"act in good faith and fairly listen to both sides ... is a duty lying upon
everyone who decides anything."  
  
Commencing perhaps with R v. Leman Street Police Station Inspector, ex p.
Venicof, (21), the audi alteram partem rule suffered debilitation, at first,
partly on account of the exigencies of unsettled wartime conditions. But the
climate of judicial opinion persisted even after hostilities had ended.
Eventually, it entered what has been described as its "twilight" years. And
that era was influenced by the decision in Nakkuda Ali v. Jayaratne,(22), in
which it was decided by the Privy Council that a Ceylon trader could be
deprived of his trading licence without any trial or hearing, although Judges
of the Supreme Court of Ceylon (as Sri Lanka was then known) were, in general,
firmly committed to the principle of hearing the other side.  
  
Since the House of Lords case in Ridge v. Baldwin, (supra), the courts have so
energetically extended frontiers of natural justice that Megarry, J. was
impelled to recommend that its principles "must be confined within proper
limits and not allowed to run wild." Hounslow L.B.C. v. Twickenham Garden
Developments,(23).  
  
Today, in certain circumstances, natural justice may not always involve a
right to a fair hearing. E.G. R. v. Aston University Senate, exp. Roffey,(24),
per Donaldson, J. and, as we shall see, the respondents in this inquiry rely
upon that position. Yet it must be noted that the rule of law requires some
form of due process designed to ascertain the truth and that the precepts of
natural justice insure that legal order will be impartially and regularly
maintained. John Rawls, A Theory of justice, (1972), p. 239. It must also be
noted that fair proceedings aim not merely at such instrumental ends as
accuracy but that they are also a constituent element of the legal and
democratic process which should treat individuals with concern and respect. De
Smith, Woolf & Jowell, p. 376, note 2.

**190**

I have briefly set out the ground lying behind the issues pertaining to the
matters before me, particularly the audi alteram partem rule, so that what
follows may be better understood. The respondents do not deny the importance
of the rule; their case is that, in the circumstances of the matters before
us, the petitioners were not entitled to a hearing, Two reasons were given:
(1) Uselessness and (2) urgency.  
  
I am unable to accept the submissions of learned counsel for the respondents
that a hearing would have been "useless" for several reasons.  
  
A hearing was not useless, for a hearing before the offending decision of
expulsion might have assuaged the pain caused to the petitioners as well as
their families, friends and supporters. As Megarry, V.C. observed in John v.
Rees,(25): "Those with any knowledge of human nature who pause to think for a
moment (are not) likely to underestimate the feelings of resentment of those
who find that a decision against them has been made without their being
afforded any opportunity to influence the course of events."  
  
Wade & Forsyth, op. cit. p. 526, point out that "in principle it is vital that
the procedure and the merits should be kept strictly apart, since otherwise
the merits may be prejudged unfairly." The observations of Lord Wright in
General Medical Council v. Spackman,(26) (cited later in my judgement), are
quoted in support. "If the principles of natural justice are violated in
respect of any decision it is, indeed, immaterial whether the same decision
would have been arrived at in the absence of the departure from the essential
principles of justice. The decision must be declared to be no decision."  
  
I should also refer to the following observations of de Smith, Woolf & Jowell
at p. 500: "The Courts have rightly cautioned against the suggestion that no
prejudice has been caused to the applicant because the flawed decision would
inevitably have been the same. It is not for the Courts to substitute their
opinion for that of the authority constituted by law to decide the matters in
question."

**191**

The respondents maintained that a fair hearing would have been futile. It
would have made no difference to the result. Numerous newspaper reports
relating to events before the expulsion were read, it was said by learned
counsel for the respondents - to establish the guilt of the petitioners - and
after the expulsion - "to throw light" on the petitioner's intentions and
"corroborate" the evidence available against them when the decision to expel
them was taken. Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that there was
clear and sufficient evidence that the petitioners supported candidate
President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, although the U.N.P., of which
the petitioners were members, had nominated its leader, Mr. Ranil
Wickramasinghe, to oppose President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga at the
forthcoming Presidential Election. It was pointed out that the petitioners
were expelled for violating Article 3.3 of the U.N.P. Constitution which
states that  
  
"In accepting membership a person agrees  
  
(a) To accept the principles, policy and code of conduct of the Party.  
  
(b) To conform to the Constitution, Rules and Standing Orders of the Party.  
  
(c) To give all possible support to the candidates nominated by the Party and
in no way to support any other person standing against such candidates ...  
  
(d) Not to take part in any political or other activities which conflict or
might conflict with the above undertakings and not to bring the Party into
disrepute.  
  
(e)...................  
  
The respondents submitted that the crucial issue was not the question of a
national government, which the petitioners had stressed at the inquiry before
this Court, but the fact that

**192**

the petitioners had pledged their support for, and in fact supported, a person
who was standing against the leader of the U.N.P. who had been nominated by
the U.N.P. In the circumstances, even if the petitioners had been formally
charged, noticed to appear and heard, there could have been no defence to the
charge and there was nothing that could have altered the decision arrived at
by the Working Committee. The principles of natural justice would have been of
no avail. A hearing would have been useless.  
  
Procedural objections may be made by unmeritorious parties and relief may
sometimes be refused because a fair hearing could have made no difference to
the result. However, experience shows that unanswerable charges, may, if the
opportunity be given, be answered; inexplicable conduct may be explained. Wade
& Forsyth, op. cit., p. 527; Jackson, op. cit. p. 137. Megarry, J. in John v.
Rees, (supra), followed with approval by this Court in Ramamoorthy and
Rameshwaran v. Douglas Devana and others,(27), and in Gamini Dissanayake v.
M.C.M. Kaleel and Others, (supra), observed as follows  
  
"When something is obvious, it may be said, `why force everybody to go through
the tiresome waste of time involved in framing charges and giving an
opportunity to be heard? The result is obvious from the start.' Those who take
this view do not, I think, do themselves justice. As everybody who has
anything to do with the law well knows, the path of the law is strewn with
examples of open and shut cases which, somehow, were not; of unanswerable
charges which, in the event, were completely answered, of inexplicable conduct
which was fully explained; of fixed and unalterable determinations that, by
discussion, suffered a change."  
  
The matters before us, could hardly be described as "open and shut" cases. I
am in agreement with learned counsel for the respondents that this Court
should not act in vain and waste its time by insisting on useless formalities.
Yet in these matters the Court was not concerned with useless formalities.

**193**

For instance, The only charge Dr. Amunugama had been called upon to answer
was, as we have seen, that he had made statements to the press about the
formation of a national government. However, he was expelled on other grounds.  
  
Mr. Bandara, the petitioner in (E) 08/99 states that he did go to the official
residence of the President, but that his visit was brief - because he had to
be in the Court of Appeal - and that his participation was limited to
answering a call to explore the possibility of the formation of a national
government rather than supporting a rival candidate.  
  
Certain petitioners reject some of the newspaper reports as not being
attributable to them. Other petitioners lay stress on the need to have a
national, rather than a partisan approach, to questions of national
significance. Mr. Pelpola described the national government idea as a "hoax",
a "camouflage", disguising the real intention of the petitioners, namely, to
oppose the candidate nominated by the U.N.P. However, the stated grounds of
dismissal were two separate charges, namely, that (1) at a meeting with
President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga and several of her party
colleagues, the petitioners had signified their intentions and willingness to
support the President who was a rival candidate to the leader of the U.N.P.,
Mr. Ranil Wickramasinghe; and (2) that the petitioners had "participated in
discussion of policy issues such as the formation of a national government
without prior discussion or mandate of the Party."  
  
What was the truth? The petitioners claim they had something to say with
regard to their meeting the rival candidate and even supporting her on the
question of a national government. The flawed decisions may or may not have
necessarily been the same had the petitioners been heard: Perhaps, after
hearing the petitioners fairly, the respondents may have concluded that all
that talk about a national government was a sham, and the result may have been
the same. Yet, in my view, that decision was not arrived

**194**

at fairly and must therefore be set aside. Lord Wright said in General Medical
Council v. Spackman, (supra); Cf. Anamunthundo v. Oilfields Workers Trade
Union,(28), "If the principles of natural justice are violated in respect of
any decision, it is indeed immaterial whether the same decision would have
been arrived at in the absence of the essential principles of justice. The
decision must be declared to be no decision." I must make it clear that I am
not in the process of substituting my opinion for that of the Working
Committee of the U.N.P. It is not for me to do so. E.g. seeper Lord Hailsham
in Chief Constable of Police v. Evans,(20); see also per Lord Brightaman,
1173. See also John v. Rees, (supra); R v. Secretary of State for the
Environment ex p. Brent L.B. C.,(30); R v. Secretary of State for Education,
ex p. Prior,(31) per Brooke, J.  
  
If the petitioners deserved to be expelled, and justice had been done, in
making their decision, was justice also seen to be done? The petitioners
complain that the principles of natural justice have been violated. Natural
justice is not always or entirely about the fact or substance of fairness. It
has also something to do with the appearance of fairness. De Smith, Woolf &
Jowell, op. cit., p. 500. Public confidence in the settlement of disputes
requires that even in so called "open and shut" cases the principles of
natural justice must be observed so as to ensure not only that justice was
done but also, to use the time hallowed phrase used by Lord Hewart C.J. in R.
v. Sussex JJ, ex p. McCarthy,(32), that it should be "manifestly and
undoubtedly be seen to be done." See also per Donaldson, J. in Altco Ltd v.
Sutherland,(33).  
  
Lord Widgery C.J. in R. v. Thames Magistrates' Court, ex p. Polemis, (supra),
1375, said: "It is again absolutely basic to our system that justice must not
only be done but must manifestly be seen to be done. If justice was so clearly
not seen to be done, as on the afternoon in question here, it seems to me that
it is no answer to the applicant to say: 'Well, even if the case had been
properly conducted, the result would have been the same.' That is mixing up
doing justice with seeing that justice is done." Lawton L.J. in Maxwell v.
Department of Trade,(34)

**195**

said: "Doing what is right may still result in unfairness if it is done in the
wrong way."  
  
The U.N.P. is a major political party. The General Secretary of the Party was
quoted as stating that it was a "disciplined party." In the handling of these
matters, it would not, in my view, have been an useless exercise to have
adhered to the principles of natural justice for the sake of preserving public
confidence. In discussing the justifications for requiring a hearing even
where there appears to be no answer to a charge, Jackson, op. cit. p. 137,
observed that "suspicion is inevitable that a body which refuses a hearing
before acting does: so because of the lack of evidence not because of its
strength."  
  
Learned counsel for the petitioners pointed out that some of the newspaper
reports that were produced at the inquiry before the Court implicated some,
but not the other petitioners. Some reports attributed certain statements to
certain petitioners but not the others. Moreover, some of the statements were
ambiguous, and others had to understood in the context of the endeavour to
forge a national consensus on matters of general, public concern. Further,
there were reports of things that were not told to the reporters but were
supposed to have been said to other persons. In the circumstances, a fair
hearing would have been useful to ascertain the truth and to apportion blame
fairly and enable the Committee to impose appropriate sanctions. Indeed the
petitioners in their petitions stated that the sanction of expulsion was
"excessive and totally disproportionate" to their conduct.  
  
The respondents case was that the petitioners were all in this thing together,
acting collectively with one purpose in mind, namely to oppose the U.N.P.
candidate and support his rival at the election. There was a repudiation of
the conditions of their membership. Their conduct was tantamount to crossing
the floor of the House and joining the ranks of the other side. Their
statements and conduct reduced the petitioners to being caught as it were in
flagrant delicto and there was therefore no need for further inquiry.

**196**

The petitioners may have been guilty of grave misconduct; but as Stephenson J.
pointed out in brook v. Berkshire Magistrates' Courts Committee,(35), "There
are, after all, degrees of grave misconduct and explanations if not excuses
for it."  
  
In Ridge v. Baldwin, (supra) it had been decided by the trial judge that the
Chief Constable had no right to be heard by the Watch Committee since "out of
the Chief Constable's own mouth at the Central Criminal Court, for the
purposes of his trial, for all the world as well as the Watch Committee to
hear, the plaintiff convicted himself of unfitness to hold the office of Chief
Constable." The House of Lords, reversed the trial judge on this point
because, even if the Chief Constable could not have hoped in the disciplinary
proceedings to persuade the Watch Committee that he ought to be allowed to
continue in his position, the committee had open to it a number of courses
and, if they had heard the Chief Constable, might have followed the most
lenient course."  
  
In the matters before me, in my view, the hearing would not have been a
useless formality, for the Working Committee had a choice of sanction. It was
quite unlike Scott v. Aberdeen Corporation,(36), where there was a statutory
duty to dismiss the person. In that case Scott argued that the Corporation,
although under a statutory duty to dismiss him, had an obligation to give him
a hearing before doing so. Lord Aronside at p. 147 in rejecting that claim,
said: "It cannot be a denial of ,natural justice' to refuse a man the right to
attempt to persuade those entrusted with the administration of substantive law
to breach the law which it is their duty to uphold."  
  
The respondents submitted that the rules of natural justice were in the
circumstances of the case excluded by practical considerations. The election
campaign was on and it was imperative that the cohesiveness of the party was
safeguarded. The petitioners were not only expressing their open support for
the rival candidate, they were also attempting to persuade others at grass
roots level to vote against the party. Immediate action was called for

**197**

Urgency has, in certain circumstances, been regarded as permitting a departure
from the need to give a hearing before action is taken. For instance, the
right to a fair hearing may have to yield to overriding considerations of
national security. Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil
Service,(37). The right may also have to yield to considerations of public
health or safety. Obviously, a hearing cannot be held about whether a fire
brigade, in the course of a fire, should destroy a building. De Smith, Woolf &
Jowell, op. cit.,. p. 375. A public authority may need to seize and destroy
bad meat exposed for sale or to order the removal to hospital of a person with
an infectious disease without a hearing. In general, whether the need for
urgent action outweighs the importance of notifying and hearing an affected
party is a matter on which opinions may differ. However, having regard to the
decisions in which urgency has been held to be a defence, (E.g. see de Smith,
Woolf & Jowell, op. cit. pp. 482 \- 488, Wade & Forsyth, op. cit., 519 - 520
and 570 et seq.) I am of the view that the respondents have failed to
establish that the expulsion fell within the category of extraordinary, urgent
circumstances recognized by courts of law.  
  
The content of fair procedures is flexible. As Lord Bridge has put it: "the
so-called rules of natural justice are not engraved on tablets of stone."
Lloyd v. McMahon,(38). "The principles of fairness are not to be applied by
rote in every situation. What fairness demands depends on the context of the
decision". Lord Mustill in R v. Secretary of State for the Home Department,
exp. Doody ,(supra). Admittedly, the opportunity of a fair hearing may have
been limited in the circumstances. For instance, the time for responding to a
charge sheet, or making submissions may have had to be reduced. Yet, the
petitioners were entitled to be told what they were charged with and afforded
some opportunity of explaining themselves. The petitioners were Members of
Parliament and expulsion could have led to losing their seats. The very
gravity of the matter required that at least a limited hearing was given to
the petitioners before a decision was taken to expel them.

**198**

Lord Upjohn in Durayappah v. Fernando,(39), observed that ". . . while great
urgency may rightly limit such opportunity timeously, perhaps severely, there
can never be a denial of that opportunity if the principles of natural justice
are applicable." Although the need to act swiftly may modify or limit what
natural justice requires, it must not to be thought 'that because rough, swift
or imperfect justice only is available that there ought to be no justice' :
Pratt v. Wanganui Education Board, (40) per Somers, J.": Jackson op. cit., p.
136.  
  
The summary dismissals were intrinsically unfair even though they may have
been fully justified off Early Slater and Wheeler (Airlyne) Ltd.,(14). In my
view, there was no justification for the failure of the respondents to observe
the principles of natural justice and grant the petitioners a hearing before
they were expelled. I therefore determine that the expulsions of the
petitioners were void and of no force or effect in law and therefore, for the
purposes of Article 99(13) (a) of the Constitution, invalid.  
  
Mr. Aziz submitted that, if the Court determines that the expulsions were
invalid because of the failure to observe the rules of natural justice, it was
obliged to decide whether on the merits the expulsions were valid. He relied
principally on certain observations of Fernando, J. in Gamini Dissanayake v.
Kaleel and Others, (supra). In that case, it was admitted that the petitioners
were neither informed of the allegations and the evidence against them, nor
afforded an opportunity (i) to submit an explanation (ii) to be heard in their
defence or (iii) to make any submissions on the law and the facts, as to
whether misconduct warranting disciplinary action had been proved, and, if so,
whether a lesser penalty than expulsion was necessary. Therefore there was a
violation of the audi alteram partem rule.  
  
However, Fernando, J. at p. 198 stated as follows: "Our jurisdiction under
Article 99(13)(a) is not a form of judicial review, or even appeal, but rather
an original jurisdiction

**199**

analagous to an action for a declaration, though it is clearly not a re-
hearing. Are we concerned only with the decision-making process, or must we
also look at the decision itself to decide whether the expulsion was valid or
invalid . . . Had these proceedings been purely by way of judicial review; it
may well be that we would have to shut our eyes to the merits of the decision,
and look only at the decision making process . . ." Fernando, J. went on to
hold that the expulsion of six of the petitioners was invalid but that the
expulsion of two of them was valid. In the same case, the majority held that
the expulsions of all the petitioners were valid.  
  
Kulatunga, J. (with whom Wadugodapitiya, J. agreed) stated at p. 242 that
"since the petitioners had not been prepared to submit themselves to the party
councils, then, there is no force in their complaint that the Working
Committee had failed to give them a hearing. I hold that the Working Committee
acted fairly and reasonably in taking disciplinary proceedings against the
petitioners in the way it did.  
  
Kulatunga, J. went into the merits of the case and concluded at p. 246 that
"the remedy of expulsion befits the mischief unleashed by the petitioners".  
  
However, Kulatunga, J. seems to suggest that it is not in every case that the
Court should go into the merits. At p. 234 His Lordship said: "The right of a
M.P. to relief under Article 99(13)(a) is a legal right and forms part of his
constitutional rights as a M.P. If his complaint is that he has been expelled
from the membership of his party in breach of the rules of natural justice, he
will ordinarily be entitled to relief,, and this Court may not determine such
expulsion to be valid unless there are overwhelming reasons warranting such
decision. Such decision would be competent only in the most exceptional
circumstances permitted by law and in furtherance of the public good the need
for which should be beyond doubt." If there is any doubt about such matters,
"the expulsion will be struck down."

**200**

In Tilak Karunanaratne v. Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike and Others,(42), the
petitioner, a Member of Parliament, was expelled from his party on a decision
of the Executive Commit tee of the party to which he refused to submit. He
challenged his expulsion in terms of Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution.
Dheeraratne, J. at p. 115 stated that, in view of the conclusion His Lordship
had reached, namely that "the petitioner's impugned statements are justified"
in that he was exercising his Constitutional rights of freedom of speech and
association, it was "unnecessary" to deal with certain questions, including a
"failure to observe principles of natural justice in the decision making
process." Dheeraratne, J. (Wijetunga, J. agreeing) held that the expulsion of
the petitioner was invalid. Dheeraratne J. said at pp. 101-102 that Article
99(13) (a) conferred an original jurisdiction on the Court empowering it to go
into the merits and shield Members of Parliament from being "unlawfully and/or
capriciously" expelled from their parties. His Lordship did not accept the
submission of learned counsel, Mr. H.L. de Silva, P.C., that investigations by
the Court should be restricted to the question whether proper procedures had
been followed, lest judges might find themselves wandering into the "political
thicket", and cited with approval the observations of Fernando, J. quoted
above in Dissanayake on that question. In Karunanayake, (supra), Ramanathan,
J. at p. 117, rejected the proposition that the business of the Court in the
exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution
extends to deciding whether an expulsion is right or wrong after deciding
whether a fair procedure had been followed.  
  
In Ramamoorthy's case, (supra), the Court (G.P.S. de Silva, C.J., Wijetunga
and Shirani Bandaranayake, JJ.) did not refer to the observations of Fernando,
J. in Dissanayake, but held that the expulsions were invalid, without going
into the merits of the decision that was challenged, quoting with approval the
observations of Kulatunga, J. in Dissanayake referred to above. The Court at
p. 287 held that the "weighty, considerations" in Dissanayake did not exist in
the matter

**201**

before them and therefore "strict compliance with the audi aleram partern rule
was a precondition to a valid expulsion from the party."  
  
In Premaratne v. Srimani Athulathmudali and Others, (supra), the Court
(Amerasinghe, Wadugodapitiya, and S.N. Silva, JJ) held that the expulsion was
invalid and did not proceed to decide on the reasonableness or rationality of
the decision.  
  
Assuming without deciding that I may go into the quality of the decision, I
would not do so in this case for at least three reasons: (1) The evidence is
incomplete; the respondents have not furnished the Court with the evidence
relating to the radio and television broadcasts they relied on for their
decision; Nor were the reports said to have been tabled at the meeting of the
Working Committee identified, if they were among the reports tabled at this
inquiry; (2) unlike Dissanayake (see pp. 142 and 242) the facts in the matters
before me are in dispute; (3) there are no "weighty considerations" which
compel me to advance beyond the realm of procedural justice, and therefore I
should follow the course of action suggested by Kulatunga, J. in Dissanayake
and taken by the Court in Ramarnoorthy. I hold the decision to expel the
petitioners invalid for want of procedural propriety.  
  
For the purposes of Article 99(13) (a) of the Constitution, for the reasons
given in my judgment, I determine that the expulsions by the respondents of
Sarath Amunugama, Nanda Mathew, Wijayapala Mendis, Susil Kumar Moonesinghe and
R.M.R. Chula Bandara were invalid.  
  
In all the circumstances, I make no order as to costs.  
  
**BANDARANATAKE, J**. - I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Expulsions of the petitioners from the party determined invalid._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/38.html_  

