##  Weerasena v. Perera, A.D.R. - SLR - 121, Vol 1 of 1991 [1991] LKSC 38;
(1991) 1 Sri LR 121 (24 May 1991)

**121**

**WEERASENA  
V.  
A.D.R. PERERA**

SUPREME COURT  
BANDARANAYAKE , J.  
FERNANDO, J. AND  
DHEERARATNE J  
SC. APPEAL 42/90; CA 281/88 (F) D.C. MOUNT LAVINIA 1351/RE.  
JANUARY 16 AND 22, 1991.  
  
_Rent and Ejectment - One contract of letting - Excepted premises - Sub-
division for rating purposes - Whether sub-divided portion falls within Rent
Act.  
  
_The Plaintiff let premises No. 97, Stanley Tillakeratne Mawatha, Nugegoda, to
the Defendant in 1972, which premises were excepted premises. The rear portion
of the premises, a store room was later separately assessed as 97B. The
Plaintiffs action for ejectment failed as premises No. 97B was alleged to be
covered by the Rent Act and there being no valid termination. The Court of
Appeal reversed the judgment and directed ejectment from the full premises.  
  
**Held:  
**  
(i) Where there has been one contract of letting, the mere assessment and sub-
division of a part of that premises does not give rise to a separate letting
or give birth to a new premises, when the sub-division is an adjunct of the
former.  
  
(ii) The entity of protection is not the premises, but the contract -
Imbuldeniya V. de Silva (4) applied.  
  
(iii) Applying the test in Ansar v. Hussein (8), in the absence of any
physical alteration to the premises 97B it cannot be said that a new premises
has come into existence.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
  
**_(1) Rohan Pieris v. Edirisinghe_ (1986) Sri LR. 147.  
  
_(2) Plate v. Ceylon Theatres Ltd._ 75 N.L.R. 128.  
  
_(3) Hemachandra v. Hinni Appuhamy_ (1982) 2 Sri L.R. 433.  
  
_(4) Imbuldeniya v. de Silva_ (1987) 1 Sri L.R. 367.  
  
_(5) Chettinad Corp. Ltd. v. Gamage_ 62 NLR 86.  
  
_(6) Sally Mohamed v. Seyed_ GA N.L.R. 486.  
  
_(7) Premadasa v. Attapattu_ 71 N.L.R. 62.  
  
_(8) Ansar v. Hussein_ (1986) CALR vol. 1 365.  
  
_(9) Hewavitharana v. Rathnapala_ (1988) 1 Sri L.R. 240.  
  
**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal  
  
_A.K. Premadasa, PC with T.B. Dillimuni and G.H.S. Suraweera_ for the
defendant - appellant.  
  
_P.A.D. Samarasekera, PC with D.J.C. Nillinduwa_ for plaintiff - respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**122**

24 May 1991  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J.  
  
**This appeal relates to a novel problem which has cropped up In the field of
landlord and tenant calling for a reconciliation of the common law with the
statutory provisions of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972.  
  
The plaintiff-respondent let to the defendant-appellant premises bearing
Assessment No. 97A, Stanley Tillekeratne Mawatha, Nugegoda situated within the
Urban Council limits of Kotte, an area in which the Rent Act is in operation.
The tenancy commenced in June 1972, and the premises, being business premises
assessed for the first time at an annual value of over Rs. 2000/- was
admittedly excepted premises within the meaning of Regulation 3 of the
Schedule to the Rent Act. The tenant ran a drapery stores in the premises.
After the tenant went into occupation in July 1972 a rear room of premises No.
97A, designed to be a storeroom, was separately assessed as premises No. 97B
at an annual value of Rs. 500/-and was then described as a tailor's shop. The
separate assessment evoked no protest from the landlord and the legal
machinery available to him to challenge this separate assessment was not set
in motion. The remaining and larger portion of the premises continued to bear
assessment No. 97A, carrying an annual value which still exceeded Rs. 2000/-.
Meanwhile the parties continued to treat the tenancy as one, the tenant paying
a single monthly rent and receiving there for one receipt. Disputes between
the landlord and tenant arose when the tenant fell into arrears of rent from
1.12.1979 and by letter dated 5.08.1980, the landlord gave the tenant notice
of termination of the tenancy, describing the premises as "97A (presently 97A
and 97B)" and requiring the tenant to quit and deliver possession of the
premises on or before 30th September 1980\. The notice to quite was followed
by this action filed on 5.02.1981 for ejectment of the tenant on the basis
that the premises was excepted premises.

The learned trial judge came to the finding that premises No. 97A was excepted
premises whereas 97B was not, and proceeded to dismiss the plaintiff's action
on the ground that there was no valid termination of the tenancy in respect of
the premises in suit. One can find no rational explanation as to why at least
in respect of premises 97A the notice was found to be ineffective, and why an
order of ejectment should not have been issued against the tenant in respect
of that premises. See Roshan Peiris v. Edirisinghe (1). The Court of Appeal
reversed the findings

**123**

of the original Court and entered Judgment for the plaintiff-respondent as
prayed for primarily on the basis that both the landlord and the tenant had
acted on the footing that there was one unit of letting and one tenancy.

Submissions made on behalf of the defendant-appellant in order to persuade us
to interfere with the Judgment of the Court of Appeal were solely directed to
avoid him being ejected from the separately assessed premises No. 97B. The
principal submission made was that the separate assessment of 97B has given
birth to new premises which instantly attracts the provisions of the Rent Act,
and that where the statute steps in the contract must yield to the statute. On
the other hand, it is contended for the plaintiff-respondent that premises No.
97B is not the subject matter of a separate letting and since it is the entire
business premises that is the subject matter of the tenancy, the whole
premises falls outside the Rent Act as excepted premises.  
  
If the submission of learned Counsel for the defendant-appellant is correct,
the separate assessment of 97B, from the point of time of such assessment has
the effect of breaking one tenancy into two, the common law continuing to
govern the contractual relationship of landlord and tenant in respect of the
excepted premises No. 97A and the statute governing the relationship in
respect of the premises No. 97B which is an adjunct of the former.  
  
Reliance was placed on behalf of the defendant-appellant on certain
observations made by Samarawickrame, J. in Plate v. Ceylon Theatres Ltd (2)
which read:-  
  
"The scheme of the Act suggests that it was intended that the criterion for
deciding whether premises were excepted premises was to be the amount of the
annual value assessed by the local authority. Once a premises was excepted
premises on the application of that test there is no support to be found in
the Act for the position that a part of this premises could be premises to
which the Rent Act applies unless that part was separately assessed."  
  
And again,  
  
"Learned Counsel for the defendant-appellants submitted that for the purpose
of the Act it was the unit of letting that should be the premises. The
definition of residential and business premises show

**124**

that the nature of the occupation is relevant and is to be taken into account.
There is nothing in the Act to suggest that the unit of letting is to be the
premises. On the other hand the reference in section 7 and 9 to the premises
let in parts or in part suggests otherwise."  
  
The problem in the Plate case (supra) was whether a tenant of an unassessed
part of an excepted premises was entitled to claim the protection of the Rent
Restriction Act when he was sued in ejectment. The argument put forward on his
behalf was that because that part of the excepted premises he was occupying as
a tenant carried no annual value, it was not excepted premises and that such
premises being situated in an area to which the Rent Restriction Act applied,
he was protected by the provisions of that Act. Cutting out a portion for
separate assessment from one excepted premises, the whole of which is covered
by one tenancy, was no doubt furthest from the mind of Samarawickreme, J and
his observations must be understood as restricted to a new assessment being
given to a portion of an excepted premises, which portion is already the
subject matter of a separate letting. That exactly is the situation which
arose in Hemachandra v. Hinni Appuhamy (3).  
  
Learned Counsel for the defendant-appellant drew our attention to Ryde on
Rating (11th Edition) page 34, in which recognized ingredients of rateable
occupation are explained as follows:-  
  
"First, there must be actual occupation, or possession;  
  
Secondly, it must be exclusive for the particular purpose of possessor;

Thirdly, the possession must be of some value or benefit for the possessor;
and  
  
Fourthly, the possession must not be for too transient a period."  
  
The submission made was that the rating authorities applied those criteria in
making a separate assessment for the purpose of rating which instantly gave
birth to new premises. The evidence in this case reveals that the separate
assessment was made in consequence of the defendant-appellant who ran a
drapery stores converting the Storeroom of the rented premises to his
tailoring unit. If the second ingredient plays such a dominant part in the
assessment of any particular portion of rented premises as separate premises,
we would perhaps have to sympathize with a landlord who lets an excepted
business premises to a tenant who thereafter decides to run a department
store, thus paving the way for

**125**

several rent controlled premises to spring up in place of one excepted
premises.  
  
The cornerstone of the argument for the defendant-appellant is section 2(4) of
the Rent Act which enacts that so long as that Act is in operation in any
area, the provisions of that Act shall apply to all premises in that area,
other than the 5 categories of premises mentioned therein. Thus assuming that
separate assessment of premises No. 97B per se gave birth to new premises, it
is submitted on behalf of the defendant-appellant, that the provisions of the
Rent Act instantly become applicable. It is contended that the Rent Act
applies to premises not to persons, and that it operates in rem and not in
personam.  
  
If the above submission is correct the Rent Act will also apply to premises
occupied by owners, licensees and untenanted premises. It seems to me that it
is the relationship of landlord and tenant in respect of premises falling
within the Rent Act that attracts its provisions. The preamble to the Rent Act
No. 7 of 1972 reads:  
  
"an Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to Rent Restriction", and
the preamble to its legislative ancestor the Rent Restriction Ordinance No. 60
of 1942 reads, "an Ordinance to restrict the increase of rent and to provide
for matters incidental to such restrictions." So it is the restriction of rent
which is the principal purpose of the Act and where there is no incidence of
rent, the provisions of the Act have no application. The contention that the
entity of protection granted by the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 is the premises and
not the contract of tenancy, was rejected in the Divisional Bench case of
Imbuldeniya v. de Silva (4) and learned Counsel for the defendant-appellant
has not been able to persuade us to take a different view. Therefore, I am
unable to hold that as long as one tenancy subsists for the whole premises the
mere assessment of a part of that premises which is not the subject matter of
a separate letting, gives birth to new premises, especially when the evidence
discloses that the latter 'premises' is an adjunct of the former.  
  
The problem may also be approached differently by examining the application of
regulation No. 3 of the schedule to the Rent Act to premises No. 97B. It may
be asked whether the assessment of the annual value in force in January 1968
or the assessment made in July 1972 is

**126**

applicable. On this question, it appears to me that the decided authorities
have taken three different approaches. The first, was to give prominance to
the original assessment, paying little attention to the transformation the
premises has undergone subsequently attracting separate new assessments. This
approach is reflected in the cases of Chettinad Corporation Ltd. v. Gamage (5)
and Sally Mohamed v. Seyed(6). The second was to grant almost absolute
sanctity to a new assessment made by rating authorities and to treat that as
giving birth to new premises in place of the old, as reflected in the case of
Premadasa v. Atapattu(7). The third, is that reflected in the judgment of
Wanasundera, J in Ansar v. Hussain (8) a via media, through which the Court
will not only look at the mere fact of a separate assessment, but also, at the
extent and significance of the change involved and the impact of that change
on the valuation and assessment. This last approach, commends itself to me as
a safeguard both against capricious assessments made by rating authorities
affecting rights of parties to the letting and also against possible
manipulations of the assessments by interested parties with intent to give
undue advantages either to landlords or to tenants, (see for example
Hewavitharana v. Rathnapala(9).)  
  
"Premises" is defined in s.48 to mean "any building or part of a building
together with the land appertaining thereto". A room in a building, such as a
bedroom, a kitchen or a storeroom is "part of a building", but obviously, in
the context of the Act, would not be "premises" unless it is physically a
distinct part, capable of separate possession. The Plate case (supra)
establishes that if such a part of a building separately let, is not
separately assessed it would be "excepted premises" if the entire building is
"excepted premises" (and vice versa). The appellant's contention requires that
definition to be read as if either a building (or a part) would fall within it
only if assessed or a part of a building would automatically come within it if
separately assessed. This cannot be accepted as the definition refers to the
building (and its parts) as physical entities, and makes no reference to how
it is treated for rating purposes. Prior to the separate assessment of Nos.
97A and 97B when regulation 3 was applied, No. 97A was "business premises";
it's annual value as specified in 1968 assessment exceeded the specified
amount; therefore No. 97A was "excepted premises". The second limb of
regulation 3 refers to a subsequent "assessment of the annual value thereof,
"meaning the "business premises" referred to in the first line of regulation
3. Unless premises No. 97A by reason of some significant physical change, had
become two distinct premises, the use of the word "thereof" indicates

**127**

that the subsequent assessment would have no effect. Hence regulation 3 covers
primarily cases where premises are originally assessed as "residential" but in
or after 1969 are assessed as "business". It also covers cases where premises
initially assessed as "business" are thereafter physically converted into two
or more distinct premises, and assessed as such for the first time after 1968.
The second limb of regulation 3 has no application to a case such as the
present where there was no physical conversion into two or more premises, but
only a notional conversion for the purpose of assessing and recovering rates.  
  
Considering the absence of any physical alterations whatsoever made to
premises No. 97B, I am unable to hold that new premises have come into
existence. The original assessment in force as at January 1968 will continue
to govern the entire premises. This situation no doubt will change if the
separately assessed premises becomes the subject matter of a separate letting.  
  
For the above reasons the appeal is dismissed and the judgment of the Court of
Appeal is affirmed. The plaintiff-respondent will be entitled to costs of this
appeal and to costs in all Courts below.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J. - I agree  
  
FERNANDO, J. - I agree**  
  
**_Appeal dismissed_**.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/38.html_  

