##  Loku Banda v. Ukku Banda - SLR - 704, Vol 2 of 1982 [1982] LKSC 38; (1982)
2 Sri LR 704 (27 October 1982)

#  704

**  LOKU BANDA**

**V.**

**UKKU BANDA**

#### SUPREME COURT

SHARVANANDA, J., VICTOR PERERA, J., AND SOZA, J.

S.C. 50/80 ‑ C.A. 49/78, M.C. MAWANELLA 4287

SEPTEMBER 3, 1982



    Administration of Justice Law, Sections 62, 63 ‑ Ande rights protected by Agricultural Lands Law ‑ Magistrate's duties when breach of peace is threatened over dispute as to possession rights.



Rasnekkumbura belonged in equal shares to Loku Banda, Ukku Banda and
Warsakone. Loku Banda was an ande cultivator of Ukku Banda's lot. Disagreement
arose and the matter was referred to the Conciliation Board. All three agreed
to a survey and by survey Plan No. 1016 Lot 1 was allotted to Ukku Banda, Lot
2 to Warsakone and Lot 3 to Loku Banda.



On 1.4.76 Ukku Banda cultivated his land but was dispossessed by Loku Banda on
2.4.76. On 8.4.76 Loku Banda was ousted.



The Magistrate inquired into the matter and declared that Loku Banda was
entitled to cultivate Lot 1 as ande cultivator while Ukku Banda was entitled
to receive his landlord's share until a judgment was given by a competent
Court.



The Court of, Appeal reversed the Magistrate's Order on the footing that the
right to cultivate was an aspect of possession.



# Held



1.That the right to cultivate can vest in a person different from the person
who has the right to  possession.



2\. What the Magistrate had to decide was who was entitled to the right to the
cultivate.



3.The Magistrate's finding that Loku Banda had an ande right to cultivate Lot
1 was correct as ande rights are protected by the Agricultural Lands Law and
therefore not wiped out by the certificate of the Conciliation Board.



#  705



**Case referred to:**



(1) _Kanagasabai v. Mylvaganam (1976) 78 NLR 280._



**APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.

_ _

_Sanath Jayatilake_ for appellant.  


Petitioner-respondent absent and unrepresented.

  
2nd respondent absent and unrepresented.



_Cur. adv. vult._

October 27, 1982

**  **

**SOZA, J.**



This appeal raises an important question relating to the interpretation and
application of the provisions of sections 62 and 63 of the Administration of
Justice Law No.44 of 1973 (now replaced by sections 66 to 72, 74 and 75 of the
Primary Courts Procedure Act No.44 of 1979) where Magistrates were called upon
to deal with disputes affecting land which are likely to cause a breach of the
peace and where only the right to cultivate is in issue.



In the case before us the dispute concerned the right of one Loku Banda the
appellant before us to cultivate the one‑third portion of the paddy field
called Rasnekkumbura alias Dettapathe Kumbura belonging to M.V. Ukku Banda the
first respondent. The whole field called Rasnekkumbura alias Dettapathe
Kumbura belonged in equal shares to the said Loku Banda, Ukku Banda and one
Warsakone. Loku Banda claimed the right to cultivate not only his own
one‑third share but also Ukku Banda's one‑third share as ande cultivator.
Disagreement arose among the three owners and the matter was referred to the
Conciliation Board of the area. At the inquiry which the Board held on
17.1.1975 the three co‑owners agreed that the field be surveyed and divided
into three lots and that each of them would work and from then on possess his
separate lot. The Sinhalese words used in the certificate of the Conciliation
Board (1D2) are surveyor M.B. Ranatunga and divided in‑to three equal lots on
13.3.1976 and 9.4.1976. The three lots were depicted in Ranatunga's plan
No.1016 which though marked 1D1 in the proceedings before the Magistrate is
not before us. Ukku Banda was allotted Lot 1, Warsakone Lot 2 and Loku Banka
Lot 3 in the said plan. Upon the division being made Ukku Banda began to
cultivate Lot No.1 but Loku Banda lost no time in claiming his rights to be
the ande



#  706



cultivator of the same Lot. The dispute led to complaints to the Police being
lodged by both Loku Banda and Ukku Banda and the Officer in Charge of the
Aranayake Police Station who is the 2nd respondent before us filing An
information on 7.5.1976 relating to the dispute before the Magistrate of
Mawanella.



At the inquiry before the Magistrate Loku Banda contended that at no stage had
he surrendered his ande rights and to establish the existence of these rights
he produced convincing proofs. He claimed the right to cultivate Lot No.1
which had been allotted to Ukku Banda at the division concluded on 1.4.1976
and he maintained that he had in fact cultivated this Lot from 2.4.1976 till
8.4.1976 when he was obstructed by Ukku Banda. Ukku Banda relied on the
settlement entered before the Conciliation Board in terms of which he claimed
he was entitled to cultivate and possess Lot 1 and he said he had in fact
entered into possession of it on 1.4.1976 and begun to cultivate it when on
2.4.1976 he was disturbed by Loku Banda.



The learned Magistrate inquired into the matter and by his order dated
9.11.1977 for which he gave his reasons on 23.11.1977 declared that Loku Banda
was entitled to cultivate Lot 1 as ande cultivator while Ukku Banda was
entitled to receive his landlord's share of the income of Lot 1. Ukku Banda
was ordered not to obstruct Loku Banda from cultivating Lot 1 until the
tenancy rights pertaining to this Lot were resolved in the appropriate forum.
The learned Magistrate felt that no question of the wiping out of the ande
rights of Loku Banda had arisen before the Conciliation Board. Indeed such a
question could only be dealt with under the provisions of the Agricultural
Lands Law No.42 of 1973 by the institutions referred to there.



It is beyond question that the rights of an ande cultivator are, except in the
limited circumstances referred to in the Agricultural Lands Law, virtually
unassailable and inalienable. Further the proceedings before the Conciliation
Board do not show that Loku Banda expressly waived his ande rights. A landlord
can work and used in  Board do not necessarily imply that Loku Banda waived
his ande rights. The ande rights which Loku Banda had, attached to the soil
rights of Ukku Banda. So at the partition which the co‑owners effected those
ande rights attach themselves to the particular Lot, here Lot 1, which Ukku
Banda was awarded. In these circumstances



#  707

**  **

the view of the Court of Appeal that the agreement for Ukku Banda to work and
possess Lot 1 wiped out the rights Loku Banda had to cultivate it in the
exercise of his ande rights, is not supportable.



The legal provisions under which the Magistrate could have acted are set out
particularly in sections 62 and 63 of the Administration of Justice Law No.44
of 1973. The Magistrate has jurisdiction to act under those sections when the
existence of a dispute affecting any land situated within his territorial
jurisdiction and likely to cause a breach of the peace is reported. The
expression "dispute affecting land" according to s.62(4) of the Administration
of Justice Law includes any dispute:



(a) as to the right to possession of any land, or part of a land, or  


(b) as to the boundaries of any land or part of a land, or

  
(c) as to the right to cultivate any land or part of a land, or

  
(d) as to the right to the crops or produce of any land or part of a land, or

  
(e) as to any right in the nature of a servitude affecting the land.



The definition is not exhaustive. Subsections 1,2,3 and 4 of section 63 apply
when the dispute relates to the right to possession of any land or any part of
a land, that is, a dispute falling under (a) above. Subsections 5 and 6 of
this section apply when the dispute relates to any right to any land or any
part of a land other than the. right to possession of such land or part, that
is, a dispute falling under (b) to (e) above.



The Court of Appeal proceeded on the footing that the right to cultivate is an
aspect of possession which cannot be dissociated from possession. As a general
proposition this is not invariably true. The right to cultivate can vest in a
person different from the person who has the right to possession. The statute
itself recognizes this distinction and has spelt out provisions for disputes
relating to possession of a land or part of a land which are different from
the provisions relating to rights in a land or part of a land other than the
right to possession. When the dispute relates to possession the Magistrate
must determine who was in possession on the date when he issued notice on his
having reason to believe that there was in existence a dispute affecting land
and likely to cause a breach of the peace or within two months prior to the
issue of such notice where a forcible dispossession has occurred. The order
which the Magistrate then makes will declare which of the disputants is
entitled to possession and prohibit all disturbance to his possession until he
is evicted under the judgment,



#  708



order or decree of a competent court. Where there has been forcible
dispossession within the period of two months prior to the date of the, issue
of notice the Magistrate may in addition to such declaration and prohibition,
direct that the party specified in his order be restored to possession. When
the dispute relates to possession, the Magistrate may make his determination
without reference to the merits of the rival claims of the parties ‑ see the
proviso to subsection 7 of section 63.



Where the dispute relates to any right to any land or part of a land other
than the right to possession, the Magistrate will declare that the person
named in his order is entitled to the disputed right until he is deprived of
it by virtue of the judgment of a competent court and prohibit all disturbance
or interference with the exercise of such right other than under the authority
of such judgment. The proviso to subsection 7 of section 63 does not apply
here. Hence by implication the Magistrate would have to consider the merits of
the rival claims in deciding who is entitled to the disputed right. This he
will do on the basis of the material before him. The order which the
Magistrate makes may also contain directions as to the exercise of the right
or the sale of the crop or produce and as to the custody and disposal of the
proceeds of such sale. It is significant that when the order of the Magistrate
relates to the right to possession it could be made without reference to the
merits of the claims of the disputants and it is operative until eviction is
ordered by the _judgment, order or decree_ of a competent Court whereas when
it relates to any other right it must be made after consideration of the
merits of the rival claims on the basis of the statements of the rival parties
and such evidence as may have been admitted by the Magistrate in his
discretion and his order is operative until deprivation of that right by a
_judgment_ of a competent Court. The omission of the words "order or decree"
is not without significance ‑ see subsections 2 and 6 of s.63. Here I would
like to add that I reserve my opinion as to whether a competent civil court
cannot by an interim injunction or order appointing a receiver, direct the
eviction of the person secured or put in possession by the Magistrate as we
did not hear argument on the question.



It is clear then that the approach prescribed by the statute when the dispute
relates to the possession of a land or part of a land is different from the
approach prescribed when the dispute relates to a right other than the right
to possession. Therefore it would not be correct to treat the right to
cultivate as an aspect of the right to possession for the purposes of the
application of the provisions of



# 709



section 63. The decision of Sharvananda, J. in _Kanagasabai v Mylvaganam_ (1)
on which reliance appears to have been placed by the Court of Appeal would not
be applicable to the instant case because that was a case where the subject,
of the dispute was the right to possession of a land ‑ business premises to be
exact.



Given that here was a dispute affecting land which was likely to cause a
breach of the peace, all that the learned Magistrate was called upon to do in
the instant case was to decide who was entitled to the right to cultivate the
disputed Lot. The evidence strongly supports the Magistrate's finding that
Loku Banda was the and ecultivator of Ukku Banda's share and was entitled to
the right to cultivate it and that after the division these ande rights
attached to the disputed Lot 1. The reference to working and possessing the
field in the certificate 1D2 of the Conciliation Board cannot wipe out the
ande rights of Loku Banda which are under the statutory protection of the
provisions of the Agricultural Lands Law.



The appeal is therefore allowed and, the judgment of the Court of Appeal is
set aside and the order of the Magistrate restored. In view of the
circumstances under which the present dispute arose I award no costs.



**SHARVANANDA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**VICTOR PERERA, J**. ‑ I agree.

_  _

Appeal allowed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/38.html_  

