##  Kanthiah Thambu Chelliah and Others v. Paranage Inspector of Police and
Others - SLR - 132, Vol 1 of 1982 [1981] LKSC 38; (1982) 1 Sri LR 132 (26 May
1981)

# 132



**SUPREME COURT  
  
Kanthiah Thambu Chelliah and Others**

**v**

**Paranage Inspector of Police and Others**



##### S C Nos 66 to 69/81 ‑ CA applications 10 to 13/81



_Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No. 48/1979 Section 6, 9,
31 ‑ Unlawful Activity ‑ Meaning ‑ Validity of detention orders Writ of Habeas
Corpus ‑ Time at which Court t is concerned with legality or propriety of
Order._



The first detention order stated the Minister had reason to suspect that each
of the detenues was connected with or concerned in terrorist activity.



The second detention order stated that except in the case of S. Murugaiah the
Minister had reason to suspect that the other three detenues were connected
with or concerned in an unlawful activity to wit the abetment of and
conspiracy to commit robbery of the People's Bank. In the case of S. Murugaiah
the order had been made on the ground that the Minister had reason to suspect
that he was connected with or connected in unlawful activity to wit harbouring
and concealing members of the gang and failing to report that such persons had
committed such offence and collecting explosives without authority.



The Petitioners prayed that as the Orders were invalid and that a Writ of
Habeas Corpus be issued.



The Court of Appeal refused the application and Petitioners appealed to
Supreme Court,

_ _

**Held      **per Weeraratne J. The words Unlawful Activity, included not only
acts which were not lawful but also offences which are triable in Court. Hence
all four petitioners had committed acts connected with or concerned in
unlawful activity and were justifiably detained by the Minister's Orders under
Section 9.



On 25.3.81 an armed gang ambushed at Neerveli two vehicles carrying currency
to the value of Rs.8.1 Million to the People's Bank in Jaffna. The members or
this gang shot and killed 2 police officers who were escorting the vehicle and
escaped with the money and two rifles. The petitioners were not members of
this gang.



Arunagirinathan along with Siva Selvan assisted in concealing and disposing of
the money.



Kulasekerarajasingham was a close associate of two members of the gang who
resided close to their home. Besides, two persons who were prevented from
leaving the country and who were in possession of part of the stolen money
were seen in the vicinity of their home.



#  133



Murugaiah harboured and concealed one member of the gang, and failed to report
to the Police that such person had committed an offence and that he was
concerned in collecting explosives without authority,



The four Petitioners were arrested on various dates in April 1981 and detained
at the Panagoda Camp on the Orders of the Minister.



per Wimalaratne J. The words 'unlawful activity did not include offences for
which a person could be taken to Court but only acts connected with or
concerned in the commission of an offence. Hence the detention and
continuation of the detention of the three corpus is justified but that S.
Murugaiah should be remanded and brought to trial for the offence disclosed.



per Perera J. I). The affidavits do not disclose that the three suspects
actually committed the offence but that there was strong suspicion of their
involvement and that the Minister was justified in making the detention
orders.



2). In the case of S. Murugaiah there was evidence of the commission of a
specified offence and therefore the corpus could not be detained for unlawful
activity but rather he was liable to be charged for the offence and thus the
detention order in his case was not warranted by law.



**APPEALS** from Order of the Court of Appeal



**Before:**           Weeraratne, J., Wimalaratne, J &

                     Victor Perera, J. 

**Counsel:**        V. S.A. Pullenayagum with F. Mustapha,

> > S.C. Chandrahasan and
>>

>> Miss M. Kanapathipillai for  
>>

>> the petitioner in S.C. 66/81.

>>

>>  
>>

>> Dr. Colvin R. de Silva with

>>

>> L. A. T. Williams. S. Perimpanayagam

>>

>> and C. Kumaralingam

>>

>> for the petitioner in S.C. 67/81.

>>

>>  
>>

>> K. Thevarajah with R. Sirinivasan,

>>

>> S.C. Kumaralingam for the petitioner in

>>

>> S.C. 68/81.

#  134



> > H.L. de Silva with S. Mahenthiran
>>

>> and T. Pakiyanathan for petitioner

>>

>> in S.C. for 69/81.

>>

>>  
>>

>> T. Marapane, Deputy Solicitor General

>>

>> with S. Ratnapala, S.C. and

>>

>> K. Kumarasiri, S.C. for

>>

>> Attorney General.



**Argued on:**      11th‑13th January, 1982.

**Decided on:     **19.2.82

**  **

_Cur. adv. vult._

**  **

**WEERARATNE   J.**



Four appeals from a judgment of the Court of Appeal in respect of Applications
in the nature of Writs of Habeas Corpus were argued before us. By agreement of
Counsel these appeals were consolidated and submissions were made by Counsel
on behalf of the several applicants.



Learned Counsel who appeared on behalf of the corpus S. Arunagirinathan in
Application No. 12/81, in opening the case for the Petitioners stated that the
matter before us is under the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions)
Act No 48 of 1979 hereinafter referred to as "the Act" and involves the
liberty of the subject. He submitted that the question which arises is the
scope of the term "Unlawful Activity" as defined in Section 31 of the Act. On
the  19th April, 1981, the corpus was arrested by officers of the C.I.D. and
Army personnel acting under Section 6 of the aforesaid Act. On the 20th April,
1981, the Minister of Internal Security by Order (marked X1), acting under
Section 9 directed his detention at the Panagoda Army Camp. Then on the 5th
May 1981, he was brought to Panagoda where he was at the time of the
application. The matter came up before the Court of Appeal on that same date
and Notice issued. The Respondents are the I.G.P and Director, C.I.D.
Thereafter an Order dated 26th May, 1981 (marked X2) was issued by the
Minister. Counsel submitted that the contents of the two Orders of the
Minister, X1 and X2 were different. However when the Application, was taken up
before the Court of Appeal on the 28th July, 1981, fresh orders had been
issued.



#  135



The real question at issue is the legality of the Detention Orders made under
Section 9 of the Act. Counsel contended that the orders of the Minister are
invalid. The Petitioner prays that the Writ be issued directing the
Respondents to bring the Corpus before the Court of Appeal, to be dealt with
according to law and for an order of release of the corpus from custody. The
Court of Appeal refused the application of the Petitioners for the issue of
the Writ of Habeas Corpus.



Counsel contended that the Orders of the Minister are invalid and illegal.
Section 6(1) of the Act No. 48 of 1979 reads:‑



"Any police officer not below the rank of Superintendent or any other police
officer not below the rank of Sub‑Inspector authorised in writing by him in
that behalf may, without a warrant and with or without assistance and
notwithstanding anything in any other law to the contrary 



(a) arrest any person;

(b) enter and search any premises;

(c) stop and search any individual or any vehicle, vessel, train or aircraft;
and

(d) seize any document or thing



connected with or concerned in or reasonably suspected of being connected with
or concerned in any unlawful activity."



Part II of the Act deals with the "Investigation of Offences." The Police
Officer's power of arrest, entering and search of premises, could be exercised
when a person is "connected with or concerned in or reasonably suspected of
being connected with or concerned _in any unlawful activity_. " Section 6(l).
Once an arrest is made there are two courses available to the authorities.
Section 7 empowers the authorities to keep a man in custody for a period not
exceeding 72 hours within which time, unless a Detention Order is made under
Section 9, the person arrested would have to be produced before the
Magistrate, and on an application being made in writing by a Police Officer
not below the rank of Superintendent, the Magistrate shall make an order of
remand until the conclusion of the trial of that person. The second course is
in Part III of that Act and which deals with Detention and Restriction Orders.
Such Orders are made by the Minister when he has reason to believe or suspect
that any



#  136



person is connected with or is concerned in any unlawful activity, in which
event he may order such person to be detained for a period not exceeding three
months, and such order may be extended from time to time for a period of not
exceeding 18 months. Section 31 of the Act defines "unlawful activity" as
follows:‑



"31(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires 



"unlawful activity" means any action taken or act committed by any means
whatsoever, whether within or outside Sri Lanka, and whether such action was
taken or act was committed before or after the date of coming into operation
of all or any of the provisions of this Act in connection with the commission
of any offence under this Act or any act committed prior to the date of
passing of this Act, which act would, if committed after such date, constitute
an offence under this Act."



The Appellant's contention is that the acts constituting "unlawful' activity"
should be external to the "offence". It is submitted that the definition draws
a distinction between an "offence" and "unlawful activity". The latter
expression, it was submitted, would not include acts prohibited by law or
offences.



It would be seen that the term "unlawful activity" means, "any action taken or
act committed............ in connection with the commission of any offence..."
It was submitted on behalf of the State that the only requirement is that the
"action" or the "act" committed should be in connection with the commission of
an offence. I agree with  this contention made on behalf of the State. The
limitation sought to be placed by Counsel on behalf of the Petitioners in
regard to the words "action taken" are not expressly set out in the
definition, nor will they be reasonably implied having regard to the ordinary
and plain meaning of the words. The following simple illustration was given to
us by Counsel for the State.



A, B and C planned the robbery of money of a Bank while in transit. The
discussions have taken place in D's rooms in his absence. 'A' borrows a motor
car from 'E' to be used as transport to the scene of the robbery. Pursuant to
the plan A, B and C arrive at the appointed place and stop the Bank van which
is transporting the money. 'A' shoots and kills the driver,



# 137



'B' rushes up and forces open the door of the van with 'C's assistance. 'B'
thereafter removes the cash that is found inside the van. It was submitted
that 'C's act of assisting to open the door is clearly an act committed in
connection with the offence of robbery and would therefore constitute
"unlawful activity" within the definition set out above.



It was further submitted that there would be no justification for treating it
as otherwise merely for the reason that this act of assisting to open the door
would in addition form part of the acts constituting the robbery itself, or
for the reason that he is guilty also of conspiracy to commit robbery. Hence,
according to learned Counsel for the State the actions of A, B and C are such
as to be included in the term "unlawful activity". Then, as regards D and E it
was suggested that their conduct is innocent even though connected to the
robbery. Had D given his room knowing that it was to be used as the venue of
the conspiratorial meeting, or E his car knowing that it was to be used in
connection with the robbery, they too, though not guilty of any offence would
be concerned in "unlawful activity". The analysis of "unlawful activity" given
above would indicate that it includes an offence under the Act.



It was contended for the respondents that the "unlawful activity" referred to
in the three Detention Orders (excepting the order regarding Murugiah) refer
to the abetment and conspiracy to commit the offence of robbery and is
therefore external to the robbery and hence constitute both an offence and an
"unlawful activity". It was further submitted that "unlawful activity"
contemplated all offences referred to in the Act and that this definition is
in order to make it as wide as possible to catch up every conceivable offence.



I agree with the judgment of the Court of Appeal where it is stated that,
"unlawful activity" as defined in Section 31 extends to persons not only on
the periphery of criminal liability, but it also encompasses any person whose
acts, "by any means whatsoever are connected with the  commission of any
offence under this Act and includes a person who has committed an offence
under Act No. 48 of 1979."



The lengthy preamble in the Act appears to have been designedly incorporated
in order to set out precisely the context in which and



#  138



the purpose for which this piece of legislation was enacted. In interpreting
any provision of the law the object of the legislation should not be lost
sight of. The following passage from Maxwell's Interpretation of Statues (11th
edition page 7) is relevant:



"At the same time, if the choice is between two interpretations, the narrower
of which would fail to achieve the manifest purpose of the legislation, we
should avoid a construction which would reduce the legislation to futility and
should rather accept the bolder construction based on the view that Parliament
would legislate only for the purpose of bringing about an effective result."



The Court of Appeal has in its judgment held that the Detention Order (X1) was
invalid. I see no reason to disagree with that finding On the 26th May, 1981,
fresh Detention Orders by the Minister were issued marked (X2).



Counsel questioned the validity of the Detention Orders (X2), the opening
words of which set out, "where the Minister has reason to believe or suspect
that any person is connected with or concerned in any unlawful activity..." In
this connection it would be observed that the said Orders are made by a
Minister of the State who, having regard to his position in Government must be
presumed to give his anxious care to the deprivation of liberty of the persons
sought to be detained. In any event there is a presumption of regularity of
official acts and also a presumption of good faith. These are no doubt
rebuttable presumptions. In this connection the relevant affidavits of Senior
Police Officers record that the material relating to the suspects was made
available to the Minister before his Orders of Detention were made. No effort
was made to rebut the apparent good faith of the Minister's orders.



In the case of _Gunasekera vs Ratnavale_ (76 NLR 316) Alles J refers to the
speeches of the Law Lords in _Liversidge vs Anderson_ (1942) AC 206 and
_Greene vs Secretary of State for Home Affairs_ (1942) AC 284, where the
production of the Home Secretary's Order, the authencity and good faith of
which were not impugned was held to constitute an answer to an application for
a Writ of Habeas Corpus.



On the matter of the legality of the said Detention Orders, the



  **139**



question arises whether there was anything to preclude the second Detention
Orders marked (X2). In this connection, as mentioned earlier, the first
Detention Order (X1) was held to be invalid and subsequently the orders X2
were issued.



Under the heading "Amending the cause of the Detention" Sharpe in his work on
the Law of Habeas Corpus (p. 176,177) states:‑



"The rule that it is only the present circumstances of the restraint which are
relevant has meant that the Courts are always prepared to allow for a
substituted warrant which corrects a defect in the first committal. It will be
permissible for there to be a substituted warrant even after the Writ is
issued and served. Indeed it has been held that it is possible to amend the
return to the Writ or to supply new and better cause for the detention as the
Court commences the hearing. It would seem that so long as material proffered
tends to show present justification, it will be accepted by Court at any stage
of the proceedings."





As Wijeyatilake J has put it in the case of _Gunasekera vs Ratnavale_ in _76
NLR 316 at 343._ "No doubt when an appeal by way of a Writ of Habeas Corpus is
considered by this Court it is concerned with the legality and/or propriety of
the detention of the corpus at the time the respondent answers unlike in a
civil suit where the Court deals with the rights of parties at the institution
of the action. So that if in the course of the proceedings a further detention
order is made and the respondent seeks to rely on it then it is the duty of
the respondent to draw the attention of the Court to the fresh order and not
wait till the corpus is discharged to take him into custody an such order."



The cases of _Subodh Singh vs The Province of Bihar_ AIR 1949 Patna 247 at 249
and _Godavant Paruleker vs State of Maharashtra_ AIR 1966 (Supreme Court) 1404
at 1407 strongly support this view.



It was submitted for the Petitioners that one must look at "the Act" with due
regard to fundamental rights. Reference was made to the language of Scrutton
L.J. in the case reported in _Rex vs Secretary of State for Home Affairs ex
parte O' Brien_ [1923] 2 K. B. 361 at page 382:‑



# 140



"This  appeal raises questions of great importance regarding the liberty of
the subject, a matter on which English law is anxiously careful, and which
English Judges are keen to uphold. As Lord Herschell says in _Cox vs Hakes_ :
'The law of this country has been very jealous of any infringement of personal
liberty.'"



Counsel made reference to Article 13 (2) of the Constitution from the Chapter
dealing with Fundamental Rights.



Article 13(2):‑



"Every person held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of personal
liberty shall be brought before the judge of the nearest competent court
according to procedure established by law, and shall not be further held in
custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty except upon and in terms of
the order of such judge made in accordance with procedure established by law."



As regards this submission made relating to the violation of Fundamental
Rights enshrined in Article 13(2), one must take note of the permissible
restrictions embodied in Article 15(7) which enacts that the exercise and
operation of Article 13(2) shall be subject to such restrictions as may be
prescribed by law in the interest of national security and public order. In
any event, Article 80(3) of the Constitution precludes this Court from calling
in question the validity of' the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary
Provisions) Act No 48 of 1979, "on any grounds whatsoever."



Having regard to the material made available to the Minister, I am satisfied
that there was a reasonable basis for him to make the subsequent Detention
Orders (X2), which in my opinion are valid Orders. The fact that the Detention
Orders (X1) made earlier are invalid is not relevant for the reason that the
Detention Order, which is operative at the point of time the Court is called
upon to issue the Writ, is the Order (X2).



There are three similar Orders marked (X2) wherein the Minister of Internal
Security states that he has reason to suspect that S. Arunagirinathan, C.
Kulageswaran and C. Sivaselvam are each of



# 141



them connected with or concerned in an "Unlawful Activity" to wit, the
abetment and conspiracy of robbery of property of the People's Bank, Neervely,
on the 25th March, 1981. There is an affidavit by B. M. N. Jurangpathy, as
Assistant Superintendent of Police (marked 'B') who states that in respect of
Arungirinathan there is material which indicates that the corpus had assisted
in the concealment of part of the monies robbed on the 25th March, 1981. It is
stated that, "further information as regards the complicity of the corpus in
the said robbery, and the evidence available against him, could be disclosed
at this stage, _when investigations are yet continuing_ , only at grave risk
to the personal safety of the informants and person conducting and
investigating in the inquiry.



In respect of the corpus _C. K. Rajasingham_ , the affidavit of P. Mahendran,
Deputy Inspector General of Police is that, "the investigations conducted so
far _have given rise to a strong suspicion_ that the corpus has abetted or
conspired in the commission of the said robbery of property of the People's
Bank Neervely."



In regard to the corpus V. Sivaselvam, B.M.N. Jurangpathy, Assistant
Superintendent of Police sets out that, "there is material to indicate that
the corpus had assisted in the concealment of part of the monies robbed on the
25th March 1981. It is stated that "further information of the complicity of
the corpus in the said robbery and the evidence against him could be disclosed
at grave risk to the personal safety of informants."



These three Orders of Detention come within the definition of "Unlawful
Activity" as interpreted earlier in this judgment, since they involve acts
committed in connection with offences under the Act.



In regard to the Detention Order in respect of _S. Murugiah_ , submissions
were made on his behalf by Counsel that the Police have identified the
offences of which he could be remanded and charged. In this connection our
attention was drawn to the affidavit of R.C.S. Gunasinghe, Assistant
Superintendent of Police.



He stated therein, "the investigations conducted so far reveal that the corpus
had harboured and concealed one N. Thangavel knowing that he had committed an
offence under the Act No. 48 of 1979, and had failed to report to a Police
Officer that such person has

#  

#  142



committed such offence." He stated that "it would appear that the corpus had
also been concerned in collecting explosives without lawful, authority.



In paragraph 9 of the Affidavit he states that, "further information in the
matters set out in paragraph 8, and the evidence against him, could be
disclosed at grave risk to the personal safety of the informant and persons
conducting the investigation. Counsel submitted that the material in the
affidavit in respect of this case reveals that the Police have identified an
offence, in which event this suspect should b remanded and brought to trial.
Each of the affidavits referred to state that the material available to them
with regard to the complicit of suspects was made available to the Minister
before he made his Order of Detention.



Since I have already held that the definition of "Unlawful Activity includes a
person who has committed an offence under the Act (No. 48 of 1979), the four
Detention Orders referred to above made b the Minister are in my opinion
valid.



For the reasons given the Applications for the Writs of Habeas Corpus are
dismissed.





**WIMALARTNE,   J.**



I have had the benefit of reading the judgment prepared Weeraratne, J. Whilst
I am in agreement with him that the detention orders X2 in respect of C.
Kulasekeran (Corpus in S.C.66/81,C.A.10/81) S. Arunagirinathan (Corpus in
S.C.67/81, C.A.12/81) an C. Sivasekeran (Corpus in S.C.68/81, C.A.13/81) are
valid, I regret I am unable to agree with him that the continued detention of
S. Murugiah (Corpus in S.C.69/81, C.A.11/81) is legal.



Enshrined in our Constitution is a Chapter on Fundamental Rights. Article 13
therein guarantees freedom from arbitrary arrest an, detention, and declares
in paragraph 2 that "every person held in custody, detained or otherwise
deprived of personal liberty shall be brought before the nearest competent
court according to procedure



# 143



established by law, and not be further held in custody, detained or deprived
of personal liberty except upon and in terms of the order of such Judge made
in accordance with procedure established by law." This guarantee of the
fundamental right to personal liberty, is based upon Article 9 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, that "no one shall be subjected to
arbitrary arrest, detention or exile". In the protection of these freedoms the
judiciary has constantly to be aware of its role as the custodian of
individual rights and the bulwark of liberty in our society.



But the exercise and enjoyment of rights and freedom is inseparable from the
performance of duties and obligations, perhaps the most important of which may
be considered to be the respect for the rights and freedom of others.
Understandably, therefore, fundamental rights are not, and cannot be absolute.
They have been and are subject to certain restrictions, which were contained
in Article 18(2) of Constitution of 1972, and are now contained in Article
15(7) of the present Constitution in these words: "The exercise and operation
of all fundamental rights declared and recognised by Articles 13(l),
13(2)......... shall be subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by
law in the interest of national security, public order.......... or for the
purpose of securing due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of
others ............................".



In the plenitude of its legislative power Parliament enacted, on the 20th of
July 1979, the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No. 48 of
1979, limited in its duration to a period of three years. The present appeals
which relate to the interpretation of the Act raise questions of great
importance regarding the liberty of the subject as this legislation seeks to
curtail that liberty in some of its drastic provisions, such as detention
without trial. Learned Counsel for the petitioners have not, and indeed they
could not, canvass the validity of the Act, but their principal concern has
been that in the interpretation of the Act, the Court will have due regard to
the well known canon of interpretation that statutes which encroach on the
rights of the subject should be interpreted, if possible, so as to respect
such rights; and that if there is ambiguity as to the meaning of any section,
the Constitution which is in favour of the freedom of the individual should be
given effect to.



# 144



According to its long title it is "an Act to make temporary provision for the
prevention of acts of terrorism in Sri Lanka, the prevention of unlawful
activities of any individual, groups of individuals, association organisation
or body of person within Sri Lanka or outside Sri Lank and matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto." One not the emphasis on the aspect of
prevention, rather than punishment although the offences specified therein are
visited with the severest, of penalties. One notes also the differentiation
between "acts terrorism" and "unlawful activity". The reason for this
legislation could be gathered from the second part of the preamble which read
thus:‑



"And whereas public order in Sri Lanka continues to b endangered by elements
or groups of persons or associations that advocate the use of force or the
commission of crime as a means of, or as an aid in, accomplishing government
change within Sri Lanka, and who have resorted to acts murder and threats of
murder of members of Parliament and of local authorities, police officers, and
witnesses such acts and other law abiding and innocent citizens, well as the
commission of other acts of terrorism such a armed robbery, damage to State
property and other act involving actual or threatened coercion, intimidation
an violence"



Part I of the Act specifies certain offences and provides for enhanced
punishment including life imprisonment and forfeiture of property Briefly,
section 2 specifies certain offences (a) against the person of specified
categories of individuals, including officers charged with the enforcement of
the law and the maintenance of public order; (b) against the property of
government and semi‑government institutions; (c) for the importation,
manufacture possession or collection firearms and explosives without lawful
authority; (d) for the rousing of religious, racial or communal disharmony by
words spoken written; (e) for the erasing of words, inscriptions or lettering
in an board or fixture in a highway or other public place; and (f) for
knowingly harbouring or interfering with the apprehension of offenders. Whilst
section 3(b) makes attempts, abetment, conspiracy, exhortation and incitement
punishable, section 3(a) makes even an act preparatory to the commission of an
offence also culpable, perhaps for the time in the recent history of our penal
legislation. Failure to report



**145**



to the Police of the commission of an offence is made punishable under section
5.



Part II deals with the investigation of offences. The Police powers of arrest,
search and seizure are contained in section 6, and such powers are to be
exercised in respect of persons or property "connected with or concerned in or
reasonably suspected of being connected with or concerned in any unlawful
activity". "Unlawful activity" is defined in section 31 to mean unless the
context otherwise requires "any action taken or act committed by any means
whatsoever, whether within or outside Sri Lanka,................  in
connection with the commission of any offence under this Act.......... ". Much
of the arguments before us have centred around the distinction between
"offences" and "unlawful activity" and as to whether the former is included
within the latter. Any person arrested under section 6(l) may be kept in
Police custody for a period of 72 hours, under a detention order unless
section 9 has been made in the meantime, and shall, under section 7(1) be
produced before a Magistrate before the expiry of that period; and the
Magistrate is obliged, on application made by a Superintendent of Police to
order that such person be remanded until the conclusion of his trial. There is
provision for the release from remand custody with the consent of the
Attorney‑General.



Part III deals with Detention and Restriction Orders. Section 9(1) reads as
follows:‑



"Where the Minister has reason to believe or suspect that any person is
connected with or concerned in any unlawful activity the Minister may order
that such person be detained for a period not exceeding three months, in the
first instance, in such place and subject to such conditions as may be
determined by the Minister, and such order may be extended from time to time
for a period not exceeding three months at a time:



Provided, however, that the aggregate period of such detention shall not
exceed a period of eighteen months."



The Minister is empowered to suspend a detention order, and to make a
restriction order under section II, imposing prohibitions and restrictions in
respect of the movements and activities of any person connected with or
concerned in the commission of any unlawful



# 146



activity. Both a detention order under section 9 and a restriction order under
section 11 are made final and conclusive and are not to be called in question
in any court or tribunal by way of writ or, otherwise. But it has not been
contended that these privative clauses preclude us from determining the
validity of any detention order made under the Act.



Part V deals with Trials. Every person who commits an offence under the Act
triable without preliminary inquiry, on an indictment before a Judge of the
High Court sitting alone without a Jury. Statements of a confessional nature
made, to an officer not below the rank of A.S.P. are admissible, if not
irrelevant under section 24 of the Evidence Ordinance. Also sections 25, 26,
and 30 of the Evidence Ordinance relation to exclusion of confessions are made
inapplicable.



On the 25th March 1981 an armed gang is alleged to have ambushed two vehicles
carrying currency to the value of 8.1 million rupees to the regional head
office of the People's Bank, Jaffna, at Neeraveli in the Kopay Police area.
The members of this gang, had shot and killed two police officers who were
escorting the vehicles, and escaped with this large sum of money as well as
with two rifles belonging to the police officers. This is said to be the
biggest robbery committed in Sri Lanka. Eye witnesses to the robbery had
described 13 persons who participated in it. The four detenues in respect of
whom the present applications relate were not among the 13 so identified by
description. They were, however, arrested on the dates specified in the table
given below, and detention orders have been made against them also on the
dates specified:



**Name of Corpus** | **Date of arrest** | **Date of 1st   detention  
 order X1** | **Date of H.C. application** | **Date of   2nd detention order
X2**  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
C. Kulasekararajasingham

(Corpus in H. C. A. 10/81)

  |  6.4.81 |  6.4.81 |  23.4.81 |  14.5.81  
  
S. Murgaiah

(Corpus in H. C. A. 12/81)

  |  28.4.81 |  30.4.81 |  30.4.81 |  26.5.81  
  
S. Arunagirinathan

(Corpus in H.C.A.12/81)

  |  19.4.81 |  20.4.81 |  30.4.81 |  26.5.81  
  
B. Sivaselvam

(Corpus in H. C. A. 13/81)

  |  19.4.81 |  20.4.81 |  30.4.81 |  26.5.81  
  


**  147  
 **

The reason specified in each of the first detention orders "Xl" was that the
Minister had reason to suspect that each of the detenues was "connected with
or concerned in terrorist activity". The subsequent orders X2 have been made
on the ground that, except in the case of S. Murugiah, the Minister had reason
to suspect that the other three detenues were "connected with or concerned in
an unlawful activity", to wit:‑ the abetment and conspiracy of the robbery of
the People's Bank". In the case of S. Murugiah X2 had been made on the ground
that the Minister has reason to suspect that he was "connected with or
concerned in unlawful activity, to wit; harbouring and concealing Nadarajah
Thangavel alias Thangathurai knowing that he had committed an offence under
the Act, failing to report to a police officer that such person had committed
such offences and collecting explosives without lawful authority".



Having heard arguments on nine dates the Court of Appeal dismissed the four
applications. The judgment of the Court is reported in (1981) 2 SLR, Vol. II
part 7, P.187. The major portion of the judgment deals with the allegations of
torture and the failure to inform the detenues of the reason for their arrest.
We were of the view that those matters were not relevant to the decision we
are called upon to make, but that what is relevant is whether the detention of
these four persons on the detentions orders "X2" are valid, and Counsel
addressed us only on that aspect of the case. The Court of Appeal has, in
interpreting the Act, applied the "mischief rule" in order to ascertain the
intention of the legislature and has come to this finding: "everybody knows
that the Act is intended to rid the country of terrorism in all its recent
sophisticated manifestations". Whilst holding that the order "X l" is invalid
because "terrorist activity" which is given as the reason for detention, is
not only lacking in particularity but also does not fall under the description
of "unlawful activity" in section 31, the judgment concludes that unlawful
activity "extends to persons not only on the periphery of criminal liability,
but it also encompasses any person whose acts 'by any means whatsoever' are
connected with 'the commission of any offence under this Act', and that
includes a person who has committed an offence under Act No. 48 of 1979".
Therefore "the specifying of an offence under the Act, as has been done in the
detention orders "X2" does not invalidate the detention orders". Briefly
stated because "offences" are included in the definition of "unlawful
activity", the fact that the offences are specified in "X2" does not make the
detention orders invalid.



#  148



The pith and substance of the argument of learned Counsel for the petitioners
before us has been that the Court of Appeal was wrong in holding that
"unlawful activity" as defined in Section 31 includes "offences" as specified
in Part I of the Act. The Minister's power of detention, they contend extends
only to those persons whom the Minister has reason to believe or suspect are
connected with or concerned in any "unlawful activity", but not to those
persons who are suspected of having committed an offence under the Act. In
respect of the former, Parliament has prescribed the remedy of detention by
the Minister extending up to a maximum period of 18 months. In respect of the
latter Parliament has prescribed not detention but remand by order of
Magistrate until the conclusion of the trial before a Judge of the High Court
without a Jury.



The learned Deputy Solicitor General has submitted that all acts, whether
committed prior to during or after the commission of an offence, if committed
in connection with the offence should be regarded as a unlawful activity.
"Unlawful activity" may be considered to be a circle within which is a segment
which constitutes "offences" committed under the Act. This segment has become
somewhat of a major segment as a result of acts preparatory to the commission
of an offence also being made culpable. If offences are excluded from the
definition of unlawful activity then hardly any other activity remains to be
called unlawful, either for the purpose of arrest under section 6(1) or for
detention under section 9(1). Police powers of arrest under section 6(1)
extend to those reasonably suspected of being connected with or concerned in
unlawful activity. The Magistrate's powers of remand under section 7(1) extend
to those who are suspected of having committed offences Under the Act. Now,
section 7(1) contemplates the remand of persons arrested under section 6(1)
and as the power of arrest under section 6(1) is for "unlawful activity",
therefore logically "offences" must be included within the definition of
unlawful activity. He has, with consummate skill, taken us through the several
provisions of the Act in order to demonstrate the absurdities that would
necessarily result if any other construction be given. To refer to just a few
of those anomalies:‑ If, the petitioners contend, offences are not included
within the meaning of unlawful activity, then the police powers of arrest for
offences cannot be the powers stipulated in section 6(1). They can only be the
general Police powers of arrest contained in section 32(1) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, Now, those general powers are much



#  149



less than the special powers given in the Act, and therefore we get the
anomalous situation of a Police officer having less power to arrest an
"offender" than a "non‑offender". Then again, section 6(2) of the Act provides
a heavier penalty in the case of obstruction during the arrest of a
"non‑offender" than the penalty prescribed under the general law in the case
of obstruction during the arrest of an "offender".



I am in agreement with the learned D.S.G. that certain absurdities do arise if
a construction other than what he has put forward is given. But "there was
never any statute so far sighted that it did not have its casus
omissi............The courts cannot escape the responsibility of considering
these unforseen contingencies". Allen‑Law in the Making (7th Edn.) 496.



Our task is to discover the intention of Parliament. Where the language is
plain and admits of but one meaning, the task of interpretation does not
arise. The various rules of interpretation are merely guides to assist the
Court in its task. The Court of Appeal has sought guidance from what is known
as the mischief rule, laid down in _Heydon's Case_. I do not for a moment
doubt the proposition that consideration of the mischief or object or purpose
of the enactment will often provide a solution to the problem. But the
ascertainment of the mischief sought to be suppressed is not sufficient by
itself. Equally important is an ascertainment of the remedy prescribed by
Parliament to suppress the mischief and the reason for the remedy. This is
best stated by _Maxwell_ thus:‑ "To arrive at the real meaning it is always
necessary to get an exact conception of the aim, scope and object of the whole
Act; to consider, according to Lord Coke (1) what was the law  before the Act
was passed; (2) what was the mischief or defect for which the law has not
provided; (3) what remedy Parliament has provided; and (4) the reason of the
remedy" _Interpretation of Statutes (11th Edn) p.19._ Whilst the Court of
Appeal has correctly identified the mischief as "terrorism in all its recent
sophisticated manifestations" the Court has not sufficiently identified the
remedy prescribed to, rid the country of terrorism which is twofold; namely
(1) remand by order of a Magistrate until the conclusion of the trial by the
High Court of those against whom there is prima facie case of the commission
of an offence under the Act, and (2) detention by order of the Minister for a
maximum period of 18 months for those against whom there is no prima facie
case of an offence but only of unlawful activity. The Court of Appeal



#  150



has not considered the question whether the material available against each of
the detenues calls for a remand order or for a detention order. This omission
is the result of giving a meaning to the term unlawful activity not warranted
in the context of section 9; statutory language is not read in isolation but
in its context. The term "unlawful activity" _unless the context otherwise
requires_ means whatsoever...........in connection with the commission of any
offence under this Act............ I emphasis the words 'unless the context
otherwise requires'. I have no doubt that in section 6 which defines the
Police powers of arrest, entry, search and seizure and contained at the
commencement of the chapter on "Investigation of offences" the term unlawful
activity is used to include offences"; that is to say the power to arrest etc.
is given in respect of those who have committed offences as well as those
whose acts and activities, although they do not constitute offences are
nevertheless unlawful because they may be said to be acts "in connection with
the commission of an offence" or those who in the words of the Court of Appeal
are "on the periphery of criminal liability". But in section 9(l) the term
"unlawful activity' does not include "'offences"; that is to say, the
Minister's powers of detention without trial are restricted to those who have
committed acts which are not offences but are only acts committed in
connection with the commission of offences. To say that the Act. gives the
Minister the power of detention without trial where a prima facie case of the
commission of an offence has been established would be to interpret section 9
contrary to the guarantee of liberty contained in Article 13 of the
Constitution.



This interpretation of the term "unlawful activity" finds support from the
procedure required to be followed after arrest, which procedure is contained
in section 7(1). Any person arrested under section 6(1) may be kept in custody
for a period not exceeding 72 hours. This applies to both those who have
committed or are suspected to have committed offences, as well as to those
whose activities are only unlawful, though they do not amount to offences. The
period of 72 hours in contrast to the normal period of 24 hours under which a
suspect may be kept in custody, is to give the police more time to complete
their investigations which will necessarily be protracted. If within that
period there is material to establish a prima facie case against a person in
custody, then such person has to be produced before a Magistrate who is
obliged to remand him until the conclusion of his trial. If on the other hand
there is no material



# 151



to establish a prima facie case, then the procedure is either a release of
that person from Police custody or detention by order of the Minister under
Section 9.



In the interpretation of statutes it is not unusual to give different meanings
to the same word in the same statute. Although it has been justly remarked
that, when precision is required, no safer rule can be followed than always to
call the same thing by the same name, _Maxwell_ says that this presumption as
to identical meaning is not of much weight. "The same word may be used in
different senses in the same statute and even in the same section ..........
(12th Edn) p. 279. To give an example of the same word being given distinct
meanings; "maliciously" does not have the same impact throughout the Offences
against the Person Act 1861, sometimes adding nothing to the statutory
definition of an offence, sometimes requiring a particular state of mind on
the part of the person inflicting a wound. It must also be remembered that the
meaning of the term "unlawful activity" is contained in an interpretation
clause which requires it to be given that meaning _only unless the context
otherwise requires_. Cockburn C.J. thought in 1865 that interpretation clauses
frequently lead to confusion. _Craies on Statute Law_ (7th Edn) 213. It may
truly be said of this Act that the definition of "unlawful activity" in the
interpretation clause has led to considerable confusion and difficulty in the
interpretaion of the several sections of the Act . However, where the word
defined is declared to _'mean'_ so and so the definition is explanatory and
has to be understood in the context. All statutory definitions or
abbreviations must be read subject to the qualification, variously expressed
in the definition clauses which create them, such as: "unless the context
otherwise requires"; or "unless a contrary intention appears". _Craies_ p.101.
I am therefore of the view that no rule of interpretation is violated by the
construction I have adopted of giving different meanings to the term "unlawful
activity" in sections 6 and 9 of the Act.



Let me apply this interpretation to the illustration given by the learned
D.S.G. of A, B & C planning the robbery of money of a Bank whilst in transit
in a van. Discussions have taken place in D's room in his absence. A borrows
E' s car to be used as transport to the scene of robbery. Pursuant to the plan
A, B and C arrive at the scene and stop the van. A shoots and kills the
driver, B forces open the door of the van with C's assistance. B thereafter
removes



#  152



the cash from inside the van. A, B and C have certainly committed offences
specified in the Act. The remedy prescribed by Parliament is that they should
within 72 hours after their arrest, be produced before a Magistrate, who is
obliged to remand them until the trial against them is concluded. But what of
D and E ? At the time of arrest there may only be a suspicion against them,
because the Police would not have had sufficient time or opportunity to
ascertain whether they had knowledge ‑ D of the purpose for which the meeting
was held in his room or E of the purpose for which his car was borrowed. Now
"suspicion in its ordinary meaning is a state of conjecture or surmise where
proof is lacking. 'I suspect but I cannot prove'. Suspicion arises at or near
the starting point of an investigation of which the obtaining of prima facie
proof is the end. When proof has been obtained, the police case is complete.
It is ready for trial and passes on to the next stage" per Lord Devlin in
_Shaaban Bin Jussein vs. Chang Fook Kam_ (1969) 3. A.E.R. 1626 at 1630.



D. and E. are then only on "the periphery of criminal liability". Their acts
or omissions constitute "unlawful activity" within the meaning of the Act. So
they are liable to be arrested under section 6(l) and are liable to be
detained under section 9(1). But once the Police investigations reveal a prima
facie case of the commission of an offence by them, then the law requires that
they shall be remanded by a Magistrate and remain on remand until their trial
before the High Court is concluded. In such a case it would be the duty of the
Police to appraise the Minister of additional evidence establishing a prima
facie case, obtain their release from detention, produce them forthwith before
a Magistrate and have them remanded.



I am of the opinion that the legislature has drawn a distinction between those
whose actions or acts, whether as perpetrator, abettor, conspirator, exhortor,
incitor or whose acts amount to attempts or even only preparation to commit an
offence are by themselves offences; and those whose actions and acts, though
not amounting to an offence are yet unlawful for the purpose of the Act
because they amount to activity "in connection with" the commission of any
offence under the Act. The remedy prescribed in the case of the former
category is remand by a Magistrate until conclusion of the trial before the
High Court without a jury. The remedy prescribed for the latter is detention
by order of the Minister for a limited period, without trial. Detention need
not necessarily be detention in



#  153



military custody, as in these cases. It may even be house detention or
detention in any other specified place. So it would not be correct to say that
those who are "offenders" receive somewhat better treatment or less
curtailment of liberty than "non‑offenders".



Having drawn this distinction I shall now consider the case of each of the
detenues in order to determine whether the remedy prescribed by the
Legislature has been applied in his case. The several affidavits of the Police
Officers who arrested the detenues as well as the affidavits of the Minister
of Internal Security are the sources of information available to us. The
detenues are, each of them, said to be members of organisation , the declared
aim of which is the establishment of a separate state to be called "Tamil
Eelam" by means of armed struggle, violence and terrorism. There was a law to
proscribe the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam enacted on 23.5.78. That law
was repealed by section 30 of the present Act; so that mere membership in such
an organisation by itself would not amount to unlawful activity within the
meaning of section 31 unless there has been some display of violence.



As against _C. Arunagirinathan_ and _B. Siva Selvan,_ the allegation is that
there is material to indicate that they had assisted in the concealment or
subsequent disposal of part of the cash robbed. Now, concealment and disposal
of stolen property are not specified as offences in the Act. But they are acts
done in connection with the bank robbery, and constitute unlawful, activity,
within the meaning of section 31; so their detention is justified.



As against _C. Kulasekerarajasingham_ the allegation is that two of the 13
suspects identified with the robbery were close associates and resided close
to his house. Besides, on 5.4.81 two of three persons apprehended that night
in the process of attempting to leave the country, and from whose possession a
portion of the money robbed was recovered were seen in the vicinity of his
house. That same night several members of the organisation had visited his
house. There was, therefore, material to show that the activities in or near
his house that night were in some way connected with the offence of robbery;
so his detention is justified.



#  154



As against _S. Murugiah_ the allegations are that (a) there was material to
indicate that he harboured and concealed one Nadaraja Thangavel alias
Thangathurai  knowing that the latter had committed an offence under the Act;
(b) he failed to report to a Police Officer that such person had committed an
offence; and (c) that he was concerned in collecting explosives without lawful
authority. Now these allegations point to the Police having prima facie proof
of the commission by Murugiah of offences under the Act, namely offences
specified in sections 2 (j), 5(a) (i) and 2(f) respectively. Therefore
detention under section 9(1) is not lawful in his case. The remedy provided by
Parliament is remand and trial.



The error in the detention orders X2 in respect of Arunagirinathan, Sivaselvam
and Kulasekerarajasingham, in that they have specified the unlawful activity
by the use of the words "to wit: the abetment and robbery of property of the
People's Bank, Neeravely on 25.3.81" does not in my view, invalidate X2
because the allegations in the­ affidavits support the reason given for the
detention, namely unlawful activity.



Accordingly I would make order dismissing appeals S.C. 66/81, 67/81 and 68/81;
but allowing the appeal in S.C. 69/81.





**VICTOR PERERA, J.**



I have had the benefit of perusing the judgments of Weeraratne, J. and
Wimalaratne, J. I am in agreement with Wimalaratne, J. that the term 'unlawful
activity' in Act No. 48 of 1979 does not include offences under the Act.



The appellants in the four Habeas Corpus Applications Nos. 10/81, 11/81, 12/81
and 13/81 had applied for Writs to the Court of Appeal on 23rd April 1981.
Each of the persons in respect of whom the applications were made had been
arrested and detained under the provisions of the Prevention of Terrorism
(Temporary Provisions) Act No. 48 of 1979\. The orders for detention had been
made by the Minister of Defence who was empowered by the Act if he had reason
to believe or suspect that any person is connected with or



#  155



concerned in any unlawful activity to order his detention for a period not
exceeding three months and to extend this order from time to time for periods
not exceeding three months at a time provided that the aggregate period shall
not exceed eighteen months.



The four applications were taken up together and at the hearing before the
Court of Appeal the appellants had challenged.



(a) the legality of the arrests and

(b) the validity of the detention orders.



They had alleged acts of torture, which too were investigated into by the
Court of Appeal.



The Court of Appeal by its order dated 10th September 1981 refused the
applications for Writ. The appellants filed appeals against this order to this
Court.



At the hearing of these appeals which were taken up together, Counsel for the
appellants did not challenge the validity of the arrest made but confined
their submissions to the question of the validity of the detention orders
only. In regard to the detention orders marked X1 in which the grounds of
detention were stated to be "terrorist activity", the Court of Appeal had held
that the said orders were invalid and Counsel for the appellants and for the
State did not challenge that finding. The only contention raised by the
appellants was that the detention orders X2 and the subsequent orders were
invalid as the alleged unlawful activity mentioned in the detention orders was
not what the law contemplated as 'unlawful activity' but acts which
constituted offences under the Act. The Court of Appeal without attempting to
analyse the various provisions of the Act No. 48 of 1979 and without assigning
any reasons whatsoever for its finding held as follows:‑



"Unlawful activity as defined in Section 31 extends to persons not only on the
periphery of criminal liability but it also encompasses any person whose acts
"by any means whatsoever" are connected with the commission of any offence
under this Act and that, we hold, includes a person who has committed an
offence under Act No. 48 of 1979".



# 156



On this basis alone, the Court of Appeal held that the four detention orders
X2 'were valid ex facie'.



Counsel for the appellants very strongly urged that this conclusion by the
Court of Appeal was absolutely without justification and that the Court of
Appeal had failed to give due consideration to t fundamental rights of a
person in regard to his liberty now enshrined  in the clearest terms in the
Constitution of the Democratic Socialist, Republic of Sri Lanka (1978). It was
also urged that the Court o Appeal had not followed the fundamental principles
of law that n person can be deprived of his liberty _except by judicial
process_ an which have up to date been jealously safeguarded and upheld by our
Courts particularly in the case of _In re Mark Antony Lyster Bracegirdle_ (39
NLR 193).



In view of the failure of the Court of Appeal to make an analytical study of
the far reaching provisions contained in Act No. 48 of 1979 Counsel for the
appellants invited us to examine the entire Act also giving consideration to
the law it sought to repeal by Section 30. In order to appreciate fully the
purpose and intention of the Legislature in enacting this Law, the Prevention
of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No.48 of 1979 in July 1979, it will be
necessary t refer to the condition prevailing in the Republic at that date. In
1978, it was established that there was an organisation styling itself as the
"Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam" advocating the use of violence whose
activities were prejudicial to national unity an integrity, national security,
public safety and public order and that certain acts of violence were being
committed in Sri Lanka in open disregard of the normal law of the land.



The Legislature therefore enacted Law No. 16 of 1978 (amended later by Act No.
30 of 1979) for the dual purposes of :



(1) proscribing the "Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam" and any other
organisation which advocated the use of violence to achieve its object, and



(2) providing for the effective prevention of ' _unlawful activities_ ' of any
such organisation and persons connected with such organisation.



**  157**



By Clause 2(1) the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam was proscribed and Clause
2(2) empowered the President to proscribe any organisation advocating the use
of violence and either directly or indirectly concerned in or engaged in any
_'unlawful activity'_. The Law proceeded to enumerate the acts that constitute
offences after an organisation is proscribed and the corresponding penalties
therefor and provided for a trial for such offences in the District Court. The
Minister was empowered to make detention orders in respect of every person so
committing an offence. The term 'unlawful activity' which had been used only
in Clause 2(2) had been defined as meaning any action taken by any means
whatsoever _within Sri Lanka or outside_ by or on behalf of any organisation
_which is prejudicial to the internal security of Sri Lanka_. Thus it is clear
that this term did not have its general meaning but a specified meaning which
did not include any offence under that Law. No prosecution could be initiated
for such ' _unlawful activity_. It merely formed the basis for the President
to use his powers to proscribe the organisation engaged in such activity.
Under this Law the Minister was empowered to make detention orders in respect
of all persons who committed offences under that Law, but no such powers were
granted in respect of persons concerned or engaged in 'unlawful activity'.



However, in spite of the operation of this Law, it was found that public order
in Sri Lanka continued even in 1979 to be endangered by elements that
advocated the use of force or the commission of crimes, as a means of
governmental change, within Sri Lanka and that it was necessary to introduce
more stringent laws to meet the situation. Accordingly the Legislature decided
to repeal Law 16 of 1978 and to enact the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary
Provisions) Act No. 48 of 1979 which according to its long title was for the
dual purposes of:



(1) making temporary provision for the prevention of acts of terrorism in Sri
Lanka, and



(2) to _prevent "unlawful activities"_ of any individual, group of individuals
association, organization within Sri Lanka or outside Sri Lanka.



#  158



The preamble of this Act proceeds to refer to various acts terrorism. In Part
I (clauses 2‑5), the Legislature in order to prevent terrorism has
specifically declared what acts constituted offence under this Act, provided
severe penalties therefor, and made the said offences triable only before a
Judge of the High Court without an preliminary inquiry. In regard to the
investigation of such offences, it is clear that the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 except Sections 303 and 306, were meant to be
operative subject to the special provisions contained in this Act. It made
provision in regard to the powers of the Police in Chapter II under the
heading Investigation of Offences. Section 7(2) made special provision in
regard to persons connected with or concerned in or reasonably suspected to be
connected with or concerned _in the commission of any offence_ who appeared in
any Court or were produced before any Court (other than in the manner referred
to in Section 7(1))." It was conceded by the State that this section
contemplate persons who came or were produced before Court in the course of
investigation of offences under the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.



            Clause 6 dealt with persons against whom investigations are commenced by the Police on the ground that they are engaged in ' _unlawful activity_ " as defined in Clause 31. The term ' _unlawful activity_ ' in this Act too does not have its general meaning but has been given a special meaning;



"Unlawful activity means any action taken or act committed by any means
whatsoever, _whether within or outside Sri Lanka_........................ in
connection with the commission of any offence under this Act".

_ _

            Section 6(1) has empowered any Police Officer not below the rank of Superintendent or any officer not below the rank of Sub‑Inspector authorised in writing to arrest without a warrant any person connected with or concerned in or reasonably suspected of being connected with or concerned in such ' _unlawful activity_.' A Police officer so arresting any person under the powers given in Section 6(1) may keep such person in custody for a period of not exceeding 72 hours, and within that period he has to be produced before a Magistrate who on an application made therefor, as provided, shall make an order that that person be remanded _until the conclusion of the trial_. It was argued that after such arrest if the person so arrested is found



#  159



to have committed an offence, the Police will be obliged to have him charged
and brought up before a competent Court for trial. The Magistrate will then
remand him till the conclusion of the trial. But if no offence as such was
disclosed, the Minister was empowered by this Act, under Clause 9 if he has
reason to believe that the person is _'connected with or concerned in any
unlawful activity'_ to order such person to be detained and in that event the
police were not obliged to have the person produced before the Magistrate.
This contention appears to be justified for the reason that there was
provision made for a person aggrieved by the detention _order on being
informed of the 'unlawful activity' for which he was detained,_ to make
representations to an Advisory Board appointed by the President, while a
person charged with an offence is detained on orders of Courts and has an
opportunity of defending himself in Court.



The Deputy Solicitor General contended that the term _'unlawful activity'_
included the acts constituting offences under this Act and that therefore the
detention orders which identify the unlawful activity as actual offences under
the Act were valid law. If this contention is accepted a person against whom
there is evidence of the commission of an offence is being deprived of his
right to be brought before a competent Court. On an examination of the
provision of Clause 6, there is nothing to show that it referred to
investigation into offences under the Act. But read along with the definition
of 'unlawful activity' it is clear that the specified category of Police
Officer could proceed to act under section 6(1) whenever they had information
or reasonable suspicion that any person was connected with or concerned in any
action or acts, connected with the commission of an offence, which constituted
'unlawful activity'. This particular Section 6 contemplates actions or acts
connected with or concerned in the commission of an offence, however remote
they may appear to be, but not by themselves constituting offences or the
abetment of such offences. They are actions or acts having a bearing on the
acts of terrorism declared offences, but which are not sufficient to be dealt
with as offences and for which a person could not be brought to trial.
Suspicious movements, acts or words of encouragement tending to incite the
commission of offences could well come within this type of activity. The
investigation into this type of activity is wider in scope than the
investigation of offences and the persons who could be arrested for such
activity are from a larger segment of the people. It is for that reason that
the Legislature gave the powers of entry,



#  160



search, seizure and arrest to Police officers not below the rank o
Superintendents of Police or a Police officer, not below the rank
Sub‑Inspector authorised in writing by such officer. Such Police officers were
given special powers in regard to dentenion. There is force in the contention
that if circumstances disclose an offence under the Act the Police, whenever
they have acted under section 6, should resort to the judicial process and
that if there were circumstances that did not disclose an offence but
consisted of acts otherwise connected with the commission of an offence
amounting to unlawful activity, then the Police will have to seek the
assistance of the Minister of Defence. If the Minister on the information so
furnished to him has reason to believe or suspect that a person has committed
an act or acts which are offences under the Law, then clearly he has no
jurisdiction to make a detention order or to continue to keep a detention
order in force.



Our Courts have consistently upheld and safeguarded the fundament principle
that no person can be deprived of his liberty except by judicial process. The
Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (1978) has
enshrined this fundamental right of the individual and it is the duty of the
Court to see that there is no infringement of such right by the Executive.



Counsel for the appellants referred us to Chapter III of the Constitution:



"Article 13(2). Every person held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived
of personal liberty shall be brought  before a Judge of the nearest competent
Court according to procedure established by law and shall not be further held
in custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty except upon an order of
such Judge made in accordance with procedure established by law."



The only restriction to these fundamental rights are contained in Article
15(7) which reads as follows:



"The exercise and operation of the fundamental rights declared under Articles
12, 13(1) and 13(2) shall be subject  to restrictions as may be prescribed by
law in the interests of national security, public order, and the protection of
public health or morality or for the purpose of securing



# 161



due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others or of
meeting the just requirements of the general welfare of a democratic society".



On an examination of the provisions of this Act No. 48 of 1979, it is clear to
me that the Legislature was very mindful of these fundamental rights and
though it was constrained by circumstances to restrict the exercise of such
rights in some measure, did not take away the fundamental rights of persons
alleged to have committed offences from being brought to trial. There was
specific provision for the remand of persons who could be charged with having
committed offences under the Act, under the ordinary law of the land, subject
to the specified restrictions in this Act. Simultaneously it provided for the
detention of persons believed or suspected of being connected with or
concerned in 'unlawful activity' as defined by the Act against whom no charges
could be framed without being brought before Court on detention orders of the
Minister of Defence in the interests of public security.



I have come to the conclusion that therefore the Court of Appeal had
misdirected itself when it held that the term 'unlawful activity' as defined
in Act No. 48 of 1979, includes offences under the Act. All the detention
orders marked X2 in all four cases purport to have been made by the Minister
as he had reason to believe or suspect that the persons were connected with or
concerned with 'unlawful activity'.



When the Minister made the orders of detention he clearly intended that they
were to be effective if the persons concerned were involved in 'unlawful
activity'. To ascertain whether the unlawful activity in each case was based
on representations made to him that the persons had committed offences or were
only involved in 'unlawful activities' it is necessary to scrutinize all the
affidavits filed by them and on behalf of the respondents. In cases Nos.
66/81, 67/81 and 68/81, all the affidavits disclosed that the suspects were
suspected or believed to be involved in 'unlawful activity' relative to
certain offences, namely the commission of the robbery of the People's Bank at
Neervelli on the 25th March 1981, or to the abetment or conspiracy for the
commission of such offence. These affidavits do not disclose that these three
suspects actually committed the offences but that there were strong suspicions
of their involvement. The reference to the abetment or conspiracy in the
detention orders in specifying the



#  162



unlawful activity' would appear to be a misdescription which does not affect
the validity of the detention orders. The Minister was justified in making
these detention orders as the facts disclosed to him point to 'unlawful
activity' within the meaning of the term used in this Law. I therefore agree,
for the aforesaid reasons with Weeraratne, J. and Wimalaratne, J. that the
three detention orders were legal and that the appeals should be dismissed.



In regard to the suspect in case No.69/81, namely, Saravanai Murugaiah, the
detention order X2 dated 26th May 1981 and the subsequent orders, thought
purporting to have been made in respect of 'unlawful activity', attempt to
describe the 'unlawful activity' as harbouring and concealing Nadarajah
Thangavel _alias_ Thangathurai, knowing that he committed such offence under
the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No.48 of 1979, failing
to report to a Police officer that such person had committed such offence and
collecting explosives without lawful authority. In the affidavit of the
Assistant Superintendent of Police, it is clear, that there was material to
indicate that the corpus had harboured and concealed Nadarajah Thangavel
knowing that he had committed an offence and that he had failed to report to a
Police officer and that he had collected explosives. There was evidence of the
commission of the specified offence in this case and therefore the corpus
could not be detained for 'unlawful activity' but rather he was liable to be
charged for such offences. I therefore hold that detention order is not
warranted by law. However, it is conceded that the arrest had been legally
made under this law under Section 6(1) in the course of an investigation into
unlawful activity. As the investigations have since disclosed specific
offences the corpus should have been produced before a Magistrate in terms of
Section 7(1). The only reason why the corpus was not so produced was the
intervening detention order. I agree with Wimalaratne, J. that the petitioner
is not entitled to have the corpus released. I direct that the corpus be
forthwith produced before the Magistrate having jurisdiction to be dealt with
in terms of section 7(l) of Act No. 48 of 1979.



### Validity of

_Detention orders in_

_66 to 68/81 upheld but not_

_in 69/81. Arrest of Corpus in_

_69/81 legal._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/38.html_  

