##  Raymond Fernando v. Bank of Ceylon - SLR - 12, Vol 1 of 2000 [1999] LKSC
38; (2000) 1 Sri LR 12 (22 October 1999)

**12**

**RAYMOND FERNANDO  
v.  
BANK OF CEYLON**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
WIJETUNGA J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
SC (APPEAL) No. 143/97  
CA (APPEALS)  
NOS. 312/89; 313/89, 314(89) and 315/89  
DC (COLOMBO) NOS. 2667/ SPL and  
AND 2668 / SPL  
21st JULY, 1999  
  
_Hire purchase agreement - Termination of agreement - Requisite notice -
Conflict between terms of agreement and the provisions of the Consumer Credit
Act, No. 29 of 1982.  
_  
The plaintiff - appellant ("the appellant" I had entered into a hire purchase
agreement on 27.2.1986 with the defendant \- respondent ("the respondent") in
respect of a vehicle. The respondent informed the appellant in terms of the
agreement that unless the appellant paid a sum of Rs. 33,000/- being arrears
of rent within 7 days, the respondent will take steps to recover the arrears
of rent. The respondent failed to pay the said sum. Thereafter the respondent
seized the vehicle and arranged to sell it. The appellant instituted an action
in the District Court against the respondent for a declaration that the
seizure of the vehicle was illegal.  
  
**Held:**  
  
The hire-purchase agreement had not been duly terminated in terms of section
18 of the Consumer Credit Act which required two weeks notice of termination
of agreement to be given and that section 18 of the Act prevailed over clause
11 of the agreement which stipulated 7 days' notice.  
  
Per Bandaranayake, J.  
  
"It is thus clear that none can contract outside the provisions of the Act"

**13**

**APPEAL** from the judgement of the Court of Appeal.  
  
S. T. Gunawardena for appellant  
  
  
Saleem Marsoof, P. C., ASG with Uditha Egalahewa, S. C. for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

October 22,1999  
**SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.**  
  
The plaintiff-appellant (appellant) entered into a hire purchase agreement on
27.02.1986 (P1) with the defendant-respondent (respondent) in respect of
vehicle No. 26 Sri 8378. The. respondent by letter dated 13.08.1986 (P2),
requested the appellant to pay on or before 20.08.1986 a sum of Rs. 33,000/-
which was due from him, by way of monthly rental and arrears. He was also
informed that, in the event of any default, the respondent would be compelled
to take steps to recover the said sum of money. The appellant failed to pay
the said sum as requested. The respondent thereafter, without any further
intimation, seized the said vehicle on 30.08.1986 and sent a letter to the
appellant stating that unless a sum of Rs. 125,573/20, together with garage
charges at Rs. 40/- per day, from the date of seizure, was paid within 14 days
from the date thereof, the said vehicle would be sold. The appellant
instituted action against the respondent on 12.09.1986 seeking a declaration
that the seizure of the said vehicle was illegal and a declaration that the
respondent is not entitled to sell or transfer the said vehicle. The appellant
also sought an order to deliver the said vehicle to him with damages at Rs.
500/- per day from 31.08.1986 (P5).  
  
The learned District Judge held that the Hire Purchase Agreement had not been
duly terminated in terms of section 18 of the Consumer Credit Act (The Act).
Since the trial judge made no order in favour of the appellant in respect of
damages claimed by him, he appealed against that judgement to the

**14**

Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal held that section 18 of the Act is only
directory and non-compliance of that section by the respondent does not make
the termination of the agreement invalid. The only question which arises in
this appeal is whether section 18 is applicable to the agreement entered into
between the parties, or not.  
  
Section 18 of the Act reads as follows  
  
" 18\. (1) Where a hirer makes more than one default in the payment of hire as
provided in a hire-purchase agreement then, subject to the provisions of
section 21 and after giving the hirer notice in writing of not less  
  
than -  
  
(a) one week, in a case where the hire is payable at weekly or lesser
intervals; and  
  
(b) two weeks in any other case,  
  
the owner shall be entitled to terminate the agreement by giving the hirer
notice of termination in writing:  
  
Provided that if the hirer pays or tenders to the owner the hire in arrear
together with such interest thereon as may be payable under the terms of the
agreement before the expiry of the said period of one week or two weeks, as
the case may be, the owner shall not be entitled to terminate the agreement.  
  
(2) If a hirer -  
  
(a) does any act with regard to the goods to which the hire-purchase agreement
relates which is inconsistent with any of the terms of the agreement; or

**15**

(b) breaks any express condition of the agreement which provides that on the
breach thereof the owner may terminate the agreement,  
  
the owner shall be entitled to terminate the agreement by giving the hirer not
less than 30 day's notice in writing specifying the particulars breach or act
which entitles him to terminate the agreement:  
  
Provided, however, that in case where the breach or act specified in the
notice is capable of being remedied by the hirer, it shall be the duty of the
owner to require the hirer by such notice to remedy the breach or act
complained of, before the expiry of the said period of thirty days, the owner
shall not be entitled to terminate the agreement."  
  
Admittedly, the respondent gave only one week's notice of the termination of
the agreement, not two weeks notice as required by section 18. Learned
Additional Solicitor General submitted that the notice of 7 days was given in
terms of clause 11 of the agreement P1. He contended that in the event of any
inconsistency between the stipulations in clause 11 of the agreement and
provisions of section 18, the former must prevail over the latter for several
reasons. Firstly, he contended that the object of the Act was not to remove
common law or contractual rights of parties. Secondly, he contended that the
object of the Act was to make supplementary provision for areas in a hire-
purchase transaction where the common law or the contract failed to make
provision. Thirdly, he contended that wherever the Act made provision which
intended to override any contractual stipulation, words "notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in the hire-purchase agreement" or words of
similar import were used; our attention was drawn to sections 7(3), 9 and
10(5).

**16**

Learned Additional Solicitor General also submitted that section 25 of the
Hire Purchase Act of the United Kingdom which corresponds to section 18 of the
Sri Lankan Act, specifically provided that the provisions of that section
"shall take effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the
hire-purchase agreement."  
  
If the learned Additional Solicitor General is correct, the Consumer Credit
Act is a mere guide containing a series of pious resolutions bereft of any
force of law. The long title to the Act reads "An Act to **define and
regulate** the duties of parties to hire-purchase agreements and to provide
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto." Although
"notwithstanding provisions" have been specified in some sections through
perhaps an abundance of caution, section 2 of the Act is specific and
pervasive when it states,  
  
"The provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to all hire - purchase
agreements entered into in Sri Lanka after the coming into operation of this
Act."  
  
It is thus clear that none can contract outside the provisions of the Act.  
  
For the above reasons, the appeal is allowed. We set aside the judgement of
the Court of Appeal and affirm the judgment of the District Court. In all the
circumstances we make no order for costs.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.  
**  
WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/38.html_  

