##  Sri Lanka Generalworkers Union v. Samaranayake - SLR - 268, Vol 2 of 1996
[1996] LKSC 38; (1996) 2 Sri LR 268 (1 January 1996)

**268**

SRI LANKA GENERAL WORKERS UNION  
**v.  
SAMARANAYAKE**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO, J.  
DR. AMERASINGHE, J.  
S. N. SILVA, J.  
S. C. 93/94.  
HCA 561/92.  
L.T. NO. 1/147/91.  
NOVEMBER 16, 1995.

_Industrial Disputes Act ‑ Amending Act 32 of 1990 ‑ section 31 D ‑ Appeals to
High Court ‑ Section 31D(6) ‑ Accompanied by certificate that security is
furnished ‑ Directory or Mandatory._

On 16.7.92 the Labour Tribunal made an order awarding the Applicant
Re­spondent ‑ Appellant a sum of Rs. 86,400/‑ as compensation; on 28.7.92 the
Respondent ‑ Appellant Respondent lodged a Petition of appeal; the certificate
re‑security under section 31 D(6) was neither annexed to or filed
simultaneously with the petition of appeal, the security was deposited 7 days
after the period of 30 days specified by section 31 D(6).

The preliminary objection that the appeal should be rejected because a sum of
Rs. 86,400/‑ had not been deposited by way of security at the time the appeal
was filed was overruled by the High Court. On appeal.

**269**

**Held :**

(1) Failure to deposit the security in time is not necessarily fatal. section
31 (D) does not specify a time limit for the deposit of security in the case
of an application in Revision or a writ application. However the certificate
is required to accompany a writ application (section 31 D (B)) indicating that
security can be deposited shortly before the application is made. There is no
similar requirement in the case of a revision application; but undoubt­edly,
in dealing with a revision application the Court will exercise its discre­tion
to require a Petitioner to deposit the security required by section 31D(4) but
in all such cases the deposit will generally be made more than 30 days after
the impunged order. This suggests that the legislature did not consider that
in every case whether appeal revision or writ the security should be deposited
within 30 days of the impunged order.

**_Per_ Fernando, J.**

"If thirty days is not mandatory for writs and revision, for what reason
should be mandatory in the case of an appeal, this is some indication although
not conclusion, that the legislature did not regard the 30 days requirement as
mandatory.

"Thus in a variety of contents, terms and conditions relating to the
preferring of an appeal have been held to be Directory, in the absence of
compelling language, I hold that the time limit of 30 days for the deposit of
security laid down by section 31 D is not mandatory.

**AN APPEAL** from the High Court:

**Cases referred to:**

1 _. Karunadasa v. Wijesinghe_ 1986‑1‑SLR 358, 364.

2\. _Kiriwanthie v. Navaratne ‑ _1990‑2‑SLR 393.

3\. _Sameen v. Abeywickrema_ (1963) 64 NLR 553.

4(1). _Edirisinghe v. Navaratnam_ 1985‑1‑SLR 100.

4(2). _Edward v. de Silva_ 46 NLR 342.

5\. _Abdul Cader v. Sittinisa_ (1951) 52 NLR 536.

6\. _Tillekeratne v. Wijesinghe_ (1908) 11 NLR 270.

7\. _Kadiragamadas v. Suppiah_ (1958) 56 NLR 172

8\. _Sandanam v. Jamaldeen_ (1969) 71 NLR 145.

9\. _Bilindi v. Attadassi Thera_ (1945) 47 NLR 7 (PC).

10. _Murugesu v. Arumugam_ (1936) 16 CLR 228.

11. _Martin v. Suduhamy_ 1991‑2 SLR 279.

**270** __

_V.C. Motilal Nehru, P.C._ with _Ms. P. Joseph_ for Applicant‑Respondent‑
Appellant.

_Chula de Silva, P.C._ with _M. Jayawardane, Lyn Amarasuriya_ and _M.
Maharoof_ for Respondent‑Appellant‑Respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 27, 1995.

**FERNANDO, J.**

The question of law that arises in this appeal involves the interpretation of
section 31 D of the Industrial Disputes Act, introduced by the amending Act
No. 32 of 1990, the relevant provisions of which are as follows:

(4) Every employer who ‑

(a) appeals to a High Court . . . . . . . . against an order of a labour
tribunal or makes an application in revision against any such order. or

(b) makes an application for the issue of an order in the nature of a writ . .
. . . . . in respect of an order made by (the President of a Labour Tribunal).

shall furnish to such labour tribunal, security in cash . . . . . .

(b) The President of every Labour Tribunal shall cause all moneys furnished as
security under subsection (4) to be deposited in an account bearing interest,
in any approved bank in Sri Lanka .

(6) Every petition of appeal. . . . . . . . shall bear uncancelled stamps to
the value of five rupees and in every case where the applicant ( _sic_ ) is
required to furnish security, be accompanied by a certificate issued under the
hand of the President of the Labour Tribunal to the effect that the appellant
has furnished such secu­rity. The petition of appeal shall be filed in the
High Court within a period of thirty days . . . . . . reckoned from the date
of the order from which the appeal is preferred.

**271**

(8) Every application referred to in paragraph (b) of subsection (4) shall be
accompanied by a certificate issued under the hand of the President of the
Labour Tribunal to the effect that the applicant has furnished the security he
is required to furnish by that subsection.

It is common ground that on 16.7.92 the Labour Tribunal made an order awarding
the Applicant‑Respondent‑Appellant (the Appellant) a sum of Rs. 86,400/‑ as
compensation; that on 28.7.92 the Respondent­Appellant‑Respondent (the
Respondent) filed a petition of appeal that the certificate referred to in
section 31 D (6) was neither annexed to, nor filed simultaneously with, the
petition of appeal; that a sum of Rs. 86,400/‑ was required as security was
deposited seven days after the period of thirty days specified by section 31
D(6).

When the appeal was taken up for hearing, the High Court considered a
preliminary objection taken by the applicant; that the appeal should be
rejected because a sum of Rs. 86,400/‑ had not been deposited by way of
security at the time the appeal was filed, and that the petition of appeal was
a nullity because it was not "accompanied by" the certificate. The High Court
overruled this objection.

In the application for special leave. and in the Applicant's written
submissions. the question for decision was stated to be whether the High Court
had erred in holding that the provisions of section 31 D(6) are directory and
not mandatory; and that being mandatory the appeal should have been rejected.

No other issue was raised. Special leave was granted upon the question whether
furnishing security within thirty days and tendering the certificate, in terms
of section 31D(6), are mandatory.

The High Court held that these requirements were plainly directory that the
legislature intended that the Court should have a discretion in the matter;
that the matter could not be determined mechanically, but after taking into
account the nature of the irregularity, the circumstances under which it
occurred, and the prejudice to the other party; and that "accompany" also
meant to "supplement" to remedy deficiencies by adding a thing or a part
later. Mr. Nehru, P.C. who appeared for the

**272**

Applicant, conceded that there had been no inquiry or argument in regard to
the circumstances of the delay, and that no alternative submission had been
made that the appeal should be rejected because the Respondent had failed to
establish facts which would justify the delay condoned or excused.

Mr. Nehru contended that there was no valid petition of appeal unless all the
requirements of section 31D(6) were satisfied the petition had to be filed
within thirty days, it had to bear uncancelled stamps to the value of five
rupees, security had to be deposited within thirty days, and the certificate
had to "accompany" (in the sense of being annexed to or filed simultaneously
with) the petition. If any of these requirements was not satisfied, there was
no valid invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court, which therefore had
no option but to reject the appeal.

These provisions have to be interpreted in the light of the purpose of the
amending Act of 1990. There can be no doubt that the legislative intention was
to ensure that at the conclusion of the appellate proceedings, however
lengthy, there would be a fund available to satisfy the workman's
entitlements; and, by providing for interest, to ensure that the lapse of time
and inflation would not unduly erode those entitlements (see section 31D(6),
which provides for the disposal of the amount deposited as security). It was
pointed out to Mr. Nehru that an Appellant might file his appeal the day after
the Tribunal made its order, and deposit the security on the 29th day; or that
after depositing the security, he might find that the President of the
Tribunal was on leave, or had some administrative difficulty in issuing the
certificate, or, to take an extreme case, was wrongfully withholding the
certificate; or that the certificate had been stolen after it was obtained. He
was unable to cite any authority, or to give any compelling reason, justifying
the view that these provisions were so strict as to require compliance to the
very letter, even where the object of the provisions had been achieved.

Further, as Ranasinghe, J. (as he then was) observed in _Karunadasa v.
Wijesinghe_ (1) in construing provisions dealing with the right of appeal, a
Court ought to prefer a broad construction which would preserve to an
aggrieved party that right, rather than a strict construction which might
abridge it.

**273**

In my view, while the primary meaning of the phrase "be accompanied by" is
"shall have annexed to it" or "shall be filed simultaneously with", that
phrase is wide enough to permit the petition of appeal to be perfected, or
"supplemented", within the prescribed time, and taking the purpose of the
amendment into consideration, this wider interpretation must necessarily be
preferred. Similar language occurs in Rule 46 of the Supreme Court Rules,
1978; that a petition must "be accompanied by" certain material documents,
Rule 46 was considered by me in _Kiriwanthie v_. _Navaratne_ (2) where I held
that strict or absolute compliance was not essential:.

". . . . . .. . .. . . it is sufficient if there is compliance which is
substantial ‑ this being judged in the light of the object and purpose of the
Rule. It is not to be mechanically applied.

Similarly, in _Sameen v. Abeywickrema_ (3) __ the Privy Council held that the
requirement that notice of security be tendered "forthwith" did not mean that
it should be given the same day. I hold that the High Court does not have any
discretion to reject an appeal, where there is compliance with all the
requirements, even if not simultaneous, within the prescribed period. The
purpose of section 31D(6) is not only to ensure the availability of an
interest ‑ bearing fund, but to compel the Appellant to create that fund not
more than thirty days after the impugned order. So long as that object is
achieved, it matters not that the appeal is filed before security is
deposited, or the certificate is filed after the petition.

If a requirement is not complied with within the prescribed time, different
considerations arise. Where the requirement goes to jurisdiction, it is,
unquestionably, mandatory. The failure to invoke the jurisdiction of a Court
or tribunal within the prescribed time limit generally results in the Court or
tribunal lacking the power to deal with the matter. But even this is subject
to exceptions. Thus where the maxim _lex non cogit ad Impossibillia_ is
applicable, this Court will entertain fundamental rights application even
though not filed within the time limit of one month fixed by Article 126 of
the Constitution; _Edirisinghe v. Navaratnam_ 4(1) __ in my view, although the
petition of appeal must be filed within thirty days, the other requirements of
section 31D (6) relate only to form, and not to the invocation of the
jurisdiction of

**274**

the High Court. In _Edward v. de Silva,_ 4(2) _Soertez, ACJ._ made the
distinction clear;

"Some of those rules are so vital, being of the spirit of the law, of the very
essence of judicial action, that a failure to comply with them would result in
a failure of jurisdiction or power to act, and that would render anything done
or any order made thereafter devoid of legal consequence. The failure to
observe other rules, less fundamental, as pertaining to the letter of the law
and to matters of form would not prevent the acquisition of jurisdiction or
power to act, but would involve exercise of it in irregularity".

Thus the failure to join a necessary party was held to be a fatal defect. The
failure to affix a five rupee stamp on the petition of appeal cannot be
regarded as a defect which is necessarily incurable after the expiry of the
appealable period. So also the failure to tender the certificate, if the
security has in fact been deposited in time ‑ because that defect does not
prevent the fulfilment of the purpose of section 31D (6) as in _Sameen v.
Abeywickrame and Kiriwanthie v. Navaratne. (supra)_

However, the failure to deposit the security in time is undoubtedly more
serious, but in my view it is not necessarily fatal, for several reasons.

Section 31D does not specify a time limit for the deposit of security in the
case of an application in revision or a writ application. However, the
certificate is required to accompany a writ application (of section 31D (B))
indicating that security can be deposited shortly before the application is
made. There is no similar requirement in the case of a revision application,
but undoubtedly, in dealing with a revision application, the Court will
exercise its discretion to require a Petitioner to deposit the security
required by section 31D(4). But in all such cases the deposit will generally
be made more than thirty days after the impugned order. This suggests that the
legislature did not consider that in every case ‑ whether appeal, revision or
writ ‑ the security should be deposited within thirty days of the impugned
order. If thirty days is not mandatory for writs and revision, for what reason
should it be mandatory in the case of an appeal? In my view, this is some
indication,

**275**

although not conclusion, that the legislature did not regard the thirty day
requirement as mandatory.

Further, a person who has a genuine difficulty in furnishing security within
thirty days may, without appealing move in revision, and attempt to justify
invoking the revisionary jurisdiction on the basis that this was a good reason
why he could not appeal indeed, it would seem that in the appeal itself he
could ask the court to act in revision. Thus in _Abdul Cader v. Sittinisa_ (5)
a party had deposited only Rs. 20/‑ instead of Rs.25/‑, as fees for
typewritten copies: while declaring the appeal to have abated, Gratiaen, J
acted in revision and granted relief, observing: " . . . . . . . . . . until
the present rule is relaxed I see no reason why the revisionary powers of this
Court should not be exercised in appropriate cases".

It is at least arguable therefore that the High Court could have dealt with
the merits of this appeal in the exercise of its revisionary powers, treating
the delay in depositing security as not being a bar to revision proceedings:
revision being a discretionary remedy, the Court would have had to consider
the nature of the default, the circumstances in which it occurred, the
prejudice to the other party, and the need to avoid a miscarriage of justice.

In _Tillakeratne v. Wijesinghe,_ (6) __ a preliminary objection was taken that
the petition of appeal was not duly signed; although it purported to be signed
by the appellant proctor, the proxy in his favour (filed at the institution of
the action) had never been signed by the client. Hutchinson, C.J., held that
the mistake could be rectified by the Appellant signing the proxy, and that
such signature would operate as a ratification of all the acts done by the
proctor in the action. This was followed by Gunasekera, J. in _Kadiragamadas
v. Suppiah_ (7) __ where the petition of appeal had been filed by a proctor
who did not hold a proxy; this irregularity was cured by the filing of a proxy
after the appealable period.

Apart from the purpose of the provision, it is necessary to consider whether
its language compels the view that it is mandatory. Two decisions dealing with
stamping suggest the proper approach. In _Sandanam v. Jamaldeen,_ (8) __ at __
146, Fernando, CJ referred to several decisions dealing with section 755 of
the Civil Procedure Code (which

**276**

then provided that "any party desirous to appeal may within the time limited
for presenting a petition of appeal, and upon his producing the proper stamp,
be allowed to state viva voce his wish to appeal") which had held that this
was a special statutory provision of appeal. But in regard to an application
for leave to appeal to the Privy Council, he held that there was no special
statutory provision concerning the time of stamping, and that a petitioner
could be allowed time to supply the deficiency. He cited Lord Goddard's
observations in _Bilindi v. Attadassi Thero._ (9) __

". . . . . . . . it would be an unfortunate and probably unintended result of
the stamp ordinance if a litigant should be debarred from an appeal on a
ground which is from a practical point of view capable of easy remedy without
injustice to anyone" . . . . . .

Of course, thereafter a party cannot expect further indulgence. In _Murugesu
v. Arumugam_ (10) __ 228, __ Fernando, AJ. held that where the Court had
allowed a party time to perfect his appeal, but the party failed to comply
within that time, then his appeal had to be rejected. Similarly, in _Martin v.
Suduhamy_ (11) __ party who had intentionally refused to comply, after
becoming aware of the defect, was refused relief.

_Martin v. Suduhamy (supra)_ dealt with non. compliance provisions requiring
security for costs, in civil proceedings. There is a difference, in that
section 759(2) __ of the Civil Procedure Code expressly confers power to give
relief. However, the deposit of security (whether in respect of an award, or
for the costs of appeal) is not a matter upon which the jurisdiction of the
Court depends but a term or condition relating to its exercise.

Thus in a variety of contents, terms and conditions relating to the preferring
of an appeal have been held to be directory, in the absence of compelling
language. I hold that the time limit of thirty days for the deposit of
security, laid down by section 31D is not mandatory.

That does not mean that the time limit can be ignored. Where the objection is
taken, the burden is on the Appellant to satisfy the High Court that it should
exercise its discretion to entertain the appeal, after considering the nature
of the default, the circumstances, in which it occurred, and the prejudice to
the other party.

**277**

Mr. Nehru contended that the Respondent in this case had failed to discharge
that burden. However, the preliminary objection that was taken was limited in
scope; that the time limit was mandatory, and for that reason alone the appeal
should be rejected. And that was the only question on which special leave was
sought and granted. The objection was never taken that the Respondent had
failed to prove ‑facts and circumstances justifying the exercise of the
discretion of the Court in his favour. We accordingly did not permit the
Applicant to raise that matter for the first time in appeal.

I affirm the order of the High Court in regard to the preliminary objection,
and dismiss the appeal. Having regard to the circumstances in which this
question of law of general importance arose for decision, I make no order for
costs. The record will be sent back to the High Court immediately.

**AMERASINGHE, J.** ‑ I agree.

**SILVA, J.** ‑ I agree.

_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/38.html_  

