##  Sirisumana v. Illangaratne and Others - SLR - 158, Vol 2 of 1995 [1995]
LKSC 38; (1995) 2 Sri LR 158 (17 January 1995)

**158**

**SIRISUMANA  
v.  
ILLANGARATNE AND OTHERS **

SUPREME COURT

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.  
KULATUNGA, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
JULY 03 AND JULY 10, 1995.

_Constitution - Tea Control Department - Employee - Promotion Discriminatory
and Violative of Article 12(i) - Merit - Seniority._

The Petitioner is the Administrative Officer, grade V attached to the Tea
Small Holdings Development Authority. He complained that the promotion of the
6th Respondent to a Senior Administrative Post was discriminatory and
violative of his Rights under Act, 12(1). The Petitioner obtained more marks
for seniority, both had equal marks at the written test, the 6th Respondent
obtained more marks than the petitioner at the interview.

**Held:**

The Petitioner did not allege mala fides or political motive against the 6th
Respondent's appointment. There is no intentional or purposeful discrimination
which vitiates the impugned appointment.

**AN APPLICATION** for infringement of Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Wijesinghe v Attorney-General FRD (1) at p. 40 at 45._  
  
_2\. Gunatileke v. Attorney-General FRD (1) at 86._  

_3\. Weligodapola v. Secretary, Ministry of Womens Affairs 1989 - 2 SLR 63 at
82-83._  
  
_A. H. H. Perera with Gamini Perera for the Petitioner._  
_  
Mohan Pieris, S.S.C., for respondents._

_Cur adv. vult._

159

July 27, 1995\.  
**KULATUNGA, J.**

The petitioner is an Administrative Officer Grade V attached to the Tea Small
Holdings Development Authority. He complains that the promotion of the 6th
Respondent to a post of Senior Administrative Officer Grade IV at the Head
Office with effect from 17.01.95 was discriminatory and violative of his
rights under Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

The petitioner claims that on the basis of merit and seniority the appointment
which is the subject matter of these proceedings should have been given to him
and not to the 6th respondent.

Both the petitioner and the 6th respondent joined the Tea Control Department
as clerks on 10.03.70. Next they joined the Tea Small Holdings Development
Authority on 20.03.78. In the course of their career in different grades of
service, each of them had gained seniority over the other alternatively, on
assessment for appointment.

In the selection to the Senior Administrative Officer, Grade IV, the
petitioner and the 6th respondent obtained equal marks at the written test;
the petitioner obtained more marks for seniority for the reason that he was
senior to the 6th respondent in grade IV; but the respondent obtained more
marks than the petitioner at the interview. The final score was 63.4 for the
6th respondent and 62.8 for the petitioner. In the result, the petitioner was
not selected for appointment.

The petitioner complains that on a precise calculation of their seniority in
Grade IV namely, 9 years and 10 112 months for him and 8 years and 3 months
for the 6th respondent, the petitioner should have been appointed. On that
basis he claims that he would have received 64.8 marks whilst the 6th
respondent would have received only 62.508 marks.

The 6th respondent in his affidavit states that in the Tea Control Department
he was promoted as Grade 11A clerk before the petitioner

160

as the latter could not pass the promotion test. Hence, the 6th respondent
became more senior at that point. In the Tea Small Holdings Development
Authority the 6th respondent was promoted as Grade 1 clerk on 01.06.82 whilst
the petitioner was promoted only on 15.11.83 and thus the 6th respondent was
17 months senior to the petitioner. However, when they competed for
appointment to the post of Administrative Officer the petitioner received 10
marks more than the 6th respondent at the test. After interview, the
petitioner was appointed, though the 6th respondent was more senior.

The 6th respondent states that the petitioner was the President of the Branch
Union of the Jathika Sevaka Sangamaya (a union which enjoyed government
patronage at that time). In proof of this, he has produced the document 6R2.
The 6th respondent has also produced a letter dated 23.04.84 addressed by the
Secretary, JSS to the then Minister of Public Administration & Plantation
Industries, introducing the petitioner as a strong supporter of the government
party.

The petitioner does not allege mala fides or political motive against the 6th
respondent's appointment. There is no intentional or purposeful discrimination
which vitiates the impugned appointment. See _Wijesinghe v. Attorney-General_
(1), _Gunatilleke v. Attorney-General_ (2). See also _Weligodapola v.
Secretary Ministry of Women's Affairs_ (3) where Amerasinghe J. said:

"The State, as I have said before, is entitled to lay down conditions of
efficiency and other qualifications for securing the best service. And when it
does so, this court will not, in my opinion, insist that the classification is
scientifically perfect and logically complete".

These principles apply to the case before us. On the available evidence, the
alleged infringement of rights under Article 12(1) has not been established.
This application is accordingly dismissed. The petitioner will pay Rs. 750/-
as costs to the 6th respondent.

**G. P S. DE SILVA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/38.html_  

