##  Channa Peris and Others v. Attorney General and Others - SLR - 1, Vol 1 of
1994 [1994] LKSC 38; (1994) 1 Sri LR 1 (31 May 1994)

**1**

**CHANNA PIERIS AND OTHERS**

**v.**

## ATTORNEY GENERAL AND OTHERS ** _  
  
(Ratawesi Peramuna Case)_**



SUPREME COURT.

AMARASINGHE, J.

GOONEWARDENE, J. AND

WIJETUNGA, J.

SC APPLICATIONS

NO. 146/92 TO 154/92

AND 155/92 (SEVEN APPLICATIONS)

(CONSOLIDATED)

17 FEBRUARY, 1994



Fundamental Rights ‑ Constitution, Articles 11, 13(1), 13(2), 13(4), 14(1) (a)
and 14(1) (c) ‑ Illegal arrest ‑ Communicating reasons for arrest ‑ Freedom of
speech and expression ‑ Freedom of association ‑ Detention ‑ Torture ‑
Regulations 18(1), 17, 19 of the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and
Powers) Regulations.



The ten applications were by consent considered together. The applicants in
the ten applications were granted leave to proceed for the alleged
infringements of their rights guaranteed by Articles 11, 13(1), 13(2), 14(1)
(a) and 14(1) (c) of the Constitution. The petitioners were participants in a
"movement" called the Ratawesi Peramuna formed in November 1991 under the
leadership of Atureliya Rathana, the petitioner in application No. 149/92. The
Peramuna had problems. In order to consider the 'crises' encountered by the
Peramuna, Rathana convened a meeting which was held at the Kawduduwa Temple on
27th February, 1992. The current political climate, various criticisms of the
Ratawesi Peramuna, the disruption in January 1992 of the exhibition of posters
in Matara and the resurgence of the JVP were discussed after which a manifesto
was introduced by Champika Ranawake the petitioner in Application No. 154/92.
There were about 15 participants at the Kawduduwa temple meeting. On an
anonymous telephone call received at the Wadduwa Police Station that a meeting
of the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna was being held behind closed doors at the
Kawduduwa temple by some University students led by one Champika Ranawaka, the
third respondent Inspector Ekanayaka went with a party of police officers and
stood outside a window of the closed room where the meeting was being held and
listened to the discussions that were taking place. Sub‑Inspector Galkande,
4th respondent, stood at another window and he also listened. They made notes
of the discussions that were taking place. They formed the impression that the
participants were engaged in a conspiracy to overthrow the Government.

**2**



Inspector Ekanayake tapped at the door and got it opened and arrested the
suspects. Having explained the charge to them he took them into custody. The
3rd and 4th respondents had noticed several priests and about ten young
persons seated on the ground in a circle. One of the young men was standing
and addressing the others and exhorting his audience to topple the Government.
After this speech a priest had asked whether anyone opposed what had been just
said. No one spoke and there was silence. At this the Inspector understood
there was a confirmed conspiracy against the Government. He made a record of
what had been said ? so did Sub-Inspector Galkanda. The third respondent heard
a great deal more than the fourth respondent. They pasted their notes in the
minor offences book.



**Held**



1\. Rights guaranteed by Articles 12, 14(1) (h) and 14(1) (g) of the
Constitution were not violated as no evidence in support of such violations
have been adduced and no submissions made during the hearing in support of
such violations.



2\. It is incumbent on the person making the arrest to precisely indicate the
procedure under which the arrest was made. A detention of a person in
pursuance of Regulation 18 must be in a place authorised by the
Inspector-­General of Police or Deputy Inspector‑General of Police,
Superintendent of Police or Assistant Superintendent of Police. Otherwise the
detention would be in violation of Regulation 19(2) and therefore, not being
in accordance with procedure established by law, there would be violation of
Article 13(1) of the Constitution which provides that no person shall be
arrested except according to procedure established by law. Therefore the
arrests of M. C. Pieris (Application No. 146/92), M. D. Daniel (Application
No. 147/92), S. H. Dayananda (Application No. 148/92), Atureliya Rathana
(Application No. 149/92), Rev. Thalpitiya Wimalasena (Application No. 150/92),
K. N. Perera (Application No. 151/92), Chandanaratna (Application No. 153/92),
Ranawake (Application Nol. 154/92) are violative of Article 13 (1) of the
Constitution.



3\. The Ratawesi Peramuna was an anti‑government organisation. However, as a
matter of law, merely vehement, caustic and unpleasantly sharp attacks on the
government, the President, Ministers, elected representatives or public
officers are not _per se_ unlawful.

  _  
**Per**_ **Amerasinghe, J  
**  
(a) "The right not to be deprived of personal liberty except according to a
procedure established by law is enshrined in Article 13(1) of the
Constitution. Article 13(1) prohibits not only the taking into custody but
also the keeping of persons in a state of arrest by imprisonment or other
physical restraint except according to procedure established by law."

3

  

(b) "Legitimate agitation cannot be assimilated with incitement to overthrow
the government by unlawful means. What the third respondent is supposed to
have heard, even according to the fabricated notes he has proferred, was a
criticism, of the system of Government, the need to safeguard democracy, and
proposals for reform."



(c) "The call to 'topple' the President or the Government did not mean that
the change was to be brought about by violent means. It was a call to bring
down persons in power by removing the base of public support on which they
were elevated.



If the throwing down was to be accomplished by democratic means, the fact that
the tumble may have had shocking or traumatic effects on those who might fall
is of no relevance. It is the means and not the circumstances that have to be
considered."



4\. The obvious purpose of Regulation 23 (a) is to protect the existing
government not from change by peaceable, orderly, constitutional and therefore
by **lawful** means, but from change by violence, revolution and terrorism, by
means of criminal force or show of criminal force.



5\. There was no basis for arrest under Regulation 18 read with Regulation 23
(a) for there was nothing the 3rd respondent heard which suggested that the
petitioners were doing anything to overthrow the Government by means that were
not lawful.



Further the arrest could not have been made on the basis that Regulation 23
(b) was being violated. There was not a word in the 3rd respondent's notes
about murdering or confining anyone.



6\. The petitioners were also vaguely charged with attempting, aiding,
abetting or conspiring to commit offences (Regulation 45) and of assisting
offenders (Regulation 46). There were no offences under the Regulations which
the petitioners were alleged to be aiding, abetting or conspiring to commit.
The petitioners were not persons arrested for committing an offence under
Regulation 23 (a), 23 (b), 45 and 46.



7\. In general, in order to make an arrest according to the procedure
established by Regulation 18(1) on the basis of a reasonable ground of
suspicion, clear and sufficient proof of the commission of the offence alleged
is not necessary. A _prima facie_ proof consists of admissible evidence.
Suspicion can take into account matters that could not be put in evidence at
all. Suspicion can take into account also matters which, though admissible,
could not form part of a _prima facie_ case. What the officer making the
arrest, needs to have are **reasonable grounds** for suspecting the persons to
be concerned in or to be committing or to have

4



committed the offence. Were the circumstances, including the prevailing
situation in the country at the time, objectively regarded (the subjective
satisfaction of the officers making the arrest is not enough) sufficient to
induce the third respondent to reasonably suspect that the petitioners were
concerned in or committing or had committed an offence under the Regulations
specified.



A reasonable suspicion may be based either upon matters within the officer's
knowledge or upon credible information furnished to him, or upon a combination
of both sources.



8\. The offence which the 3rd respondent had in mind when he arrested the
petitioners was the offence of conspiracy as set out in Regulation 23 (a)
though other offences are also mentioned in the Detention Order. In the case
of conspiracy to overthrow the Government by unlawful means, the Government
cannot be expected to wait until the _putsch_ is about to be executed, the
plans have been laid and the signal is awaited or the bomb assembled and fuse
ignited. If the ingredients to the reaction are present, it is not necessary
to await the addition of the catalyst. A single revolutionary spark may kindle
a fire that, smouldering for a time, may burst into a sweeping and destructive
conflagration. It cannot be said that the State is acting arbitrarily or
unreasonably when it seeks to extinguish the sparks without waiting until the
flame has been enkindled or blazed into conflagration. It cannot reasonably be
required to defer the adoption of measures for its own peace and safety until
the revolutionary utterances lead to actual disturbances of the public peace,
but it may and it is expected in the exercise of its duty, to suppress the
threatened danger in its incipiency. If the Government is aware that a group
aiming at its overthrow by unlawful means is attempting to indoctrinate its
members and to commit them to a course whereby they will strike when the
leaders feel the circumstances permit, action to save the nation from the
physical and political harm that might otherwise ensue is not only reasonable
but also the duty and a fundamental function of Government and its law
enforcement agencies. In order to justifiably claim that the arrest were
fitting in regard to time and circumstances, the respondents were obliged to
establish that the speech impelled the hearers to imminent, unthinking lawless
action to overthrow the Government.



Law enforcement officers cannot reasonably be required to measure the danger
from every such utterance in the nice balance of a jeweller's scale. At the
same time, sufficient regard must be had to the constitutional right of free
speech. Here the Police had their suspicions and hoped that some evidence
might turn up to make their suspicions reasonable. Detention for search has
here not been in accordance with the procedure established by Regulation
18(1).



9\. The fundamental right of each and everyone of the petitioners to be free
from arrest except according to procedure established by law guaranteed under

5



Article 13(1) of the Constitution has been violated. Neither the Secretary nor
the Assistant Superintendent were empowered by Regulation 17 to detain the
petitioners for the purpose of completing investigations relating to the
commission of offences; Regulation 17(1) is not concerned with the
investigation of offences but with measures aimed at the prevention of certain
specified kinds of unlawful behaviour.



Although detention orders under Regulation 17 may be issued while a Detention
Order under Regulation 19 or under the Prevention of Terrorism Act is in
force, yet there must be some justification for it. The evidence for arrests
of the petitioners in terms of Regulation 18(1), could not have led to the
formation of an opinion that it. was necessary to detain the petitioners in
terms of Regulation 17(1).



The failure to provide the petitioners with copies of the detention orders
does not infringe any constitutional right.



10\. The person being arrested must be informed of the reason for his arrest.
The obligation of the person making the arrest is to give the reason at the
moment of the arrest, or where it is in the circumstances not practicable, at
the first reasonable opportunity.



11\. The petitioners were not arrested and kept arrested in accordance with a
procedure established by law and they were not informed of the reason for
their arrest. While the arrest, holding in custody, detention or deprivation
of personal liberty of a person pending investigation or trial does not
constitute a punishment by imprisonment and while holding a person in
preventive detention has been held not to be punitive imprisonment violative
of Article 13(4) of the Constitution yet deprivation of personal liberty would
amount to punitive imprisonment violative of Article 13(4), where the person
was never, or cannot any longer, be reasonably said to be held for purposes of
investigation, trial or preventive detention as the case may be.



12\. The fact that Article 13(1) is violated does not necessarily mean that
Article 13(2) is therefore violated. Nor does the violation of Article 13(2)
necessarily mean that Article 13(1) is violated. Arrest and detention, as a
matter of definition, apart from other relevant considerations, are
"inextricably linked". However Articles 13(1) and 13(2) have a related but
separate existence. Article 13(1) is concerned with the right of a person not
to be arrested including the right to be kept arrested except according to
procedure established by law and the right to be informed of the reasons for
arrest, whereas Article 13(2) is concerned with the right of a person arrested
to be produced before a judge according to procedure established by law and
the right not to be further deprived of personal liberty except upon and in
terms of the order of such judge made in accordance with procedure established
by law.

6



The fundamental rights of the petitioners to be brought before the judge of
the nearest competent court according to procedure established by law
guaranteed by Article 13(2) of the Constitution were violated.



13\. In regard to violations of Article 11 (by torture, cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment), three general observations apply:



(i) The acts or conduct complained of must be qualitatively of a kind that a
Court may take cognizance of. Where it is not so, the Court will not declare
that Article 11 has been violated.  


            (ii) Torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment may take many forms, psychological and physical.



(iii) Having regard to the nature and gravity of the issue, a high degree of
certainty is required before the balance of probability might be said to tilt
in favour of a petitioner endeavouring to discharge his burden of proving that
he was subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.



There has been here no violation of the fundamental rights guaranteed by
Article 11 of the Constitution.



14\. The petitioners had no purpose of helping to make the Ratawesi Peramuna
an instrument of terrorism or violence which would menace the peace and
welfare of the State. They were considering matters of personal concern and
were anxious to mobilize public opinion to accept their views so that. they
might replace those in power with other representatives who may give effect to
their views. The fundamental right of freedom of expression under Article
14(1) (a) of all the petitioners (except of petitioner in SC Application No.
150/92) has been violated.



15\. The right of association is not only guaranteed by the Constitution to
protect the freedom of intimate association but also as an indispensable means
of preserving other individual liberties concerned with a wide variety of
political, social, economic, educational, religious and cultural ends. In
essence the petitioners' complaint is that their right of association for the
advancement of certain beliefs and ideas was violated by their arrest and
detention. The Ratawesi Peramuna was not an organization whose members or
adherents were engaged in purposes prejudicial to national security or the
maintenance of public order or in other unlawful activities. The Peramuna was
not a proscribed organization. No justification existed for the violation of
the petitioners' associational rights relating to their expressive activities.
The fundamental right of freedom of association guaranteed by Article 14(1)
(c) of the Constitution was violated by the 3rd and 4th respondents in respect
of all the petitioners except the petitioner in SC Application No. 150/92. **
**



**7  
 **

**List of cases referred to :**



1\. _Wimalawardena v. Nissanka_ : SC Appeal 685/92 ‑ SC Minutes of 09.09.93  


2\. _De Silva v. Mettananda and Others_ : SC 158/87 ‑ SC Minutes of 10.03.89  


3\. _Piyasiri v. Fernando_ [1988] 2 Sri LR 173, 179  


4\. _Rajapaksa v Kudahetti_ : SC Application No. 52/70 ‑ SC Minutes of
28.07.92  


5\. _Jayakody v. Karunanayake_ : SC Application No. 91/91 ‑SC Minutes of
18.11.92  


6\. _Kumarasena v. Sub ‑Inspector Shriyantha & Others_: SC Application No.
257/93 ‑ SC Minutes of 23.05.94  


7\. _Podiappuhamy v Liyanage & Others_: SC Application 446/93 **** ‑ SC
Minutes of 31.05.94  


8\. _Lalanie & Nirmala v. De Silva & Others_: SC 53/88 ‑ SC Minutes of
24.05.89  


9\. _Dissanayake v. Superintendent Mahara Prison_ : SC (Spl) 6/90 **** ‑ SC
Minutes of 28.03.91  


10\. _Wijesiri v. Rohan Fernando & Others_: SC Application 20/90 ‑ SC Minutes
of 28.07.92  


11\. _Weerakoon a Mahendra & Others_: SC Application 36/90 ‑ SC Minutes of
29.07.91  


12\. _Vidyamuni a Jayatilleke_ : SC Application 852/91 ‑ SC Minutes of
22.07.92  


13\. _Wijewardena v. Zain_ : SC Application 202/87 ‑ SC Minutes of 24.07.89  


14\. _Sasanasiritissa Thero & Others v De Silva & Others _[1989] 2 Sri LR 356  


15\. _Weerakoon v Weeraratne_ : SC Application 42/92 ‑ SC Minutes of 16.11.92  


16\. _Mohamed Faiz v Attorney ‑General & Others_: SC Application 89/90 - SC
Minutes of 19.11.93  


17\. _Shantha Wijeratne v. Vijitha Perera_ : SC Application 379/93 ‑ SC
Minutes of 02.03.94



18\. _Pieris v. The Commissioner of Inland Revenue_ (1963) 65 NLR 457, 458  


19\. _Kumaranatunga v. Samarasinghe_ : SC Application 121/82 ‑ SC Minutes of
03.02.83; (1983) 2 FRD 347, 355, 362, 363  


20\. _Fernando v. Attorney ‑General_ [1983] 1 Sri LR 374  


21\. _Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam_ [1985] 1 Sri LR 100, 114  


22\. _Joseph Silva & Others v. Balasuriya & Others_: SC Applications 112‑115
of 1987 ‑ SC Minutes of 26.05.86  


23\. _Gunaratne et al a Cyril Herath & Wijesooriya Abeyratne and Others_: SC
Applications 96/97 and 97/87 ‑ SC Minutes of  03.03.89  


24\. _Wijesooriya v. Abeyratne & Others: SC _Application 99/87 ‑ SC Minutes of
03.03.89  


25\. _Chandradasa & Kularatne v. Lal Fernando: SC _Application 174 ‑ 5/87 - SC
Minutes of 30.09.88  


26\. _Wickremabandu v. Herath & Others: SC _27/88 ‑ SC Minutes of 06.04.90  


27\. _Deniyakumburagedera Sriyani Lakshmi Ekanayake v. Inspector Herath Banda
and Others:_ SC __ 25/91 (FR) ‑ SC Minutes of  
 11.10.91  


28\. _Dissanayake v. S. I. Guneratne and Others:_ SC __ Application 22/91 SC ‑
Minutes of 11.10.91

8



29\. _Gitlow v New York_ 268 US 652; 455 Ch. 625, 69L. Ed. 1138 (1925)  


30\. _NAACP v. Claiborne Hardware Co._ 458 US 886 (1982)  


31\. _Watts v. United States_ 394 US 705 (1969)  


32\. _Masses Publishing Co. v Patten_ 244 Fed. 535 (SDNY 1917)  


33\. _New York Times Co. v. Sullivan_ 376 US 254, 84 S. Ch. 710, 11 L. Ed. 2
Ed 686(1984)  


34\. _Cohen v. California_ (1971) 403 US 15, S. Ch. 1789, 29 L. Ed. 2 Ed. 284  


35\. _Joseph Perera v. A. G.: SC_ Application 107 ‑ 109/86 SC ‑ Minutes of
25.05.87  


36\. _Dayasena Amaratunga v. P. Sirimal and Others: SC_ Application 468/92 -SC
Minutes of 08.03.93  


37\. _Feiner v. New York_ 340 US 315; 71 Ch. 303, 95L. Ed. 295 (1951)  


38\. _West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette_ 319 US 624, 63 S.Ch
1178, 87L. Ed. 1628 (1943)  


39\. _Whitney v. California_ 274 US 357; 47S ct 641; 71L Ed 1095 (1927)  


40\. _Mallawaratchi v Seneviratne:_ SC __ Application 212/88 SC ‑ Minutes of
28.09.89  


41\. _Muttusamy v. Kannangara_ (1951) 52 NLR 324  


42\. _Gunasekera v Fonseka_ (1972) 75 NLR 246  


43\. _Lundstron v. Cyril Herath and Others_ : SC __ Application 27/87 ‑ SC
Minutes of 29.04.88  


44\. _Jayasuriya v. Tillekeratne and Others:_ SC __ Application 117/87 ‑ SC
Minutes of 06.10.88  


45\. _Withanachchi v. Cyril Herath and Others_ : SC __ 144‑45/86 ‑ SC Minutes
01.07.88  


46\. _Yapa v Bandaranayake_ [1988] 1 Sri LR 63  


47\. _Weerakoon and Allahakoon v. Beddewela:_ SC __ Application 213/86 -SC
Minutes of 11.12.90  


48\. _Gamlath v Silva and Others:_ SC __ Application 78/90 ‑ SC Minutes of
27.08.91  


49\. _Munidasa and Others v. Seneviratne and Others:_ SC __ Application 115/91
-SC Minutes of 03.04.92  


50\. _Karunasekera v. Jayavardene and Others:_ SC __ Application 15/90 -SC
Minutes of 06.05.90  


51\. _Chandrasekeram v. Wijetunga:_ SC __ Reference No. 1‑3/92 ‑ SC Minutes of
29.06.92  


52\. _Elasinghe v. Wijewickrema and Others:_ SC Application 218/92 - SC
Minutes of 19.03.93



53\. _Nihallage Dona Ranjani v. Liyanapathirana and Others:_ SC Application
784/92 ‑ SC Minutes of 30.07.93  


54\. _Baba Appu v. Adan Hamy_ (1900) 1 Browne's Reports 34 .  


55\. _Ragunathan v. Thuraisingham:_ SC __ Application 158/88 ‑ SC Minutes of
23.08.89  


56\. _Shaaban Bin Hussein v. Chong Fook Kam_ [1969] 3 All ER 1626  


57\. _Buhary v. Jayaratne_ (1947) 48 NLR 224  


58\. _Dennis v. US_ 1951 341 US 495, 71 S. Ch. 857, 95L. Ed. 1157.

9



59\. _Dumbell v. Roberts_ [1944] 1 All ER 326  


60. _Podiappuhamy v Liyanage and Others:_ SC _Application 446/83 ‑ _SC __ Minutes of 31.05.94  


61. _Premaratne and Somawathie v K. D. Somapala:_ SC __ Application 68/86 - SC Minutes of 11.05.88  


62. _Nanayakkara v Henry Perera_ [1985] 2 Sri LR 375  


63 _. Kalyanie Perera and Sathyajith v. Siriwardena:_ SC Application 27/90 -
SC Minutes of 11.03.91  


64\. _Godagama v Ranatunge:_ SC Application 138/92‑SC __ Minutes of 03.02.93



65. _Jayaratne v. Tennakoon and Others:_ SC Application 10 and 18/89 - SC Minutes of 04.07.89  


66. _Fernando v. Silva and Others:_ SC Application 7/89 ‑ SC Minutes of 03.05.91  


67. _Hirdararnani a Ratnavale_ (1971) 75 NLR 67  


68. _Leelaratne v. Cyril Herath and Others:_ SC Application 145/86 ‑ SC Minutes of 09.03.87  


69. _Fernando v. Kapilaratne and Others:_ SC Application 1/91 ‑ SC Minutes of 10.12.91  


70. _Secretary of State v. Tameside_ [1976] 3 All ER 665, 671  


71. _Siriwardene v Liyanage_ (1983) 2 FRD 310, 328, 329  


72. _Somasiri and Somasiri v Jayasena and Others:_ SC Application 141/88 - SC Minutes __ of 01.03.91  


73. _Senthilinayagam v. Seneviratne_ [1987] 2 Sri LR 187  


74. _Jayatissa v. Dissanayake and Others:_ SC Application 74/88 ‑ SC __ Minutes of 10.07.89  


75. _Lankapura v P. D. A. Perera and Others:_ SC Application 80/88 ‑ SC Minutes of 09.12.88  


76. _Pushpakumari and Jayawickrema v. Mahendra and Others:_ SC Application 37/90‑SC Minutes of 28.01.91  


77. _Dharmatilleke v Abeynaike:_ SC Application 156/86‑SC Minutes of 15.02.88  


78. _Christie v. Leachinsky_ [1949] 1 All ER 567; [1947] AC 573  


79 _. Mariadas Raj v Attorney ‑General _FR (Vol 2) 397, 403; [1983] 2 Sri LR
461  


80 _. Walter v. City of Burmingham_ (1967) 388 US 307  


81. _Nallanayagam v. Gunatilleke_ [1987] 1 Sri LR 293  


82. _Gerstein v Pugh_ 420 US 103, 95 S. Ch. 854, 43L. Ed. 2nd 54 (1975) _  
 _

83. _Scheisser Case ‑ _European Court on Human Rights Decision of 04.12.79  


84. _Skoogstrom Case ‑ European Court _of Human Rights Decision of 02.10.84



85 _. Mclyoff Case_ ‑ European Court of Human Rights Decision of 26.10.84  


86. _Geekiyanage Premalal de Silva v. Rodrigo:_ SC Application 24/89 ‑ SC Minutes of 05.09.90  


87\. _Samanthilaka v. Ernest Perera and others_ : [1990] 1 Sri LR 318; SC
Application 65/88 ‑ SC Minutes of 29.06.90  


88. _Sirisena and others v Ernest Perera and Others:_ SC Application 14/90 - SC Minutes of 26.08.91

10



89\. _Abeywickrema v. Dayaratne and others:_ SC Application 125/88 ‑ SC
Minutes of 12.07.89  


90. _Dayananda v Weerasinghe and Others_ (1983) 2 FRD 292  


91. _Gurusinghe v. Kadurugamuwa:_ SC Application 133/87 ‑ SC Minutes of 01.06.88  


92. _Liyanage v. Chandrananda and Others:_ SC Application 107/91 ‑ SC Minutes of 02.02.92  


93. _Saranal v. Wijesooriya and Others:_ SC Application 39/87 ‑ SC Minutes of 13.02.88 _  
 _

94. _Kumarasinghe v Attorney ‑General: _SC Application 52/82 ‑ SC Minutes of 06.09.92  


95. _Leo Fernando v. Attorney ‑General _[1985] 2 Sri LR 541  


96. _Jayasinghe v. Mahendran and Others_ [1987] 1 Sri LR 206  


97. _Velmurugu v. Attorney ‑General _(1980) 1 FRD 180, 197‑8, 223  


98. _Samsan v Leeladasa:_ SC Application 4/88 ‑ SC Minutes of 12.12.88  


99. _Siriyawathie v. Pasupathi and Jansz:_ SC Application 112/86 ‑ SC Minutes of 28.04.87  


100. _Kamegam v. Jansz and Others:_ SC Application 100/87 ‑ SC Minutes of 28.01.88  


101 _. Lawless Case ‑ _European Court of Human Rights Decision of 07.14.61  


102. _Wemhoff Case_ ‑ European Court of Human Rights Decision of 27.06.68  


103. _Neumeister Case_ ‑ European Court of Human Rights Decision of 27.06.68  


104. _Strogmuller case_ ‑ European Court of Human Rights Decision of 10  November 69   


105. _Matznetter Case_ ‑European _Court_ of Human Rights __ Decision of 10.11.69  


106. _Ringeisen Case ‑_European Court of Human Rights Decision of 16.07.71  


107. _Eckle Case_ ‑ European Court of Human Rights Decision of 15.07.82  


108. _Foti and others ‑ _European Court of Human Rights Decision of 10.12.82  


109. _Corighano Case_ ‑ European Court of Human Rights Decision of 10.12.82  


110. _Vallon Case ‑ _European Court of Human Rights Decision of 03.06.85  


111. _Carr Case ‑ _European Court of Human Rights Decision of 30.09.85  


112. _Capuano, 8agetta and Milasi Case_ ‑ European Court of Human Rights Decision of 25.06.87  


113. _Lechner and Hess Case_ ‑ European Court of Human Rights Decision of 23.04.87  


114. _Pathmasiri v. Illangasiri and others_ : SC Application 142/87 ‑ SC Minutes of 18.10.88  


115 _. Shantha Wijeratne v. Vijitha Perera and Others:_ SC Application 379/93
- SC Minutes of 02.03.94  


116. _Namasivayam v. Gunawardene:_ SC Application 166/86 ‑ SC Minutes of 24.09.87  


# 117\. Padmakanthi Dimbulagamuwa v. OIC Army Camp Matale and Others: SC
Application 10/91 ‑ SC Minutes of 02.10.91



11



118\. _Karunaratne v. Rupasinghe:_ SC Application 71/90 ‑ SC Minutes of
17.06.91  


119\. _Rajapakse v Kudahetti:_ SC __ Application 52/90 ‑ SC Minutes of
28.07.92  


120\. _O'Connor v. Donaldson_ 422 US 563, 95S. Ct 2486, 45 L. Ed. 2d 396
(1975)  


121. _State ex rel. Doe v. Madonna_ 295 N. W. 2d 356, 363 n. 9 Minn (1980)  


122\. _Jackson v Indiana_ 406 US 715, 95 S. Ct 1845, 32 L Ed. 2d 435 (1975)  


123\. _Humphrey v. Cady_ 405 US 504 92 S. Ct. 1048, 31 L Ed 394 (1972)  


124\. _Addington v. Texas_ 441 US 418, 99 S. Ct. 1804, 60 L Ed. 2d  


125\. _Winterp Case:_ European Court of Human Rights Decision of 24.10.1979  


126\. _X v. UK:_ European Court of Human Rights Decision of 05.11.1981  


127\. _Luberti Case_ : European Court of Human Rights Decision of 23.02.1984  


128\. _Ashingdane Case:_ European Court of Human Rights Decision of 28.05.1985  


129\. _Dalaguan v Perera_ : SC __ Application 193/88 ‑ SC Minutes of 13
September 1989  


130\. _Madera v. Weerasekera:_ SC __ Application 192/88 ‑ SC Minutes of 12
September 1989  


131\. _Alwis v. Raymond and Others: SC_ Application 145/87 ‑ SC Minutes of 21
July 1989  


132\. _Manseer v. Seneviratne: SC_ Application 9/89 ‑ SC Minutes of 29
September 1989  


133\. W _M. K. Silva v. Chairman Fertilizer_ Co. [1989] 2 Sri LR 393  


134\. _Vithanage Kumar Medagama v. Praneeth Silva and Others:_ SC Application
914/92 ‑ SC Minutes of 02 July 93  


135\. _Ratnasiri and Kumarana v Devasurendran and Others:_ SC Application 3 &
4 of 91 ‑ SC Minutes of 21 October 92  


136\. _Gunasekera v. Kumara and Others_ : SC __ Application 191/88 ‑ SC
Minutes of 3 November 1993  


137\. _Amal Sudath Silva v. Kodituwakku_ [1987] 2 Sri LR 119  


138\. _De Silva v. Amarakone_ : SC __ Application 49/88 ‑ SC Minutes of 12
February 1989  


139\. _Lankapura v. Lathiff_ : SC __ Application 112/88: SC Minutes of 26
April 1989  


140\. _Ariyatillake v. Thalawela and Others: SC_ Application 137/92 ‑ SC
Minutes of 25 October 1993  


141\. _Ireland v. U.K. ‑ European _Court of Human Rights Decision of 18
January 1978  


142\. _Tyrer Case ‑ _European Court __ of Human Rights Decision of 25 April
1978  


143\. _Campbell and Cosans Case ‑ _European __ Court of Human Rights Decision
of 25 February 82  


144\. _Hobbs v. London & S. W Railway _(1875) LR 10 QB 111, 121  


145\. _Gunawardene v. Perera & Others _[1983] 1 Sri LR 305  


146\. _Thadchanamoorthi v. A.G. & Others _(1980) 1 FRD 129, 136, 137  


147\. _Vijayakumar v. Gunawardena:_ SC __ Application 173/86 ‑ SC Minutes of
24 Sept. 1987  


148\. _Vitharana v. A.G. and Others:_ SC __ Application 209/86 ‑ SC Minutes of
04 May 1990



12



149. _Hameed v. Ranasinghe and Others_ [1990] 1 Sri LR 104 _  
 _

150. _Seneviratne v. Karunatilake and Others:_ SC Application 21/90 ‑ SC Minutes of 22 January 1991  


151. _Bater v. Baxter_ [1951 ] Probate 35  


152. _Greek Case ‑ _European Court of Human Rights Decision: Journal of Universal Humans Rights Vol 1, No. 4  
 October‑December 1979, p. __ 42  


153. _Ratnasara Thero v. Udugampola_ [1983] 1 Sri LR 461 _  
 _

154. _Abeyratne v Edison Gunatilleke and Others:_ SC Application 270/92 - SC Minutes of 26 October 1992  


155. _United States v. Carolene Products Co._ 304 US 144, 58 S. Ct. 778, 82 L Ed 1234 (1983)  


156. _Brandenberg v Ohio_ 395 US 444, 89 S. Ct. 1827, 23 L. Ed. 2 Ed. 2d 430 (1969)  


157. _Hess v Indiana_ 414 US 105, 94 S. Ct. 326 ‑ 38 L. Ed. 2d 303 (1973) _  
 _

158. _Gooneratne v. De Silva and the A.G. : SC_ Application 49/87 ‑ SC Minutes of 27 Aug. 1987  


159. _Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC_ 395 US 367 (1969)  


160. _Abrams v. United_ States 250 US 616, 624, 40 S. Ct. 17, 20, 63 L. Ed. 1173,1178 (1919)  


161. _Schenck v. United States_ 249 US 47, 39 S. Ct. 247 ‑ 63 L. Ed. 470 (1919)  


162. _Near v. Minnestota_ 283 US 697, 51 S. Ct. 625 ‑ 75 L. Ed. 1357 (1931 _)  
 _

163\. _Yasapala v Wickremasinghe_ (1980) 1 FRD 143, 155  


164\. Abeywardene v. Perera: SC Application 92/91 ‑ SC Minutes of 23 August
1989  


165\. _Chaplinsky v New Hampshire_ 315 US 568 (1942 _)  
 _

166. _Cantwell v. Connecticut_ 310 US 296 (1940)  


167. _Palko v. Connecticut_ 302 US 319, 327 ‑ 658 S. Ct. 149, 152 ‑ 82 L. Ed. 288 (1937)  


168\. _NAACP v. Alabama_ 357 US 449, 78 S. Ct. 1163, L. Ed. 1488 (1958)  


169. _NAACP v. Button_ 371 US 415; 83 S. Ct. 328, 9 L. Ed. 405 (1963)  


170\. _Roberts v. United States Jayacees_ 104 S. Ct. 3244, 82 L. Ed. 2d 462
(1984)  


171\. _Mudiyanselage Tillekaratne Bandara Ekanayake v Edison Gunatilleke and
the A.G. :_ SC Application 1007/92 ‑ SC Minutes  
 of 16 November 1993

  


**Applications** **for infringement of fundamental rights**



_R. K. W Goonesekere_ with _Methsiri Coorey_ for Petitioner in SC Application
Nos. 146/92, 149/92 and 154/92.



Ms. Manouri Muttetuwegama for the petitioners in SC Applications Nos. 147/92
and 148/92.

_ _

_C. Swarnadhipathy_ for the petitioners in SC Applications Nos. 151/92 and
153/92.



13



_J. C. Weliamuna_ for the __ petitioner in SC Application No. 152/92.



Suranjith Hewamanna with J. C. Weliamuna for the petitioner in SC Application
No. 155/92.



_D. P. Kumarasinghe,_ Deputy __ Solicitor‑General for the Respondents.

_ _

_ _

_Cur. adv vult._



17th June, 1994.  


**AMERASINGHE, J.**  



**1\. THE PARTIES AND THE MANNER OF HEARING AND DETERMINATION**



Sixteen persons in ten applications to this Court complained that their
fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution were violated.



Nine of them filed separate applications: Mahinda Channa Pieris in Application
No. 146/92; M. D. Daniel in Application No. 147/92; Singapulli Hewage Sunny
Dayananda in Application No. 148/92; Athureliye Rathana (Ranjith) in
Application No. 149/92; Rev. Thalpitiye Wimalasara in Application No. 150/92;
Kuruwitage Nandana Perera in Application No. 151/92; Jayasinghe Mudiyanselage
Janaka Priyantha Bandara in Application No. 152/92; Pallimulle Hewa Geeganage
Pradeep Chandanaratne in S.C. Application No. 153/92; and Ranawake Arachchige
Patali Champika Ranawake in S.C. Application No. 154/92.



Seven others collectively filed S.C. Application No. 155/92. The seven persons
were Avalikara Galappathige Muditha Malika Wimalasuriya, Gileemalege Janaka
Priyantha Dayaratne, Karunaratne Paranawithana, Weerasekera Mudalige Anura
Weerasekera, Rev. Kalupahana Piyarathna, Rev. Ambalanthota Premarathana, and
Rev. Kitulgala Upali.



The First and Second respondents in each of the ten applications were
respectively the (1) Hon. Attorney‑General and (2)Inspector-General of Police.

 14

_        _

__ The third respondent in each of the ten applications was Inspector of
Police Ekanayake Mudiyanselage Karunatilake, the Officer‑in Charge of the
Wadduwa Police Station, who was identified as I.P.Karunatilake,
Officer‑in‑Charge, Police Station, Wadduwa in all the applications save one:
In application No. 149/92 he is referred to simply as "The Officer‑in‑Charge,
Police Station, Wadduwa, "However, in paragraph 1 of his affidavit dated 9th
August 1992, filed in Application No. 150/92; and in paragraph 1 of his
affidavit dated 24 August 1992 filed in Application No. 146/92; in paragraph 1
of his affidavits dated 9th September 1992 filed in Application Nos. 147/92;
148/92; 149/92; 151/92; 152/92; 153/92; 154/92 and 155/92 Ekanayake
Mudiyanselage Karunatilake identifies himself as the Officer‑in‑Charge of the
Wadduwa Police Station and as the Third Respondent.



The Fourth Respondent in each of the ten applications was Sub‑Inspector
Galkanda Arachchige Sunil Piyaratne of the Wadduwa Police who was identified
as "Sub‑Inspector Piyarathana of Wadduwa Police" in all the applications save
one: In application No. 149/92 the fourth respondent is named as
"Sub‑Inspector Pathiratne" of Wadduwa Police. However, in paragraph 1 of his
affidavit dated 9 August 1992 filed in application No. 150/92; and in
paragraph 1 of his affidavit dated 24th August 1992 filed in application No.
146/92; and in paragraph 1 of his affidavit dated 9th September 1992 filed in
application Nos. 147/92; 148/92; 149/92; 151/92; 152/92; 153/92; 154/92 and
155/92, Galkanda Arachchige Sunil Piyaratne identified himself as the Fourth
Respondent.



The Fifth Respondent in Applications Nos. 146/92; 147/92; 152/92 and 155/92 is
the Officer‑in‑Charge, Security Co‑ordinating Division, Colombo.



The Fifth Respondent in Applications Nos. 149/92 and 151/92 is the
Officer‑in‑Charge, Police Station, Maradana.



The Fifth Respondent in Application Nos. 148/92; 150/92; 153/92 and 154/92 is
the Officer‑in‑Charge, Police Station, Pettah.



The Officer‑in‑Charge of the Police Station Maradana and the Officer‑in‑Charge
of the Police Station Pettah are named as the Sixth and Seventh respondents
respectively in Application No. 155/92.  ** **



**15**



**THE MATTERS FOR CONSIDERATION**



The applicants in each of the ten applications were granted leave to proceed
for the alleged infringements of their rights guaranteed by Articles 11,
13(1), 13(2), 14(1) (a) and 14(1) (c) of the Constitution. Those are the
matters for consideration. However I must clear the records of persisting and
misleading errors.



**ARTICLES 12, 14(1) (h) AND 14(1) (g) NOT VIOLATED**



The **** petitioners in their petitions and amended petitions complain of the
infringement of the right of "associating with others" in their "lawful
occupation" and being deprived of their "freedom of association as provided
for in the Constitution." In their amended petitions the petitioners state
that their constitutional rights under Articles 14(1) (a), 14(1) (c) and 14(1)
(h) have been violated.



Article 14(1) (h) is concerned with the right of a citizen to freedom of
movement and of choosing his residence within Sri Lanka. Leave to proceed was
not sought or granted for the alleged violation of Article 14(1) (h) at the
stage of the hearing when leave to proceed was considered.



Why were alleged violations of Article 14(1) (h) repeated in the amended
petitions especially when leave to proceed was not granted in respect of the
alleged violation of that provision?



The right to engage oneself in association with others in any lawful
occupation is a right guaranteed by Article 14(1) (g) of the Constitution.
Leave to proceed under Article 14(1) (g) was not sought or granted by the
Court at the stage of the hearing when leave to proceed was considered.



Why was an oblique reference to an alleged violation of Article 14(1) (g)
repeated in the amended petition? Additionally, M. D. Daniel 147/92, Dayananda
148/92, Nandana Perera 151/92, Bandara 152/92, Chandanaratne 153/92, Ranawake
154/92; and Wimalasuriya, Dayaratne, Paranavithana, Weerasekera, Piyarathana,
Pemarathna and Kitulgala Upali in 155/92 in their petitions and

16



amended petitions complain of the violation of Article 12(2) of the
Constitution on account of their political opinions.



At the hearing when the matter of leave to proceed was being considered
learned Counsel for the petitioners did not seek leave to proceed under
Article 12 and leave to proceed under Article 12 was not granted.



Since the amended petitions contain averments directly alleging the violation
of Articles 12 and 14(1) (h) and obliquely alleging the violation of Article
14(1) (g), and no evidence in support of such violations have been adduced and
no submissions made during the hearing in support of such violations, I
declared that Articles 12, 14(1) (h) and 14(1) (g) have not been violated by
the respondents in respect of any of the petitioners in the matters before
this Court.



**CONSOLIDATION OF MATTERS**



It was agreed by Counsel for the petitioners and respondents that the ten
applications concerning the sixteen persons complaining of the violations of
their fundamental rights under Articles 11, 13(1), 13(2), 14(1) (a) and 14(1)
(c) and the evidence adduced should be considered together and that a single
order of this Court should bind the parties and be sufficient for all
purposes.



Mr. Goonesekere and Ms. Muttetuwegama for the petitioner, and Mr. Kumarasinghe
for the respondents addressed us in broad, general terms. Learned Counsel for
the Petitioners stating that the cases were "not the same. There are
differences", left the Court to discover the "differences" and unscramble the
evidence submitted in the sometimes glib, and often marginally truthful,
averments in the affidavits and counter‑affidavits filed by the 16 applicants
in their ten petitions and supporting affidavits from others and in the
equally unsatisfactory affidavits and supporting documents of the respondents.



I wish to draw the attention of attorneys‑at‑law to their grave professional
responsibilities in the preparation and submission of affidavits, especially
in matters in which a Court is called upon to arrive at a determination based
solely upon the evidence adduced in affidavits, I would also draw the
attention of everyone concerned,

17



including Government officials, to the fact that stating wrong, false and
especially purposely untrue statements in affidavits is a matter that could
lead to criminal proceedings against them.



**THE RATAWESI PERAMUNA**



The petitioners were participants in a "movement" called the Ratawesi Peramuna
formed in November 1991 under the leadership of Athureliye Rathana, the
Petitioner in Application No. 149/92.



In his affidavit (2.2 ‑ 2.4) Rathana says he became a monk in 1976 and that he
played an active and prominent role when he was at the University at Dumbara
and Peradeniya between 1984 and 1986 and that he was the organizer of a
protest march to Kandy. The movement, he says (2.5), was intended to "unite
the democratic opposition of the country."



The movement was believed by some of the petitioners to be "the base for a
broad political" (eg. see paragraph 2.1 of the affidavit dated 15th April 1992
of Wimalasuriya in Application 155/92) or "agitational" (eg. see para. 4.3 of
the affidavit dated 14th April 1992 of Seneviratne in Application 146/92)
"front and not controlled by any party."



Champika Ranawake, the Petitioner in Application No. 154/92 in paragraph 3.4
of his affidavit dated 15th April 1992 states that it was an "anti‑government
pressure group which would not have any bias to existing political parties."
Ranawake, who was a founder‑member of the Peramuna, (154/92, 2.2 ‑ 3.4) says
that, as a University student, he took an active part in anti‑JVP activities,
but, finding "the guns of both the JVP and the Government trained towards" his
group, ceased to participate in politics after he was arrested in September,
1989. He continued, however, to write articles to the _Lakmina_ and _Ravaya._
He began his activities again with what he called "the fever of the
Impeachment Motion in 1991 ", and, with Rathana and others, formed the
Peramuna to bring together "intellectuals and other professionals" to
formulate policies that would remain despite changes of Government, and to
"prevent the youth from being pushed to violent politics."

 18



Although it would seem that eight of the sixteen petitioners were university
students (See Wimalasuriya 155/92, 4.8) and that the movement was said to have
had the support of university students (See Bandara 152/92, 2.1 and Nandana
Perera 151/92, 2.1) the membership of the movement was not confined to
university students.



For instance, there was Malinda Seneviratne, the petitioner in SC Application
146/92. He had, according to paragraphs 2.1 ‑ 4.3 of his affidavit, read the
"fundamental texts of Marxism" while he was at school, and in his political
thinking was "influenced to a large extent" by the political views of his
father who he says was "a Trotskyite as an undergraduate." He was admitted to
the Dumbara Campus in 1985 but proceeded to the United States in 1987 under an
Exchange Program and later read Sociology at Harvard University where he
graduated in 1991. His undergraduate dissertation was "Students as Agents of
Revolution: The Case of the Sri Lanka Student Movement." In January 1992 he
was employed by the Peradeniya University as an English Instructor of the
Medical Faculty. When Rathana put it to him, he thought that the formation of
the Ratawesi Peramuna as " a broad agitational front" was "a good idea" and
attended two of its meetings and met Rathana and others at the "open canteen"
of the University at Colombo at about 6 p.m. on 26th February 1992 and agreed
to meet at the Kawduduwa temple.



The matters engaging the attention of the Peramuna were wider than those
purely concerning the literati: M. D. Daniel, a Committee Member, says
(147/92, 2.1) he had, at a meeting of the Peramuna at the office of the Leader
of the Opposition, voiced concerns about the plight of farmers. Nor was the
Peramuna intended to be limited in membership. Rathana (149/92, 2.5) says that
the aim was "to bring together the alternative forces in the opposition ‑
intellectuals, students, artists, youth, workers, farmers etc." It appears
from paragraph 5 of the affidavit of Champika Ranawake that he had a scheme to
restructure the Peramuna on the lines of a political party.



Several meetings of the members of the movement were held and a District
Branch was formed at Matara. According to Seneviratne in his affidavit
(146/92, 4.3) the Peramuna organized a "series of public

**19**

**  
**seminars and an exhibition of posters depicting human rights violations by
the Government and the JVP in Matara on 26th, 27th and 28th of January."
Seneviratne and many of the other petitioners alleged that "a group of armed
men had stolen some of the posters." (Seneviratne 146/92, 4.3: Daniel 147/92,
2.2; Dayananda 148/92, 3.2; Rathana 149/92, 2.6; Nandana Perera 151/92, 2.2;
Bandara 152/92, 2.2; Chandanaratne 152/92, 2.1; Ranawake 154/92, 3.6; and
Wimalasuriya 155/92, 2.2).



The Peramuna it is said came to be criticized by "pro‑Anura elements within
the SLFP" as being a "group formed to promote Chandrika": (Seneviratne 146/92,
4.4; M. D. Daniel, 147/92, 2.3; Dayananda 149/92, 3.3; Rathana 149/92, 2.7;
Wimalasara 150/92, 2.3; Nandana Perera 151/92, 2.3; Bandara, 152/92, 2.3;
Chandanaratne 153/92, 2.2; Ranawake 154/92, 3.7; Wimalasuriya 155/92, 2.3).



It was also said that the Peramuna lacked money and organization and that a
moderate stance should be taken on issues such as "the ethnic conflict",
"affiliated university colleges" and "peoplization": (Rathana 149/92, 2.8;
Nandana Perera 151/92, 2.4; Bandara 152/92, 2.4; Ranawake 154/92, 3.8;
Wimalasuriya 155/92, 2.4).



There was also the return of the JVP into the political arena which they
regarded as a matter for concern. I shall deal with this aspect of the matter
in greater detail later on.



The Peramuna had problems. In order to consider the "crises" encountered by
the Peramuna, Rathana, the petitioner in application 149/92, (who had earlier
been appointed 'convener' of the Peramuna), summoned a meeting.



**THE MEETING OF THE RATAWESI PERAMUNA ON 27 FEBRUARY 1992**



The meeting was held on 27th February 1992 at the Kawduduwa temple. It
commenced at about 6 a.m.

The current political climate, various criticisms of the Ratawesi Peramuna,
the disruption in January 1992 of the exhibition of posters

20



in Matara, and the resurgence of the JVP were discussed after which a
manifesto was introduced by Champika Ranawak the Petitioner in Application No.
154/92.



After a discussion, the meeting was adjourned at about 1 p.m. to enable them
to take lunch. (See the affidavits of Seneviratne 146/92, 5.2 & 5.3; Daniel
147/92, 2.4; Dayananda 148/92, 3.4; Rathana 149/92, 4.9; Nandana Perera
151/92, 2.5; Bandara 152/92, 3.3; Chandanaratne 153/92, 2.4; Ranawake 154/92,
4.1; and Wimalasuriya 155/92, 3.3).



**THE TELEPHONE CALL**



Document XI filed by the Third Respondent in support of his affidavit
resisting each application is a "Message Form". It is dated 27.02.92 and the
time of receipt is stated to be 13.50 hours. The message is said to have been
received at Wadduwa Police Station. In the "From" column, it is said to have
been transmitted by "an informant who did not state his name." The message was
this: "Today, there is a meeting of the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna, all
participants being students of the Colombo University, under the leadership of
Champika Ranawake. Inform the Officer‑in‑Charge."



**THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE ARREST ‑ TAKING INTO THE CUSTODY OF THE LAW**



According to the third respondent in his affidavits (of 9th August 1992,
paragraph 5 in respect of SC Application 150/92; 24th August1992, paragraph 5
in respect of SC Application 146/92; 9th September 1992 paragraph 4 in respect
of Applications Nos. 147/92, 149/92 **** and 152/92; 9th September 1992
paragraph 5 in respect of Applications Nos. 148/92, 151/92, 153/92, 154/92 and
155/92), on 27.2.92 at 1.50 p.m. an anonymous telephone call was received at
the police station that a "meeting of the Janatha Vimukthi Peramunawas being
held behind closed doors at the Kawduduwa Temple and that the participants are
University students, led by one Champika Ranawaka. I annex herewith a true
copy of the telephone message marked "XI". On receipt of this information, I
went to the temple with a

21



party of police officers. I stood outside the closed room and listened to the
discussions that were taking place. I made a note of the part of the
discussion that I could hear. I annex hereto a photocopy of my notes marked
"X2". There were about 15 participants. Upon listening to the speeches, I
formed the impression that they were engaged in a conspiracy to overthrow the
Government. As such, I tapped at the door and got it opened and entered the
room where the discussion was taking place and having explained the charge
against the suspects, took them into custody .... "



The fourth respondent in his affidavits (of 9th August 1992 in Application
150/92; 24th August 1992 in Application 146/92; of 9th September in
applications 147/92; 148/92; 149/92; 151/92; 152/92; 153/92 and 154/92) in
paragraph 3 admits being a member of the police party that arrested the
petitioners; and in paragraph 4 states that he had read the affidavits of the
Third Respondent and associates himself with what the Third Respondent had
said as being "true and accurate". In Application No. 155/93 the Fourth
Respondent in his affidavit dated 9 September 1992 states in paragraph 3 that
he was a member of the police party that arrested the petitioners; and, in
paragraph 6, that he had read the affidavit of the Third Respondent and
associates himself with the averments of the Third Respondent as being "true
and accurate".



Document X2 filed by the Third Respondent was supposed to be a contemporaneous
record of what he and the Fourth Respondent made in their notebooks and later
pasted in the Minor Crimes (sic.) Information Book at 17.40 hours. According
to the Third Respondent's notes, in response to the phone call, he "arrived at
the Kawduduwa temple at 14.20 where a secret meeting was being held behind
closed doors." He says he "stood near a window and listened. There were
several priests and about ten young persons seated on the ground in a circle.
One of the young men was standing and addressing them. Now I am recording what
he is saying. If this autocratic system of administration continues, before
another twenty years our country will be completely destroyed. The system
which has enabled Premadasa to rule autocratically must be abolished.
Premadasa is waging war with Prabhakaran. This must be stopped. The proposal
to set up Universities at a District Level will devalue the

22

  
status of graduates and leave them destitute. Because of bickering in the
opposition Premadasa's power will grow. The youth cannot permit this expansion
of power. The country must be rid of autocratic rule. We must under the guise
of the Ratawesi Peramuna take this struggle forward.  
  
  
  
We must make immediate preparations to topple the Government. For that purpose
we need to strengthen our organizational structure. Therefore we have
assembled today representatives of all the Universities. We must set up a
Government which will remove problems pertaining to the economy, education,
administration and culture. Under such a system of Government 200 Village and
Provincial Governments controlled by a Central Government is proposed. Above
the Central Government will be a body of persons learned in various fields.
Under their direction a just and orderly administration will be established.
In this way the freedom of the mass media will be established. In this way
fundamental human rights will be given and it will become possible to remove
harrassment. He went on talking. Then a priest rose and inquired whether there
were any suggestions or new proposals or opposition to the proposed scheme of
action. The lack of opposition by anyone was signified by their silence, said
the priest. At this time I understood that there was a conspiracy against the
Government. Now I proceed to take steps to make arrests."



The next entry by the third respondent in document X2 is dated 27.03.93 and is
stated to have been recorded at 14.50 hours "after the arrests were made". The
statement goes on to say that the Third Respondent knocked at the door which
Rev. Thalpitiye Wimalasara opened. He explained the charge about the
conspiracy against the Government, to each of the persons arrested separately,
investigated each person separately, ascertained that there were no "external
injuries" in respect of each person, and took various books and documents
(which he refers to by title and author) for further investigations, after
making a written inventory of the papers and pages in each book or document.
The report says that nothing else that was "relevant to the case" was found.

**  23**



The final entry in X2 is the statement of the Fourth Respondent, Sub‑Inspector
Piyaratne, entered at 17.50 hours. It is as follows: On the information given
to me by the Officer‑in‑Charge, I arrived at Kawduduwa temple at 14.40 hours.
Having informed me that a secret meeting was taking place in the "Simamalake"
and that he was listening at a window he advised me to listen at the other
window. When I went to the other window and looked, I saw about ten young
persons and several priests seated on the ground. A young person who was
speaking said "If the autocratic rule we have continues for about another 20
years our country will be completely destroyed. Therefore another system of
Government must be introduced after chasing away autocratic Premadasa. Because
of bickering Premadasa's power will grow. We cannot possibly allow Premadasa's
autocratic rule to go on. We must under the guise of the Ratawesi Peramuna  
  
  
take this revolutionary struggle  
  
forward. Firstly fundamental rights and the Government must be toppled.  
  
  
  
For that end you must remember lives will have to be sacrificed." And so on,
the speaker said. Then a priest rose and inquired whether in respect of the
proposals there were suggestions or opposition or doubts, Since all those
present were silent, it appeared that there was no opposition. At this time,
on a signal from the Officer‑in‑Charge, we forced our way into the
Simamalakaya. The Officer‑in‑Charge arrested the person who made the speech.
The Officer‑in‑Charge examined the books and documents and took charge of them
and on the orders of the Officer ­in‑Charge the premises were searched for
weapons. There were none. While I am a witness for the Officer‑in‑Charge I am
now proceeding with the suspects to the station."



Although the Third Respondent states in his affidavits that he tapped at the
door and had it opened, his so‑called notes say that when he formed the
opinion that there was a conspiracy, he took steps to arrest the petitioners.
If getting the door opened was a step in the process of arrest, it is not
supported by anyone. Even Piyaratne the Fourth Respondent fails to support
him. The notes of the Fourth Respondent state that when he received a ****
signal from the Third **** Respondent the police party forced their way into
the room and the Third Respondent arrested the person who made the address and
the others. According to the Fourth Respondent the



24



third respondent then examined and took over documents and ordered a search of
the premises for weapons. No mention is made of explaining charges, or
interrogation, or examinations for external injuries, referred to by the Third
Respondent.



The Third and Fourth respondents in their affidavits state that they stood at
two windows, making notes. If, as the third respondent states in his notes,
the petitioners were seated _in a circle,_ then, wheresoever the two officers
were standing near two windows, peeping in from time to time, as they must
have in order to have been able to record as they say they did, the number of
persons present, in order to be able to have seen that there were _young_
persons and _priests,_ how they were seated and who was speaking at a given
time, some of those facing the windows would surely have seen the officers and
alerted the others and stopped the discussions? And then, did no one hear the
approaching police vehicles?



If the Third Respondent believed there was "a conspiracy to overthrow the
Government", necessitating the immediate arrest and detention of the
petitioners, is it not rather strange that he chose to paste his notes in the
Information Book pertaining to Minor Offences rather than in the book reserved
for Grave Crimes? I referred to this during the course of the arguments, but
the learned Deputy Solicitor-­General offered no explanation.



The Third Respondent in his notes states that in respect of each and every one
of the sixteen persons arrested, he explained the charge of conspiracy,
investigated, and ascertained that there were no external injuries. According
to his notes, the tap on the door was at 14.30 hours. He had completed the
arrests after explaining the charges, investigations and so on by 14.50 when
he made the second entry in his notes giving details of the sixteen arrests.
This means that, in respect of each suspect, in about 75 seconds he explained
the charge, interrogated the person and examined him for external injuries. In
fact, the Third Respondent must have had much less time for all that, since
between 14.30 and 14.50 hours, according to his notes, he had seized several
books, and documents, ascertaining and noting the titles, authors, number of
papers as well as pages in each of them!

 25



The Police message XI which the Third Respondent produced does not refer to "a
secret meeting" behind "closed doors" at all. This seems to have been
introduced in the Third Respondent's affidavits to give some support to his
conspiracy theory. Someone had to open the "closed doors". So. the incumbent
of the temple, Wimalasara, was supposed to have done this. However, Wimalasara
was in ill-­health and asleep in his residential quarters and brought by some
of the officers to the place where the others were. (Cf. the affidavit of
Jayalin Silva dated 3 November 1992 filed by the Petitioner in Application
150/92; Paragraph 2.3 dated 15 April 1992 of Rev. Wimalasara filed in
Application 150.92).



The Third Respondent heard, it seems a great deal more than the fourth
respondent, but the Fourth Respondent happened, it seems, to have heard and
recorded in more or less the same words all the key statements attributed to
the speakers by the third respondent. Was it simply a matter of discernment? A
comparative examination of the "notes" of the Third and Fourth respondent
leads me towards the conclusion that the fourth respondent simply copied a
part of what the third respondent had invented and made available to him. His
clumsy attempt at variation (for example, his attempted variation of the third
respondent's explanation of the increase in Premadasa's autocratic powers on
account of the problems of the opposition; and the telescoping of the third
respondent's notes relating to the call to topple the Government into the
supposed statement that the freedom of the news media and fundamental rights
will be secured, resulting in the Fourth Respondent's strange version that
there was advocacy not only to topple the Government but that fundamental
rights also should be dethroned!) suggests that X2 is a sham ‑ a deceptive and
worthless document fabricated to provide a justification for the arrest of the
petitioners based solely on a misconception of what it meant to be a member of
the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna on 27th February, 1992. If the petitioners' are
to be believed, the Third and Fourth respondents really heard nothing because
the meeting had not yet been resumed. Were the notes a concoction by the Third
Respondent to provide a justification for an accusation of conspiracy when it
dawned on them that it was not an offence to be a member of the JVP and that
in any event the persons arrested were not members of the JVP ?

 26



If so, it is not the first time this kind of thing has happened. Kulatunga, J.
in _Wimalawardena v. Nissanka_ (1) __ referred to the practice of police
officers "nonchalantly making false entries and fabricating evidence to cover
up their illegal acts," and drew attention to the fact that police officers
seemed to be immune to ordinary liability in circumstances in which ordinary
citizens might have been otherwise dealt with. Reference was made to the
"self‑serving notes" of Police officers in _De Silva v. Mettananda and Others_
(2). The Third Respondent, especially by interrogating Chandanaratne (153/92
para. 3.4) could well have obtained information regarding some broad areas of
concern and matters that were talked about in the morning to form the basis of
"notes".



However, I shall assume that the statements purported to have been recorded by
the Third and Fourth respondents were in fact made in order to consider the
case of the respondents in the light of their best showing.



**VIOLATIONS OF ARTICLE 13(1) OF THE CONSTITUTION: MATTERS FOR CONSIDERATION**



The petitioners state that their fundamental rights guaranteed by Article
13(1) of the Constitution were violated.



Article 13(1) states that "No person shall be arrested except according to
procedure established by law. Any person arrested shall be informed of the
reason for his arrest."



There is no dispute in the matters before us that the petitioners were taken
into the custody of the law. The problems raised in _Piyasiri v. Fernando_ (3)
and _Rajapaksa v. Kudahetti_ (4) __ ascertaining whether the petitioners were
deprived of their personal liberty do not trouble us in the matters before us.



The question then is whether the two rights set out in Article 13(1), namely,
(1) the right to be free from arrest except according to procedure established
by law; and (2) the right to be informed of the reason for arrest, have been
violated. (Cf. _Piyasiri v. Fernando_ )(3).

**27**



**ARREST ‑ TAKING INTO CUSTODY ‑ NOT ACCORDING TO PROCEDURE ESTABLISHED BY LAW
‑ SOME GENERAL OBSERVATIONS**



Ordinarily, in terms of the Code of Criminal Procedure, where a person is
alleged to have committed an offence, the complaint against him and the
offence it constitutes are set out in writing by the Magistrate with reference
to the alleged offence and he is summoned to appear before the Magistrate at a
specified time and place to answer the complaint and be further dealt with
according to law. If the person does not appear, the Magistrate may issue a
Warrant so that the person may be brought before the Court by the person
authorized by the Warrant to answer the complaint and offence set out in the
Warrant of arrest. Further, in certain circumstances, upon oath being made
substantiating the matter of a complaint, the Magistrate may order that a
person be apprehended forthwith and brought before him to answer the complaint
and to be further dealt with according to law.



However, in certain other special circumstances, a person may be arrested
without a Warrant. The procedure generally established by law for arresting a
person without a Warrant are set out in Chapter IV B (Sections 32‑43) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure. Where a person is arrested without a warrant
otherwise than in accordance with these provisions, Article 13(1) of the
Constitution will be violated. _(Jayakody v. Karunanayake_ (5) See also
_Kumarasena v. Shriyantha and Others_ (6); _Podiappuhamy v. Liyanage and
Others_ (7) _._



It was common cause that the petitioners were arrested without a Warrant.



The Third and Fourth respondents do not in their affidavits say that the
arrests were made in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. However, that does not necessarily mean that the respondents were
in breach of Article 13(1) of the Constitution, for the arrests could have
been made in accordance with some other procedure established by law.

28

  
In the written submissions filed by Counsel on their behalf, the respondents
state that, after the arrests, the petitioners were "taken to the Wadduwa
Police Station and detained under the Emergency Regulations." The position of
the respondents is that, having acted under the Emergency Regulations, they
made the arrests in accordance with a procedure established by law and
therefore did not violate Article 13(1) of the Constitution.



Article 15(7) of the Constituion provides that the exercise and operation of
certain fundamental rights declared and recognized by the Constitution,
including those referred to in Article 13(1) and 13(2), shall be subject to
such restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the interests, among other
specified things, of national security and public order; and "law", for the
purpose of paragraph 7 of Article 15, is said to include regulations made
under the law for the time being relating to public security.



The law relating to public security in force at the time relevant to the
matters before us was the Public Security Ordinance (Cap. 40) as amended by
Act No. 8 of 1959, Law No. 6 of 1978 and Act No. 28 of 1988 under which
various Regulations have been made from time to time.



It is unhelpful to simply say, as the respondents do, that the petitioners
were arrested under "the Emergency Regulations" **** for the simple reason
that a bewildering mass of emergency regulations made under the Public
Security Ordinance covering a wide range of matters, including, for instance,
the Adoption of Children (606/6 of 18.4.90 and 730/8 of 1.9.92), the
possession and control of Ceylon Cold Stores (604/10 of 6.4.90, 612/12 of
6.2.90, 640/18 of 14.12.90, 660/5 of 30.4.91, 664/8 of 31.5.91, 669/9 of
2.7.91), Edible Salt (635/7 of 7.11.90), Private Omnibuses (653/22 of 15.3.91,
692/8 of 10.12.91), School Development Boards and Provincial Boards of
Education (701/12 of 12.2.92 ‑ the references are to Gazette numbers and dates
of publication), have nothing to do with the arrests and detentions in
question. Moreover, significant changes of the Regulations take place from
time to time. When a petitioner states in an application under Article 126 of
the Constitution that his freedom to be at liberty, unless he is arrested
according to procedure

29

  
established by law, has been denied, it is incumbent on the person making the
arrest to precisely indicate the procedure under which the arrest was made.
Additionally, for reasons I shall explain, it is desirable that certified
copies of the relevant regulations should be filed by the respondents.



__

**VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 13(1) BY FAILURE TO ACT IN ACCORDANCE WITH PROCEDURE
ESTABLISHED BY REGULATION 19(2)**



The Third Respondent, in support of his affidavits, filed Detention Orders
issued in response to only two of the ten applications, namely 152/92 and
155/92. They were marked as follows: X3A in application 152/92 relating to
Bandara and as X3A in application 155/92 relating to Wimalasuriya, X4A in
relation Dayaratne, X5A in relation to Paranavitane, X6A in relation to
Weerasekera, X7A in relation to Piyarathana, X8A in relation to Premarathana
and X9A in relation to Kithulgala Upali.



Having regard to the fact that detention orders, were not filed in respect of
the other petitioners, I assume that there were no detention orders made in
terms of Regulation 19(2) in respect of such other petitioners. A detention of
a person in pursuance of Regulation 18 must be in a place authorized by the
Inspector‑General of Police or Deputy Inspector‑General of Police,
Superintendent of Police or Assistant Superintendent of Police. Otherwise the
detentions would be in violation of Regulation 19(2) and therefore, not being
in accordance with procedure established by law, they would be violative of
Article 13(1) of the Constitution which provides that no person shall be
arrested except according to procedure established by law. I hold therefore
that the arrest of M. C. Pieris, the applicant in SC Application 146/92; M. D.
Daniel, the applicant in SC Application 147/92; S. H. Dayananda, the applicant
in SC Application 148/92; Athureliye Rathana, the applicant in SC Application
149/92; Rev. Thalpitiye Wimalasara the applicant in SC Application 150/92; K.
N. Perera the applicant in SC Application 151/92; P. H. G. P. Chandanaratne,
the applicant in SC Application 153/92; and R. A. P. C. Ranawake, the
applicant in SC Application 154/92 to be violative of Article 13(1) of the
Constitution.

 30



There are however some decisions which suggest that where the provisions of
Regulations 19(2) have been violated either because the persons arrested were
not detained at a place designated by the Inspector‑General of Police or by
another authorized officer because there were no detention orders (see
_Lalanie and Nirmala v. De Silva_ (8); _Dissanayake v. Superintendent, Mahara
Prison_ (9) or because they were detained at places other than those
designated in an order (see _Wijesiri v. Rohan Fernando_ (10); _Dissanayake v.
Superintendent Mahara Prison_ supra); or because the requirements prescribed
by Regulation 19(2) for instance with regard to production before a judge have
not been complied with (see _Weerakoon v. Mahendra and Others_ (11) __ or
because, for lack of supporting grounds the detention orders were "unlawful"
(see _Vidyamuni v. Jayetilleke_ (12); _Wijewardene v. Zain (_ 13) or
"vitiated" (see _Sasanasiritissa's case_ (14) __ see also _Weerakoon v.
Weeraratne_ (15), Article 13(2) of the Constitution has been violated.



Article 13(2) simply states that "Every person held in custody, detained or
otherwise deprived of personal liberty shall be brought before the judge of
the nearest competent court according to procedure established by law and
shall not be further held in custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty
except upon and in terms of the order of such judge made in accordance with
procedure established by law." (Per Goonewardene, J. in _Faiz v.
Attorney­-General_ ,(16) __ and in _Wijeratne v. Vijitha Perera_ (17) _._
Article 13(2) does not, as the decisions referred seem to assume, state that
"No person shall be held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of
personal liberty except according to procedure established by law."



The right not to be deprived of personal liberty except according to a
procedure established by law is enshrined in Article 13(1) of the
Constitution. Article 13(1) prohibits not only the taking into custody but
also the keeping of persons in a state of arrest by imprisonment or other
physical restraint except according to procedure established by law. Where a
person is deprived of personal liberty without being brought before the judge
of the nearest competent court according to procedure established by law,
there could be a violation of both Articles 13(1) and 13(2) of the
Constitution. These matters will be further considered later on in my
judgment.

**31  
 **

**MERE ERRORS OF FORM DID NOT VIOLATE ARTICLE 13(1)**



The caption in each of the orders refers to Emergency Regulations published in
Gazette Extraordinary dated July 18th, 1989. There are no Emergency
Regulations published in Gazette Extraordinary dated July 18th, 1989\. What
appears in Gazette Extraordinary (No. 567/3) of July 18th, 1989 is the
Proclamation of the President of the Republic declaring that the provisions of
Part II of the Public Security Ordinance shall come into operation. In the
body of each Order the Assistant Superintendent states that he is acting in
terms of powers derived from Regulation 19(4) and 19(2) published in Gazette
Extraordinary 701/19. Gazette Extraordinary No. 701/19 does not set out
Emergency Regulations: It sets out the Proclamation of the President of the
Republic declaring that Part II of the Public Security Ordinance shall come
into operation.



Errors of the kind made in the preparation of these Detention Orders do not
_per se_ make the arrests otherwise than in accordance with a procedure
established by law, for an exercise of power will be referable to a
jurisdiction which confers validity upon it and not to a jurisdiction under
which it will be nugatory. This principle has been applied even to cases where
a statute which confers no power has been quoted as authority for a particular
act but where there was in force another statute which conferred that power.
(Per Sansoni, J. in _Peiris v. The Commissioner of Inland Revenue,_ (18)
followed per Soza and Ranasinghe, JJ. in _Kumaranatunge v. Samarasinghe_ (19)
__ See also _Fernando v. Attorney ‑General_,(2o) _Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam_
,(21) _Joseph Silva v. Balasuriya & Others_(22); _Gunaratne v. Cyril Herath
and Others_ (23) and _Wijesooriya v. Abeyratne and Others_ (24).



However, these errors suggest that the arrests were arbitrarily made, not as
required by Article 13(1) of the Constitution in terms of the relevant
procedure established by law, namely Regulation 18(1), the police being at a
loss even six days after the arrests to accurately indicate some procedure
established by law under which they might have made the arrests. Moreover,
errors of this sort show "a deplorable lack of diligence on the part of the
police" and not only "creates much suspicion and doubt as to the legality of
the arrests

32

  
but also as to the veracity of the respondents' affidavits upon certain
matters." (Atukorale, J. in _Chandradasa v. Lal Fernando_ )(25).



I shall assume that the Orders were issued, as they might have been, in
pursuance of Regulation 19 of the Emergency (Miscellaneuous Provisions and
Powers) Regulations No. 1 of 1989 made under the Public Security Ordinance and
published in Part 1 Section (1) General, of the Gazette Extraordinary of
20.06.1989 as amended from time to time. Those were the regulations in force
at the relevant time, although they were later replaced by the Emergency
(Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations Ordinance No. 1 of 1993 made
by the President under Section 5 of the Public Security Ordinance and
published in the Gazette Extraordinary No. 771/16 of 17th June 1993\. I shall
also infer from the detention orders made, even though they were not issued in
respect of certain petitioners, that the arrests of all the petitioners were
supposed to have been under Regulation 18(1).



**ARREST UNDER REGULATION 18(1) IN GENERAL**



Regulation 18(1) empowers certain persons, including any police officer, to
"search, detain for purposes of such search, or arrest without warrant, any
person who is committing or has committed or whom he has reasonable ground for
suspecting to be concerned in or to be committing or to have committed, an
offence under any Emergency Regulation . . . "



Were the arrests in the matters before us in accordance with the procedure
established by law as set out in Regulation 18(1) of the Emergency
(Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations No. 1 of 1989?



The following analysis is a checklist approach I shall follow to facilitate my
determination on whether the constitutional requirement of freedom from arrest
except according to procedure established by law has been observed in the
matters before me. The words italicized have no application to the matters
before us but have to be mentioned merely for the sake of completeness. _ _

** **

**33**

**  
ANALYSIS**



Regulation 18(1) empowers



a person authorized by that provision



(1) to search; or  


(2) detain for purposes of "such" search as referred to in (1) or  


(3) arrest without Warrant,



any person



(a) who is committing; or  


(b) who has committed; or  


(c) who he has reasonable ground for suspecting



(i) to be concerned in; or  


(ii) to be committing; or  


(iii) to have committed



an offence under the Emergency Regulations; _and to_



_(4) search; or  
 _

_(5) seize; or  
 _

_(6) remove; or  
 _

_(7) detain_



_(a) any vehicle; or  
 _

_(b) vessel; or  
 _

_(c) article; or  
 _

_(d) substance; or  
 _

_(e) thing whatsoever_



_used in or in connection with the commission of an offence under the
Emergency Regulations._



The respondents were police officers and were therefore "authorized" persons.



**34  
 **

**ARREST UNDER REGULATION 18(1) ‑ ARREST WITHOUT WARRANT WHEN NO OFFENCE
COMMITTED OR BEING COMMITTED ‑ 3(a) AND (b) OF THE ANALYSIS**



It was an uncontroverted fact that there was a telephone message stating that
a meeting of the JVP was being held. The third and fourth respondents
proceeded to the temple because of that message. The Order proscribing the JVP
was revoked on 10.5.88 (Vide Gazette Extraordinary 505/3 of 10.5.88) and as
conceded by learned counsel for the respondents on the day in question, namely
27 February 1992, membership of the JVP was not "an offence under the
Emergency Regulations". The procedure established by Regulation 18(1) is to
enable the police to arrest a person who is committing or who has committed or
who is reasonably suspected to be concerned in or committing or who has
committed **an offence under the Emergency Regulations.** Membership of or
participation in the activities of a lawful organization, such as JVP was at
that time, was not an offence under the Emergency Regulations, (see
_Wickremabandu v. Herath_ (26); _Deniyakumburugedera Sriyani Lakshmi Ekanayake
v. Inspector Herath Banda and Others_ (27); _Dissanayake v. S. I. Gunaratne_
(28) __ and no arrest was possible under or in pursuance of the procedure
established by Regulation 18(1) on account of participation in a JVP Meeting.
(See 3(a) and (b) of the analysis above).



What was the offence under the Emergency Regulations which the petitioners
were committing?



The detention orders filed by the third respondent state that the petitioners
had contravened Regulations 23(a) and (b) and Regulations 45(a), (b), (c) and
Regulation 46.



Regulation 23 (a) provides that whoever conspires to overthrow or attempts or
prepares to overthrow, or does any act, or conspires to do or attempts or
prepares to do any act calculated to overthrow, or with the object or
intention of overthrowing, or as a means of overthrowing, otherwise than by
lawful means, the Government of Sri Lanka by Law established, shall be guilty
of an offence.

**35**  


Much emphasis was placed by the learned Deputy Solicitor­ General on the
supposed use of the phrase under the guise of the Ratawesi Peramuna and the
word revolutionary struggle. The learned Deputy Solicitor‑General was of the
view that the speech went beyond legitimate criticism and fell into the genre
of criticism called "incitement".



However, mere incitement is not an offence. As Justice Holmes observed in
_Gitlow v. New York_ 29 __ "Every idea is an incitement. It offers itself for
belief and if believed is acted on, unless some other belief outweighs it or
some failure of energy stifles the movement at its birth. The only difference
between the expression of an opinion and an incitement in the narrower sense
is the speaker's enthusiasm for the result. Eloquence may set fire to reason".



Legitimate agitation cannot be assimilated with incitement to overthrow the
Government by unlawful means, What the third respondent is supposed to have
heard, even according to the fabricated notes he has proffered, was a
criticism, albeit a severe criticism, of the system of Government, the need to
safeguard democracy, and proposals for reform.



Ms. Muttetuwagama, submitted that these were not calls to revolt but rather a
rhetorical way of saying things. Vague references to revolutionary action of
an unspecified kind will not do. I agree.



Almost as eloquently and persuasively as she did, Justice Stevens observed in
_NAACP v_. _Caliborne Hardware Co._ (30) __ "Strong and extemporaneous
rhetoric cannot be nicely channelled in purely dulcet phrases. An advocate
must be free to stimulate his audience with spontaneous and emotional appeals
for unity and action in a common cause. When such appeals do not incite
lawless action they must be regarded as protected speech." And as the U.S.
Supreme Court observed in _Watts v. United States._ (31) __ "The language of
the political arena, like the language used in labour disputes is often
vituperative, abusive and inexact." In the _Watts_ case the petitioner had
been convicted under a law making it an offence "knowingly and wilfully" to
make any threat to take the life of the President. The petitioner had been
conscripted to serve in the army in the Vietnam War. At a public rally he
said, "I am not going. If they ever make me

36

  
carry a rifle the first man I want to get in my sights is L.B. J.", referring
to President Lyndon B. Johnson. In holding him free from liability, the Court
said: "Certainly the statute is constitutional on its face. The Nation
undoubtedly has a valid, even an overwhelming, interest in protecting the
safety of its Chief Executive and in allowing him to perform his duties
without interference from threats of physical violence." Nevertheless,
considering in context, the conditional nature of the remarks and the fact
that listeners had laughed at the statement, the "political hyperbole"
indulged in by the petitioner was taken to be nothing more than "a kind of
very crude offensive method of stating a political opposition to the
President."



Learned Hand, then a District Judge, in _Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten,_
(32) regarded as legitimate the "right to criticise either by temperate
reasoning or by immoderate and indecent invective" as "normally the privilege
of the individual in countries dependent upon the free expression **** of
opinion as the ultimate source of authority." The Judge went on to say:
"Political agitation, by the passions it arouses or the convictions it
engenders, may in fact stimulate men to the violation of the law. Detestation
of existing policies is easily transformed into the forcible resistance of the
authority which puts them in execution, and it would be folly to disregard the
casual relation between the two. Yet to assimilate agitation, legitimate as
such, with direct incitement to violent resistance, is to disregard the
tolerance of all methods of political agitation which is in normal times a
safeguard of free government."



I do also recall Justice Brennan's opinion in _New York Times Co. v_.
_Sullivan_ (33) that cases of this kind should be considered "against the
background of a profound national commitment to the principle that debate on
public issues should be uninhibited, robust, and wide‑open."



As far as we are concerned, that pledge is enshrined in Article 14(1)(a) of
the Constitution which guarantees that every citizen is entitled to the
freedom of speech and expression including publication.



While the emotive content of words might in the circumstances of a case be the
more important element of the overall message to be

37

  
communicated (Cf. Justice Harlan, in _Cohen v. California_ )(34) and at the
same time bearing in mind that words are not only the keys of persuasion but
also the "triggers of action", yet in the circumstances of this case there was
nothing in the speech directly or by way of rational inference to suggest that
the pre‑eminent message was to overthrow the Government by unlawful means. It
is the course of meaning which holds on through a speech that matters. It is
the tenor of the speech rather than isolated sentences, phrases and words that
matter. (Cf. per Sharvananda CJ in _Joseph Perera v. A.G_.) (35).



The fourth respondent says that what was being advocated was simply "chasing
away" the President ‑ a perfectly legitimate objective under a democratic
system of Government if it was to be accomplished by lawful means. The call to
"topple" the President or the Government did not mean that the change was to
be brought about by violent means. It was a call to bring down persons in
power by removing the base of public support on which they were elevated.



If the throwing down was to be accomplished by democratic means, the fact that
the tumble may have had shocking or traumatic effects on those who might fall
is of no relevance. It is the means and not the consequence that have to be
considered.



The third respondent says in his affidavits that he concluded that the
petitioners "were engaged in a conspiracy to overthrow the Government." An
offence of conspiracy to wage war against the Republic is dealt with in
Section 115 of the Penal Code read with Section 114. However, in the written
submissions of the respondents and Detention Orders the reference is to the
offence of conspiracy under the Emergency Regulations in Regulation 23. No one
was arrested for sedition and incitement, which is dealt with in Regulation
26. Regulation 26 provides as follows:



"Any person who by words, whether spoken or written or by sight or visible
representations or by conduct or by any other act (a) brings or attempts to
bring the President or the Government into hatred or contempt, or excites or
incites or attempts to excite or incite feelings of disaffection to or hatred
or contempt of the President or the Government; or (b) brings or attempts to
bring the Constitution or the administration of justice

38

  
into hatred or contempt or excites or incites or attempts to excite or incite
the inhabitants of Sri Lanka or any section, class or group of them to procure
otherwise than by lawful means, the alteration of any matter by law
established; or (d) raises or creates or attempts to raise or create
discontent or disaffection among the inhabitants of Sri Lanka or any section,
class or group of them; or (e) promotes or fosters or attempts to promote or
foster feelings of hatred or hostility between different sections, classes or
groups of inhabitants of Sri Lanka; or (f) excites or incites or attempts to
excite or incite inhabitants of Sri Lanka or any section, class or group of
them to the use of any form of physical force or violence, breaches of the
peace, disobedience of the law or obstruction of the execution of law, for the
purpose thereby of inducing or compelling the Parliament or the government to
alter any matter by law established or to do or forbear from doing any act or
thing; or (g) excites or incites or attempts to excite or incite the
inhabitants of Sri Lanka or any section, class or group of them to do or omit
to do any act or thing which constitutes a breach of any emergency regulation,
shall be guilty of an offence and punished with rigorous imprisonment which
shall extend to at least three months but shall not extend to more than twenty
years and may also be liable to a fine."



One would have thought that the speech in the matters before us was reached by
Regulation 26? However, there was just the one speech containing the
supposedly offensive words; if the charge had been incitement, only the arrest
of the speaker could have been justified. And so, it seems, a charge of
conspiracy was made to justify the other arrests, the element of complicity
being supplied by the statement that a priest inquired whether there was
opposition and the others signifying their involvement by remaining silent.



By making Regulation 23(a) it has been determined that a conspiracy to
overthrow the organized Government established by law by unlawful means is so
inimical to the general welfare and involves such danger of substantive evil
that such an action is an offence that must be penalized by the State in the
exercise of its police power. The obvious purpose of Regulation 23(a) is to
protect



39  


the existing government, not from change by peaceable, orderly, constitutional
and therefore by **lawful** means, but from change by violence, revolution and
terrorism, by means of criminal force or show of criminal force. (Cf. section
114, 115 and 120 of the Penal Code and Regulation 25 of the Emergency
(Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations No. 1 of 1993. It is of
interest to note in passing that Regulation 23(a), which is the provision we
have to, and do, consider, has ceased to exist, and that offences under the
Penal Code, including offences to wage war against the Republic (section 114)
and conspiracy to do so (section 115) have now been incorporated by reference
in substitution for Regulation 23(a). )



The petitioners were certainly not meeting merely to hold a seminar of
political theory or to engage in an academic study of national problems. They
were engaged in more than a harmless letting off of steam. The Ratawesi
Peramuna was as we have seen acording to the petitioners themselves, an
"anti‑government" organisation. However, as a matter of law, merely vehement,
caustic and unpleasantly sharp attacks on the government, the President,
Ministers, elected representatives or public officials are not _per se_
unlawful. (See per Brennan, J. in _New_ _York Times Co_. _v. Sullivan,_
(supra). Cf. _Deniyakumburagedera Sriyani Lakshmi Ekanayake v. Inspector
Herath Banda and others_ (27); _Amaratunga v. Sirimal_ (36); _Joseph Perera v.
A.G._ (35) per Sharvananda C.J.) They have on that day been engaged in
discussions against the Government: but there was nothing said that showed
incitement to have been subjectively intended by the speaker; or that might be
objectively regarded as being encouraged by the speaker; or in the context apt
to create a seditious temper that was likely to produce lawless action.



It is useful in this connection to consider what might or might not constitute
.unlawfully exciting or attempting to excite disaffection under the normal
law. Section 120 of the Penal Code states as follows:



"Whoever by words, either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by
visible representations or otherwise, excites or attempts to excite feelings
of disaffection to the President or to

40  


the Government of the Republic, or excites or attempts to excite hatred to or
contempt of the administration of justice, or excites or attempts to excite
the people of Sri Lanka to procure, otherwise than by lawful means, the
alteration of any matter by law established, or attempts to raise discontent
or disaffection amongst the people of Sri Lanka, or to promote feelings of
ill‑will and hostility between different classes of such people, shall be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years."



The "Explanation" to the Section states as follows:



"It is not an offence under this Section by intending to show that the
President or the Government of the Republic have been misled or mistaken in
measures, or to point out errors or defects in the Government or any part of
it or the administration of justice, with a view to the reformation of such
alleged errors or defects, or to excite the people of Sri Lanka to attempt to
procure by lawful means the alteration of any matter by law established, or to
point out in order to their removal matters which are producing or have a
tendency to produce feelings of hatred or ill‑will between different classes
of the people of Sri Lanka."



The speech, according to the third and fourth respondents" affidavits, was
directed against "autocratic rule" and the constitutional framework they
supposed facilitated it. Changes of the Executive President and **** the
Constitution were advocated. This was perfectly legitimate. Jefferson
articulated the relevant precepts in the following words:



It is the Right of the People to alter or to abolish it (Government), and to
institute new Government, laying its foundation on such principles, and
organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to
effect their safety and happiness."



There was no evidence that the Peramuna ever adopted,, embraced or espoused
undemocratic means either to overthrow the  


41  


government or to change the Constitution. On the other hand, the evidence in
the affidavits of the petitioners cited at the end of this paragraph was that
Peramuna eschewed violence either for obtaining or retaining power. A raison
deter for the Peramuna was to wean young persons from pursuits aimed at
changing governments by violence. The petitioners in their affidavits have
maintained that, not only were they not members of the JVP, but that they were
anxious to prevent young persons from resorting to violence and armed
conflict. They were opposed to and viewed the re‑entry of the JVP into the
political arena as requiring a more cautious approach on the part of the
Ratawesi Peramuna, making that a subject for their discussions at Kawduduwa
temple on 27th February 1992. They were conscious of the fact that their lives
were in danger. While they were themselves not preparing for violent action,
they might have been steeling its members to be ready to face the violence of
rival groups, having regard to the armed intervention they had experienced at
their poster exhibition at Matara. The statement attributed by the third
respondent to a speaker at the meeting that they must be ready to sacrifice
lives is therefore quite understandable. ((See para 2.4 of the affidavit of M.
D. Daniel in S.C. Application No. 147/92; para 3.4 of the affidavit of
Singappuli Hewage Sunny Dayananda in S.C. Application No. 148/92; 2.9 of the
affidavit of Athureliya Rathana in S.C. Application No. 149/92; para 3.4 of
the affidavit of Jayasinghe Mudiyanselage Janaka Priyantha Bandara in S.C.
Application 152/92; para 2.4 of the affidavit of Pallimulle Hewa Geeganage
Chandraratne in Application No. 153/92; and para 4.1 of the affidavit of
Ranawake Arachchige Patali Champika Ranawake in S.C. Application  No. 154/92.)
__  



The criminal activities of the once proscribed JVP perhaps left an indelible
impression. Unfortunately some law enforcement officers, including the third
respondent, seem to have come to the erroneous conclusion that all
anti‑government activity, regardless of the body under whose auspices it is
being advanced, are **necessarily** directed at subverting the Government by
violent, undemocratic and unlawful means. Several applications made to this
Court have made this quite obvious. (E. g. see _Gunaratne v. Cyril Herath_
(23) _and Wijesooriya v. Abeyratne and Others_ (24)).

42



Overthrowing the Government of the day might in the third respondent's private
opinion have been bad or undesirable or harmful or unfortunate or positively
disastrous, evil and reprehensible; he may have entertained a hate or revolted
dislike of the contents of the speech; but the relevant matter for him as a
police officer acting in pursuance of Regulation 18(1) read with Regulation
23(a) in respect of persons engaged in expressive activities was to consider
whether there was anything to show that the petitioners were engaged in a
plot, some combination or agreement, to overthrow the Government by imminent
action which was likely to bring about such overthrow otherwise than by
**lawful means;** to use a phrase in common parlance, "by the bullet rather
than by the ballot", by force and violence rather than by the means provided
by law, and therefore in contravention of Regulation 23(a) of the Emergency
(Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations No. 1 of 1989. On the other
hand, it was not the function of the police, purporting to act in pursuance of
their powers of arrest under Regulation 18(1), to be an instrument of
Government for the suppression of merely unpopular views, (Cf. _Feiner_ v _.
New York_ )(37).



Police Officers who are tempted to play the role of censors should be mindful
of the fact that the right of free speech cannot be interfered with on slender
grounds and that "if there is any fixed star in our constitutional
constellation, it is that no official, high or petty, can prescribe what shall
be orthodox in politics, nationalism, religion, or other matters of opinion or
force citizens to confess by word or act their faith therein." _(West Virgina
State Board of Education v. Barnette_ )(38) _._



As we shall see later on, it is of fundamental importance that there should be
freedom of thought and expression in a democracy. What I should like to
emphasize here is the fact that attempts to achieve conformity by compulsion
must be effectively discouraged, for "those who begin coercive elimination of
dissent soon find themselves exterminating dissenters. Compulsory unification
of opinion achieves only the unanimity of the graveyard. It seems trite but
necessary to say that [the Constitutional guarantee of freedom of expression]
was designed to avoid these ends by avoiding beginnings."

43



_(West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette,_ supra, cited with
approval by Fernando, J. in _Wijeratne v. Vijitha Perera and Others_ )(17) _._



Police Officers should also realize that if, as indeed it should be, it is
their desire to maintain public order and stability, precipitate action of the
sort taken by the third and fourth respondents may be counter­-productive and
pernicious. As Justice Brandeis pointed out in his judgment in _Whitney v_.
_California_ (39), repression breeds hate and hate menaces stable government.
The immense value of free speech as a safety valve cannot be overemphasized.
As Nowak, Rotunda and Young _(Constitutional Law,_ pp. __ 836‑7) point out:



"Just as the ancient Roman eventually learned that executing Christians did
not suppress Christianity, modern Governments should realize that forbidding
people to talk about certain topics does not encourage public stability. It
only creates martyrs. Punishing people for speech does not discourage the
speech; it only drives it underground and encourages conspiracy. In the battle
for public order, free speech is the ally, not the enemy".



In ventilating their dissident views, the petitioners may have passed the
bounds of argument and persuasion and there may have been advice,
encouragement or even pressure brought to bear on the listeners to overthrow
the Government . Yet, there was no basis for arrest under Regulation 18 read
with Regulation 23 (a), for there **** was nothing the third respondent was
supposed to have heard that in any way suggested that the petitioners were
doing anything to overthrow the Government by means that were not lawful.



According to the Detention orders marked X3A in Application 152/92 and X3A ‑
X9A in Application 155/92, the petitioners were also supposed to have been
acting in contravention of Regulation 23( _b_ ). What Regulation 23(b) states
is this: "Whoever conspires to murder or attempts to murder, or wrongfully
confines, conspires or attempts to prepare to wrongfully confine, the
President or a Member of Parliament, or a Member of the Police or a Member of
the Armed Forces, or a Public Officer with the intention of inducing or
compelling the President, such Member of Parliament, Member of the Police or
Member of the Armed Forces or a Public Officer to exercise or refrain

44

  
from exercising in any manner any of the lawful powers of the President, such
Member of Parliament, Member of the Police, Member of the Armed Forces or
Public Officer ... shall be guilty of an offence."



Even assuming that the third respondent did hear the things he recorded, how
could an arrest have been made on the basis that Regulation 23( _b_ ) was
being violated ? There was not a word in his notes of what he is supposed to
have heard about either murdering or confining anyone.



The petitioners were also vaguely charged with attempting, aiding, abetting or
conspiring to commit offences (Regulation 45) and of assisting offenders
(Regulation 46).



What were the offences under the Regulations the petitioners were aiding,
abetting or conspiring to commit ? None.



For the foregoing reasons 1 hold that the third and fourth respondents in
arresting the petitioners were not arresting persons who were committing or
who had committed an offence under Emergency Regulations 23(a), 23)b), 45 and
46.



**WERE THE ARRESTS WITHOUT WARRANT ON REASONABLE GROUND OF SUSPICION?** ‑
**3(C) OF THE ANALYSIS.**



Were the petitioners making the arrest of persons whom they had reasonable
ground for suspecting (1) to be concerned in; or (ii) to have committed an
offence under the Emergency Regulations?



In general, in order to make an arrest according to the procedure established
by Regulation 18(1) on the basis of a reasonable ground of suspicion (See 3(
_c_ ) in the analysis of Regulation 18(1) above), an officer need not have
clear and sufficient proof of the commission of the offence alleged. He is not
called upon even to have anything like a _prima facie_ case for conviction.
_Prima facie_ proof consists of admissible evidence. Suspicion can take into
account matters that could not be put in evidence at all. Suspicion can take
into account also matters which, though admissible, could not form part of a

45  


_prima facie_ case. The provisions relating to arrest are materially different
to those applying to the determination of the guilt or innocence of the
arrested person. One is at or near the starting point of criminal proceedings
while the other constitutes the termination of those proceedings and is made
by the Judge after the hearing of submissions from all parties. The power of
arrest does not depend on the requirement that there must be clear and
sufficient proof of the commission of the offence alleged. What the officer
making the arrest needs to have are **reasonable grounds** for suspecting the
persons to be concerned in or to be committing or to have committed the
offence. In general, the question for me in deciding whether the arrests on
the ground of reasonable suspicion were in accordance with the procedure
established by Regulation 18(1) is this: Were there circumstances, including
the prevailing situation in the country at the time (see per Wanasundera J. in
_Joseph Perera_ (35) __ per, Kulatunga, J. in _Wijewardene v. Zain_ (13) __
and in _Dissanayake v. Superintendent Mahara Prison_ (9) _._ See also
_Mallawaratchi v. Seneviratne_ (40) _,_ objectively regarded, ‑the subjective
satisfaction of the officer making the arrest is not enough ‑ that should have
induced the third respondent to reasonably suspect that the petitioners were
concerned in or committing or to have committed an offence under the Emergency
regulations specified by the respondents ?





If the answer is in the affirmative, Article 13(1) is not violated. If the
answer is in the negative, Article 13(1) is violated. The test is the same
whether the arrest is under the normal law, or under the Emergency Regulations
or the Prevention of Terrorism Act. _(Muttusamy v. Kannangara_ (41);
_Gunasekera v. Fonseka_ (42) _Joseph Perera v. Attorney ‑General _(42); __ Cf.
_Lundstron v. Cyril Herath and Others_ (43); _Joseph Silva and Others v.
Balasuriya and Others_ (22); _Jayasuriya v. Tillekeratne & Ohers _(44)
___Wijewardene v. Zain_ (13); _Withanachchi v. Cyril Herat and Others_ (45) _,
Chandradasa v. Lal Fernando_ (25); _Yapa v_. _Bandaranayake_ (45); _Gunaratna
v_. _Cyril Herath and Others_ (23) __ and _Wijesooriya v. Abeyratne and
others_ (24); _Weerakoon and Alahakoon v. Beddewela_ (47); _Gamlath v. Silva
and Others_ (48); _Dissanayake v. Superintendent Mahara Prisons_ (49);
_Munidasa v. Seneviratne_ (49); _Karunasekera v_. _Jayewardene_ (5o);
_Chandrasekeram v_. _Wijetunge_ (51); _Vidyamuni v. Jayetilleke_ (13);
_Elasinghe v. Wijewickrema and Others_ (51); _Nihallage Dona Ranjani v.
Liyanapathirana and Others_ (53) _._

_ _ 46



It has been said in some of these cases, using the ambiguous test laid down in
_Baba Appu v. Adan Hamy_ (54) _,_ as if it were a ritual or prescribed formula
to be followed in deciding whether there was a ground of reasonable suspicion,
that "a suspicion is reasonable if the facts disclose that it was founded on
matters within the police officer's own knowledge or on the statements made by
other persons in a way in which justify him giving them credit."



A reasonable suspicion may be based either upon matters within the officer's
knowledge or upon credible information furnished to him, or upon a combination
of both sources. He may inform himself either by personal investigation or by
adopting information supplied to him or by doing both, as the third respondent
suggests he did in the matters before us, and as it was the case in
_Ragunathan v. Thuraisingham_ (55). A suspicion does not become "reasonable"
merely because the source of the information is creditworthy. If he is
activated by an unreliable informant, the officer making the arrest should, as
a matter of prudence, act with greater circumspection than if the information
had come from a creditworthy source.. However, eventually the question is
whether in the circumstances, including the reliability of the sources of
information, the person making the arrest could, as a reasonable man, have
suspected that the persons were concerned in or committing or had committed
the offence in question. If the basis of the ground of arrest is alleged to be
information received, the Court may, as it did in _Joseph Silva and Others v.
Balasuriya and Others_ (23), require the respondents to produce evidence of
the information. However, I would with great respect hesitate to accept the
view expressed by Wanasundera, J. in _Joseph Perera_ (supra) and followed in
_Joseph Silva and Others v. Balasuriya and others_ (22) that "the sole issue
for the Court is the knowledge and state of mind of the officer concerned at
the time of the arrest ..." "knowledge", as opposed to mere "belief", means
that what was **believed** was **true.** The truth of the matter is not what
is relevant at the stage of arrest. What Regulation 18(1) requires is
reasonable ground for suspecting. As Lord Devlin pointed out in _Shaaban Bin
Hussein v. Chong Fook Kam_ (56) "suspicion in its ordinary meaning is a state
of conjecture or surmise where proof is lacking; 'I suspect but I cannot
prove'. Suspicion arises at or near the starting point of an investigation of
which the obtaining of _prima facie_ proof is

47

  
the end." Moreover, the officer is not required to have reasonable grounds to
_believe._ As Dias J. pointed out in _Buhary_ v _. Jayaratne_ (57) __
"believe" is much stronger than "suspect" and involves the necessity of
showing that a reasonable man must have felt convinced in his mind of the fact
in which he believed. (See per Seneviratne J. in _Withanachchi v. Cyril Herath
and others_ (45) . However the officer making an arrest cannot act on a
suspicion founded on **mere** conjecture or **vague** surmise. His information
must give rise to a **reasonable** suspicion that the suspect was concerned in
the commission of an offence for which he could have arrested a person without
a warrant. The suspicion must not be of an uncertain and vague nature but of a
positive and definite character providing reasonable ground for suspecting
that the person arrested was concerned in the commission of an offence. (See
the observation of Atukorale J. in _Jayasuriya v. Tillekeratne_ ) (44). __

The offence in question in the matters before us was the offence of conspiracy
defined in Regulation 23(a). Other offences were also mentioned in the
Detention Orders; but from the affidavits of the third respondent one gathers
that it was the offence of conspiracy as set out in Regulation 23(a) that was
supposed to have been in his mind when he heard the speeches and decided to
arrest the petitioners.



According to the telephone message, the petitioners were attending a meeting
of the JVP. The JVP was once proscribed under Regulation 68 as an organization
whose activities were prejudicial to national security or the maintenance of
public order. As a matter of prudence, past conduct might not have been
altogether ignored. If in all the circumstances the Officer‑in‑Charge had
reasonable grounds for suspecting that the petitioners were concerned in or
committing or to have committed an offence under the Emergency Regulations, he
had the duty to ascertain what the position was and take timely action.



In the case of a conspiracy to overthrow the Government by unlawful means, the
Government acting through its agents of law enforcement cannot be expected to
wait until the **putsch** is about to be executed, the plans have been laid
and the signal is awaited or the bomb assembled and the fuse ignited. If the
ingredients to the

48

  
reaction are present, it is not necessary to await the addition of the
catalyst. A single revolutionary spark may kindle a fire that, smouldering for
a time, may burst into a sweeping and destructive conflagration. It cannot be
said that the State is acting arbitrarily or unreasonably when it seeks to
extinguish the spark without waiting until the flame has been enkindled or
blazed into conflagration. It cannot reasonably be required to defer the
adoption of measures for its own peace and safety until the revolutionary
utterances lead to actual disturbances of the public peace; but it may, and it
is expected in the exercise of its duty, to suppress the threatened danger in
its incipiency. If Government is aware that a group aiming at its overthrow by
unlawful means is attempting to indoctrinate its members and to commit them to
a course whereby they will strike when the leaders feel the circumstances
permit, action to save the nation from the physical and political harm that
might otherwise ensue is not only reasonable but also a duty and a fundamental
function of government and its law enforcement agencies. (Cf. Vinson, C.J. in
_Dennis v. U.S_. (58); Justice Stanford in _Gitlow v. New_ York (29). Where
there are utterances directed to inciting or producing imminent action to
bring about the overthrow of organized government established by law by
unlawful means and which are likely to incite or bring about such overthrow,
such utterances involve danger to the public peace and to the security of the
State. They threaten breaches of the peace and must be immediately dealt with
even though the effect of a given utterance cannot be accurately predicted. As
Justice Douglas observed in _Dennis v_. _United States_ (58) : "There comes a
time when even speech loses its constitutional immunity ... When conditions
are so critical that there will be no time to avoid the evil that the speech
threatens, it is time to cry a halt. Otherwise free speech which is the
strength of the Nation will be the cause of its destruction."



However, intervention must be opportune. Justice Brandeis, in _Whitney's Case_
(39) stated as follows:



"Those who won our independence by revolution were not cowards. They did not
fear political change. They did not exalt order at the cost of liberty. To
courageous, self‑reliant men, with confidence in the power of free and
fearless reasoning applied through the

49

  
processes of popular government, no danger flowing from speech can be deemed
clear and present, when the incidence of the evil apprehended is so imminent
that it may befall before there is opportunity for full discussion. If there
be time to expose through discussions the falsehood and fallacies, to avert
the evil by the processes of education, the remedy to be applied is more
speech. Only an emergency can justify repression. Such must be the rule if
authority is to be reconciled with freedom. Such in my opinion is the command
of the Constitution."



Since in Sri Lanka the word "emergency", by long usage, is sometimes taken to
mean the state of emergency proclaimed by the President under the Public
Security Ordinance, it might be pointed out that "emergency" in the Brandeis
statement meant that the lawless action must be imminent before repressive
action, by arrest or otherwise, is warranted. In order to justifiably claim
that the arrests were fitting in regard to time and circumstances, the
respondents were obliged to establish that the speech impelled the hearers to
imminent, unthinking lawless action to overthrow the Government.



Law enforcement officers cannot reasonably be required to measure the danger
from every such utterance in the nice balance of a jeweller's scale. At the
same time sufficient regard must be had to the constitutional right of free
speech. Had it been established that the speaker subjectively intended
incitement and in the context, the words used were objectively likely to
encourage or produce imminent unthinking lawless action to overthrow the
Government, then "more speech" in "'the market place" of ideas to correct the
speech by reasoned debate had no place. The third respondent, acting for and
on behalf of the State would then have had a significant interest in, and no
other means of, preventing the resulting lawless conduct than by arresting the
persons advocating and clearly supporting such activity. However, that was not
the case.



The petitioners were not arrested on any certain and verifiable basis or even
on the basis of reasonable suspicion that they were concerned in or committing
or had committed the offence of conspiracy as defined by Regulation 23. They
had done nothing to attempt or prepare to overthrow the Government by unlawful
means.

**  50**



Indeed, they were not prepared even for **lawful** activity, for they were
merely attempting to structure their organization at the time. Even imminent
lawful activity was as yet a remote possibility. The petitioners were arrested
simply in the expectation that something might turn up to support the vague
suspicions of the third respondent that the petitioners were engaged in some
venture to overthrow the Government by unlawful means. The third respondent in
paragraph 6 of his affidavit of 9th September 1992 filed in SC Application
153/92 states that petitioner Chandanaratne "and the other suspects were
brought to the Wadduwa Police Station and they were interrogated with a view
to finding out their subversive connections." Having no reasonable grounds
against the petitioners, it was hoped that "connections" with others against
whom there may have been reasonable grounds would, perhaps, supply the
deficiency.



__ One may be "connected" through bonds of family or friendship or common
employment and a myriad of other ways. There may have been no choice, as in
the case of one's relatives or fellow employees. It is hardly reasonable to
suggest that "connections" alone imply complicity or even a shared sympathy
with each other's views. Yet the petitioners seemed to have lost their
personal liberty simply because of possible "connections." People who were
"connected", as in the case of the members of Ranawake's family, were
therefore subjected to needless worry, vexation and harassment. Ranawake
((154/92, 4.13, 4.14 **** and 5.1) relates how _ex post facto_ efforts were
made in his case to discover a basis for his arrest, including extensive
interrogation in relation to his writings seized from his home and that of his
sister after a search of his home by Piyaratne, the fourth respondent, which
included the splitting of mattresses. The third respondent in his affidavit
(para 10) denies removing documents but admits the visits to the homes. The
third respondent (para 18) admits that Piyaratne visited Ranawake's sister's
home and Ranawake's home but states that he only examined the rooms. Piyaratne
in his affidavit (para 3) not only denies splitting mattresses but denies even
visiting Ranawake's home. I have no doubt that the search for "connections"
cause needless distress, and by the destruction of mattresses, needless
misfortune, in the homes of the Ranawake family.

 51



The police had their suspicions and hoped that some evidence might turn up to
make their suspicions reasonable. However, vague, general suspicions and the
fervent hope or even confident assumption that something might eventually turn
up to provide a reasonable ground for an arrest will not do. (Cf. _Piyasiri_
v. _Fernando_ (3); _Wijesiri v. Rohan Fernando & Others _(10); _Wijewardene v.
Zain_ (13); _Weerakoon and Allahakoon v. Beddewela_ (47) _._



Scott, L.J. in _Dumbell v_. _Roberts_ (60) __ (followed in _Mutthusamy v_.
_Kannangara_ (41); __ per Gratiaen, J.; and in _Faiz v_. _Attorney
‑General_(16) __ per Perera, J. said: "The principle of personal freedom, that
every man should be presumed innocent until he is found guilty applies also to
the police function of arrest ... For that reason it is of importance that no
one should be arrested by the police except on grounds which the particular
circumstances of the arrest really justified the entertainment of a reasonable
suspicion." Even a _bona fide_ suspicion that something was amiss, if there
are no reasonable grounds, is insufficient. The good intentions of the police
officer are irrelevant. (See _Podiappuhamy v_. _Liyanage and Others_ (61) __
Cf. _Premaratne and Somawathie v. K. D. Somapala_ (62)) _._ In the
circumstances of that case, however, the Court was of the view that no more
was required than a "formal" declaration of the violation of the petitioner's
Constitutional rights. With great respect, either there is a violation or
there is no violation and a declaration must be made accordingly.)



**DETENTION FOR SEARCH ‑ ANALYSIS (1) AND (2)**



As **** we have seen, Regulation 18(1) empowers a person authorized by that
law to (1) search or (2) detain for purposes of search any person, who is
committing or who has committed or whom he has reasonable ground for
suspecting **to be concerned in** or to be concerned in **or to be
committing** or to have committed, an offence under the Emergency Regulations.
"Search" may be an examination or exploration in order to find, or to
ascertain the presence or absence of some person or thing by looking through
places like residences or places or receptacles like cupboards and cabinets in
which things are held or stored or by examining a person by handling, removal
of garments and the like or looking through and examining writings, records
and other documents in order to

52

  
ascertain whether there are certain things contained therein. A search in this
sense took place according to the third and fourth respondent, for it was
supposed to have been ascertained that the petitioners had no injuries and
that there were found certain suspicious books and papers but nothing else of
relevance to the case at the temple. There is no complaint by the petitioners
with regard to the search in that sense. There was also a search in this sense
of the homes of Ranawake and his sister which I have already referred to.



"Search", also means the examination, by interrogation or otherwise,
systematically and in detail relating to the commission of an offence so as by
such investigation to track down offenders. (See _Nanayakkara v. Henry Perera_
(62); _Weerakoon v. Weeraratne_ (15); _Perera and Sathyajith v. Siriwardene_
(63) _._ See also _Wijewardene v. Zain_ (13); _Weerakoon v_. _Weeraratne_ (15)
_'._



A person may, in terms of Regulation 18(1) be detained "for purposes of such
search". The investigation must either relate to an offence under the
Emergency Regulations which the person detained was committing or had
committed, or to an offence under the Emergency Regulations which the person
detained was suspected on reasonable grounds to be concerned in or to be
committing or to have committed. A person, as the cases cited in the preceding
paragraph show, cannot be detained for unspecified and unknown purposes. As we
have seen there were no reasonable grounds for arrest and the petitioners were
detained merely on account of a vague suspicion in the hope that something
might turn up to make it reasonable. Such a detention for search is not in
accordance with the procedure established by Regulation 18(1).



The respondents have failed to adduce evidence to show that the petitioners
were (1) committing or (ii) had committed an offence under the Emergency
Regulations or (iii) that they had any reasonable ground for suspecting the
petitioners to be concerned in or to be committing or to have committed any
offence under the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations
No. 1 of 1989.

 53



Therefore in detaining the petitioners for search the respondents were not
acting in accordance with the procedure established by Regulation 18(1) of the
Emergency Regulations. (See paragraphs (1) and (2) of the Analysis).



I therefore declare that the fundamental right of each and every one of the
petitioners to be free from arrest except according to procedure established
by law guaranteed by Article 13(1) of the Constitution has been violated.



**ACTING ACCORDING TO A HYBRID PROCEDURE COMBINING REGULATION 17(1) WITH
REGULATION 19.**



There were other Detention Orders in addition to those already referred to
which provide us with information regarding the basis of the arrests. A
Detention Order dated 4 March 1992 (except in the case of Bandara in 152/92
and Weerasekera in 155/92 where the Orders are dated 3rd March 1992 and the
period of detention is said to be from 3rd March 1992) and the period of
detention is said to be from 3rd March, 1992) issued by the Assistant
Superintendent of Police, Panadura, has been filed by the third respondent in
respect of each of the following applications, namely, the applications of
Seneviratne in 146/92; M. D. Daniel in 147/92, Sunny Dayananda in 148/92;
Rathna in 149/92; Wimalasara 150/92; Nandana Perera in 151/92; Chandraratne in
153/92; Champika Ranawake in 154/92; Wimalasuriya in 155/92; Dayaratne in
155/92; Paranavithana in 155/92; Piyarathna in 155/92 and Kithulgala Upali in
155/92. The above mentioned Orders in applications 146/92; 147/92; 148/92'
149/92; 150/92; 151/92; 153/92; and 154/92 are marked in each order as X3. The
Detention Order is marked as X3 in the application of Wimalasuriya in
Application 155/92; X4 in the application of Dayaratne in Application 155/92;
X5 in the application of Paranavithana in 155/92; X7 in the application of
Piyarathna in 155/92; X8 in the application of Pemarathana in 155/92 and X9 in
the application of Kithulgala Upali in 155/92.



The Detention Orders have the following terms except (a) with regard to the
place of detention (Maradana Police Station is



54  


designated in the case of Wimalasuriya, Paranavithana, Premarathana, Kitulgala
Upali, Nandana Perera and Rathana; the Pettah Police Station is designated in
the case of Dayaratne, Piyarathana, Ranawake, Chandana Perera, Wimalasara and
Sunny Daniel; and the Co‑ordinating Division is designated in the case of
Weerasekere, Bandara, M. D. Daniel and Seneviratne), (b) the name and
residence of each of the sixteen petitioners detained as set out in the
Schedule to each order, and (c) the reference number of each order:



My Ref ......

Police Office,

Panadura  
         4th March, 1992.

## DETENTION ORDER UNDER THE EMERGENCY

**                                                 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
AND POWERS REGULATIONS**



By **** virtue of the powers vested in me under Section 19(2) of the Emergency
(Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulation No. 4 of 1989, published in
the Gazette (Extraordinary), No. 701/19 of 14.2.82, I, L. A. Jayasinghe, Asst.
Suptd. of Police, Panadura/Bandaragama Dist. being in (sic.) opinion that with
a view to arresting the person specified in Column of the Schedule to this
order residing in the corresponding entry in Column II of that Schedule from
acting in any manner prejudicial to the National Security or to the
Maintenance of Public Order or with a view to complete investigations into his
actions in the commission of offences under the aforesaid Regulations, it is
necessary to do (sic.) hereby order that such person be detained in custody at
Police Station ... for a period of 84 days from 4 March 1992.



SCHEDULE



Column I Column II

Name of Detinue Place of Residence

A.L. Jayasunghe,

Asst. Superintendent of Police

55  


The number of the Column relating to the name of the person detained is not
mentioned in the main text of the Orders.



In each case, the Assistant Superintendent of Police states that he was
issuing the Order "by virtue of the powers vested in [him] under section 19(2)
of the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulation No. 4 of
1989 published in Gazette (Extraordinary) No. 701/19 of 14.2.92". There is no
such thing mentioned in that Gazette. There was however such a thing as the
Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations No. 1 of 1989
which was published in Part 1 Section 1 of Gazette Extraordinary of
20.06.1989. As we have seen, Gazette Extraordinary No. 701/19 of 14.2.92
merely sets out the Proclamation bringing Part II of the Public Security
Ordinance into operation.



Assuming that he was acting under Regulation 19(2) (read with Regulation 19(4)
of the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations No. 1 of
1989, what was the Assistant Superintendent empowered to do? He could have
authorized a person arrested in pursuance of the provisions of Regulation 18
to be detained for a period not exceeding ninety days, "reckoned from the date
of his arrest under that regulation", in a place authorized by him. In terms
of Regulation 18 a police officer "may search, detain for purposes of such
search, or arrest without warrant, any person who is committing or has
committed or whom he has reasonable ground for suspecting to be concerned in
or to be committing or to have committed, an offence under any emergency
regulation ..." As we have seen, the petitioners were not committing, nor had
they committed any offence under the Emergency Regulations. Nor were there
reasonable grounds for suspecting them to be concerned in or to be committing
or to have committed any offence under the Emergency Regulations. Therefore
the petitioners could not be said to have been arrested and detained in
accordance with the procedure established by Regulation 18. Therefore they
were not persons "detained" in **pursuance** of the provisions of Regulation
18. The special procedures prescribed by Regulation 19 are conditional upon
compliance with Regulation 18\. This is evident from the use of the word
"under" the Regulation 19(1) and the phrase "in pursuance of" in Regulation
19(2). Not being persons "detained in pursuance of

56  


Regulation 18", the procedures for detention and release and production in
terms of Regulation 19 had no applicability.



Probably realizing that the petitioners could not have been arrested and
detained under Regulation 18, the Assistant Superintendent, in the Detention
Orders under consideration, gives another explanation for the detention. He
states in each case that the Detention Order was issued because it was his
"opinion" that it was "necessary" to prevent the person detained "from acting
in any manner prejudicial to the National Security or to the Maintenance of
Public Order or with a view to complete investigations into his actions in the
commission of offences under the aforesaid Regulations." Regulation 19(2),
which he states empowered him, does not in fact empower the **Assistant
Superintendent** or any one else to arrest or detain a person for the stated
or any other reasons. What that regulation does is to prescribe procedures
relating to the custody of persons arrested in pursuance of Regulation 18:
Where they may be kept, how they should be treated, when and how such
detention may end, and how a judge should act in changing the character of the
custody when a person is produced before him. It was beyond his authority to
issue such orders. It was ultra vires and the Orders were therefore worthless
pieces of paper. However, if the **Secretary to the Ministry of Defence** was
of opinion with respect to any person that, _inter alia,_ **with a view to
preventing such person from acting in any manner prejudicial to the national
security or to the maintenance of public order,** it was necessary to do so,
such _Secretary_ was empowered by Regulation 17(1) (not Regulation 19 ‑Cf.
_Godagama v_. _Ranatunge_ (64) __ to make order that such person be taken into
and detained in custody. What the **Assistant Superintendent** could have done
was to use his powers under Regulation 17(2) to give effect to the
**Secretary's orders.** The person so detained would then have had to be
detained at a place authorized by the Inspector‑General of Police and such
detention would, in terms of Regulation 17(3), have been deemed to be "lawful
custody".



Let us assume that the detention orders were made under Regulation 17(1),
having regard to some of their terms. Regulation 17(1) of the Emergency
(Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers)

57

  
Regulations No. 1 of 1989 says that the Secretary to the Ministry of Defence
should be "of opinion" with regard to certain matters. This Court must be
satisfied that (a) the **Secretary** (b) was of such opinion before Regulation
17(1) can be invoked as procedure established by law empowering the
deprivation of personal liberty. The Secretary should be able to state that
**he himself** came to form such an opinion. In _Weerakoon v. Weeraratne_ (15)
_,_ Kulatunga J. found that the Secretary had acted mechanically as a rubber
stamp at the behest of the police and placed his signature on papers submitted
to him. (See also the observations of Kulatunga J. in _Sasanasiritissa Thero
and others v. De Silva and others_ (14) __ where it was observed that the
Secretary and his Additional Secretaries had "signed orders mechanically on
the request of their subordinates" and the Court found that the Secretary and
Additional Secretaries "never held the opinion they claim to have
entertained." Cf. _Jayaratne v_. _Tennekoon_ (16); _Weerakoon v. Mahendra_
(11) _._ It __ is a matter of personal judgment. And so, for instance, an
affidavit supporting the detention from his successor in office would have
been of no avail. (See _Dissanayake v. S. I. Gunaratne and others_ (28) _._ In
the matters before us it was not the Secretary or even his successor but an
Assistant Superintendent of Police who arrogated the powers of the Secretary
to himself. The Secretary cannot abdicate his authority. Nor may others usurp
his powers. Otherwise Regulation 17(1) would become a dragnet in which
innocent persons would become enmeshed whether it would have been against the
Secretary's will or not ‑ _nolens volens._



It has been suggested that where a petitioner challenges an order made under
Regulation 17(1) and asserts that the Secretary did not form that opinion
which the Secretary was supposed to have formed, (See _Kalyanie Perera v.
Siriwardene_ (63) __ he must take steps to have the relevant material placed
before the Court, _(Fernando v. Silva and Others_ (67) __ and establish his
averment by "proof positive". (See _Hirdramani v. Ratnavale_ (69) __ cited
with approval in _Sasanasiritissa Thero_ (14) _._



On the other hand, if the Secretary has information to support his opinion, he
must place it before the Court rather than baldly asserting that he was of the
opinion that it was necessary to detain a petitioner.

 58



Otherwise the Court will decide the matter on the available evidence. What is
the position if the information on which the Secretary acted cannot be made
public? In such a case the Court may make order that such information be made
available to the Chief Justice who will make the information available to the
Judges who will adjudicate on the matter. _(Leelaratne v. Cyril Herath and
others_ ) __ (68) _._



Where it appears to the Court on the material available that the deprivation
of liberty was unreasonable, the Court may hold that the Secretary, who is
confidently assumed to be a reasonable man, could not have formed the opinion
and was therefore not of the alleged opinion. (Cf. _Hirdaramani v. Rathnavale_
(67); _Wickremabandu v_. _Herath_ (26); _Chandrasekeram and Others_ v _. D. B.
Wijetunge and Others_ (51) __ ; _Vidyamuni v. Jayetilleke and others_ (12);
_Sasanasiritissa Thero v_. _P. A. de Silva_ (14); _Kalyanie Perera_ _v_.
_Siriwardene_ (64); _Perera and Sathyajith v. Siriwardene_ (63); _Dissanayake
v. Guneratne_ (28); _Fernando v. Kapilaratne and Others_ (69); _Ekanayake v.
Herath Banda and Others_ (27); _Weerakoon v_. _Weeraratne and Others_ (15);
_Godagama v_. _Ranatunge_ (64) _._



I should observe that at the date of the relevant detention order, namely 4th
March 1992, Regulation 17(1) had been amended, (606/4 of 18th April 1990)
_inter alia,_ by substituting "satisfied" for "of opinion". This makes no
practical difference. Thus in construing the phrase "if the Secretary of State
is satisfied", Lord Denning MR in _Secretary of State v_. _Tameside_ (70) __
cited in _Siriwardene_ v _. Liyanage_ (71) _,_ said that the Secretary's
decision "must be reasonable in the sense that it is or can be supported with
good reasons or at any rate be a decision which a reasonable person might
reasonably reach."



The 1990 amendment of Regulation 17 in fact seems to be in accordance with the
judicial interpretation of the old Regulation, for it requires the Secretary
to be "satisfied upon the material submitted to him or upon such additional
material as may be called upon for by him". The opinion is therefore one that
must be based upon grounds. Moreover, the amended provision requires the
Secretary to be satisfied that "it is necessary" to detain the person. The
element of reasonableness is, therefore underlined.

 59



These are considerations of general applicability. Thus, similar
considerations it seems apply, _mutatis mutandis,_ to arrests under the
Prevention of Terrorism Act. In _Somasiri and Somasiri v_. _Jayasena and
Others_ (72) __ Kulatunga J., following _Senthilnayagam v. Seneviratne_ (73)
said: "If such arrest or detention is challenged, they should justify their
conduct objectively by means of sufficient evidence." In that case, the
Detention Order was found to have been signed by the Minister "mechanically at
the request of the police without giving his mind to the preconditions under
Section 9 for making such orders." The order was held to be "vitiated" and
Article 13 was declared violated. In _Dissanayake v. Superintendent Mahara
Prison_ (9)too the Minister was held to have made the orders mechanically and
the detention was held to be "unlawful".



In the matters before us, no evidence was placed to explain the reasons for
the Detention Orders that were partly formulated in terms of Regulation 17(1).



Realizing probably that neither the Secretary, for want of reasons, nor an
**Assistant Superintendent,** for want of authority, could have invoked the
procedure prescribed by Regulation 17, the Detention Orders state
alternatively that the petitioners were being detained "with a view to
complete investigations" into their actions in the commission of offences
under the "Emergency Regulations."



Neither the **Secretary** nor **The Assistant Superintendent** were empowered
by Regulation 17 to detain the petitioners for the purpose of **completing
investigations** relating to the commission of offences; Regulation 17(1) is
not concerned with the investigation of offences but with measures aimed at
the prevention of certain specified kinds of unlawful behaviour, (see
_Godagama v_. _Ranatunge_ )(64) __ and so, presumably, despite its terms,
Regulation 19(2) is mentioned in the second set of detention orders as the
empowering law.



A further matter should be referred to. The orders ‑ X3A in 152/92 and X3A ‑
X9A in 155/92 ‑ are undated but are stated to be operative from 27.2.92 to
17.5.92. However, in paragraph 4 of his affidavit filed in application 152/92,
the third respondent states that he was filing

60

  
detention "orders" in that case dated 4.3.92. There were two detention orders
he filed in application 152/92. One of the two Orders was X3A. The attempt in
the later Orders to explain the taking of the petitioners into custody on the
ground that it was to prevent     them from "acting in a manner prejudicial to
national security" or to "the maintenance of public order", was obviously an
attempt to supply possible deficiencies in the other orders. Neither set of
detention orders were of any use to Bandara and Weerasekere, even if the
Orders were shown to them, for they were released from custody on the date of
the orders viz., 3rd March 1992. As far as the others were concerned, the
Detention Orders cover a period of "84 days" from 4th March, 1992. Why 84 days
and not 90 as determined by Regulation 19(2) under which the Assistant
Superintendent states he was acting? Perhaps, as Mr. Goonesekere suggested, it
was, albeit mistakenly, supposed that the other detention orders "justified"
the first six days of detention? It is not for the police to determine the
circumstances in which a person may be detained for investigation. That is a
matter determined by Regulation 18(1). Nor is it for the police to determine
the maximum or minimum period of detention. That is a matter determined by
Regulation 19(2). (Cf. _Jayatissa v_. _Dissanayake_ )(74) _._ However, the
Inspector‑General of Police and the other authorized officers mentioned in
Regulation 19(4) may determine the place of detention and the applicability of
the Prisons Ordinance with regard to persons detained. Fresh detention orders
were necessary because the places of detention were altered and such places
must, in terms of Regulation 19(2), be indicated in the Detention Orders.
Detention except at a place authorized would make the custody otherwise than
in accordance with procedure established by law. (See _Dissanayake v.
Superintendent Mahara Prison_ (9)).



However, the detention orders had more than that simple objective in view.
They purported to be in terms, orders made under Regulation 17\. Although
detention orders under Regulation 17 may be issued while a Detention Order
under Regulation 19 or under the Prevention of Terrorism Act is in force, yet
there must be some justification for it. (See _Yapa v_. _Bandaranayake_ (46);
_Lankapura v_. _P. D. A. Perera and Others_ (75). _Sasanasiritissa Thero and
Others_ _v. De Silva and Others_ (14);

 61

_  
Lankapura v. Douglas Perera and others_ (75); __ See also _Jayaratne v_.
_Tennekoon_ )(65) _._ A Detention Order under Regulation 17 is not simply a
device to hold a person arrested under Regulation 18, (and therefore required
to be released not later than 90 days after the arrest) in custody for an
unspecified period. Nor is it a device to extend the period of detention after
the lapse of the ninety day period for purposes of further investigation.
Regulation 17 is there to enable the Secretary to the Ministry of Defence,
either in respect of persons already in custody or others, to detain by order
a person who, he is satisfied on the available material, it is necessary to
detain to prevent him acting in any manner described in 17(1) (a) and/or (b).
There was no explanation for the second Detention Orders in this case. The
evidence for making the arrests in terms of Regulation 18(1) was the only
evidence placed before us, and that evidence could not have led to the
formation of an opinion that it was necessary to detain the petitioners in
terms of Regulation 17(1). It may well be, as it was for instance the case in
_Yapa_ v. _Bandaranayake (supra),_ that the grounds warranting an arrest under
Regulation 18 may at the same time warrant a detention in terms of Regulation
17\. However that is not so in the matters before us.



The second set of detention orders, which were applicable to all the
petitioners, show that the respondents were not making the arrests in
accordance with a procedure established by law but rather under a procedure
evolved by them, albeit combining elements found in two distinct procedures
designed with quite separate and clearly differentiated objectives in view. In
any event, for the reasons explained, even the borrowed elements of the hybrid
procedure have not been established. I therefore declare that the petitioners'
fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 13(1) of the Constitution not to be
arrested except according to procedure established by law have been violated.



**PETITIONERS NOT INFORMED OF REASONS FOR ARREST ‑FURNISHING WRITTEN REASONS
FOR ARREST**



Article 13(1) provides not only that a person who is arrested should be
arrested in accordance with procedure established by law but also that "Any
person arrested shall be informed of the reason for his arrest."

62



The petitioners complained that they were not served with Detention Orders
giving reasons for their arrest. In _Kumaranatunge v. Samarasinghe_ (19) __
followed in _Sasanasiritissa Thero v_. _De Silva and Others_ (14) __ Soza, J.
observed: "Nowhere is service of the detention order made imperative by any
rule of law. The order really serves as authority for the person putting it
into effect. In fact, even under the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, no
service of a charge sheet or Warrant of arrest where the arrest is on a
Warrant is provided for. The person being arrested can ask to see the Warrant
or order but there is no legal requirement that it should be served. No legal
consequences flow from the non‑service of the order."



Admittedly neither Section 53 of the Code of Criminal Procedure nor
Regulations 17 or 19 stipulate that the reason for arrest should be
communicated to the person in a written order and that he should be supplied
with a copy of the order. I therefore hold that the failure to provide the
petitioners with copies of detention orders does not infringe any
constitutional right. However, as Colin Thome, J. observed in _Nanayakkara v.
Henry Perera_ (supra) "it is in the interest of natural justice" that this
should be done. (See also per Kulatunga, J. in _Wickremabandu v. Herath and
others_ (26); _Wijewardene v. Zain_ (13); _Perera and Sathyajith v.
Siriwardene_ (63); _Jayaratne v. Tennekoon_ (65). __ So much for furnishing a
**copy of the order** with reasons for arrest. The need to give reasons, apart
from the form of doing so, is another matter.



**THE NEED FOR AT LEAST AN ORAL EXPLANATION**



The petitioners were arrested under the Emergency Regulations. The command in
Article 13(1) that "Any person arrested shall be informed of the reason for
his arrest" must be observed even when an arrest is made under the Emergency
Regulations. ( _Chandradasa v_. _Lal Fernando_ (25); _Pushpakumari and
Jayawickrama v. Mahendra and Others_ (76) __ ; _Weerakoon v. Mahendra and
Others_ (11); _Gamlath v. Silva and Others_ (48); _Munidasa and Others v_.
_Seneviratne and Others_ (49) _._ Cf also _Piyasiri v. Fernando_ (3);
_Wijewardena v. Zain_ (13); _Perera and Sathyajith v. Siriwardene_ (63).

63



The opposite view was taken in _Kumaranatunge v. Samarasinghe_ (19) __ (Cf per
Kulatunga J. in _Wickramabandu v. Herath and Others_ (26) in relation to
orders made in terms of Regulation 17(1). _Kumaranatunge_ (19) __ was
distinguished in _Wijesiri v. Rohan Fernando_ (10) _._



Admittedly, restrictions of the exercise and operation of the right might have
been imposed by the Emergency Regulations in terms of Article 15(7) of the
Constitution: but no such restriction has been made of the constitutional
right to be informed of the reasons for arrest. In this connection it might be
observed in passing that H. A. G. de Silva J. in _Wickremabandu v. Cyril
Herath and Others_ (26) . Fernando J. agreeing; (cf. also the observations of
Kulatunga J. which are, however, somewhat differently expressed) said that,
although a restriction of a right may be permissible if it might survive,
albeit in an attenuated form, yet, having regard to its nature, the
curtailment of the right to be informed of the reason for arrest might amount
to a denial.



Regardless of possible challenges to the validity of future Regulations that
might impinge on Article 13(1). It has never been the position that any
Regulation or other law has hitherto taken away the right to be informed of
the reason for arrest conferred by Article 13(1). It may happen. It has not
yet happened. For mercies vouchsafed in this regard, the petitioners in giving
thanks might well have said _'non nobis'._



It may be observed in passing that, although in terms of Article 22(1) of the
Indian Constitution "no person who is arrested shall be detained in custody
without being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest ...
", Clause (3) (b) of Article 22 provides that Clause (1) shall not apply "to
any person who is arrested or detained under any law providing for preventive
detention."



The right to be informed of the reasons for arrest is not set out in
Regulation 17 or 18. It is to be found in Article 13(1) of the Constitution.
That provision cannot be **repealed** by Regulations, much less by judicial
interpretation. Although in terms of Article 15(7) the **exercise** and
**operation** of the right to be given reasons may be subject to restrictions
prescribed by law, including Regulations, no such law exists. If the
recommended practice of issuing Detention Orders with written reasons for
arrest cannot be observed, then the

#### 64



person concerned should "at least" be orally given reasons, for that is his
untrammeled right today under Article 13(1) of the Constitution. (Cf.
_Kalyanie Perera v_. _Siriwardene)_ (63).



Soza, J. referred to the Code of Criminal Procedure. Attention should be drawn
to Section 53 of the Code of Criminal Procedure which provides that "The
person executing a Warrant of arrest **shall notify the substance thereof to
the person arrested,** and if so required by the person arrested shall show
him the Warrant or a copy thereof signed by the person issuing the same." The
need for "scrupulously and diligently" observing the terms of Section 53 to
safeguard the "liberty of the subject" was stressed by Seneviratne J. in
_Dharmatilleke v. Abeynaike_ (77) __



Assuming that the petitioners knew the general nature of the cause for arrest,
and that therefore they were sufficiently informed of why they were being
arrested (Cf. _Christie v. Leachinsky_ (79); _Lundestron v. Cyril Herath and
Others_ namely, that they were supposed to be members of the JVP, was that
sufficient? I do not think so. The constitutional right is not to be simply
given **any** explanation. For example, 'I do not like the shape of your nose'
or 'I do not like your political party' are in a sense explanations or
reasons; but a reason for arrest, a reason to deprive a person of his personal
liberty within the meaning of Article 13(1) of the Constitution must be a
ground for arrest. There can be no such ground other than a violation of the
law or a reasonable suspicion of the violation of the law. In _Gunasekera v_.
_de Fonseka_ ((42)); followed in _Kumarasena v_. _Shriyantha and Others_ (6)
H. N. G. Fernando, C.J. said that a citizen has a right to resist an unlawful
arrest, but he can exercise that right if he is informed of the **" grounds
**upon which he is being arrested". It is, the Chief Justice said, "only if a
person is informed of the ground for his arrest, or in other words, of the
offence of which he is suspected, that he will have an opportunity to rebut
the suspicion or to show that there was some mistake as to identify."



According to the averments of some of the petitioners (eg. see paragraph 6.7
of the affidavit of Malinda Channa Pieris Seneviratne in Application 146/92:
paragraphs 2.5, 3.3 of the affidavit of Kuruwitage Nandana Perera in S.C.
Application 151/92; paragraphs 3.3. and 4.4.

65  


of the affidavit of Jayasinghe Mudiyanselage Janaka Priyantha Bandara in
Application 152/92; paragraphs 2.4 of the affidavit of the Pallimulle Hewa
Geeganage Pradeep Chandraratne in application 153/92; paragraphs 4.2 and
paragraph 4.14 of the affidavit of Ranawake Achchilage Patali Champika
Ranawake in Application 154/92; paragraphs 3.3. and 4.3 of the affidavit of
Avalikara Galappathige Muditha Mallika Wimalasuriya in Application 155/92) it
appeared to them that they were being arrested because the police believed
they were members of the JVP, sometimes described by the police officers
during the arrest as "JVP dogs". The Third Respondent who was, without
dispute, the man behind the arrests, states that he went to the temple simply
because he was told that there was a meeting of the JVP but that he made the
arrests because he formed the opinion, based on what he heard, that there was
a conspiracy to overthrow the Government. For the reasons I have explained in
discussing the circumstances of the arrest , I consider it improbable that the
Third Respondent mentioned, much less "explained" the charges set out in the
detention orders referred to. The third respondent simply arrested the
petitioners because he believed them to be members of the JVP, and therefore,
but for no other reason, suspecting them to be engaged in some unlawful
activity designed to overthrow the Government. As we have seen, he had no
reasonable ground. He was, however, hoping that some evidence might turn up to
make his suspicion reasonable. As in _Wijewardene v. Zain_ (13) _,_ the
petitioners in the matters before us were arrested for subversive activity "on
speculation in the hope of obtaining evidence of such activity but admittedly
without informing [them] of such reason."



The JVP was not a proscribed party. Therefore an awareness on the part of the
petitioners that they were being arrested for being supposed to be members of
the JVP did not discharge the respondents from their duty or giving a reason
for the arrests in the sense of telling them what offence or offences they
were supposed to be concerned in or committing or to have committed. If he was
arresting the petitioners for violating Regulations 23 (a), 23 (b), 45 and 46,
as the first set of Detention Orders suggest, he did not give them the true
reasons for the arrest. The officer was neither entitled to keep the reasons
to himself nor to give a reason which was not the true reason. _(Christie v.
Leachinsky_ supra; _Wijewardene v. Zain_ ) __ (13).

 66



If a person is taken into custody, or if a person already in custody is to
continue arrested in terms of Regulation 17, as the second detention orders in
the matters before us purport to order, the person so detained must in terms
of Article 13(1) of the Constitution be informed of the reason for his arrest
or state of arrest. In the case of an order made under Regulation 17 the
person arrested should know why it was necessary to detain him with a view to
preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the national security
or the maintenance of public order and to the maintenance of essential
services or preventing him from acting in any manner contrary to the
provisions of Regulation 41 (a) or (b) or Regulation 26. No such grounds were
orally given in the matters before us.



The respondents claimed that the reasons for arrest were set out in the
Detention Orders which were shown to the petitioners. If the first set of
detention orders were shown to the petitioners, they could only have been
usefully shown to those in respect of whom the orders were issued. As we have
seen there were no orders with regard to some of the petitioners. Even as far
as those petitioners in respect of whom detention orders were issued are
concerned, the orders merely set out the provisions contravened and do not
explain how the petitioners contravened them. A mere reference to a Regulation
in a Detention Order does not sufficiently explain the reason for arrest.
_(Weerakoon v_. _Mahendra_ (11) _._ Cf. also the observations of Sharvananda,
J. quoted below). Quoting chapter and verse is neither necessary nor
sufficient.



The second set of Detention Orders do not give reasons. They merely set out
the objects and purposes in pursuance of which the arrest and detention were
made, namely, the prevention of the petitioners "acting in a manner
prejudicial to the national security or the maintenance of public order or
with a view to complete investigations into his actions." What was the
prejudicial manner in which the petitioners were likely to act? What were the
"actions" that were being investigated? The constitutional right of a person
is to be informed of the reason ‑ the grounds, material facts and particulars
‑for his arrest and detention and not merely the objects and purposes of the
arrest and detention. It is such information that will enable him to take
meaningful steps towards regaining his liberty. (See per Kulatunga, J. in
_Wickramabandu v. Herath_ (26). See also _Weerakoon v. Weeraratne_ ) (15).

67

  
Moreover, as we have seen, the orders appear to have been issued on 3rd March
,1992 although the petitioners had been taken into custody on 27th February,
1992. Even if the Orders were shown to the petitioner the information was
conveyed much too late to serve the purpose of being informed of the reason
for arrest, namely the regaining of one's liberty expeditiously by explaining
away the suspicions held by the arresting officer. As far as Bandara and
Weerasekera were concerned the Detention Orders were issued on the date of
their release.



Justice Sharvananda in his treatise **Fundamental Rights in Sri Lanka** states
as follows at p. 141:



"The requirement that a person arrested should be informed of the reason for
his arrest is a salutary requirement. It is meant to afford the earliest
opportunity to him to remove any mistake, misapprehension or misunderstanding
in the mind of the arresting authority and to disabuse the latter's mind of
the suspicion which triggered the arrest and also for the arrested person to
know exactly what the allegation or accusation against him is so that he can
consult his attorney‑at‑law and be advised by him. _Mariadas v. Attorney
‑General _(79). All the material facts and particulars must be furnished to
the arrested person because they are the reasons or grounds for his arrest to
enable the arrested person to understand why he has been arrested. A bald
statement that the arrestee is a terrorist falls far short of the required
standard. Further, it is important that the communication of the reasons
should be in a language the arrestee understands. The adequacy of the reasons
for arrest require that they are: (a) such as to _prima facie_ warrant arrest
and (b) based upon information which is considered reliable. The necessity to
give reasons serves as a restraint on the exercise of power and ensures that
power will not be arbitrarily employed."



The obligation of the person making the arrest is to give the reason at the
moment of the arrest, or where it is in the circumstances not practicable, at
the first reasonable opportunity. _(Mallawarachchi_ _v._

68  


_Seneviratne_ (40) __ followed in _Elasinghe v_. _Wijewickrema and others_
(52). In _Kalyanie Perera v_. _Siriwardene_ (63) the petitioner was not given
reasons immediately but within a reasonable time. In _Lalanie and Nirmala v.
De Silva and others_ (8) __ the giving of reasons a day after the arrest was
held to be violative of Article 13(1). In _Wickremabandu v. Herath and others_
(26) Kulatunga, J. states that Regulation 17(4) and (5) "permits a delay" in
informing a person deprived of his liberty by an order made in terms of
Regulation 17(1). With great respect Regulation 17(4) and (5) "permit" no such
delay. (See Regulations 17(4) and 17(5). Indeed, delay in giving reasons would
postpone the taking of steps to make representations to the President so that
the Advisory Committee might expeditiously advise the Secretary to the
Ministry of Defence.).



Justice Sharvananda in the passage from his work which I have quoted, explains
that an object of the requirement in Article 13(1) of the Constitution that
"Any person arrested shall be informed of the reason for his arrest" is that
the earliest opportunity should be given to the person who is arrested or
about to be arrested of securing his liberty by removing any misapprehension,
misunderstanding or mistaken belief in the mind of the authority concerned. By
failing to give reasons, the third respondent deprived himself of the
opportunity of clarifying the matter and acting or otherwise, as it was the
case in _Mariadas v. A ‑G _(79). On the other hand by giving reasons in time
the petitioners may have been able to secure their release expeditiously as it
was the case in _Malawarachchi v. Seneviratne_ (40) __ In _Christie v.
Leachinsky_ (78) __ (followed in _Munidasa and others v Seneviratne and
others_ (49), and per Perera J. in _Faiz v_. _Attorney­-General and others_
(16), Lord Chancellor Simon said: "If the charge or suspicion under which the
man is arrested is then and there made known to him, he has the opportunity of
giving an explanation of any misunderstanding or of calling attention to other
persons for whom he may have been mistaken with the result that further
inquiries may save him from the consequences of false accusations."



Explanations from the person arrested may serve its purpose only if the
officer making the arrest is perceptive enough and not stupid or witless. It
also presupposes that the real reason is given.

69



Rev. Rathana explained to the Police "You gentlemen are mistaken. We are not
JVP but Ratawesi Peramuna officials discussing matters. You may take us away,
but you will realize later that you were mistaken." (See para 3.1 of the
Affidavit of M. D. Daniel in S.C. Application 147/92; paragraph 3.6 of the
Affidavit of Singappuli Hewage Sunny Dayananda in S.C. Application 148/92;
para 2.10 of the affidavit of Athureliya Rathana in S.C. Application 149/92;
para 2.6 of the affidavit of Jayasinghe Mudiyanselage Janaka Priyantha Bandara
in S.C. Application 153/92; para 4.3 of the affidavit of Ranawaka Arachchige
Patali Champika Ranawake in S.C, Application No. 154/92; and para 3.4 of the
affidavit of Avalikara Galappathige Muditha Mallika Wimalasuriya in S.C.
Application No. 155/92).



The Third respondent, however, remained unyielding and obdurate. Why did the
third respondent so recklessly throw away the opportunity of revising his
beliefs? Why was he so utterly obtuse? was he blinded by zeal? The real reason
for the arrests was, as the third respondent admits in his affidavits, that he
supposed that the petitioners were engaged in a conspiracy to overthrow the
Government. This was not, as we have seen, based on reasonable ground, but on
the erroneous assumption that (a) the JVP was once a proscribed party, and
therefore, a party continuing to be engaged in unlawful activity and forever
branded with the mark of illegality and that (b) consequently, according to a
previously conceived opinion, members of the group assembled at the temple who
were, acording to the telephone message, members of the JVP were necessarily
engaged in purposes prejudicial to national security and the maintenance of
public order. One may sympathize with the commitment of the third respondent
to his cause, but I cannot hold that he was constitutionally free to ignore
the salutary safeguards established by law for arresting the petitioners. Law
enforcement officers must be ever mindful of the fact that respect for
procedures established by law, although they may sometimes appear to be
irksome, are, in the, words of Justice Stewart in _Walter v. City of
Birmingham_ (80) __ , "a small price to pay for the civilizing hand of law,
which alone can give abiding meaning to constitutional freedom." Having regard
to the fact that all the information he had was that conveyed by an anonymous
caller, should he have not acted more

70  


cautiously even though he might have earlier considered the telephone
messenger ‑ albeit mysterious ‑ to be reliable and credible?



The third respondent was told that the petitioners were not members of the
JVP. The place of arrest, the Kawduduwa temple, as some of the petitioners
admit, was a "noted" venue for political activity (See paragraph 2.9 of the
affidavit of Rathana dated 14th April 1992; paragraph 3.9 of the affidavit of
Champika Ranawake dated 15 April 1992 in S.C. Application 154/92). But of what
sort of political activity: Was it not equally well‑known in the area of which
the Third and Fourth respondents were police officers as the scene of the
assassination in December 1988 by the JVP of Rev. Pohoddaramulle Pemaloka?
(See para. 2.9 of the affidavit of Rathana dated 14th April 1992; and paras
2.1 and 2.2 of the affidavit dated 15th April 1992 of Rev. Wimalasara, who was
ordained by Pemaloka and succeeded him as the chief incumbent when Rev.
Nandaloka abandoned his robes: and para 3.0 of the affidavit of Champika
Ranawake dated 15 April 1992 in S.C. Application 154/92). So much so that, in
the minds of at least some of the petitioners, the place of the meeting was
simply {Rev.. Pemaloka's temple" (See eg. para 3.4 of the affidavit of
Dayananda in S.C. Application 148/92). And if the version of some of the
petitioners as to the little speech the Third Respondent was supposed to have
made as soon as he came into the Police Station in the early hours of the 28th
of February is true, (with regard to this, see the discussion later on in
relation to the alleged violation of Article II) then the assassination of
Pemaloka by a member of the JVP must surely have been very much in his mind?
(See Nandana Perera 151/92, 3.3; Bandara 152/92, 4.3; Wimalasuriya 155/92,
4.3). Was the temple in which the chief incumbent, namely Rev. Wimalasara, a
priest ordained by a person who was murdered by the JVP a likely place for a
JVP meeting?



Although in his affidavits in respect of Seneviratne (146.92) and Dayananda
(148/92) the Third Respondent does not state that he specifically explained
the charges to them at the time of their arrests, yet he does so in the
affidavits filed by him in respect of Daniel (147/92), para 9), Rathana
(149/92 para 7), Wimalasara (150/92, para 9), Nandana Perera (151/92 para 13),
Bandara (152/92, para 15),

71  


Chandanaratne (153/92, para 13), Ranawake (154/92 para 15) and Wimalasuriya,
Dayarathne, Pemarathana and Kitulgala Upali (155/92 para 15).



However, in respect of all the petitioners, the Third Respondent states as
follows: "Upon listening to the speeches, I formed the impression that they
were engaged in a conspiracy to overthrow the Government. A such, I tapped at
the door and got it opened and entered the room where the discussion was
taking place and having explained the Charge against the suspects, took them
into custody. I annex hereto marked ... Detention Order ... " (See the Third
Respondent's affidavits in the matters of Seneviratne 146/92 para 5; Daniel
149/92 para 4; Dayananda 148/92 para 5; Rathana 149/92 para 4 ‑ where,
however, an order is filed but not referred to in the affidavit; Wimalasara
150/92 para 5; Nandana Perera 151/92 para 5; Bandara 152/92 para 4;
Chandanaratne 153/92 para 5; Ranawake 154/92 para 5 and in respect of
Wimalasuriya and other applicants in 155/92 para. 5).



What was the "charge" he says he explained? That the petitioners were
conspiring to overthrow the government by unlawful means? If the contents of
the first set of Detention Orders filed by the Third Respondent in
Applications 152/92 and 155/92 relating to the arrest and his affidavits are
anything to go by, the charge he had in mind was the offence of conspiracy
defined in Regulation 23(a), which, however, for the reasons explained, was
not committed nor which he could have reasonably suspected the petitioners to
be concerned in or to be committing or to have committed. What he says he
heard may have lead him to conclude that there was a conspiracy to overthrow
the Government, but what he heard could not have reasonably led him to believe
or suspect that there was a conspiracy to overthrow the Government by unlawful
means. Therefore, there was no reason for the arrests, in the relevant sense,
which the Third Respondent could have explained.



If the petitioners were, as the Third Respondent suggests, engaged in a
conspiracy to overthrow the Government by unlawful means and he entered the
meeting place, as he says he did, then he would have caught them _flagrante_
_delicto_ and there would have been

72  


no need to give any reasons, for then it would have been known to the
petitioners why they were being arrested. (See per De Alwis J. _Joseph Perera
v_. _AG_ (35), following _Gunasekera v. Fonseka_ (42) __ See also _Jayatissa
v. Dissanayake_ SC Application 74/88 SC Minutes 10 July 1989). No such
position was taken up by the Third Respondent, for he probably entered the
meeting place before the meeting was resumed, and even if we assume that he
did listen to the speeches he reported in his notes, for the reasons I have
given, there was nothing he heard that could have reasonably led him to
suspect that an offence was being committed or about to be committed.



**DECLARATION AND ORDER IN RESPECT OF ARTICLE 13(1)**



For the reasons explained I am of the view that the petitioners (a) were not
arrested and kept arrested in accordance with a procedure established by law
and (b) that they were not informed of the reason for their arrest. I
therefore declare that the fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 13(1) of
the Constitution were violated in respect of Malinda Channa Pieries, applicant
in S.C. Application 146/92; M. D. Daniel, applicant in S.C. Application
147/92; Singappuli Hewage Dayananda, applicant in S.C. Application 148.02;
Athureliya Rathana (Ranjith), applicant in S.C. Application 149/92; Rev.
Thalpitiye Wimalasara, applicant in S.C. Application 150/92; Kuruwitage
Nandana Perera, applicant in SC Application No. 151/92; Jayasinghe
Mudiyanselage Janaka Priyantha Bandara, applicant in S.C. Application 152/92;
Pallimulle Hewa Geeganage Pradeep Chandanaratne, applicant in S.C. Application
No. 153/92; Ranawake Arachchige Patali Champika Ranawake, applicant in S.C.
Application 1554./92; and the following applicants in S.C. Application 155/92,
namely, Avalikara Galappathige Muditha Mallika Wimalasuriya, Gileemalage
Janaka Priyantha Dayaratne, Karunaratne Paranavithana, Weerasekera Mudalige
Anura Weerasekera, Rev. Kalupahana Piyarathana, Rev. Ambalanthota Premarathana
and Rev. Kithulgala Upali.



I make order that each and every one of the persons named in the preceeding
paragraph, except Rev. Thalpitiye Wimalasara, shall be severally paid a sum of
Rs. 5,000 by the State as a solatium for the

73  


violation of both, as distinguished from each of, the rights guaranteed by
Article 13(1) of the Constitution as aforesaid.



Rev. Thalpitiye Wimalasara was not present at the meeting place and was
sleeping in his room in the temple, not only because he was in ill‑health but
also because he was not associated with tile Peramuna. I therefore make order
that Rev. Thalpitiye Wimalasara the applicant in SC Application 150/92 be paid
a sum of Rs. 10,000 as a solatium by the State for the violation of his
fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 13(1) of the Constitution.



**THE FACT OF DETENTION AFTER TAKING THE PETITIONERS INTO THE CUSTODY OF THE
LAW**



After the arrest of the sixteen petitioners they were a taken to the Wadduwa
Police Station on 27th February, 1992. On 28th February Champika Ranawake was
taken for some hours to Kalutara for interrogation and brought back to
Wadduwa. (See paragraph 4.9 of the affidavit of Ranawake in S.C. Application
154/92 dated 15th April 1992). It would seem that the University students
among the persons arrested, probably eight in number, were taken on March 3rd,
1992 to the office of the Police concerned with Security Co‑ordination at
Longdon Place, Colombo, and except for Bandara (the applicant in S.C. 152/92)
and Weerasekere (an applicant in S.C, 155/92), were sent back to Wadduwa
Police Station. (See para 4.8 of the affidavit of Bandara in S.C. 152/92 and
para 3.7 of the affidavit of Nandaina Perera in S.C. Application 151/92. See
also para 6.6. of Seneviratne of 14th April 1992 in Application 145./92; para
3.4 of Wimalasara dated 15th April 1992 in Application 150/92; para 3.10 of
the affidavit dated 15th April 1992 of Chandanaratne in S.C. Application
153/92; and para 4.8 of the affidavit dated 15th April 1992 of Wimalsuriya in
Application 155/92). Bandara and Weerasekera were kept back at Longdon Place
so that they might present themselves at the University examinations. However,
they refused to do so while in police custody. (See para. 4.8 of the affidavit
dated 15th April 1992 of Bandara in S.C. Application 152/92). Bandara and
Weerasekere were then released on 3rd March 1992 on condition that they
returned to police custody on 21st March 1992. (See para 3.4 of the affidavit
of Wimalasara dated 15th April 1992 in Application 150/92; para 3.7 of the
affidavit of Nandana Perera in Application 151.9; para 4.8 of the

74  


affidavit of Bandara dated 15th April 1992 in Application 152/92; and para 4.8
of the affidavit of Wimalasuriya dated 15 April 1992 in Application 155/92).



The petitioners (other than Bandara and Weerasekere) were taken from Wadduwa
Police Station to Colombo on 4th March 1992 and released on 17th March 1992
after being produced before the Fort Magistrate in connection with case No.
25841. Between 4th March and 17th March 1992, Seneviratne and Daniel were
detained at the premises of the Police concerned with Security Co‑ordination
at Longdon Place, Colombo. Dayananda, Wimalasuriya, Chandanaratne, Ranawake,
Dayaratne and Piyarathana were detained at the Police Station, Pettah.
Rathana, Nandana Perera, Wimalasuriya, Paranavithana, Premarathana and
Kitulgala Upali were detained at Maradana Police Station. (Cf. paras 6.6 and
6.8 of Seneviratne's affidavit of 14th April 1992 in Application 146/92; paras
3.7 and '3.10 of Daniel's affidavit of 14th April 1992 in Application 147/02;
para 4.9 of Dayananda's affidavit of 14th April 1992 in Application 148/92;
para 4.3 of Rathana's affidavit of 14th April 1992 in Application 149/92;
paras 3.2 and 3.4 of Wimalasara's affidavit of 15th April, 1992 in Application
15‑/02; paras 3.6 and 3.12 of Nandana Perera's affidavit of 15th April 1992 in
Application 151/92; paras 3.5 and 3.10 of Chandanaratne's affidavit of 15th
April 1992 in Application 153/92; para 4.12 of Champika Ranawake's affidavit
of 15th April 1992 in Application 154/92; and para 4.8 of Wimalasuriya's
affidavit of 15 April 1992 in Application 155/92).



The evidence relating to the places of detention and release given by the
petitioners is corroborated by the Third Respondent in paragraphs 5, 6, 7 and
9 of his affidavit of 24th August 1992 filed in S.C. Application 146/92;
paragraphs 4, 5 and 9 of his affidavit of 9 September 1992 in S.C. Application
147/92; paragraphs 5,. 6, 7, 8 and 9 of his affidavit of 9th September 1992 in
S.C. Application 148/92; paragraphs 4, 5, 6 and 7 of his affidavit of 9th
September 1992 in S.C. Application 149/92; paragraphs 5, 7 and 9 of his
affidavit of 9th August 1992 in S.C. Application 150/92;

**  75**



paragraphs 5, 6, 7, 9 11, 12 and 13 of his affidavit of 9th September 1992 in
S.C. Application 151/92; paragraphs 4, 5, 6, 7., 8, 10, 12 and 13 of his
affidavit of 9th September 1992 in S.C. Application 152/92; paragraphs 5, 6,
7, 9, 11 and 13 of his affidavit of 9th September 1992 filed in S.C.
Application 153/92; paragraphs 5, 6, 7, 9, 11 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17 of his
affidavit of 9th September 1992 in S.C. Application 154/92 and in paragraphs
5, 6, 7, 8., 9, 11, 13, 14 and 15 of his affidavit of 9th September 1992 in
S.C. Application 155/92.



Corroboration is also available from the affidavits of Chief Inspector
Opathavalage Wimaladasa. (See paragraphs 3 and 5 of his affidavit of 20th
August 1992 in S.C. Application 146/92 and paragraphs 3 of his affidavit of
8th September 1992 in S.C. Application 147/92) as well as from the Detention
Orders and extracts from the Routine Information Book filed by the respondents
and from the several affidavits of relatives and others who visited the
petitioners while they were in police custody.



**ARTICLE 13(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION**



The petitioners allege that Article 13(2) of the Constitution was violated by
the Respondents. Article 13(2) provides that "Every person held in custody,
detained or otherwise deprived of personal liberty shall be brought before the
Judge of the nearest competent court according to procedure established by
law, and shall not be further held in custody, detained or deprived of
personal liberty except upon and in terms of the order of such judge made in
accordance with procedure established by law."



**ARTICLE 13(2) ‑ A SALUTARY PROVISION**



The right to be produced before a judge is a "salutary provision to ensure the
safety and protection of arrested persons." (See _Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam_
(21); _Nallanayagam v_. _Gunatilleke_ (81); _Weerakoon v. Mahendra_ (11);
_Weerakoon v. Weeraratne_ (115); _Perera and Sathyajith v_. _Siriwardene_
(63); _Kalyanie Perera v. Siriwardene_ (63); _Weerakoon v._ _Mahendra and
others_ (11) _._



### OBJECT OF THE PROVISION



The "purposes" of Article 13(2) are not, as stated in _Wijesiri_ _v. Rohan
Fernando_ (10) _,_ "enumerated" in that provision. However, in

**76**  


general, the purpose of the provision is to enable a person arrested without a
Warrant by a non‑judicial authority to make representations to a judge who may
apply his "judicial mind" to the circumstances before him and make a neutral
determination on what course of action is appropriate in relation to his
detention and further custody, detention or deprivation of personal liberty,
(Cf. Sharvananda, **Fundamental Rights,** at p. 142; _Gerstein v. Pugh_ (82) ;
Cf. also the decisions of the European Court on Human Rights in the _Schiesser
case_ (83); __ the _Skoogstrom case_ (84), the _McGoff case_ (85) ; Cf. also
per Goonewardene, J. in _Mohamed Faiz_ _v_. _The Attorney ‑General and Others
_(16).



**HAVING REGARD TO THE PURPOSES OF ARTICLE 13(2), PRODUCTION MUST BE REAL**



The right to be produced before a judge will be beneficial to the person
arrested and conducive to a person seeking his liberty, only if the
"production" is real and not technical, as for instance when the person is
kept in a motor vehicle outside the judge's house while the police officer
alone meets the judge and obtains his order. (See _Ekanayake v_. _Herath Banda
and Others_ ) __ (27). In _Withanachchi v. Cyril Herath and Others_ (45)
Seneviratne J. deplored the practice of "producing" suspects at judges'
residences which he said was a "common" practice of police officers "to
prevent lawyers from representing a party ... and to prevent any application
on behalf of a suspect being made." His Lordship also drew attention to
similar observations he had made in _Dharmatilleke v. Abeynaike_ (77) __.
Where a person is produced only in a technical sense so that the purposes of
Article 13(2) are incapable of fulfillment, such a person cannot be said to
have been brought before the judge according to procedure established by law
and Article 13(2) of the Constitution will be violated. In _Ekanayake v.
Herath Banda_ (27) _,_ the petitioner was arrested on 11th September 1989 in
terms of a Detention Order under Regulation 19 and later detained under a
Detention Order under Regulation 17. There was no reasonable basis for either
order. On 20th September 1989 the petitioner was taken to the residence of the
Magistrate and warned not to say anything to the judge. While the petitioner
was outside the residence, the Magistrate came up to the vehicle. Article
13(2) was declared violated. Fernando J. observed

77  


that "production does not mean being shown or exhibited to a judicial officer,
nor does it connote mere physical proximity: 'production' requires at least an
opportunity for communication and this has been denied to the petitioner. She
was thus denied the opportunity to make a prompt complaint of her arrest on
11th September 1989, the failure to inform her of the reason for arrest and
the torture inflicted on her 13.9.89."  


### THE RIGHT TO BE PRODUCED MAY BE SUBJECT TO LIMITATIONS



Although the constitutional right to be brought before a judge exists and
remains "untouched" (as G. P. S. de Silva, J. observed in _Joseph Silva and
Others v. Balasuriya and Others_ (22) as long a s Article 13(2) of the
Constitution remains as it is, (C f. the observations of Kulatunga, J. in
_Wickremabandu's case_ (26) _,_ yet the **exercise** and **operation** of that
right is, in terms of Article 15(7) of the Constitution, subject to such
restrictions as may be prescribed by law, _inter alia_ , in the interests of
national security and public order. "Law" includes regulations made under the
law for the time being relating to public security. The relevant provisions of
the law in force at the time of the arrest must be examined in order ascertain
whether, if at all,

and in what manner the right guaranteed by Article 13(2) may he operative.



**THE WHITTLING EFFECT OF THE EMERGENCY REGULATIONS**



With regard to persons arrested under the Emergency Regulations, the functions
of the judge are severely restricted and the force and importance of the
'salutary' provision have been significantly diminished. Both under the old
proviso and in terms of a new proviso the Regulation 19(2) introduced on 15th
February 1990 (Gazette Extraordinary 597/9 of 15th February 1990), when a
person is arrested or detained under the provisions of Regulation 18 and is
produced before a Magistrate, such person cannot be released on bail except
with the prior written consent of the Attorney‑General. Further, although in
terms of Regulation 19(2) a person should not be detained for a period
exceeding 90 days, yet if the detainee is produced before a Court, all that
the Court is empowered to do in

78  


terms of Regulation 19(3) is to order that such a person be detained in the
custody of the Fiscal in a Prison established under the Prisons Ordinance.
However, as the facts in _Wijewardena v. Zain_ (13) __ showed, the opportunity
provided for the judge to express his opinion on the inappropriateness of the
detention may yield positive results in favour of the liberty of the person
detained.



**THE IMPORTANCE OF ASCERTAINING THE PRESCRIBED LAW**



I should like to draw attention to the fact that the "procedure established by
law" may change from time to time and to emphasize the need for respondents to
clearly indicate the procedure applicable in the case before the Court and
produce, where required, copies of the Regulation or Gazette setting out the
procedure relied upon, for copies of certain Regulations are not sent at all
or in time to even the Supreme Court, although it is required to adjudicate
upon matters relating to the laws set out in such documents. Errors might
result from the applicability of wrong provisions.



In _Karunasekera v. Jayewardene and Others_ (50) the petitioner was arrested
in terms of Regulation 18 of the Emergency Regulations on 13th May 1990\. He
was produced before a Magistrate on 25th June 1990 and released on bail and
later discharged on 2nd December 1991 because there were no grounds for arrest
or detention. It was held, that Article 13(2) of the Constitution was
violated. The attention of the Court was not drawn to the fact that on the
date of arrest the proviso to Regulation 19 had been repealed and amended on
18th December 1989 (Gazette Extraordinary 589/5) so that there was no
obligation imposed by the Emergency Regulations on the respondents to produce
the petitioner before a Magistrate except when the Magistrate visited the
place where the petitioner was detained.



Similarly, in _Weerakoon v. Weeraratne_ (15) the petitioner was arrested on
25th January 1992, after the amendment of Regulation 19. However, it was held
that the "impugned detention" was "vitiated" by the failure to produce the
petitioner before a Magistrate not later than thirty days from his arrest
"which is the procedure prescribed by law for his detention under Regulation
19(2)."

**79**



**LIMITATIONS ON TIME ‑ INTRODUCTION**



The salutary right to be brought before a judge would be of little or no
practical value unless the person is so produced within a reasonable time. The
time within which the person should have been produced must be ascertained by
reference to the provisions of the law applicable to the case at the relevant
time.



The position in India, however, is different. Article 22(2) of the Indian
Constitution provides that "Every person who is arrested and detained in
custody, shall be produced before the nearest magistrate within a period of
twenty‑four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey
from the place of arrest to the court of the magistrate and no such person
shall be detained in custody without the authority of a magistrate." Article
22(3) provides that Clause (2) does not apply (a) to any person who for the
time being is an alien enemy; or (b) to any person who is arrested or detained
under any law providing for preventive detention.



**LIMITATIONS ON TIME UNDER ORDINARY LAW**



Ordinarily, **** a police officer making an arrest without a warrant is
required by Section 36 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 to
send the person arrested before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case
"without unnecessary delay." Section 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure goes
on to provide that a person arrested without a warrant should not be detained
in custody or otherwise confined "for a longer period than under all the
circumstances of the case is reasonable, and such period shall not exceed
twenty‑four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the
place of arrest to the Magistrate."



Where an investigation cannot be completed within the twenty‑four hours fixed
by Section 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and there are grounds for
believing that further investigation is necessary, the officer in charge of
the police station is required by section 115 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure to "forthwith" forward the suspect to the Magistrate and take the
prescribed steps to enable the Magistrate to decide whether it is expedient to
detain the suspect in custody pending further investigation.

**80**



**LIMITATIONS ON TIME UNDER EMERGENCY REGULATIONS ‑REGULATIONS 18 AND 19**



Where a person is arrested under the powers conferred on a Police Officer by
Regulation 18 of the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers)
Regulations No. 1 of 1989 made under the Public Security Ordinance (Cap 40)
(vide Gazette Extraordinary of 20th June 1989), the provisions ordinarily
applicable cease to be relevant, for Regulation 19(1) of the Emergency
Regulations states that the provisions of Sections 36, 37 and 38 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 shall not apply to persons arrested
under Regulation 18. The person arrested therefore, need not be produced
before a Magistrate in terms of Sections 36 and 37 of the Criminal Procedure
Code and the police need not obtain orders from a Magistrate with regard to
the duration or place of detention ‑ _Joseph Silva and Others v. Balasuriya
and Others_ (22) .



Between June 20th 1989 and December 2nd 1989, a person arrested and detained
under the provisions of Regulation 18 was, in terms of the proviso to
Regulation 19(1), required to be produced before "any Magistrate within a
reasonable time, having regard to the circumstances of each case, and in any
event not later than thirty days after such arrest."



The proviso to Regulation 19(1) of the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and
Powers) Regulations, requiring production before a Magistrate within a
reasonable time and not exceeding thirty days, was repealed by a Regulation
dated December 2nd 1989 published in Gazette 589/5 of 18.12.1989. In terms of
the new provision the Magistrate was required to visit the place of detention
at least once in every month and the person in charge of the place of
detention was required to produce persons detained, otherwise than by order of
the Magistrate, before the visiting Magistrate. The duty of production was
therefore primarily linked to the Magistrate's visit. Making timely visits was
the duty of the Magistrate in the discharge of a judicial function and not an
executive obligation. The time for production became in effect, if and when
the Magistrate visited the place of detention.



The petitioners were supposed to have been arrested in pursuance of and under
Regulation 18. In terms of the provisions of



81



Regulation 19 prevailing at the time, namely 27th February ‑ 17th March 1992,
the procedure prescribed by the Emergency Regulations required the petitioners
to be produced before a Magistrate upon the visit of the Magistrate to the
place of detention. It was not the petitioners' case that they were not
produced before a Magistrate who visited the places of their detention. In the
circumstance, assuming that the petitioners were detained in pursuance of
Regulation 18, I hold that the provisions of Article 13(2) were not violated
by any failure to comply with the procedure established by Regulation 19.



**LIMITATIONS ON TIME** ‑ **EMERGENCY REGULATIONS ‑REGULATIONS 17**



The petitioners were also, as we have seen albeit mistakenly, detained under
certain provisions contained in Regulation 17. Where a person is detained in
pursuance of an order made under Regulation 17 of the Emergency (Miscellaneous
Provisions and Powers) Regulations No. 1 of 1989 or, Regulation 17 of the
Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations of 1993, it has
been said that by "implication" the person detained need not be produced
before a judge. (see per Kulatunga, J. in _Wickremabandu's case_ (26) and in
_Weerakoon v. Mahendra_ (11) _._ See also _Femando v. Kapilaratne_ (69) . Was
failure to provide a procedure relating to the production of persons detained
under Regulation 17 a sweeping away of the Constitutional right guaranteed by
Article 13(2) by implication? Constitutional guarantees cannot be removed or
modified except in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. That, I
believe is a proposition that commends itself to general acceptance. I believe
it is still a well‑established and universally conceded principle. One might
even say that it is axiomatic. In the case of detentions under Regulation 19
the relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure are expressly
suspended. The exercise and operation of Article 13(2) may, in terms of
Article 15 (7) of the Constitution be subject to restrictions prescribed by
law, but where the limitations are not plainly expressed. I would be reluctant
to imply their existence. If there is no procedure prescribed by the Emergency
Regulations, the right guaranteed by Article 13(2) should be secured and
advanced by declaring that the ordinary provisions of law are

82  


applicable in such a case. And indeed, if such provisions existed, they should
be "strictly scrutinized and construed", since they make inroads into the
liberty of the citizen. (Cf. per Samarakoon, CJ. in _Kumaranatunga v.
Samarasinghe_ ) __ (19) __



It is interesting to compare Article 22 of the Indian Constitution which deals
with so important a matter understandably in the Constitution itself. Although
Article 22(2) requires a person arrested to be produced before the nearest
magistrate within the prescribed time, Clause 3 (b) of Article 22 expressly
provides that the right to be produced does not apply to any person who is
arrested or detained under any law providing for preventive detention.



**VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 13(2) BY FAILURE TO PRODUCE THE ARRESTED PERSON WITHIN
THE PRESCRIBED TIME**



Where a person is not produced before a judge in the time prescribed, the
provisions of Article 13(2) are violated. (E.g. see _Premalal de Silva v.
Rodrigo_ (86); _Samanthilaka v. Ernest Perera and Others_ (87); _Sirisena v.
ErnestPerera_ (88) ; See also _Abeywickrema v_. _Dayaratne_ (89);
_Pushpakumari and Jayawickrema v. Mahendra and Others_ (76); _Weerakoon v.
Mahendra and Others_ (11); _Karunasekera v_. _Jayewardene_ (50); _Weerakoon
v_. _Weeraratne_ (15); Cf. _Somasiri and Somasiri v. Jayasena and Others_ (72)
___._



### RELEASE OR PRODUCTION WITHIN PRESCRIBED TIME

Generally, if a person is released before the time statutorily prescribed for
production, or if the person is produced before a judge' within such
prescribed time, Article 13(2) will not be violated. (See _Dayananda v.
Weerasinghe and Others_ (91); _Joseph Silva v. Balasuriya and Others_ (22);
see also _Garusinghe v. Kadurugamuwa_ (91); _Liyanage_ v _. Chandrananda_
(92); _Mallawarachchi v. Seneviratne_ (40); __ Cf. also _Saranal v_.
_Wijesooriya and Others_ (93) which held that where there is no evidence of
detention without production within the prescribed time, the petitioner's
application will be rejected).



**DETENTION AFTER PRODUCTION ‑ JUDICIAL ACT ‑ NO PROTECTION FOR LONG DETENTION
PENDING TRIAL**



Once **** a person held in custody or detained or otherwise deprived of
personal liberty is brought before a judge of the nearest competent

83  


Court according to procedure established by law, he shall not be further held
in custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty except upon and in terms
of the order of the judge made in accordance with procedure established by
law. (Article 13(2) of the Constitution). The holding of a person in custody
upon the Orders of the judge constitutes judicial as distinguished from
administrative or executive action. (See _Dharmatillake v_. _Abeynaike_ (77)
__ ; _Kumarasinghe v. A. ‑G. _(94); _Siriwardena v_. _Liyanage_ (71);
_Dayananda v_. _Weerasinghe_ (90); _Leo Fernando v_. _Attorney ‑General _(95);
_Jayasinghe v. Mahendran and Others_ (96); _Velmurugu v. A.G._ (97); _Saman
v_. _Leeladasa_ (98) _._ But __ see per De Alwis J. in _Joseph Perera (supra)
‑ where _it was thought that because "judicial discretion" could not be
exercised in acting under the Emergency Regulations, the continued detention
after the judicial remand order remained executive action. See also
_Sriyawathie v. Pasupathi and Jansz_ (99) where detention on account of an
invalid judicial order was held to be violative of the petitioner's
fundamental rights. There is it seems no constitutional protection of the
personal liberty of the subject where he is held in custody or detention
pending trial for a longer period than under all the circumstances of the case
is reasonable. Cf. Article 13(4). All that the Court has done is to urge the
authorities to expedite the trial. Cf. _Kamegam v. Jansz and Others_ (100) __
where long incarceration was unsuccessfully claimed by the petitioner to be
violative of Article 11). On the other hand, in terms of Articles 5.3 and 6 of
the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms, a person is entitled to a fair trial within a reasonable period.
(E.g. see the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights in the cases of
_Lawless_ (101); _Wemhoff_ (102) __ ; _Neumeister_ (103); _Strogmuller_ (104);
_Matznetter_ (105); _Ringeisen_ (106); _Eckle_ (107); _Foti and others_ (108);
_Corighano_ (109); _Vallon_ ; _Carr_ (110); _Capuano, Bagetta and Milasi_
(112) _._ Cf. also _Lechner and Hess_ (113).

** **

**THE STATUTORILY PRESCRIBED PERIOD SETS THE OUTER LIMIT**



The prescribed maximum time within which a law may require a person to be
produced before a judge merely indicates the outer limit which cannot be
passed without violating Article 13(2) of the Constitution. In the
circumstances of a case, detention for a shorter period of time may violate
Article 13(2).

 84



With regard to persons arrested under the Code of Criminal Procedure, it is
clear from the terms of Sections 36 and 37 that the twenty‑four hour period
indicates the maximum time and not a mandatory period of detention, although
certain dicta might suggest that so long as a person is released or produced
within twenty‑four hours, Section 37 is not violated whether or not it was
under all the circumstances of the case a longer than reasonable period. For
instance in _Lundstron v. Cyril Herath and Others_ (43), where the petitioner
was ordered to drive to the Police Station and she had to remain at the
station in her vehicle until the keys of her car which were taken by the
Police were returned, De Alwis, J. said: "The petitioner was thus in custody
for a little over 12 hours and this period did not exceed 24 hours before
which she was required to be produced before a Magistrate, in accordance with
the procedure established by law, namely Section 37 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act." "Consequently" it was held that Article 13(2) had not been
violated. (Cf. also _Pathmasiri v_. _Illangasiri_ (114); __ per Goonewardene
J. in _Wijeratne v. Vijitha Perera_ )(115).



Section 36 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that an officer making
an arrest "shall without **unnecessary delay**... take or send the person
arrested before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case." And Section 37
of the Code provides that an officer "shall not detain in custody or confine a
person arrested without a warrant **for a longer period than under all the
circumstances of the case is reasonable,** and such period shall not exceed
twenty‑four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the
place of arrest to the Magistrate."



Whether a detention within the prescribed maximum period is reasonable must be
determined by the Court having regard to the circumstances of each case,
including, but not limited to, the statutorily prescribed outer limit.



In _Kumaranatunge v. Samarasinghe_ (19) a detention of ten hours was
considered reasonable in a case to which section 37 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure was applicable.



However, in _Faiz v. A.G._ (16) _,_ where the petitioner was arrested at about
6.30 p.m. on 26th April 1991 and produced before a

85  


Magistrate on the following eveing within the prescribed twenty‑four hour
maximum period, and remanded till the 29th of April and released on bail,
Fernando and Perera JJ. held that Article 132(2) was violated. Fernando J.
explained that in the circumstances of the case the "detention was
unnecessarily prolonged." In _Kumarasena v. Shriyantha and Others_ (6), the
petitioner, who was arrested without reasonable grounds, was released in about
six hours after being subjected to degrading treatment in violation of Article
11 of the Constitution. I held that Article 13(2) was violated although the
person was released within the twenty‑four hour period. I said: "The salutary
nature of the provision that persons arrested without warrant must be produced
before a judge without unnecessary delay has been stressed over and over again
by this Court. (E.g. see _Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam_ (21) _._ The __ provision
is there "to ensure the safety and protection of arrested persons." The
desirability of the provision was strongly underlined by the facts of the case
before us where much harm was caused even during the short period of
detention."



At a time when it was required under Regulation 19(2) that persons should be
produced no later than 30 days after arrest, it was held that Article 13(2)
was not violated in a case where the person was released from custody in about
24 ‑ 27 hours after "expeditious inquiry" had revealed that further detention
for investigation was unnecessary. _(Mallawarchchi v. Seneviratne_ ) (40) _._



Regulation 19(2) provides that "Any person detained in pursuance of the
provisions of Regulation 18 may be detained for a period not exceeding ninety
days reckoned from the date of his "arrest under that Regulation" and shall at
the end of that period be released by the Officer‑in‑Charge of that place
unless such person has been produced by such officer before the expiry of that
period before a Court of competent jurisdiction.



The period of ninety days prescribed by Regulation 19 and the right to detain
for an unspecified period in terms of Regulation 17 are permissive, and not
mandatory ‑ it is certainly not, as suggested in _Namasivayam v. Gunawardene_
(116) a penalty incurred by [a] petitioner under the Emergency Regulations" ‑
and many hundreds of persons, including the sixteen petitioners in this case,
have been properly released before the period of ninety days and, in the case
of persons

86



detained or purported to be detained under Regulation 17, (including the
petitioners in this case who were detained _inter alia,_ in terms of the
objects and purposes of Regulation 17) even before an appeal to the Advisory
Committee had been lodged. This is in accordance with the scheme of the law
and the foundational assumption underlying Regulations 17, 18 and 19 that a
person arrested and detained should not be confined for a longer period than
under all the circumstances of the case is "reasonable" (Cf, _Kumaranatunge's
case_ (19) ( _supra_ ); _Gurusinghe v. Kadurugamuwa_ (91); _Mallawarachchi's
case (supra)._



As soon as investigations have revealed that, although there were reasonable
grounds for suspicion at the time of the arrest, further search (including, as
explained above, investigation) is unnecessary, steps should be taken in terms
of Regulation 19 to have the person released. It would be unreasonable not to
do so. (See _Nanayakkara v. Henry Perera_ _and Others_ (62) **** followed in
_Nallanayagam v. Gunatilleke and Others_ (81); _Joseph Perera_ _v_. _A.G._
(35) __ ; __ per De Alwis J. _Wijewardene v. Zain_ ) (13).



Likewise, although at the time of making an order under Regulation 17, the
Secretary had reasonable grounds for doing so, yet if at any time thereafter
the Secretary to the Ministry of Defence can no longer as a reasonable man be
satisfied and so hold the opinion that it is necessary to continue to detain
the person to prevent him from acting in a manner such person was once
reasonably supposed to have been likely to act, the Detention Order issued
under Regulation 17 should be revoked and the person detained set free. (See
_Weerakoon v. Mahendra_ ) (11) _._



Persons should not be held in custody for an "excessive" period, that is, a
longer than "reasonable period" in the sense that having regard to the
purposes of arrest or detention, the detention can no longer be supported.
(Cf. _Joseph Silva and Others v. Balasuriya and Others_ (22): _Jayatissa v_.
_Dissanayake_ (74) _._



If a person who, for the foregoing reasons ought to have been released, is in
custody at the time of the hearing with regard to an application made to the
Supreme Court to hear and determine any question relating to the infringement
by executive or administrative

**87**  


action of the fundamental rights declared and recognized by Article 13 of the
Constitution, the Court may order the release of the petitioner as it did in
_Padmakanthi v. O.I.C. Matale_ (117) __ and in _Dissanayake v. Guneratne &
Others _(28).



If a person is detained in terms of Regulation 17 and or 19 beyond a time when
in all the circumstances it is unreasonable to do so, because the grounds for
detention in terms of those laws no longer exist, such detention can no longer
be said to be under or in pursuance of such Regulation or Regulations. The
person detained can no longer be described as a person arrested according to
the procedures established by those laws.



Detention without reasonable ground, or beyond a time when such detention
ceases to be reasonable has been sometimes referred to as "excessive",
"unjustified", "unlawful" or "illegal" detention. (Cf. _Wijewardene v. Zain_
(13); _Wickremabandu v. Herath and Others_ (26) _Jayaratne v. Tennekoon and
Others_ (66) and _Fernando v. Kapilaratne and Others_ (70); _Padmakanthi
Dimbulagamuwa v. OIC Army Camp Matale and Others_ (117) _._ Wanasundera J. in
_Joseph Perera_ (35) said that such detention **" transgresses the law." **No
doubt this may be so for various reasons and give rise to various reliefs and
remedies. For instance, there may be a cause of action based on false arrest.
But the question for determination in matters of the sort before us is this:
What provision or provisions of the Constitution are violated in a way that
the transgression is justiciable in terms of Article 126 of the Constitution?



**THE CONSEQUENCES OF UNREASONABLE DETENTION ‑VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 13(1)**



Firstly, as we have seen in this case, there may be a violation of Article
13(1).



Where a person is taken into custody supposedly in terms of Regulation 17 or
18 but in fact otherwise than in accordance with those provisions, or where
subsequently the circumstances make continued detention unwarrantable in terms
of Regulation 17 and 18, the person detained must be released. Otherwise,
being in the custody of the law, he would be a person who is not "arrested" in



88  


accordance with procedure established by law and Article 13(1) would be
transgressed.



Where a person is in the custody of the law he is a person "arrested", in the
words of H. A. G. de Silva in _Piyasiri v. Fernando_ (3) "for whatever the
period may be". In _Kumaranatunga v. Samarasinghe_ (19), Samarakoon CJ said:
"Article 13(1) ... deals only with arrest and not with subsequent detention
... the arrest and incarceration however short on document A [the Detention
Order] was in contravention of the petitioner's fundamental right guaranteed
by Article 13 of the Constitution." Samarakoon CJ was referring to the right
of the petitioner under Article 13(1) and not his right enshrined in Article
13(2) to be produced before a judge while in detention. It seems to be
sometimes assumed that Article 13(1) is confined to the act of taking into
custody whereas Article 13(2) is concerned with subsequent detention. H. A. G.
de Silva, J. in _Wickremabandu_ (26) for instance, stated that Article 13(1)
dealt with arrest and that "paragraph (2) refers to the consequences of such
arrest: the person arrested may be 'held in custody', 'detained' or 'otherwise
deprived of personal liberty' ‑ which would cover, for instance, house arrest,
or a restriction order limiting freedom of movement to a particular area or
during specified periods." Article 13(2) deals with an aspect of the rights of
persons deprived of their liberty, namely the right to be produced before a
judge and the right to be detained in terms of the orders of the judge
thereafter made by him in accordance with procedure established by law.



Article 13(1) could be violated not only by the act of first depriving a
person of his liberty in violation of procedure established by law, but also
by holding any person in the custody of the law during any period, unless
perhaps the detention is extremely brief and momentary so as to be of a _de
minimus_ nature, (the duration may be relevant in computing amounts to be
awarded by way of relief: but that is another matter) when he is deprived of
his liberty contrary to procedure established by law. He is under arrest. He
is an arrested person. (Cf. per H. A. G. de Silva, J. in _Wickremabandu's
Case_ (26). See also _Rajakpaksa v. Kudahetti_ (119) on the meaning of the
term "arrest").

89



In a vulgar sense "arrest" is simply taking a person into custody for the
suspected commission of an offence. However, in law, as Fernando, J. observed
in _Sirisena and Others v_. _Ernest Perera and Others_ (88) _,_ "Arrest" must
be given a wide meaning and includes deprivation of liberty for purposes other
than the suspicion of the commission of an offence, as in that case where
persons were detained for obtaining evidence. This is in accordance with the
view expressed by H. A. G. de Silva, J. (Fernando J. agreeing) in
_Wickremabandu_ (26) __ that "taking Article 13 as a whole, "arrest" in
paragraph (1) includes an arrest in connection with an alleged or suspected
commission of an offence, as well as any other deprivation of personal
liberty."



How else could a detention under Regulation 17, which is concerned merely with
the **prevention** of violations of the law, be ever violative of Article
13(1) except on the basis that deprivation of personal liberty is what is
meant by the term "arrested" in Article 13(1)?



Moreover, certain arrest can take place only if the person is already in the
custody of the law. For instance, in _Karunaratne v. Rupasinghe_ (118) _,_ it
was held that a rehabilitation order could not be enforced in respect of a
person who was not in custody. Fernando J. observed: "I hold therefore that
this regulation does not authorize the arrest or detention of a person not
already in detention ... The resulting position is that the arrest and
detention was illegal."



The essential constitutional guarantee of the first part of Article 13(1) is
that the State may not imprison or otherwise physically restrain a person
against his will except according to fair procedures, namely, procedures
established by law. Admittedly, the position might have been clearer if, as in
Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, it had been simply stated that "No
person shall be deprived of his personal liberty except according to procedure
established by law." However, in the formulation of Article 13(1), I cannot
find any reason to suppose that a narrower meaning was intended by the
substitution of the word "arrested" for the phrase "deprived of his personal
liberty."

90



It had been submitted by Counsel in _Wickremabandu_ (26) __ that any detention
other than detention pending investigation or trial constituted a "punishment"
and was therefore violative of Article 13(4) of the Constitution. H. A. G. de
Silva (Fernando J. agreeing), however, said: "If this contention is correct,
it would follow that deprivation of liberty in relation to persons of unsound
mind or suffering from specified diseases, (under the Contagious Diseases
Ordinance, Cap. 223, the Mental Diseases Ordinance, Cap 227 and the Lepers
Ordinance Cap. 228), or under Chapter XLVII of the Civil Procedure Code would
also be punishment ‑ since such deprivation is not "pending investigation or
trial." We are of the view that references to public health and public order
in Article 15(7) were necessary to ensure that legislation could authorise
deprivation of liberty in situations of that kind."



There is abundant persuasive authority supporting the view that a person
cannot be committed for treatment or detained for treatment subsequently
unless it is in accordance with a procedure established by law to determine
that a person is dangerous to himself or others. (E.g. see _O'Connor v.
Donaldson_ (120); State _ex_ _rel. Doe v. Madonna_ (121); _Jackson v_.
_Indiana_ (122); _Humphrey v. Cady_ (123); _Addington v_. _Texas_ (124) _._
See also the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights in the cases of
_Winterwerp_ (125); _X v. U.K._ (126) _Luberti_ (127) __ and _Ashingdane_
(128) _._



**THE CONSEQUENCES OF UNREASONABLE DETENTION ‑VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 13(4)**



While the arrest, holding in custody, detention or deprivation of personal
liberty of a person **pending investigation or trial** does not constitute a
punishment by imprisonment, (Article 13(4); and while holding a person in
**preventive detention** has been held not to be punitive imprisonment
violative of the Constitution, _(Kumaratunge v. Samarasinghe_ (19); _Yapa v.
Bandaranayake_ (46); _Wickremabandu v_. _Herath and Others_ (26) yet
deprivation of personal liberty would amount to punitive imprisonment
violative of Article 13(4) of the Constitution where the person was never, or
cannot **any longer,** be reasonably said to be held for purposes of
investigation, trial or preventive detention, as the case may be. (See
_Nanayakkara v_. _Henry Perera_ (62); _Yapa v_. _Bandaranayake_ (46);
_Nallanayagam v. Gunatilleke_ (81); _Sasanasiritissa Thero and Others v. De
Silva and Others_ (14) ; __

91  


_Wijewardene v Zain_ (13) _, Joseph Silva v. Balasunya_ (22); _Chandradasa and
Another v. Lal Fernando & Others _(25); _Guneratne et el_ (23); _Premalal de
Silva v. Rodrigo_ ) __ (86).



Although the **duration** _per se_ of the imprisonment would sometimes seem to
be regarded as the criterion for deciding whether Article 13(4) has been
violated, it is the fact of detention beyond a time when it is not warranted
that is relevant. The objective of Article 13(4) seems to be that no person
shall be subject to death or deprivation of personal liberty except by an
order of a competent court. Subjecting a person to pain, or suffering or loss
caused by the deprivation of personal liberty without judicial authority is
"punishment", when there is no constitutional or other legislative authority
for doing so. (Compare Articles 13(2) and 13(4) of our Constitution and
Article 22 of the Indian Constitution. See also Emergency Regulation 17).
Punitive imprisonment may be of any duration. Thus in _Premalal de Silva's
case_ the petitioner who was supposed to have been arrested on 19th May 1989
in terms of the Code of Criminal Procedure ‑ although there were no reasonable
grounds ‑ was produced before a Magistrate on 23rd May and enlarged on bail on
28th June 1989. Article 13(4) was held to be violated in addition to the
violations of Article 13(1) and 13(2). Duration, of course, would be relevant
in assessing the amount to be paid to a petitioner who has been detained for a
longer period than under all the circumstances of the case is reasonable.



**SEVERAL VIOLATIONS BASED ON THE SAME FACTS IS A POSSIBILITY**



As a consequence of the deprivation of personal liberty otherwise than
according to procedure established by law, rights other than those guaranteed
by Article 13 of the Constitution too may in the circumstances of a case be
held to be violated. For instance, deprivation of personal liberty in
violation of Article 13(1) may consequentially or incidentally violate Article
14(1) (a) ‑ freedom of speech, as it is in the matters before us (see also
_Joseph Perera_ _v. A.G_. (35) __ and/or Article 14(1) (b) ‑ freedom of
peaceful assembly: and/or Article 14(1) (c) ‑ freedom of association as in the
matters before us ‑ and/or Article 14(1) (a) ‑ the freedom to engage himself

92  


in his lawful occupation, profession, trade, business or enterprise: and/or
Article 14(1) (h) the freedom of movement _(Chandradasa v. Lal Fernando_ )
(25) _._ However, those are not matters that immediately concern us, but I
mention them, firstly, to acknowledge the possibility that the evidence
adduced in support of the violation of one provision of the Constitution may
also support the violation of other provisions of the Constitution. Persons
depriving others of their personal liberty should therefore realize that they
may unwittingly lay themselves open to more violations of the Constitution
than one. Secondly, I should like to emphasize that, in the circumstances of a
case. the violation of one provision of the Constitution guaranteeing a
fundamental right may not be necessarily violative of some other right. The
alleged violation of each right must be considered independently in the light
of the circumstances of each case. Thus, although in _Joseph Perera_ (35) the
arrest resulted in a violation of Article 14(1) (a), it did not do so in
_Chandradasa's Case_. (25)



**ARTICLE 13(1) VIS ‑A‑VIS 13(2)**



However, is this true of violations of Article 13(1) vis‑a‑vis 13(2)? In view
of the fact that I have found that Article 13(1) was violated, does it follow
that Article 13(2) is also violated as a **necessary consequence?** There are
dicta that might lead to such a conclusion.



It has been said, for instance, that where the arrest is "invalid" "unlawful"
or "illegal" the subsequent detention is also "invalid" "unlawful" and
"illegal" and the provisions of Article 13(2) are therefore violated. (E.g.
see _Chandradasa and Kularatne v. Lal Fernando and Others_ (25) ; _Lalanie and
Nirmala v. De Silva_ (8); _Sasanasiritissa Thero and Others v. De Silva and
Others_ (14); _Wijewardene v. Zain_ (13) ; _Dissanayake v. Superintendent,
Mahara Prison_ (9); _Vidyamuni v. Jayatilleke_ (12); _Wijesiri v. Rohana
Fernando_ (10); _Nihallage Dona Ranjanie v. Liyanapathirana_ (53) _._



The genesis of the problem is not identifiable with certainty. Was it Chief
Justice "Samarakoon's statement in _Kumaranatunga v. Samarasinghe_ (19) that
Article 13(1) of the Constitution "deals only

93  


with arrest and not with subsequent detention"? It was probably not, for it
seems that His Lordship was concerned with the right of the petitioner to be
free from arrest except according to procedure established by law (Article
13(1)) rather than with his constitutional rights as a person held in custody,
detained or otherwise deprived of personal liberty.



There were no problems until the Court (Athukorale J., G. P. S. de Silva and
Bandaranayake, JJ. agreeing) in _Chandradasa and Kularatne_ _v. Lal Fernando
and Others_ (15) held that "The arrests of the petitioners by the 1st
respondent was not authorized in terms of Regulation 18(1) and was thus
unlawful. The detention of the petitioners by the respondent was therefore
illegal", and it was held that the violations of Articles 13(1), 13(2) and
13(4) had been "established" and that by reason of the "illegal detention",
Article 14(1) (c), 14(1) (g) and 14(1) (h) had been "consequentially"
violated.



The facts certainly supported the finding that the several transgressions of
various Articles of the Constitution had taken place. The suggestion that,
since the arrests were not in accordance with the procedure prescribed by
Regulation 18(1), "therefore", by reason of that fact, _ipso_ _facto,_ other
provisions of the Constitution were violated, was, with great respect,
somewhat misleading, for although, as in _Chandradasa_ (25) __ the same __
facts may have supported violations of several provisions of the Constitution,
the violation of one provision of the Constitution does not inevitably and
necessarily result in the violation of another provision.



Then in 1990 H. A. G. de Silva, J. (Fernando J. agreeing) in _Wickremabandu
(supra)_ suggested that Article 13(1) was concerned with the arrest of persons
while Article 13(2) was concerned with "the consequences" of arrest.



None of these cases attempted to evolve a theory that if Article 13(1) is
violated then Article 13(2) is also violated.



We then have the view expressed by Kulatunga J. that "arrest and detention are
inextricably linked" (see _Wijewardene v. Zain_ (13). Based **** on
Sharvananda J's observation in _Mariadasa Rai v. A.G_.(79) that if a

94  


person arrested is not informed of the reason for his arrest, "his detention
after the arrest is illegal", a theory was evolved that if an arrest is
"illegal" or "unlawful", (Article 13(1), the subsequent detention is therefore
"illegal" or "unlawful" and consequently Article 13(2) is violated. (E.g. see
_Nihallage Dona Ranjani v. Liyanapathirana_ ) (53.



Conversely, it has sometimes been suggested that if the arrest is "justified"
and not violative of Article 13(1) it automatically follows that the detention
is justified and that Article 13(2) is therefore not violated. (Cf. _Dalaguan
v. Perera_ 129) and _Madera_ _v. Weerasekera_ (130), where there were
reasonable grounds for arrest, it was held in each case that the "arrest and
detention were legal.").



This view has lead to difficulties resulting in the need to explain the
violation of Article 13(2) by stating that if detention is "excessive" in the
sense of being long in duration, rather than in relation to a prescribed
period for production before a judge, the provisions of Article 13(2) of the
Constitution have been violated.



In _Jayaratne v. Tennekoon_ (65) it was held that the arrest was "justified
and not violative of Article 13(1) of the Constitution." Kulatunga J. there
states: "It follows that his detention after his arrest is also justified and
not violative of Article 13(2). The question then is whether his continued
detention up to date is justified ..." His Lordship states: "...learned
Counsel for the petitioner ... has strenuously submitted that the continued
detention of the detenu for so long a period is without due consideration of
the relevant facts. He has not been charged with any offence: in these
circumstances the detention is _mala fide_ and unwarranted ... I am in
agreement with this submission and hold that in all the circumstances the
impugned detention is excessive and hence violative of the detenu's rights
under Article 13(2) of the Constitution." Kulatunga, J. later adds as follows:
"As regards the infringement of Article 13(2) I have already held that the
arrest of the detenu is justified and not violative of Article 13(1) and that
the detention after such arrest is also justified and not violative of Article
13(2); the infringement of Article 13(2) occurred only by reason of excessive
detention."

95



In _Padmakanthi v. O.I.C. Matale_ (117) __ the petitioner had been arrested on
10th August 1989. Although investigations were completed on 29th March 1990
the petitioner was still in custody at the date of the hearing of the
application in the Supreme Court. It was held that detention after 29th March
was "unjustified" and violative of Article 13(2).



In _Fernando v. Kapilaratne_ (69) there were reasonable grounds for arrest and
the petitioner had been informed of the reasons for arrest. Continued
detention, however, was not warranted, for the petitioner was detained merely
because he was not behaving himself properly while in custody. It was held,
that, since the petitioner was held under Regulation 17, Article 13(2) was not
violated by non‑production before a Magistrate. However, Article 13(2) was
violated on account of the "excessiveness of the detention," which "violated"
the detention order from the date of the application to the Court.



In _Godagama v. Ranatunge_ (64) Article 13(2) was declared violated because
the petitioners had been detained for over two years.



There is no discussion of, or reference to, Article 13(2) at page 403 by
Sharvananda J. _Mariadas_ (79) __ was a case concerning Articles 11 and 13(1).
In any event, I have no difficulty at all in accepting Chief Justice
Sharvananda's proposition that if an arrest is illegal the subsequent
detention is illegal. However, the fact that the arrest and subsequent
detention are illegal does not carry with it the corollary that Article 13(2)
is violated. _Mariadas_ (79) did not as a precedent embalm a principle that a
detention following an illegal arrest is also illegal and **that therefore
Article 13(2) is violated.** There is nothing at all in Article 13(2) that
expressly or by implication warrants such a conclusion. See Article 13(2).
Article 13(2) of the Constitution does not say that "No person shall be held
in custody or detained or otherwise deprived of personal liberty except
according to procedure established by law. Nor does it say that "No person
shall be held in custody or detained or otherwise deprived of his personal
liberty unlawfully or illegally or for a longer period than under all the
circumstances of the case is reasonable." What Article 13(2) does say is that
"Every person held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of personal
liberty shall be brought before the judge of the

96  


nearest competent court according to procedure established by law, and shall
not be further held in custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty
except upon and in terms of the order of such judge made in accordance with
procedure established by law."



Goonewardene, J. observed in _Faiz v. A.G._ (16) __ that it is not only
"unnecessary" to "characterize any action that does not conform to the
provisions of Article 13(1) as an "illegal arrest", it is "perhaps hazardous
to attempt to characterize a particular action as an "illegal detention", an
expression which carries certain overtones which may tend to colour and
confuse and carry one away from an objective appraisal of a situation ... Upon
a simple reading of its language uncomplicated by reference to the concept of
"illegal detention", what do the provisions of Article 13(2) mandate or
require to be done? It demands that any person held in custody, detained or
otherwise deprived of personal liberty shall be brought before the judge of
the nearest competent court according to procedure established by law ... when
the period of time is exceeded before such person is brought before a judge,
there would be a violation of Article 13(2) whereas if such period has not
been exceeded, there would be no such violation and whether or not there has
been an infringement of Article 13(1) is irrelevant ..."



In _Wijeratne v. Vijitha Perera_ (115) Goonewardene J. referred to his
judgment in _Faiz_ (16), reiterated the views His Lordship had earlier
expressed, and said that "a violation of Article 13(2) "can occur only when
there has been a failure to transfer an arrested person from non‑judicial
custody to judicial custody within the time prescribed by law." The phrase
"judicial custody" was no doubt meant to underline the salutary purposes of
Clause (2) of Article 13 rather than to deal with the question of
custodianship in the sense of in whose keeping an arrested person is to be ‑
e.g. the police or the fiscal.



According to Goonewardene J. "an illegal arrest violative of Article 13(1) of
the Constitution is not necessarily accompanied by the consequence that there
is a violation of Article 13(2) as well."



Fernando J. in _Garusinghe v. Kadurugamuwa_ (91) __ observed that "merely
describing an arrest or detention as being "illegal" does not

97  


amount to an allegation of an infringement of Article 13(1) or 13(2)". And as
Fernando J. pointed out in _Chandrasekeram v. Wijetunge_ (51), it may be that
Article 13(1) is violated but "It does not necessarily follow that their
subsequent detention was unlawful."



Moreover, the terms "unlawful" and "illegal" and "excessive" do not mean the
same thing and are not interchangeable. For instance in _Wickremabandu v.
Herath_ (26) _,_ H. A. G. de Silva (Fernando J. agreeing) found that the
detention was "unlawful: it is not merely excessive detention but illegal
detention."



In most of the cases, notwithstanding the dicta explaining the manner in which
Article 13(2) was violated, namely by reference to "invalidity" "illegality"
and "unlawfulness", and "excessiveness" in the sense of long duration, the
facts certainly justify a declaration of the violation of Article 13(2). Thus
although in _Faiz v. A.G ._ (16) Perera J. would appear to have decided that
Article 13(2) was violated because the arrest was unjustified and therefore
the "subsequent detention ... was unwarranted". Fernando J. explains that in
the circumstances of the case detention even within the twenty‑four hour
period was "unnecessarily prolonged" and therefore violative of Article 13(2).
In _Wijesiri v. Rohan Fernando_ (10) and _Nihallage Dona Ranjani v.
Liyanapathirana_ (53) the petitioners were not produced before a judge within
the time prescribed by section 37 of the Civil Procedure Code; and in
_Weerakoon v Weeraratne_ (15) within the time prescribed by Regulation 19(2).



However as Goonewardene, J. cautions, preoccupation with questions of legality
may "carry one away" from the matters to be decided in considering whether
Article 13(2) has been violated. In _Wijesiri v. Rohan Fernando_ (10) the
petitioner was arrested without reasonable grounds under the Criminal
Procedure Code on 23rd April 1990\. A Detention Order under Regulation 19(1)
was issued on 28th April 1992. The petitioner was produced before a Magistrate
on 1st June 1990. Article 13(2) was held to be violated. Wadugodapitiya J.
said that the production "was not for the purposes enumerated in Article 13(2)
of the Constitution, but was for the purpose of having him discharged as there
was no material against him. "The Detention Order had authorized detention for
90 days at Homagama

98  


Police/Boosa/Poonani/Pelawatta camp. However, on 6th May the petitioner was
transferred to and thereafter detained at Maharagama Police Station.
Wadugodapitiya J. states: "Therefore, at most, it is only the short perod of
detention from 29th April 1990 to 6th May 1990 that can be said to have been
covered by the Detention Order ...the rest of the period is from my view of
the matter, illegal ... I therefore hold that the 1st Respondent is guilty of
violating the provisions of Article 13(2) of the Constitution."



In _Munidasa v. Seneviratne_ (49), the petitioner was arrested on 13th July
1991 under Regulation 18 without reasonable grounds and without being given a
reason for his arrest. The provisions of Article 13(2) were declared violated
because the detention was held to be "illegal" and "unlawful" even though the
petitioner had been produced before a Magistrate on 14th July 1991 and
remanded by him and released on 19th July 1991.



In _Wijeratne v. Perera_ (115) _,_ the __ petitioner was released within the
maximum twenty‑four hour period. Goonewardene, J. held that Article 13(2) had
not been violated. However Fernando and Wadugodapitiya JJ held that Article
13(2) was violated.



Whether as in _Faiz v. A.G._ (16) there were circumstances in _Munidasa_ (49)
_and Wijeratne_ (115) __ that made the detention violative of Article 13(2) is
not evident from the judgments.



The provisions of both Articles 13(1) and 13(2) may be violated in a given
case (E.g. see _Samanthilaka v. Ernest Perera_ (87) ; _Premalal de Silva v.
Rodrigo_ (86); _Somasiri and Somasiri v. Jayasena_ (72); _Karunaratne v
Rupasinghe_ (118); _Weerakoon v. Mahendra_ (11); _Sirisena v. Ernest Perera_
(88); _Dissanayake v. Guneratne_ (28); _Munidasa and Others v. Seneviratne and
Others_ (49); _Chandrasekeram v. Wijetunge_ (51); _Vidyamuni v. Jayetilleke_
(12).



However, the fact that Article 13(1) is violated does not necessarily mean
that Article 13(2) is therefore violated. Nor does the violation of Article
13(2) necessarily mean that Article 13(1) is violated. Arrest and detention,
as a matter of definition, apart from other relevant considerations, are
"inextricably linked". However, Article 13(1) and

99  


13(2) have a related but separate existence. Article 13(1) is concerned with
the right of a person not to be arrested including the right to be kept
arrested except according to procedure established by law and the right to be
informed of the reasons for arrest, whereas Article 13(2) is concerned with
the right of a person arrested to be produced before a judge according to
procedure established by law and the right not to be further deprived of
personal liberty except upon and in terms of the order of such judge made in
accordance with procedure established by law. Article 13(1) and 13(2) are no
doubt linked: For instance, the procedure under which a person is arrested may
determine the period within which a person has to be produced before a judge.
Moreover, as we shall see the lack of grounds for arrest or subsequent
cessation of reasonable grounds might well be important in deciding whether an
obligation arises to produce a person. Article 13(1) and (2) are linked but
not inextricably so.



The fact that Article 13(1) was not violated does not necessarily mean that
Article 13(2) cannot be violated. For instance, a person may be arrested on
grounds of reasonable suspicion and given reasons for his arrest. However, if
he is not produced before a judge in accordance with a procedure prescribed by
law ‑ and that is the matter dealt with by Article 13(2) ‑ there will be a
violation of Article 13(2), althugh Article 13(1) was not violated. In
_Nallanayagam v. Gunatileke_ (81) __ a belated production" three days after
the maximum thirty‑day period specified was held to be violative of Article
13(2) although the arrest and continued detention even after the specified
period for production was not violative of Article 13(1).



In _Pathmasiri v. Illangasiri and Others_ (114) _,_ Article 13(1) was not
violated because there were reasonable grounds and the petitioner was aware of
the reasons for his arrest. However, the petitioner who had been arrested on
19th September, 1982 was produced before a Magistrate only on 25th September
1987 in violation of section 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and
therefore Article 13(2) was held to be violated.



In _De Silva v. Mettananda and Others_ (2) there was no question of the
violation of Article 13(1). However the "arbitrary detention" of the
petitioner for interrogation was held to have violated Article 13(2).

100  


In _Kalyanie Perera v. Siriwardene_ (63) _,_ there were reasonable grounds for
arrest, and detention for investigation was, in the circumstances of the case
warranted. The reason for arrest had been given. There was no violation of
Article 13(1). Kulatunga, J. however, said: "The learned Counsel for the
petitioners complained without contradiction by the State that the First
Petitioner was never produced before a Magistrate. Accordingly, I hold her
detention under Regulation 19(2) to be unlawful and violative of Article
13(2).  
  
In some matters no complaint is made of the violation of Article 13(1) or the
matter is not pressed but nevertheless a violation of Article 13(2) has been
found. (E.g. see _De Silva v. Mettananda and Others_ (2); _Alwis v. Raymond
and Others_ ((131); _Sasanasiritissa Thero and Others v. De Silva and Others_
(14) _._ If __ the violation of one Article necessarily followed the other, it
is difficult to understand why, ordinarily, resort to one might be abandoned
except on the basis that the ingredients to constitute the other violation are
wanting. There may, of course, be additional reasons, as for instance in
_Sasanasiritissa_ (14) where perhaps the violation of Article 13(1) was not
pressed also because relief was not sought within the time for doing so
specified in Article 126(2) of the Constitution.



Conversely, where Article 13(1) is violated it does not follow that Article
13(2) is violated. For instance, where a person is not informed of the reason
for his arrest he would be entitled to complain of the violation of his rights
under Article 13(1). Yet he may be brought within the time prescribed by the
relevant procedure prescribed by law before a judge of competent jurisdiction,
and in the circumstances it would not be open to him to complain that Article
13(2) has been violated merely because Article 13(1) has been violated.



in _Dharmatilleke v. Abeynaike_ (77) __ Article 13(1) was violated because the
substance of the Warrant was not notified in terms of Section 53 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, but Article 13(2) was not violated. Even though the
petitioner was not "physically" produced before the Magistrate, Seneviratne J.
observed that "On the facts of this application" ‑ meaning that petitioner had
been technically produced ‑ "the relevant Article is only Article 13(1)".
Violations of both Article 13(1) and (2) had been alleged in that case.

101  


It may also be the case, as it was in _Manseer v. Seneviratne,_ (132) __ that,
although there were no reasonable grounds for arrest and Article 13(1) was
contravened because the arrest could not have been made in accordance with
procedure established by law, yet there was no violation of Article 13(2)
since the person had been produced before the Magistrate within the prescribed
time. Therefore, it seems, the petitioner did not press the matter.



**THE CONSEQUENCES OF UNREASONABLE DETENTION ‑ THE VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 13(2)
OF THE CONSTITUTION BY FAILING TO PRODUCE THE DETAINED PERSON IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE**



If a person stands deprived of his personal liberty **otherwise than in
accordance with procedure established by law,** including the Emergency
Regulations, and this may be at the moment of taking the person into the
custody of the law, or subsequently when the grounds for detention cease to
exist, the person having custody of the person must set him free forthwith if
he is to avoid violating Article 13(1).



If the person is not so released, then in terms of Article 13(2) steps must be
taken to produce the person before the judge of the nearest competent court
according to the procedure established by law.



Ordinarily, the procedure is that which is prescribed by the Code of Criminal
Procedure. However, if a person is arrested in pursuance of Regulation 18 of
the Emergency Regulations, in terms of Regulation 19(1) the provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure are suspended and the procedure laid down in
Regulation 19(2) is made the relevant procedure. The provisions relating to
detention and production set out in Regulation 19(2) are conditional upon the
person having been arrested "in pursuance of" Regulation 18\. The arrest must
have been in accordance with the procedure set out in Regulation 18. Where a
person is not arrested in that way, Regulation 19(1), which suspends the
operation of the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure when a person is
arrested in pursuance of Regulation 18., thereby making way for the provisions
of Regulation 19(2) to take their place, ceases to be operative. The
suspension of

102  


the operation of the provisions of sections 36, 37 and 38 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure is conditional upon the person being arrested **under**
Regulation 18\. Where a person is not arrested and kept arrested in pursuance
of Regulation 18, Regulation 19 has no applicability.



The procedure established by law for the purposes of Article 13(2) of the
Constitution in such a case is the procedure prescribed by Section 37 of the
Code of Criminal procedure. The provisions of the Code were not swept away by
the Emergency Regulations. The provisions of the Emergency Regulations are
supplementary, "in addition to, and not in derogation" of the provisions of
the "ordinary law" including, of course, the provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure. (See Regulation 54 of the Emergency (Miscellaneous
Provisions and Powers) Regulations No. 1 of 1989. See also per Wanasundera, J.
in _Joseph Perera_ (35); and per De Alwis, J. _Yapa v. Bandaranayake._ (46) __
Cf also per Soza, J. (Ranasinghe, J. agreeing) in _Kumaranatunga v.
Samarasinghe._ )(19) __



The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure do not, with great respect
continue to exist merely in "truncated form", as it was supposed by
Wanasundera, J. in _Edirisuriya v. Navaratne_ (21) and cited with approval by
Kulatunga, J. in _Wickremabandu v. Herath and Others._ (26) __ They may not
set out the "procedure established by law" applicable to the circumstances of
a particular matter relating to Article 13 of the Constitution on account of
the operation of Regulation 19(1) because the arrest or detention has been
made "under" Regulation 18(1). In such a case, the conditions for the
operation of the substituted provisions having been satisfied, the provisions
of the Regulations are followed as the relevant procedure established by law.
The operation and exercise of Article 13(2) is not absolute; but it is subject
only to "such restrictions as may be prescribed by law". (Article 15(7) ).
Where the restrictions are conditional and the conditions have not been
fulfilled, the operation and exercise of Article 13(2) is subject to the
ordinary procedures established by law. The provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure do not exist in a mutilated form, but are merely conditionally
suspended by the Emergency Regulations.

103  


Looked at in this way, _Chandradasa and Kularatne v. Lal Fernando_ (25);
_Vidyamani v. Jayatilleke_ (12) and _Wijewardene v. Zain_ (13) where there
were no reasonable grounds for arrest and detention; and _Dissanayake v.
Superintendent of Prisons_ (9) _Jayaratne v. Tennekoon,_ (66) _Padmakanthi v.
O.I.C. Matale,_ (117) _Fernando v. Kapilaratne_ (69) __ and _Godagama v.
Ranatunge_ (64) __ where the detention although originally under and in
pursuance of a procedure established by law subsequently ceased to be so, the
petitioners rights under Article 13(2) were violated because they were not
produced before a judge in terms of sections 36 and 37 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, although the violations have been explained by reference to
"unlawfulness", or "illegality", or "excess" in the sense of long duration.



In the matters before us, the provisions of the Emergency Regulations relating
to production before a judge were inapplicable because the petitioners could
not have been arrested and detained under or in pursuance of Regulations 17 or
18. Therefore in terms of the applicable procedure established by law, namely
Section 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the petitioners should have been
produced before a Magistrate no later than twenty‑four hours of the arrest. As
we have seen, the petitioners in this case were not arrested because they were
committing or had committed any offence. They were not arrested because they
were suspected to be concerned un or to be committing or to have committed an
offence. They were not detained for any search or investigation on account of
being concerned in or committing or because they had committed any offence. I
do not think they should in terms of Sections 36 and 37 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, have been detained except for the time necessary to
transport them from the temple, where they were arrested, to the Magistrate of
the nearest competent court. Even if a person has been incarcerated following
a procedure established by law, that does not completely terminate his or her
right to liberty. That is a very basic and fundamental principle enshrined in
the Constitution and supported by reason and abundant **** precedent. In the
matters before us the petitioners were not arrested under a procedure
established by law; they were arrested on grounds of vague suspicion, in
circumstances that showed a reckless disregard

104  


for their right to personal liberty so that their right to be produced before
a Judge was particularly urgent. In failing to comply with the "salutary'
provision relating to the production of the petitioners before a judge of the
nearest competent court in this way, the respondents transgressed the rights
conferred on them by Article 13(2) of the Constitution.



**DECLARATION AND ORDER IN RELATION TO ARTICLE 13(2)**



I therefore declare that the fundamental rights of the petitioners to be
brought before the judge of the nearest competent Court according to procedure
established by law, guaranteed by Article 13(2) of the Constitution were
violated.



I make order that Jayasinghe Mudiyanselage Janaka Priyantha Bandara applicant
in SC Application No. 151/92 and Weerasekera Mudalige Anura Weerasekera
applicant in SC Application No. 155/92 who were detained from 27th February to
3rd March 1992 without being produced before a Magistrate, shall each be
severally paid a sum of Rs. 5000 by the State as a solatium for the violation
as aforesaid of their rights guaranteed by Article 13(2) of the Constitution.



I further order that Malinda Channa Pieris, applicant in SC Application
146/92; M. D. Daniel, applicant in SC Applicant 147/92, Singapulli Hewage
Dayananda, applicant in SC Application 148/92; Athureliye Rathana (Ranjith),
applicant in SC Application 149/92; Kuruwitage Nandana Perera, applicant in SC
Application 151/92; Pallimulle Hewa Geeganage Pradeep Chandanaratne,
application in SC Application 153/92; Ranawake Arachchige Patali Champika
Ranawaka, applicant in SC Application 154/92; and the following applicants in
SC Application 155/92, namely, Avalikara Galappathige Muditha Malika
Wimalasuriye; Gileemalage Janaka Priyantha Dayaratne: Karunaratne
Paranavithana: Rev. Kalupahana Piyarathana; Rev. Ambalanthota Premarathana;
and Rev. Kithulagala Upali who were detained from 27th February to 17th March
1992 without being produced before a Magistrate be each paid severally a sum
of Rs. 9000 by the State as a solatium for the violation as aforesaid of their
rights guaranteed by Article 13(2) of the Constitution.

105  


Rev. Thalapitiye Wimalasara was neither present at the meeting nor was he a
member of the Peramuna. I therefore order that Rev. Thalpitiye Wimalasara the
applicant in SC Application 150/92 be paid a sum of Rs. 10,000 by the State as
a solatium for the violation of his rights guaranteed by Article 13(2) of the
Constitution by his detention without being produced before a Magistrate from
27th February to 17th March 1992.



**ALLEGED VIOLATIONS OF ARTICLE 11**



The petitioners complained that their fundamental rights guaranteed by Article
11 of the Constitution were violated by the respondents. Article 11 provides
that "No person shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment"



Three general observations may be usefully made at the outset.



Firstly, the acts or conduct complained of must be qualitatively of a kind
that the Court can take cognizance of. Where it is not so, the Court will not
declare that Article 11 has been violated. (E.g. see W _H. K. Silva v.
Chairman Fertilizer Corporation_ (133) _ ‑_ which __ suggested criteria for
identifying acts that were violative of Article 11 ‑ followed in _Samanthilaka
v. Ernest Perera and Others_ (87) __ ; _Weerakoon and Allahakoon v. Beddewala_
(47); _Vithanage Kumar Medagama v. Praneeth Silva and Others_ (134) __ and
_Ratnasiri v. Devasurendran and Others._ (135) __ Cf. also _Lundstron v. Cyril
Herath and Others_ (43) __ ; _Gunasekera v. Kumara and Others_ (136) ; _Perera
and Sathyajith v. Siriwardene_ (63); _Fernando v. Kapilaratne and Others_
(69); _Kumarasena v. Sub ‑Inspector Shriyantha and Others._(6) __



Where the acts proved are qualitatively of the relevant kind, the Court has
declared a violation of Article 11 to have taken place. (E.g. See _Amal Sudath
Silva v. Kodituwakku_ (137); _Pathmasiri v. Illangasiri and Others_ (114); _De
Silva v. Amarakone_ (138); _Lankapura v. Lathiff_ (139); _Abeywickrama v.
Dayaratne and Qthers_ (90) __ ; _Alwis v. Raymond and Others_ (131);
_Ragunathan v. Thuraisingham_ (55); _Samanthilaka v. Ernest Perera and Others_
(88); _Geekiyanage Premalal de Silva v. Rodrigo_ (86); _Jayaratne v.
Tennekoon_ (66); _Gamlath v. Silva_ (48); _Ekanayake v. Herath Banda and
Others_ (27); _Liyanage v. Chandrananda_ (93); _Vidyamani v._



106 _  
 _

_Jayatilleke and Others_ (12); _Wijesiri v. Rohan Fernando and Others_ (10);
_Ratnasiri and Kumarana v. Devasurendran and Others_ (135) __ ; _Weerakoon v.
Weeraratne_ (15); _Liyanage v. Chandrananda and Others_ (92); _Wimalawardena
v. Nissanka and Others_ (1) __ ; _Ariyatillake v. Thalawala and Others._ (140)
__



Those were cases in which **physical harm** of a qualitatively relevant nature
in terms of the criteria set out in _W_. _M. K. de Silva_ (133) were
satisfied. The Court was satisfied that the acts in question had occasioned
suffering of a particular intensity or cruelty implied by the word "torture"
(Cf. _Ireland v. U.K._ (141) __ decided by the European Court of Human Rights
on 18th January 1978) or that the suffering occasioned had attained the level
of severity inherent in the notions of "torture" and "inhuman", "degrading"
treatment. (Cf. the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights in
_Ireland (supra)_ and in _Tyrer_ (142) and _Campbell and Cosans._ (143) __ As
to whether a particular act satisfies the relevant criteria is not an easy
matter to determine. The assessment is in the nature of things, relative and
depends on all the circumstances of the case including the nature and context
of the act and the manner and method of its commission. (Cf. the decision of
the European Court of Human Rights in the _Tyrer_ case.(142) As it was
observed in _Gunasekera v. Kumara and Others (supra),_ adopting dicta from
_Hobbs v. London & S. W. Railway_(144) _,_ the decision whether an act is
qualitatively of the kind that contravenes Article 11 "is something like
having to draw a line between night and day; there is a great duration of
twilight when it is neither night nor day; but on the question now before the
Court, though you cannot draw the precise line you can say on which side of
the line the case is."



The facts in _Kumarasena v. Sub Inspector Shriyantha and Others_ (6) __ left
the Court in no doubt that the petitioner's case fell on the side of
transgression. The petitioner was young girl who had been arrested without
reasonable grounds and detained for about six hours at a police station.
During that time, several police officers, accepting the invitation of the
officer making the arrest to play with the "toy" he had fetched, touched her
body, squeezed her breasts, pinched her buttocks, addressed her as "love
bird", questioned her as to whether she wore underwear and invited her to come
out with one of them. The Court held that the petitioner had been subjected to
degrading treatment.

107

__

In that case I said: "In the circumstances of this case, the suffering
occasioned was of an aggravated kind and attained the required level of
severity to be taken cognizance of as a violation of Article 11 of the
Constitution. The words and actions taken together would have aroused intense
feelings of anguish that were capable of humiliating the petitioner. I
therefore declare that Article 11 of the Constitution was violated by the
subjection of the petitioner to degrading treatment."



Secondly, torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment may
take many forms, psychological and physical. _(W M. K. Silva v. Ceylon
Fertilizer Corporation_ )(133), Holding a person incummunicado, without
required medication, without adequate food and basic amenities for the
performance of normal bodily functions and requirements, including sleep, have
been held to be violative of Article 11. See _Fernando v Silva and Others_
(66) _._



Thirdly, having regard to the nature and gravity of the issue, a high degree
of certainity is required before the balance of probability might be said to
tilt in favour of a petitioner endeavouring to discharge his burden of proving
that he was subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment; and unless the petitioner has adduced sufficient evidence to
satisfy the Court that an act in violation of Article 11 took place, it will
not make a declaration that Article 11 of the Constitution did take place. (
_Goonewardene v. Perera & Others _(145); per Wanasundera, J. in
_Thadchanamoorthi v. A.G. & Others_(146); __ see also _Vijayakumar v.
Gunawardena_ (147) __ read with _Namasivayam v. Gunawardene_ (116);
_Wijewardene v. Zain_ (13); _Witharana v. A.G. and Another_ (148); __ _Hameed
v Ranasinghe and Others_ (149);; ; _Samanthilaka v. Ernest Perera_ (87);
_Seneviratne v. Karunatilleke and Others_ (50); _Sirisena and Others v. Ernest
Perera and Others_ (88). Would "the guarded discretion of a reasonable and
just man lead him to the conclusion"? is the test I would apply in deciding
the matter. If I am in real and substantial doubt, that is if there is a
degree of doubt that would prevent a reasonable and just man from coming to
the conclusion, I would hold that the allegation has not ben established. (Cf.
_Bater v. Baxter_ (151) cited with approval by Wanasundera J. in _Velumurugu_
)(97) _._ With regard to the standard of proof where a respondent denies the
petitioner's averments see also _Sasanasiritissa Thero and Others v. De Silva
and Others_ (14) _._  

108



In this connection, I take note of the following observations of the European
Commission of Human Rights in the _Greek Case_ (152) quoted with approval by
Sharvananda J. in _Velmurugu v. Attornery ‑General_(97) __ and followed by G.
P. S. de Silva, J. in _Abeywickrema v. Dayaratne and Others_ (90)



"There are certain inherent difficulties in the proof of allegation of torture
or ill‑treatment. First, a victim or a witness able to corroborate his story
might hesitate to describe or reveal all that has happened to him for fear of
reprisals upon himself or his family. Secondly, acts of torture or
ill‑treatment by agents of the Police or Armed Services would be carried out
as far as possible without witnesses and perhaps without the knowledge of
higher authority. Thirdly, when allegations of torture or ill-­treatment are
made, the authorities, whether the Police or Armed Services or the Ministries
concerned, must inevitably feel that they have a collective reputation to
defend, a feeling which would be all the stronger in those authorities that
had no knowledge of the activities of the agents against whom the allegations
are made. In consequence there may be reluctance of higher authority to admit
or allow inquiries to be made into facts which might show that the allegations
are true. Lastly, traces of torture or ill‑treatment may with lapse of time
become unrecognizable, even by medical experts, particularly where the form of
torture itself leaves ... few external marks."



The Supreme Court has been conscious of the difficulties in the proof of
allegations of torture and stated that it will have regard to the
circumstances of a case and not impose undue burdens on a petitioner which
might impede access to justice. (See _Samanthilaka v. Ernest Perera and
Others_ (87) __ followed in _Liyanage v. Chandrananda and Others_ (92) There
were no special difficulties of proof alleged in the matters before us. The
petitioners experienced no constraints in describing their grievances. As
Wimalasuriya states in his affidavit, when the representatives of the Red
Cross visited them at the Police Station "We described to them exactly how we
were treated." According to Seneviratne, the petitioners obtained relief by
complaining to the Assistant Superintendent of Police. Moreover, the
petitioners have quite freely, in their several affidavits, narrated their
stories without reservation. The difficulties in the matters before us, as

109  


far as the petitioners are concerned, are not based on a want of evidence due
to hesitation on their part to describe what happened, but rather, in several
instances, on account of complications caused by their freedom to say as much
as they did. It was an _embarrass de richesse_ situation that impeded proof of
the violation of Article 11 of the Constitution in several instances.



Nor was there a lack of witnesses. Their alleged infringements in the matters
before us are supported by affidavits of the other petitioners who state they
were spectators of those acts and auditors of the statements that gave rise
for complaint.



There is no complaint that might even remotely suggest that "higher
authorities" allied themselves with their subordinates. On the other hand,
Seneviratne states that when complaints were made to the
Assistant‑Superintendent, he took steps to make life more tolerable by
ordering the removal of handcuffs. Not only were inquiries made but positive
remedial action was also taken by the higher authorities.



The observations in the _Greek Case_ (152) __ are limited to a physical harm.
In Sri Lanka, we have gone beyond regarding torture, cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment or punishment as being limited to physical injury, hurt,
impairment or ill‑treatment. see _W M_. _K. de Silva (supra)_ and _Fernando v.
Silva (supra)._ See also _Kumarasena v. Sub­-Inspector Shiyantha and Others,_
(supra). However, where such harm is alleged, as G. P. S. de Silva, J.
observed in _Abeywickrema v Dayaratne and Others (supra)_ "from a practical
point of view. "it is often only the medical evidence that could afford
corroboration." These observations, as we shall see, are particularly
applicable to Dayananda's case, (Application 148/92 and _Bandara's case_
(152/92). **** As for the supposition that the police have techniques of
assaulting persons without leaving traces, which the _Greek_ case, on account
of its reference to "forms of torture", is sometimes said to have noted, and
which loomed large in Dayananda's case, I must draw attention to the words of
Wanasundera, J. in _Thadchanamoorhi v. A.G. and Others_ : _ "_I __ do not
think ... the Police have so perfected the art of assaulting that even when
they use force ... one should not expect to find any marks of violence." The
difficulty of recognition due to the healing process of time is another
matter.

#### 110

The evidence adduced appears in the several affidavits of the petitioners and
respondents and by other persons. In setting out the facts, I shall refer to
the deponent, the application number to which the affidavit relates, and
relevant paragraph of the deponent's affidavit.



After the arrests were made, the hands of the lay petitioners were tied with
strips of cloth from a torn sarong. (Bandara 152/92, 3.4 said it was his
sarong). The priests were not tied. (Seneviratne 146/92, 5:3; Daniel 147/92,
**** 3:1;Dayananda 148/92, 3.6; Rathana 149/92, 2.10; Wimalasara 150/92, 2.3).
Bandara (152/92, 3.4) complained that the binding was so tight that he
suffered from numbness.



The petitioners were then transported in a van and a jeep to the Wadduwa
police station. (Seneviratne 146/92, 5.3; Daniel 47/92, 3.1; Dayananda 148/92,
3.6; Wimalasara 150/92, 2.3). Those who were in the van were kept in it until
4.30 or 5 p.m. which some of the petitioners regarded as a long time. (Bandara
152/92, 3.4). Daniel who wanted to answer a call of nature was particularly
distressed. (Daniel 147/92, 3.10).



At the Wadduwa Police Station, Rev. Rathana, the petitioner in Application
149/92, and Champika Ranawake, the petitioner in Application 154.92, were
confined in two separate cells. (Seneviratne 146/92, 6.1; Daniel 147/92, 3.2;
Dayananda 148/92, 4.1; Rathana 149/92, 2.10; Wimalasara 150/92, 3.1; Nandana
Perera 151/92, 3.1; Bandara 152/92, 4.1).



According to the petitioners, the others were tied or chained or handcuffed to
each other and made to sit here and there linked by handcuffs fastened on
their ankles or otherwise to the bannisters of the stairway at the Police
Station. Bandara complained that the handcuffs out on his leg (sic.) at the
Police Station were tight. Seneviratne, (146/92), 6.1) M. D. Daniel (147/92,
3.2) and Dayananda (148/92, 4.1) sat on the floor. However, the priests were
given a bench. (Daniel 147/92. 3.5; Dayananda 148/92, 3.4; Wimalasara 150/92,
3.1; Nandana Perera 151/92, 2.6 and 3.1; Jayalin Silva's affidavit of
3.11.1992 paragraph 7 filed in 150/92).

111 _ _



The third respondent states in his affidavit that, due to the lack of
accommodation in the cells, some of the petitioners were kept outside the
cells under police supervision but that all of them were given benches to sit
on and that they were not handcuffed or chained to the bannister, nor tied
with strips of cloth. (See the third respondent's affidavit in 146/92, 7;
147/92, 8; 148/92, 6; 151/92, 7; 152/92, 6; 153/92. 7; 154/92, 7; 155/92, 7).



Dinner was provided at 10 p.m. (Seneviratne 146/92, 6.2; Rathana 149/92, 4.1;
Wimalasara 150/92, 3.1; Nandana Perera 151 /92, 3.3). They were served with
dhal and bread. They were not faring too badly, for dhal and bread was what
they had eaten by choice on the previous night. (See Seneviratne 146/92, 5.1).
However, Seneviratne says the dhal supplied by the Police was "uneatable"
(146/92, 6.3); and Nandana Perera (151/92, 3.3) and Chandanaratne (153/92,
3.3) complained of "too much salt". Ranawake (154/92, 4.14) complained of the
lack of water at the Pettah Police Station. He complained "we were infected
with diarrhoea." No one else made such a complaint and so Ranawake's ailment
may have been related to something other than the quality of the water
supplied. There were no other complaints about the food except Bandara's
comment (152/92, 4.5) that it was "not palatable." Whatever was normally
required by way of food to support life was supplied. The third respondent in
his affidavits (151/92, 11; 146/92, 5; 153/92, 9) states that the petitioners
were served with meals "normally supplied to police officers". It is of
interest to observe that Seneviratne in his affidavit (146/92, 6.2; last line)
refers to the petitioners offering biscuits to some person other than one of
their group who had been brought to the police station. The biscuits and other
items of food may have been brought by members of their families or by their
friends and well‑wishers who visited them and augmented and supplemented their
supplies of food. However, from‑whatever the source, wholesome food was
available although fastidious persons like Seneviratne. Chandanaratne and
Bandara might have been somewhat disappointed with the quality of food police
officers and those in their keeping are required to eat.



Ranawake (154/92, 4.12) states that his parents were allowed to see him to
hand him food and to check if he needed anything. He



112  


complained, however, that visits were limited to such purposes. Others
complained that only family members were allowed to visit them and that
friends had to be accompanied by either parent of the petitioner (Seneviratne
146/92, 6.8), or that they were not allowed to talk "freely" with their
visitors (M. D. Daniel 147/92, 3.10; Wimalasara 150/92, 3.2). Dayananda
(148/92, 4.6) and Rathana (148/92. 4.2) state that those who came to see them
were only allowed to ask if they needed anything. Dayananda adds that his wife
"was not allowed to speak even a word." He states, however, that they were
visited by the Red Cross. Wimalasuriya (155/92, 4.7) also recalls the visit of
the Red Cross and says: "We described to them exactly how we were treated."
Ranawake (154/92, 4.6) recalls that he was visited by the Vice Chancellor of
the Moratuwa University.



No affidavits or reports from the Red Cross or the Vice Chancellor have been
filed in these proceedings, and the learned Deputy Solicitor‑General pointed
out that information from disinterested persons would have helped to ascertain
the truth relating to the alleged violations of Article 11 of the
Constitution.



The conversations might have been limited: but the petitioners were not held
incommunicado. The affidavits of the petitioners, supporting petitions from
others filed in 146/92 and 155/92 by the petitioners, the third respondent's
affidavits, and extracts from the Routine Information Book he has filed, make
this very clear.



Nor was it denied that anyone in need of medication had to suffer without it.
Wimalasara (150/92, 3.1) states that he was taken back to the temple at about
7 p.m. on the date of the arrest "to collect some clothes and some medicine
for my illness." Ranawake (154/92, 4.9) says he was given "Panadol" for his
fever. Bandara says (152/92, 4.9) he had Panadol and used "Siddhalepa" to ease
his "aches and pains."



Nandana Perera (151/92, 3.12) complained that the petitioners were permitted
to answer calls of nature only once a day and Bandara (152/92, 4.5) and
Wimalasuriya complained that the petitioners were allowed to bathe only once.
Chandanaratne (153./92, 3.5) says that although he was allowed to go to the
toilet on

113  


the day after the arrest, he was not allowed to wash himself, but that after
the Red Cross personnel arrived, the petitioners were allowed to bathe and
wash their clothes. These allegations are denied by the third respondent. (See
affidavits in 152/92, 10, and 153/92, 11).



According to their affidavits, the petitioners seem to have found it irksome
that they were interrogated, finger‑printed, photographed, and constantly
placed under guard.



Seneviratne (146/92, 6.8) complained of the discomfort of having to sleep
handcuffed during the first two days. However, he says that "this practice was
stopped" after complaints were made by the petitioners to the Assistant
Superintendent of Police. Seneviratne adds that "Although there was no
physical ill‑treatment, many of the officers passed remarks which caused us
great pain of mind."



The use of opprobrious, abusive, rude, offensive and coarse language by the
third and fourth respondents is referred to by all the petitioners but denied
by the respondents.



It is alleged that menacing references were made. It is said by some of the
petitioners, that "One Sergeant threatened us saying 'parana tyre thevama
(sic.) ivara nehe, thava ona tharam thiyenava.' We were not allowed to speak
with each other." (Dayananda 148/92, 4.2; Nandana Perera 151/92, 3.2; Bandara
152/92, 4.2; Chandararatne 153/92 3.2; Wimalasuriya 155/92, 4.2) Ranawake
154/92. 4.4 is supposed to have been told by "several Police Officers:
'Bandaragama Avi deepang' 'thova ada mas karanava' and other such threats. One
person said 'Thova tyre vala yavanava.' I heard the others being threatened in
a similar way.'



Stated as it is in exactly identical terms, including the unrelated complaint
of not being allowed to speak to each other, the version of Dayananda, Nandana
Perera, Bandara, Chandanaratne and Wimalasuriya appear to me to be artificial.
In fact, I believe that their story and the threats reported by Ranawake seem
to have been invented to tie up with their version of the fears they were
supposed to have entertained when they were taken into custody.

114



At the time of the arrest, some of the petitioners (M. D. Daniel 147/92, 2.4;
Dayananda 148/92, 3.4; Nandana Perera 1512/92, 2.5; Bandara 152/92, 3.3;
Chandanaratne 153/92, 2.4 and Wimalasuriya 155.92, 3.3) say ‑ in he course of
a long passage, couched again in identical terms ‑ that they conjured up
"visions of dead bodies" during the so called "beeshanaya". (Would "reign of
terror" be an appropriate translation?). Imagination, rather than the facts,
seem to have played the dominant part in causing fear. One petitioner
frightened himself by recalling "films" he had seen. So Chandanaratne says in
paragraph 3.3 of his affidavit (153/92). They had supposed that the
respondents were, as they say, members of a "vigilante group". However, at
least by the time the statements referred to above were supposed to have been
uttered, the petitioners had no illusions as to who the respondents were and
therefore had no rational basis for fears of the sort they were supposed to
have at first entertained. In fact they must have known this even before they
were transported to the temple, for although the fourth respondent and some
others were supposed to be in "civils", the third respondent was in uniform
and he was identified by the petitioners on account of his distinctive clothes
as a "Police Inspector". (Seneviratne, 146/92, 5.3; Daniel 147/92, 3.1;
Dayananda 148/92, 3.6; Rathana 149/92, 2.10; Nandana Perera 150/92, 3.4;
Chandanaratne 153/92, 2:5; Ranawake 154/92, 4.3; Wimalasuriya 155/92, 3.4).



The petitioners may have experienced feelings of apprehension or disquiet, but
that was insufficient to bring them within the provisions of Article 11. (Cf.
the dicta in the case of _Campbell and Cosans_ (143) __ decided by the
European Court of Human Rights on 25th February 1982). There was nothing said
or done that subjected them to intense physical or mental anguish or that
aroused such intense feelings of anguish and inferiority as were capable of
humiliating and debasing them so as to break their physical and moral
resistance. (Cf. the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in
_Ireland_ (141) _, Tyrer_ (142); _Campbell and Cosans_ (143) __



None of the matters referred to so far amount to any transgression of Article
11 of the Constitution in terms of the criteria proposed in _W. M. K. de
Silva_ (133) __ Nor do they even remotely resemble the facts in

115  


_Fernando v. Silva_ (66) __ or _Kumarasena v. Sub ‑Inspector Shriyantha and
Others _(6). The petitioners might have been greatly distressed and felt
keenly the loss of their personal liberty and accustomed comforts, yet there
was no torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment within the meaning of
Article 11.  


Indeed, on the whole, the petitioners had very little to complain about.



Nandana Perera (151/92. 3.12) makes the following interesting observation:
"Although some of the officers were very cruel, a lot of them treated us
kindly." Ranawake (154/92, 4.14) says that "The only cause for complaint at
Pettah was the lack of water. We were infected with diarrhoea." However,
Chandanaratne (153/92, 3.10) was contented during his detention at the Pettah
Police Station. He says: "Here we were treated very well, food being given
regularly, and no restrictions being placed on talking amongst ourselves."



I might say at once that there are no allegations in any of the affidavits
relating to the violation of Article 11 by any of the respondents except those
in relation to the third respondent. Inspector of Police Karunatilleke, the
Officer‑in‑Charge of the Wadduwa Police Station, and the fourth respondent,
Sub‑inspector Piyaratne of the Wadduwa Police Station. I therefore declare
that there are no violations proved or even suggested in the petitioners'
affidavits against any of the respondents in the matters before this Court
except with regard to the third and fourth respondents against whom certain
matters are alleged. There are certain allegations made in some of the
affidavits against Sergeant Chumley, who was, however, not named as a
respondent. (See my observations in this regard later in this judgment in
considering Wimalasara's Case).



Ranawake (154/92) and following petitioners in Application 155/92 ‑
Wimalasuriya, Rev. Piyarathana, Rev. Premarathana and Rev. Kithulgala Upali ‑
made no complaints of assault.



Nandana Perera's complaint (151/92, para 3.5) was that he was "poked" with a
stick by the third respondent as he passed him.

**116  **



According to Daniel (147/92, 3.8). Dayananda 148/92, 4.7; Nandana Perera
(151/92, 3.9) and Chandanaratne (153/92, 3.7), expressing themselves in their
separate affidavits in identical words: "one day SI Piyarathana asked
something from Anura Weerasekera and slapped him saying "thopi police karayo
ponnayo kiyala hithuvade? Police report aavama thope ellala api ahagannam."



Even if they did take place, I cannot regard the trivial acts relating to
Nandana Perera and Weerasekera as violations of Article 11.



Daniel (147/92, 3.7) says that "One particular Sergeant was in the habit of
kicking me on my head as he passed me." Who that Sergeant was is not known,
nor is Daniel supported by any other petitioner. Daniel also complains (3.8)
that the fourth respondent once pulled his hair. Even if this were true, it
was too trivial a matter to be taken cognizance of under Article 11.



The alleged assaults which might support some of the other petitioners'
complaints in relation to Article 11 took place between about 1.30 a.m. and
3.30 a.m. on 28th February 1992. Although Nandana Perera (151/92, 3.3) states
that from dinner time till 1.30 a.m. the petitioners were subjected to
threats, he does not state who uttered the threats or what they were. They
were certainly not uttered by the third and fourth respondents who, he says,
came in at 1.30 a.m. The more likely position is that after dinner, as many of
the petitioners say (Seneviratne 146/92, 6.2; Rathana 149/92, 4.1; Wimalasara
150/92, 3.1; Bandara 152/92, 4.3; Wimalasuriya 166/92 4.3), the petitioners
fell asleep or tried to sleep, albeit in their uncomfortable positions, (in
the case of Chandanaratne 153/92 ‑ 3.3 ‑with his head on his knees), until
about 1.30 a.m.



**Bandara's Case:**



The essential features of his own case as stated by Bandara (152/92), and
certain matters stated by him relating to the allegations of assault on
certain other petitioners, are as follows:



"4.1 I was taken up the stairs and chained to one of the bannisters with a
pair of handcuffs. These were actually put upon my left ankle.

117

  
Sergeant Chumley without taking any notice of my request not to tighten it too
much, he tightened the handcuffs.



4.3 That night I had to sleep on the stairs. _The_ OIC, the third respondent,
_" came around 1.30 a.m. He was wearing a white pair of sharts" (sic.) "and T
shirt (white, with stripes). He said: "geri JVP kaaraya, thopi konaka indala
hamagahanava, den ithin eththa kiyapiyav, neththeng gahanne ellala." He also
said "thopi aanduva peralannada hadanne? Thope nayakaya Wijeweera merenna baye
paava deepuy ekkek. Oo merenna baye Gamanayake paava dunna. Paava dunne nethi
ekama eka JVP karayay mata hambavune, Uge nama . . . (he said a name which I
can't remember), umbala hitapau pansale haamuduruvo marapu eka thamey oo. Oo
vitharay merenna baye paava dunne neththe. 'Sir, ekaparata oluvata vedi
thiyala maranna' kiyala, vedi thiyanakotama uda penala `Janatha Vimukthi
Peramunata Jayawewa' kiyala vedi kala maruna. Thopith nikang merun noka aththa
kiyapang. "_



_4.4 The OIC said "onna oyahaamduruva huththige puthava mehata ganing sivura
galola. " and went upstairs. Rev. Wimalasara (from the temple) was taken up. I
heard Rev. Wimalasara being beaten. I started shivering, thinking that he
would do the same to me._



_Then they asked Chandana about his family. After that the OIC kicked and hit
Chandana and hammered his head many times again " (sic.) "the wooded" (sic.)
"hand rail of the staircase. _He then pointed to me and [there is a long blank
space here in the affidavit] "ganin okava udata". While I was being taken
upstairs I was beaten on my face, head and chest. I was thrown off balance and
got thrown a few feet away and fell down. The OIC said "oya polla genen" and
taking the stick which SI Piyarathana was carrying, he hit me on my thighs and
on my calves. He said "thoge athapaya kadanava. Kiyapiya gihilla geval
bindaneda?" I was in extreme pain. He kicked . me once more and said: "meeta
vediya gehuvoth ila eta kedeneva, guti kannavath puluvan ekek nemey, violava
karanna heduvata." I was tied upstairs. I was bleeding from a wound inside my
mouth. I felt dizzy and felt that I was going to faint. Expecting another
round of assault I was terrified and was shivering. _The OIC then went up to_

118 _  
 _

_Priyantha who was tied up upstairs and said "geri vesige putha, tho nidida?"
and hit him with a stick and trampled him. _I __ saw Priyantha squirming in
paid, sobbing and shivering. _Chandana who had been beaten earlier_ also, was
brought up again and beaten again by the OIC _. "Kiyapiya tho mokatada aave
kiyala, kamkaruvage puth, bellige putha. After beating him the OIC asked him
many questions about some "pamunugama incident". _Meanwhile Piyarathana came
up to me and said "kiyapiya tho pita palath keeyaka veda karala thiyenavada?"
He hit me in the area below my right ankle and on my sole. _After that the two
of them went downstairs. 1 continued to hear foul language and the sound of
someone being beaten and cries of pain. Meanwhile, I could hear Sergeant
Chumley taking down Rev. Wimalasara's statement. 1 heard him shouting and the
sound of assault. After some time the OIC came up again and started lecturing
Chandana "apita onanam thopi okkama maranna puluvang, evata apita balaya
thiyenava, thopi dannavada hadisi neethiya gene?"_

The words I have italicized, in paragraph 4.3 of Bandara's affidavit,
including the curious word "sharts" and the words "uge nama. . (he said a name
which I can't remember)", are produced in identical terms in paragraph 3.3 of
Nanda Perera's affidavit in Application 151/92 as well as in paragraph 4.3 of
the affidavit of Wimalasuriya (155/92).



The words I have italicized in paragraph 4.4 of Bandara's affidavit are
reproduced in identical terms in paragraph 4.3 of Wimalasuriya's affidavit in
Application 155/92.



The affidavits have obviously been prepared using (or more accurately in this
case, abusing) the facilities of a word‑processing device. Blocks of data have
been mechanically transferred from one affidavit to another. The little speech
by the man in what has been described in three separate affidavits as "white
sharts and a T shirt (white with stripes)", was, it seems, remembered and
recalled with precision, except for a certain name with regard to which all
three deponents not only, inexplicably, suffer amnesia, but also record their
inability to remember precisely in the same way. The remarkably

119  


consistent way in which the events have been reported make the affidavits of
Bandara, Nandana Perera and Wimalasuriya suspect.



When variations were sought to be introduced, the amendments were made without
due care. Wimalasuriya's affidavit has been amended to enable Bandara to fit
in his story into his own affidavit. In the process of manipulation, "against"
in the affidavit of Wimalasuriya has been retyped as "againd" in Bandara's
application. In the following sentence, Wimalasuriya says: "He then pointed to
Janaka Bandara and said "ganin okava udata." The words "Janaka Bandara and
said" were deleted in turning out Bandara's affidavit and replaced only with
the word "me". By failing to retype the word "said" the sentence is left
incomplete, leaving a tell‑tale blank space in Bandara's affidavit.



Wimalasuriya does not say that he witnessed Bandara being assaulted. He merely
states that he and the second petitioner in Application 155/92, Dayaratne,
"heard Janaka" Bandara "being beaten." There is no affidavit from Dayaratne
supporting Bandara's complaint of assault. Nor is it supported by anyone else.



Bandara has said that he was already on the stairs when he was ordered to be
brought up. If, as he says, he lost his balance and was "thrown a few feet
away and fell down", he must have fallen down the stairs and, if so, sustained
serious injuries? There is no complaint of such injuries. In paragraph 4.9 of
his affidavit, Bandara states that due to the beating he received, a section
of the right sole of a foot was numb. He says he was told by his family doctor
that some nerves had been damaged and that he was treated for his ailment.
Bandara has not filed an affidavit or medical report from the doctor. However,
he filed an affidavit to meet the third respondent's denial of assault but in
doing so merely reaffirmed what he had said in his earlier affidavit in broad,
general terms. He filed a supporting affidavit from his sister who, on 1st
March 1992, accompanied by her mother, saw him at the Police Station. However,
she does not report him to have been in pain. She merely says he was
handcuffed to a bannister and that she was not permitted to speak to him. From
a "practical point of view" _(Abeywickrama v. Dayananda, (supra) )_ why **
__** did he not adduce supporting medical evidence?

120  


In this state of the evidence, I entertain very real and substantial doubts
about the truth of Bandara's allegations of assault and I therefore declare
that he has not established that his rights guaranteed by Article 11 of the
Constitution have been violated.



**Wimalasara's Case**



Rev. Wimalasara (150/92) in paragraph 3.1 of his affidavit stated that he fell
asleep after dinner and woke up "around 1.30 p.m. (sic.) when the OIC started
shouting "Ko ara thalpitiye eka mehata genen." He says he was then taken
upstairs into a room where he was made to sit next to Sergeant Chumley. There
was, he says, "an RWPC near a typewriter." Wimalasuriya continues as follows:
"The OIC came up to me wearing a pair of shorts and a T shirt smelling of
liquor. He said: "galopiya paaharaya sivura, tho eththe kiyapiya, netham thova
vedi thiyala maranava." He made me sit on the floor and kicked me on my neck,
saying that I was hiding some guns. I denied this. After that he went out. I
heard him beating someone else. Sergeant Chumley then beat me saying: me
vidihe kata uththara vissak vithara gannava, udeth retath danduvam denava,
eththa kiyapiya. He also hit me on my neck and back."



Bandara, Nandana Perera and Wimalasuriya, as we have seen, said that the third
respondent made a speech about Wijeweera and the assassination of Wimalasara's
predecessor at the temple. This did not awaken Wimalasara. He woke up only
when he was ordered to be fetched. Wimalasuriya's version (155/92, 4.4) is
that after his speech, the third respondent said: " 'onna oya hamuduruva
huthige puthava mehata ganing sivura galola' and went upstairs. Rev.
Wimalasara (from the temple) was taken up. I heard Rev. Wimalasara being
beaten . . . I and the second petitioner could hear Sergeant Chumley taking
down Rev. Wimalasara's statement. I heard him shouting arid the sound of
assault."



Was the order to disrobe in the terms stated by Wimalasara or by Wimalasuriya?
Where was Wimalasara disrobed, if at all? Was Wimalasara who was at first
seated next to Sergeant Chumley later ordered to sit on the floor to be kicked
on his neck? No other petitioner says he saw Wimalasara disrobing or being
disrobed or

121  


being kicked. Wimalasuriya says he "heard" Wimalasara being beaten. On what
basis did Wimalasuriya come to that conclusion? Wimalasara says that after he
was kicked on the neck, the third respondent went downstairs. Wimalasuriya,
however, states that the OIC proceeded to kick and hit Chandana, ordered
Bandara to be brought up and beaten, he then beat Dayaratne and trampled him,
spoke to and beat Chandana again and then, after all that, "the two of them",
the third and fourth respondents, went downstairs. "Meanwhile", Wimalasuriya
says, he and Dayaratne "could hear Sergeant Chumley taking down Rev.
Wimalasara's statement. I heard him shouting and the sound of assault." If the
third and fourth respondents went downstairs, the assault could not have been
made by them. Wimalasara says that Chumley beat him, but Chumley has not been
made a respondent and he has been given no opportunity of stating his case. As
it was observed in _Alwis v._ _Raymond and Others_ (131), "natural justice
demands that we should refrain from coming to any finding or order as to the
involvement or liability of such a person." In any event how did Wimalasuriya,
who was downstairs, conclude that he "heard" Chumley taking down the
statement? In the light of the inconsistent versions of what was supposed to
have taken place, and in the absence of corroboration, I cannot hold that the
alleged assault on Wimalasara has been established.



**Paranavithana's Case**



Paranavithana (155/92) has not personally filed an affidavit, but at paragraph
3.3 of the petition filed in his name as one of several petitioners, and in
several affidavits filed by other petitioners in a narration of events
regarding the arrest at the temple in identical terms, and it seems to me, in
a highly artificial way (M.D. Daniel 147/92, 2.4, Dayananda 148/92, 3.4;
Bandara 152/92, 3.3; Chandanarathna 153/92, 2.4; Wimalasuriya 155/92, 3.3. Cf.
Seneviratne 146/92, 5.3) he is supposed to have been "slapped" by the fourth
respondent at the time of arrest. Rathana does not mention the incident. Even
assuming it to be true. I cannot regard such a trivial act as a violation of
Article 11. Nor, for the same reason, can I regard the alleged subsequent (M.
D. Daniel 147/92 3.5: Dayananda 148/92 4.4) slap given at the police Station
as a violation. Seneviratne (146/92 6.2) said that Paranavithane was hit with
a stick. In the

122  


petition in Application 155/92 in which Paranavithana is the third petitioner,
the Attorney‑at‑Law who has signed the Application states: "I verily believe
and have been informed that the OIC had beaten the third petitioner that
night. He had been assaulted and kicked and had been beaten with the pole that
SI Piyarathana was carrying." It is strange that Rathana, outside whose cell
Paranavithana was kept, did not see the incident or if he did why he chose to
ignore it in his affidavit. Nor does Seneviratne mention Paranavithana being
kicked. No violation of Paranavithana's rights guaranteed by Article 11 of the
Constitution have been established.



**Dayananda's Case**



Sunny Dayananda (Application 148/92) says in paragraph 4.3 of his affidavit
that the third respondent came up to him and hit him on the face. Then he hit
him on his knees "and the head many times (over 20) with the stick saying
"baya venna epa, thuvala venne ne, thuvala venne nethi vidihatagahanna api
igenaganay thiyenne." Seneviratne (146/92, 6.2) says: "He hit Sunny 25 times
on the head with the same stick saying, "Thuvala venne ne, thuvala novenna
gahana heti api igena genay thienne." Nandana Perera says (151/92, 3.5): "Next
he went up to Sanidayananda and hit him on the face. Then he hit him on the
head many times (over 20) with the stick saying "baya venna epa, thuvala venne
ne, thuvala venne nethi vidihata gahanna api igenegenay thiyenne."
Chandanaratne (153/92, 3.3) says: "Next he went up to Sanidayananda and hit
him on the face. Then he hit him on the head many times (over 20) with stick
saying "Baya venna epa, thuvala venne ne, thuvala venne nethi vidihata gahanna
api igenagenay thiyenne." What sort of credibility can one be reasonably
expected to attach to affidavits prepared in this way? And what does one make
of the following statement in paragraph 4.4 of the affidavit of Bandara
(152/92): "He kicked me once more and said "Meeta vediya gehavoth ila eta
kedenava, guti kannavath puluvan ekek nemey, viplava karanna heduvata." Did
the third respondent act with restraint because when it came to Bandara's turn
he had forgotten to use the special skills relating to assault he was supposed
to have acquired? If the observations in the **Greek** case quoted in
**Velmurugu** and in **Abeywickrama** guided the person who, prepared the
affidavits supporting Dayananda's

123  


allegations, it is a matter for regret that he chose to ignore the
observations of Wanasundera, J. in _Thadchanamoorthi_ with regard to the
supposed techniques of assault, and the observations of G. P. S. de Silva, J.
in _Abeywickrama_ on the question of proof.

__ The "stick" with which the man was supposed to have been hit, "over 20"
times, according to those who appear to have given up counting at a certain
point in time, and exactly 25 times according to Seneviratne, needs to be
described in order to understand the felt need on the part of the deponents to
introduce the supposed boast by the third respondent of the skills he had
learnt in hitting people without leaving incriminating injuries. The stick was
said to be "about four feet long, and slightly thicker than a brook‑stick"
which the fourth respondent was carrying and from time to time handed to the
third respondent for beating someone. (Wimalasuriya 155/92, 4.4; Seneviratne
146/92, 6.2; M. D. Daniel 147/92, 3.4 and 3.6; Dayananda 148/92, 4.4 and 4.5;
Rathana 149/92, 4.1; Nandana Perera 151/92, 3.5; Bandara 152/92, 4.4;
Chandanaratne 153/92, 3.3, 3.4). There is no medical evidence to support the
allegation of the assault (see the observations of G. P. S. de Silva, J. in
_Abeywickrama v. Dayaratne_ quoted earlier). If he was assaulted in the manner
alleged on the night of 27th February, surely the marks of the assault must
have been evident at the time of his release on 17th March? The lapse of time
could not have obliterated or made uncertain the harm sustained? Why was no
medical evidence submitted? In the circumstances, I hold that Sunny Dayananda
has failed to establish that his rights under Article 11 of the Constitution
have been violated.



**Rathana's Case**



Athureliya Rathana (149/92) in paragraph 4.1 of his affidavit states that
after dinner he fell asleep. He says: "I woke up around 1.30 a.m. upon hearing
the sound of someone being beaten. Mulinda also got up. A little while later,
the OIC came up to the cell and said: "Kawda methenta dennek damme? Moo
kawda?" He then took out Milinda and beat him. After that he removed my robe
and beat me, using his fists. He also kicked me and banged my head against the
wall. SI Piyarathana was carrying a stick. I started chanting the "karaniya

124



metta suthra". He said "thoge karaniya muththa" (sic.) "and continued to hit
me. He also said "Mo (sic.) thamay naayakaya, ara kollo okkama amaruve demme
moo. Huthige puthava maranava, balla." After that I heard him beating several
others."



Seneviratne, who shared a cell with Rathana, (146/92, 6.2) says that after he
himself was assaulted by the third respondent, "He then pulled Rev. Rathana
and started hitting him. Rathana started saying the 'karaniya metta sutta' and
the OIC continued to hit him saying "Karaniya metta; thota dennang karaniya
huththa." Seneviratne does not mention the **** disrobing, nor **** the
allegation that Rathana was kicked and that his head was banged against the
wall. Nor does Seneviratne mention the alleged statement about Rathana's role
in misleading the others and the vituperative words referred to by Rathana.



M. D. Daniel (147/92, 3.5), Dayananda (148/92, 4.4) and Nandana Perera
(151/92, 3.4) say that the third respondent asaulted Seneviratne. "Then I
heard him saying "galavapang hamudurvange sivura, tho thamay mun serama
amaaruve danne" and started assaulting the priest. Rev. Rathana started
telling the Karaniya metta sitra" (sic. ‑this is how it is in the affidavits
of Daniel, Dayananda and Nandana Perera). "The OIC said "Karaniya metta, thoge
karaniya huththa." and continued to beat him using foul language." Neither
Daniel nor Dayananda nor Nandana Perera make reference to Rathana being kicked
or of his head being banged against a wall. And whereas Rathana says he was
disrobed by the third respondent, Daniel, Dayananda and Nandana Perera say
they heard the third respondent ordering someone to remove the robe, adding at
that time a statement relating to Rathana's responsibility for getting the
others into difficulties. However, according to Rathana, that statements came
**after** the Karaniya‑metta‑sutra episode.



Ranawake (154/92, 4.5) has yet another version. He does not say he saw him
doing so but that he "heard" the third respondent "beating Rev. Rathana saying
"sivura galopiya huththige putha." Rev. Rathana started chanting the (sic.)
"Karaniya metta Sutra" and the OIC said "Karaniyametta, thoge karaniya
huththa." I heard people being beaten up and cries of pain and the voices the
OIC and SI Piyarathana using bad language for about 1 hour . . ." Was Rathana

125  


disrobed by the third respondent, or ordered to be disrobed by a third party
or ordered to disrobe himself? was he disrobed at all?



Wimalasuriya is one of the seven petitioners in SC Application 155/92. The
only affidavit filed with the petition is that of Wimalasuriya. In paragraph
4.4 of that affidavit he says: "I and the other petitioners heard the OIC
abusing Rev. Rathana ‑ "Ko oya hamuduruvo huththige putha? Oka thamay me kollo
okkoma amaruve demme." While he was beating Rev. Rathana, he started chanting
the Karaniya metta suthra. The OIC said "Karaniya metta? thoge karaneeya
huththa." The third respondent was not looking for Rathana; and so a question
with regard to where Rathana was, or trying to establish his identity seems
hardly probable. Wimalasuriya does not say a word about the alleged disrobing
of Rathana, nor about the precise nature of the assault alleged by Rathana.



Chandanaratne (153/92, 3.3) says he saw Seneviratne being kicked by "him" and
that "he" hit him with the stick the fourth respondent was **** carrying and
heard him saying certain things to Seneviratne. Were the references to "him"
and "he" to the third respondent? Chandanaratne makes no mention at all of
what was supposed to have happened to Rathana.



If the attempt of Athureliya Rathana, the petitioner in S.C. Application
149/92 to seek solace at a time of personal crisis by the recitation of the
karaniya metta sutra was, in the manner described, met with coarsely expressed
disapproval by the third respondent, I am of the opinion that such conduct was
extremely disappointing and deplorable. Nevertheless it did not constitute a
violation of Rathana's rights guaranteed by Article 11 of the Constitution.
According to his own affidavit, he was a **** well‑seasoned man who by
experience was fortified against the sort of things he experienced so as not
to be disturbed by them. Even if the things he complains of did take place,
they could not have reached such levels of intensity so as to have broken his
moral resistance. Indeed, he is supposed to have observed with perspicacity,
that even a cuff or two was not something of an unexpected or shocking nature.
The evidence does not in my opinion establish that Rathana's rights under
Article 11 of the Constitution had been violated.

** 126  
 **

**Seneviratne's Case**



Malinda Seneviratne (146/92) in paragraph 6.2 of his affidavit says that he
was put into Rathana's cell "around 7.30". Rathana (149/92, 4.1) confirms
this. Nandana Perera (151/92, 3.3) says that dinner was served "around 10
p.m." and that "By this time Malinda had been put in the same cell as Rev.
Rathana." However, Daniel (147/92, 3.5) and Dayananda (148/92, 4.4) state that
Seneviratne was put into Rathana's cell after dinner. All the petitioners,
including Seneviratne and Rathana, agree that dinner was served at 10 p.m.



It is sufficient to assume that at sometime before dinner was served ‑ 10 p.m.
‑ or not long thereafter, Seneviratne was placed in the same cell as Rathana,
although one begins to become cautious about Seneviratne's ability to
accurately recall the events of that night.



Caution begins to turn into doubt as I proceed to further consider
Seneviratne's affidavit. He says, "I was woken by the sound of someone being
beaten by someone who was shouting in filth. I heard him say "umbalava ada mas
karanava, Hama galavanawa huththige puthage." I was terrified. Rev. Rathana
said: "baya venna epa. gutiyak dekak kanna vey. Bayada?" I said "ne, upset
ekak ne." Not one of the other petitioners refers to what Seneviratne says he
heard at the time of waking. Ranawake says (154/93, 4.4) that one of the
threats uttered was **" Thova ada mas karanava". **However, it appears from
Ranawake's affidavit that remark was made at about dinne time, while he was
eating his meal. Later 154/92, (444.5), after the alleged assault on
Seneviratne and Rathana and others, the third and fourth respondents were
supposed to have abused the petitioners "for about 1 hour". And after that the
OIC went up to Ranawake's cell with a stick and said: "mata den hathi, heta
udeta thova mas karanawa." Nandana Perera (1511/92, 3.5) says the threat "Heta
mas karanawa" was made. However, that was said according to Nandana Perera
**after** the third respondent had inquired how Seneviratne had come to be put
into the cell occupied by Rathana. That questioning, according to Seneviratne,
was after he had conversed with Rathana **soon after waking up.**

127  


After referring to his conversation with Rathana, Seneviratne states as
follows: "About 10 minutes later the OIC of the Police Station, Mr.
Karunatillake, came near the cell and said: "Kawda methannata dennek damme,
gannawa moova (that's me) eliyata." I was asked to come out and he assaulted
me beating me with his fists (I got blows on my face, back and upper arms). He
was smelling of alcohol (sic.). While he was hitting me he was shouting in
filth: "Umbalava marana eka sulu deyak yako. Kariyo ayeth patangannada
hadanawa veda?" Finally, he kicked me (?)" (sic.) "and instructed one of the
policemen to tie my wrists and beat me on against (sic.) the wall of the
room." Seneviratne then gives his version of the alleged assault on Rathana
and says: "after that he hit Paranavithana with the stick that SI Piyarathana
was carrying and he came up to me and said "Tho emarican karaya neda. Api
dannawa tho emarikavata giye ay kiyala.". He kicked me again and hit me on my
fingers with the stick (it was about 4 feet long and slightly thicker than a
broom stick), handed to him by SI Piyarathana."



Rathana (149/92, 4.1) says the OIC said: "Kawda methenata dennek damme, Moo
kawda? "He then took out Malinda and beat him." None of the other things
mentioned by Seneviratne are referred to by Rathana, his cell‑mate.



Daniel (147/92., 3.5) however says that when the OIC came to the cell he hit
Paranavithana on the face **before** dealing with Rathana and Seneviratne and
not **afterwards** as Seneviratne recalls. Moreover, Daniel (147/92, 3.5) and
Nandana Perera (151/92, 3.4) say that the third respondent, seeing
Seneviratne, asked "Me mokada?"; to which someone replied "Oya ara ingreesi
guruwaraya". It was then that the OIC was supposed to have asked who put them
together. Dayananda (148/92, 4.4) supports the version of Daniel and Nandana
Perera.



According to Daniel, Dayananda and Nandana Perera, the OIC said "emarican
karayava gannava eliyata", and not "moova gannava eliyata", as Seneviratne
states. Neither Daniel nor Dayananda refer to the threats which Seneviratne
says were made when he was being assaulted.

128  


The alleged second assault on Malinda Seneviratne is referred to in an
identically worded paragraph in the affidavits of Daniel (147/92, 3.6) and
Dayananda (148/92, 4.5). The first sentence of those two paragraphs are as
follows: "He next came up to Malinda again, kicked him saying. "Emarican
karaya, api dannava tho emericavata giye ay kiyala" and hit him with the stick
that Piyarathna was carrying."



Chandanaratne (153/92, 3.3) says nothing else about Seneviratne's case except
as follows: "I saw him come up to Malinda and kick him saying "Emarican
karaya, api dannawa tho emaricavata, giye ay kiyala" and hit him with the
stick that Piyarathana was carrying."



Ranawake (154/92, 4.5) has a unique version. He says "I heard him say: "thoda
emaricaven aave?" and beating Malinda".



Wimalasuriya (155/92, 4.4) has merely this to say: "I and the other
petitioners saw while the others heard Malinda and Sani Dayananda being
beaten".



The evidence relating to Seneviratne's case has too many inconsistencies to
make it probable. In any event, even assuming that he may have received a blow
or two, it was probably not something that so troubled or distressed him as to
cause discomposure. When Rathana told him that a blow or two might be expected
and inquired whether he was afraid, Seneviratne replied "ne upset ekak ne".
Seneviratne has failed to establish that his rights under Article 11 of the
Constitution have been violated.



**Chandanaratne's Case**



Chandanaratne (153/92, 3.3) states that their hands were not untied to enable
the petitioners to eat. He kept his head on his knees and tried to sleep while
he was on the stairs. Around 2 p.m. he was "awaken by the sound of someone
shouting in pain." After relating his version of the alleged assaults on
Seneviratne, Dayananda and "a priest", he says that "all of a sudden the OIC
kicked me on my head

129  


several times saying: "mokoda yako katha karanne?" When he was with his head
on his knees "without looking back or saying a word." He says he was in a
state of "complete shock", and "extremely down hearted". He says "his head was
full of all kinds of fearful thoughts "remembering films I had seen of people
being beaten" and felt his "body was burning".



After some time (Chandanaratne says 3.4) the OIC came up to him and said
"Moova lihagena varella, oka eththa kiyanawa". He was then taken upstairs
where the third respondent made him sit down, bent his neck and started
beating him. He then took the stick from the fourth respondent and hit him on
his knees while kicking his ribs. After some time he stopped hitting him,
threatened to break his skull in two, asked him about the meeting in the
temple and his occupation, "lectured" him "at length" about the JVP, ordered
him to be re‑chained and said: "Thopita hariyata gehuve ne. Thava davas
anoovak innavane, eththa nokivoth thopi serama ivaray."



Bandara (152/92, 4.4) does not mention the alleged kicks for talking. However
he says "Chandana" was questioned about his family, after which the OIC
"kicked and hit Chandana and hammered his head many times again (sic) the
wooded (sic) hand rail of the staircase." After referring to other incidents,
Bandara says "Chandana who had been beaten earlier also was brought up again
and beaten again by the OIC."



Dayananda (148/92, 4.5) and Daniel (147/92, 3.6) each make a single reference
in identical terms to Chandanaratne: "I heard him beating Chandana again"



Seneviratne (146/92, 6.2) says he heard the third respondent asking that
"Chandana be freed. He was taken up and assaulted for about 20 minutes".



Bandara and Seneviratne seem to exaggerate Chandanaratne's own story.
Chandanaratne does not complain of his head being struck on the rail nor does
he complain of an assault lasting twenty minutes.

 130



In my view of the evidence, I have serious doubts about the truth of
Chandanaratne's allegation and I hold that Chandanaratne has failed to
establish that his rights guaranteed by Article 11 of the Constitution have
been violated.



**Declaration in respect of Article 11  
 **

For the reasons given, I declare that none of the respondents, including the
third and fourth respondents, have violated the fundamental rights of any of
the petitioners guaranteed by Article 11 of the Constitution.



**Infringements of Article 14(1) (a)**



When the matter was supported on 11.5.92 for leave to proceed, learned Counsel
for the petitioner moved to amend the petition by adding the following
additional averment; "The respondents above-­named by their action as
aforesaid have violated the petitioner's freedom of speech and expression
guaranteed by Articles 14(1) (a) of the Constitution." Learned Counsel further
moved to amend the prayer "(b)" by adding a reference to Article 14(1) (a).



The amendments were allowed and leave to 'proceed was granted in respect of
the alleged violations of Articles 11, 13(1), 13(2), 14(1) (a) and 14(1) (c)
of the Constitution. Duly amended petitions with notice to the
Attorney‑General were filed on 18th May 1992.



According to the petitioners, when they were about to resume their discussions
after lunch, a police party stifled any further proceedings by arresting and
incarcerating them. According to the third and fourth respondents, the
petitioners had resumed their discussions, but after listening to them for a
time, further discussion was prevented by arresting and detaining them.



In either case, the petitioners', claim that their rights under Article 14(1)
(a) of the Constitution were thereby violated: Article 14(1) (a) provides that
"every citizen is entitled to the freedom of speech and expression including
publication."

131  


The solicitude shown by this Court for the freedom of speech and expression in
such decisions as _Ratnasara Thero v. Udugampola_ (153) __ ; _Joseph Perera v.
Attorney ‑General _(35) _Deniyakumburugedera Sriyani Lakshmi Ekanayake v.
Inspector Herath and Others_ (27);; _Abeyratne v Edison Gunatilleke and
Others_ (154); _Dayasena Amaratunga v. P. Sirimal and Others_ (36); __ and
_Shantha Wijeratne v. Vijitha Perera and Others_ (17) _,_ should be sufficient
assurance of its importance. However, one notes with genuine dismay that
transgressions continue.



Yet this hardly comes as a surprise. When one considers the struggle of the U.
S. Supreme Court from the now famous "footnote 4" of the opinion of Chief
Justice Stone in _United States v. Carolene Products Co._ (155) __ to
_Brandenberg v. Ohid_ (156) __ and _Hess v. Indiana_ (157) __ in interpreting
the First Amendment, so as to be able to evolve guidelines that, on the one
hand protect free speech, and on the other, the safety of the State, one
begins to have some sympathy for law enforcement officers "on the beat" who
may, given the curricula in schools and other institutions, have at best a
vague ideal of the values of freedom of expression and little else to guide
them.



It is not easy to understand the system of freedom of expression as envisioned
by the language of the Constitution. As Professor Thomas Emerson observed
**(Toward a General Theory of the First Amendment,** 1963 72 Yale LJ 877,
894): "The theory of freedom of expression is a sophisticated and even complex
one. It does not come naturally to the ordinary citizen but needs to be
learned. It must be restated and reiterated not only for each generation, but
for each new situation."



I appreciate the dangers of encapsulation. Yet I shall endeavour to call
attention to some matters of importance in understanding Article 14(1) (a) and
the cognate provisions of the Constitution that are relevant to the
circumstances of the matters before me. I shall endeavour to focus attention
on the three intrinsic bases of the right to freedom of expression, namely,
the desire to discover the truth, the need of every man to achieve personal
fulfillment, and the demands of a democratic regime.



The very first Article of the Constitution proclaims Sri Lanka to be a
**democratic** State. "Democratic" is derived from the Greek words

**132  
 **

**demos** meaning "the people" and **kratos** meaning "rule". "Democracy is
the rule of the people. Although at a time when the Greek States had small
populations and limited franchise it was possible for the people to directly
decide every important issue, today, with large populations, and universal
suffrage, in an infinitely more complex society, the people cannot do so. For
practical reasons, the people must act in a modern democracy through their
elected representatives. Although, as Article 3 of the Constitution says,
Sovereignty is with the people, the right to make political decisions is not
exercised directly by the whole body of citizens but through representatives
chosen by and answerable to them.



And so Article 4 of our Constitution provides, among other things, that the
legislative power of the people shall be exercised by Parliament consisting of
elected representatives of the people; that the executive power of the people
shall be exercised by the President elected by the people, and that the
judicial power of the people shall be exercised by Parliament, which consists
of elected representatives of the people, through courts and tribunals and
institutions.



Although the system of self‑Government thus envisaged is one in which the
representatives of the majority of electors are entrusted with the powers of
the State, such powers are exercised within a framework of constitutional
restraints designed to guarantee all citizens the enjoyment of certain
fundamental rights which are set out in Chapter 11 of the Constitution. These
rights, including the right of free speech, are important both as values unto
themselves, benefitting the individual, and as having an instrumental value,
bringing aggregate benefits to society.



Freedom of thought and expression is an indispensable condition if Sri Lanka
is to be more than a nominally representative democracy, Speech concerning
public affairs is more than self‑expression: it is the essence of
self‑government. To make an informed and educated decision in choosing his
elected representative, in deciding to vote for one group of persons rather
than another, a voter must necessarily have the opportunity of being informed
and educated with regard to proposed policies **.** The election of
representatives is based on an appeal **** to reason and not to the emotions.
Party symbols

133  


and faces on posters merely stand for ideas. That sometimes is not the case in
practice; but a system of government based on representative democracy assumes
it to be so. There can be no appeal to reason without the freedom to express
ideas and propagate them and discuss them with a view to forming private
opinions and mobilizing such ideas to be accepted in the competition for the
right to represent the people. How else can a voter be convinced of the
validity and benefit of what a candidate says he stands for and promises to
espouse? (As to the way in which public opinion is mobilized though party
politics, see the observations of Sharvananda CJ, in _Gooneratne v. De Silva
and the A. G_.(158)).



He must be able to freely and openly, without previous restraint or fear of
harassment, discuss such matters and obtain clarification so as to be able to
form his own judgment on matters affecting his life.



Moreover, it is only by discussion that proposals adduced can be modified so
that the political, social and economic measures desired by the voter can be
brought about. The right of free speech enhances the potential of individual
contribution to social welfare, thus enlarging the prospects for individual
self‑fulfilment.



And in between elections it is only through free debate and exchange of ideas
that the elected majority can be made to remain responsive to and reflect the
will of the people. In respect of a few, exceptional matters the Constitution
insists that the people shall directly decide the matter at a Referendum.
However there are many other matters of public concern which arise in between
elections which cannot be decided by universal suffrage but are nevertheless
matters on which the individual citizen must communicate his ideas if
representative democracy is to work. The election of representatives does not
imply that such representatives may always do as they will. Members of the
public must be free to influence intelligently the decisions of those persons
for the time being empowered to act for them which may affect themselves.
Every legitimate interest of the people or a section of them should have the
opportunity of being made known and felt in the political process. Freedom of
speech ensures that minority opinions are heard and not smothered by a

134



tyrannizing majority. It is the only way of enabling the majority in power to
have an educated sympathy for the rights and aspirations of other members of
the community. The health of a society of self­-government is nurtured by the
contributions of individuals to its functioning. It is the way that makes
possible the valuable and distinctive contribution of a minority group to the
ideas and beliefs of our society.



Moreover, in a representative democracy there must be a continuing public
interest in the workings of government which should be open to scrutiny and
criticism. Indeed, a central value of the free press, free speech, and freedom
of association and assembly lies in checking the abuse of power by those in
authority.



The unfettered interchange of ideas from diverse and antagonistic sources,
however unorthodox or controversial, however shocking or offensive or
disturbing they may be to the elected representatives of the people or any
sector of the population. however hateful to the prevailing climate of
opinion, even ideas which at the time a vast majority of the people and their
elected representatives believe to be false and fraught with evil
consequences, must be protected and must not be abridged if the truth is to
prevail. Freedom of speech does not mean the right to express only generally
accepted, but also dangerous, aggravating and deviant ideas which the
community hated and from which it recoiled. As Justice Jackson of the United
States Supreme Court once observed: "Freedom to differ is not limited to
things that do not matter much. That would be a mere shadow of freedom. The
test of its substance is the right to differ as to things that touch the heart
of the existing order." Wide open and robust dissemination of ideas and
counter thought are essential to the success of intelligent self‑government.



No person or group of persons, not even majorities, can claim to have a
monopoly of good ideas. Many a strange and singular idea has in time, through
argument and debate, had the power to get itself accepted as the truth. Most
people once believed Galileo to be a dangerous food and a large number of
people with fanatical zeal behind the iron curtain once founded their systems
of Government on the philosophy of Marx and Lenin until Glasnost opened the
way to

135



the free flow of information and ideas and the collapse of a repressive
system. There is a vital societal interest in preserving an uninhibited market
place of ideas in which truth will ultimately prevail. _(Red Lion Broadcasting
Co. v. FCC_ ) __ (159). An assumption underlying Article 14(1) (a) is that
speech can rebut speech, propaganda will answer propaganda and that free
debate of ideas will result in the wisest policies at least for the time
being.



Indeed, the initial justification for a system of free speech was its value in
preventing human error through ignorance. In 1644, John Milton, during his
battle with the English censorship laws, in his tract, **Aeropaqitica, A
speech for the Liberty of Unlicensed Printing to the Parliament of England,
said:**



"Though all the winds of doctrine were let loose to play upon the earth, so
truth be in the field, we do injuriously, by licensing and prohibiting, to
misdoubt her strength. Let her and falsehood grapple; whoever knew truth put
to the worse in a free and open encounter?"



In 1859, Hohn Stuart Mill in his essay **On Liberty** expanded Milton's
arguments by his recognition of the public good ‑ the public enlightenment ‑
which results from the free exchange of ideas. He said:



"First, if any opinion is compelled to silence, that opinion for aught we can
certainly know, to be true. To deny this is to assume our own infallibility.
Secondly, though this silenced opinion be in error, it may, and very commonly
does, contain a portion of the truth; and since the generally prevailing
opinion on any subject is rarely or never the whole truth, it is only by the
collision of adverse opinions that the remainder of the truth had any chance
being supplied. Thirdly, even if the received opinion be not only true but the
whole truth; unless it is suffered to be, and actually is, vigorously and
earnestly contested, it will, by most of those who receive it, be held in the
manner of a prejudice, with little comprehension of feeling of its rational
grounds. And not only this, but fourthly, the meaning of the doctrine itself
will be in danger of being lost or enfeebled ..."

136



Among the earliest and best known judicial articulations of the value of free
speech in promoting the search for knowledge and truth is that of Justice
Holmes in his dissenting opinion in‑ _Abrams v. United States_ (160). He said:



Persecution for the expression of opinions seems to me perfectly logical. If
you have no doubt of your premises or your power and want a result with all
your heart you naturally express your wishes in law and sweep away all
opposition. To all opposition by speech seems to indicate that you think the
speech impotent, as when a man says that he has squared the circle, or that
you do not care wholeheartedly for the result, or that you doubt either your
power or your premises. But when men have realized that time has upset many
fighting faiths, they may come to believe even more than they believe the very
foundations of their conduct that the ultimate good desired is better reached
by free trade in ideas ‑ that the best test of truth is the power of the
thought to get itself accepted in the competition of the market, and that
truth is the only ground upon which their wishes safely can be carried out.
That at any rate is the theory of our Constitution. It is an experiment, as
all life is an experiment. Every year if not every day we have to wager our
salvation upon some prophecy based upon imperfect knowledge. While that
experiment is part of our system I think that we should be eternally vigilant
against attempts to check the expression of opinions that we loathe and
believe to be fraught with death, unless they so imminently threaten immediate
interference with the lawful and pressing purposes of the law that an
immediate check is required to save the country. [Only] the emergency that
makes it immediately dangerous to leave the correction of evil counsels to
time warrants making any exception to the sweeping command, congress shall
make no law abridging the freedom of speech. Of course I am speaking only of
expressions of opinion and exhortations, which were all that were uttered
[here].



An equally well known judicial articulation of the values of free speech was
the opinion of Justice Brandeis, (with Justice Holmes concurring) in _Whitney
v. California_ (39) .Although freedom of speech

137  


is recognized as one of the pre‑eminent rights of democratic theory and the
touchstone of individual liberty, the framers of the American Constitution
(1787) felt no need to include in the original document a provision upholding
a general theory of freedom of speech. It was in 1791 by the First Amendment ‑
the progenitor of Article 14(1) (a) (b) and (c) of our own Constitution ‑ that
provision was made that "Congress shall make no law ... abridging the freedom
of speech, or of the press, or the right of the people peaceably to assemble
..." Justice Brandeis, said: _ _



Those who won our independence believed that the final end of the State was to
make men free to develop their faculties; and that in its government the
deliberative forces should prevail over the arbitrary. They valued liberty
both as an end and as a means. They believed liberty to be the secret of
happiness and courage to be the secret of liberty. They believed that freedom
to think as you wish and to speak as you think are means indispensable to the
discovery and spread of political truth; that without free speech and assembly
discussion would be futile; that with them, discussion affords ordinarily
adequate protection against the dissemination of noxious doctrine; that the
greatest menace to freedom is an inert people; that public discussion is a
political duty; and that this should be a fundamental principle of the
American Government. They recognized the risks to which all human institutions
are subject. But they knew that order cannot be secured merely through fear of
punishment for its infraction; that it is hazardous to discourage thought,
hope and imagination; that fear breeds repression; that repression breeds
hate; that hate menaces stable government; that the path of safety lies in the
opportunity to discuss freely supposed grievances and proposed remedies; and
that the fitting remedy for evil counsels is good ones. Believing in the power
of reason as applied through public discussion, they eschewed silence coerced
by law ‑ the argument of force in its worst form. Recognizing the occasional
tyrannies of governing majorities, they amended the Constitution so that free
speech and assembly should be guaranteed.



One may think what one may wish, but no intelligent person in his senses
articulates everything he thinks. As Stanford J. observed in

138  


_Gitlow v. New York_ (29). "It is a fundamental principle, long established,
that freedom of speech and the press which is secured by the Constitution,
does not confer an absolute right to speak or publish without responsibility,
whatever one may choose." And those who cannot restrain themselves are in many
ways prevented by law from speaking as they think, for the societal value of
speech must on occasion be subordinate to other values and considerations. As
Professor A. Meiklejohn **(Free Speech and Its Relation to Self Government)**
once observed, the constitutional provision relating to free speech "is not
the guardian of unregulated talkativeness." Laws restraining speech are
commonplace. The limitations imposed by the law of defamation are well known.
Laws against perjury, extortion and fraud prohibit speech. So does much of the
law of contracts. Indeed, no one contends that citizens are free to say
anything, anywhere at any time. As Holmes, J. observed, in _Schenck v. United
States_ (161) , a decision cited with approval in _Mallawarachchi v.
Seneviratne_ (40). "The most stringent protection of free speech would not
protect a man in falsely shouting fire in a theater and causing panic."
Certain forms of speech, or speech in certain contexts, or laws or regulations
not intended to control the content of speech but incidentally limiting its
unfettered exercise, have often been considered outside the scope of
constitutional protection. As Justice Brandeis observed in _Whitney v.
California_ (39), a decision followed in _Ekanayake v. Herath_ _Banda_ (27);
and in _Amaratunga v. Sirimal_ (36):



"The right of free speech, the right to teach and the right of assembly are of
course, fundamental rights ... But, although the rights of free speech and
assembly are fundamental, they are not in their nature absolute. Their
exercise is subject to restriction, if the particular restriction proposed is
required in order to protect the state from destruction or from serious
injury, political, economic or moral."



In _Dennis v. United States_ (58) Chief Justice Vinson said:



"Whatever theoretical merit there may be to the argument that there is a
"right" to rebellion against dictatorial governments is without force where
the existing structure of the government provides for peaceful and orderly
change. We reject any

139



principle of governmental helplessness in the face of preparation for
revolution, which principle, carried to its logical conclusion, must lead to
anarchy. No one could conceive that it is not within the power of Congress to
prohibit acts intended to overthrow the Government by force and violence ...
Overthrow of the Government by force and violence is certainly a substantial
enough interest for the Government to limit speech. Indeed, this is the
ultimate value of any society, for if a society cannot protect its very
structure from armed internal attack, it must follow that no subordinate value
can be protected."



It has never been doubted that when the Government is in the throes of a
struggle for the very existence of the State, the security of the community
may be protected. (Per Holmes J. in _Abrams v. U.S.A._ (supra); _Whitney v.
California_ (supra), _Gitlow v. New York_ (supra). _Near v. Minnesota_ (162)
_._



Article 15 of the Constitution makes it very clear that the rights of free
speech, (14) (1) (a), assembly (14) (1) (b) and association (14) (1) (c) are
not absolute. Article 15 provides, _inter alia_ , as follows:  


(1)......



(2) The exercise and operation of the fundamental right declared and
recognized by Article 14(1) (a) shall be subject to such restrictions as may
be prescribed by law in the interests of racial and religious harmony or in
relation to parliamentary privilege, contempt of court, defamation or
incitement to an offence.



(3) The exercise and operation of the fundamental right declared and
recognized by Article 14(1) (b) shall be subject to such restrictions as may
be prescribed by law in the interests of racial and religious harmony or
national economy.



(4) The exercise and operation of the fundamental right declared and
recognized by Article 14(1) (c) shall be subject to such restrictions as may
be prescribed by law in the interests of racial and religious harmony or
national economy.

140



(5)......



(6)......



(7) The exercise and operation of all the fundamental rights declared and
recognized by Articles 12, 13(1), 13(2) and 14 shall be subject to such
restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the interests of national
security, public order and the protection of public health or morality, or for
the purpose of securing the recognition and respect for the rights and
freedoms of others, or of meeting the just requirements of the general welfare
of a democratic society. For the purposes of this paragraph "law" includes
regulations made under the law for the time being relating to public security.



(8) The exercise and operation of the fundamental rights declared and
recognized by Article 12(1), 13 and 14 shall, in their application to members
of the armed Forces, Police Force and other forces charged with the
maintenance of public order, be subject to such restrictions as may be
prescribed by law in the interests of the proper discharge of their duties and
the maintenance of discipline among them.



After balancing interests, albeit at a very general, wholesale level, the
makers of the Constitution have in Article 15 made a threshold, exclusionary
categorization, _inter alia,_ of the varieties of speech, assembly and
association that are not protected absolutely but the exercise and operation
of which may be limited by law. Where restrictions in respect of those classes
are imposed by an **Act of Parliament** we are precluded from inquiring into
or pronouncing upon or in any manner calling in question the validity of such
an Act on any ground whatsoever (Article 80(3) of the Constitution). Article
15(7) of the Constitution provides that "law" includes regulations made under
law for the time being relating to public security. While it is a matter for
the President and not Courts of Law to decide whether there is a state of
Emergency and to decide that regulations may be necessary or expedient to deal
with such a situation ‑ See _Yasapala v. Wickramasinghe_ (163) ; _Abeywardene
v. Perera_ (164), yet, in certain circumstances, the validity of the
regulations may be subject to

141  


judicial scrutiny. (See _Siriwardene v. Liyanage_ (71); _Joseph Perera v A.G._
(35). See also _Wickremabandu v. Herath_ (26)).



In addition to restrictions prescribed by law in respect of the categories
referred to by the Constitution, there may be utterances that are no essential
part of any exposure of ideas and are of such slight social value as a step in
truth that any benefit that may be derived from them is outweighed by the
social interest in order and morality. ( _Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire_ (165).
Thus it has been said that resort to rude epithets or personal abuse is not in
any proper sense communication of information or opinion safeguarded by the
Constitution. ( _Cantwell v. Connecticut_ (166). What value is to be attached
to a speech claiming protection and whether the right is outweighed by
competing state interest and societal concerns is a matter for the
determination of the Court having regard to the circumstances of each case,
for speech interacts with too many values, in too many complicated ways to be
subject to a single formula.



The respondents did not deny that a necessary consequence of the arrests and
detentions was a termination for the time being of the expressive and
communicative activities of the petitioners and a probable chilling of such
future activities. However, they denied the averments of the petitioners that
there was a contravention of Article 14(1) (a)



The respondents did not seek to justify the alleged violations of Article
14(1) (a) by reference to any law made in accordance with Article 15 or
otherwise proscribing the use of language designed to prevent any substantive
evil which expressly required, empowered or enabled them to extinguish or in
any way temporarily limit the petitioners' rights under Article 14(1) (a) of
the Constitution. Nor are these appeals from convictions for offences
committed under any law. In these proceedings Regulation 23(a) of 1989 was the
principal provision relied upon by the respondents as a justification. That
Regulation makes it an offence to conspire to overthrow the Government of Sri
Lanka otherwise than by lawful means. Attempting or preparing to overthrow or
doing any act or conspiracy to do or attempting or preparing to do any act
"calculated to overthrow" or with the "object or intention of overthrowing",
or as a "means of

142  


overthrowing" the Government otherwise than by lawful means are reached by the
provisions of the Regulation. That provision does not control the content of
speech but incidentally limits its exercise in certain circumstances.



The respondents arrested the petitioners and prevented them from proceeding
with their discussions. Although they were not by express statutory provision
empowered to prohibit the use of speech advocating the overthrow of the
Government, yet if there were utterances directed to inciting or producing
imminent action to overthrow the Government otherwise than by lawful means and
such utterances were likely to incite or produce such action, the respondents
were entitled to terminate the discussion. (Cf. _Brandenberg v. Ohio_ (156);
_Hess v. Indians_ (157).



As we have seen in discussing the question of arrest in relation to the
violation of Article 13(1), there was no action to overthrow the Government by
unlawful means being advocated at all. The petitioners had no purpose of
helping to make the Ratawesi Peramuna an instrument of terrorism or violence
which would menace the peace and welfare of the State. They were not engaged
in the development of an apparatus designed and dedicated to overthrow the
Government by unlawful means. The petitioners were considering matters of
personal concern and were anxious to mobilize public opinion to accept their
views so that they might replace those in power with other representatives who
may give effect to their views. They were critical of what they regarded as a
"sorry scheme of things" and, like Omar Khayyam, wanted to remould things
nearer to their "heart's desire". This was, as we have seen in considering the
question of the violation of Article 13(1) of the Constitution, perfectly
legitimate, even with regard to agitations for changes of the Constitution
which permitted a supposed unsatisfactory state of affairs. (See especially
the reference to the comments of Jefferson). Moreover, as we have seen, such
activities, for several reasons in a democratic society such as our own, in
addition to the "safety‑valve" aspect referred to earlier, must be regarded as
not only permissible and highly desirable, but also as necessary.

_ _ **143  
 **

**DECLARATION AND ORDER IN RESPECT OF ARTICLE 14(1) (A)**



For the reasons explained I declare that the fundamental right of freedom of
speech and expression guaranteed by Article 14(1) (a) of the Constitution were
violated by the respondents in respect of Malinda Channa Pieris the applicant
in S.C. Application 146/92; M. D. Daniel the applicant in S.C. Application
147/92; Singappuli Hewage Dayananda, the applicant in S.C. Application 148/92;
Athureliye Rathana (Ranjith), the applicant in S.C. Application 149/92;
Kuruwitage Nandana Perera, applicant in S.C. Application 151/92; Jayasinghe
Mudiyanselage Janaka Priyantha Bandara, the applicant in S.C. Application
152/92; Pallimulla Hewa Geeganage Pradeep Chandanaratne, the applicant in S.C.
Application 153/92; Ranawake Arachchige Patali Champika Ranawake, the
applicant in S.C. Application 154/92 and the following applicants in S.C.
Application 155/92, namely, Avalikara Galappathige Muditha Malika
Wimalasuriya, Gileemalage Janaka Priyantha Dayaratne, Karunaratne
Paranavithana, Weerasekera Mudalige Anura Weerasekera, Rev. Kalupahana
Piyarathana, Rev. Ambalanthota Premarathana and Rev. Kuthulgala Upali.



I make order that each and every one of the persons named in the preceding
paragraph ‑ Wimalasara, the applicant in SC Application 150/92 is not included
‑ shall be severally paid a sum of Rs. 5000 by the State for the violation of
the right of free speech guaranteed by Article 14(1) of the Constitution.



**VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 14(1) (C)**



The petitioners state that by arresting and detaining them, their rights
guaranteed by Article 14(1) (c) of the Constitution were violated. Article
14(1) (c) provides that "Every citizen is entitled to the freedom of
association."



Free speech is so linked with other rights guaranteed by the Constitution that
one might say with Justice Cardozo that it is "the matrix, the indispensable
condition of nearly every other form of freedom." ( _Palko v._ _Connecticut_
(167). And freedom of association is equally linked with other freedoms
including freedom of thought,

144  


conscience and religion, including the freedom to have or to adopt a religion
or belief of his choice (Article 10), the right not to be discriminated
against on the grounds of race, religion, language, caste, sex, political
opinion, place of birth (Article 12(2) and the right of free speech and
expression (14) (1) (a), the freedom of peaceful assembly (14) (1) (b), the
freedom to form and join a trade union (14) (1) (d), the freedom to manifest
his religion or belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching (14) (1)
(e), the freedom to enjoy and promote his own culture and to use his own
language (14) (1) (f) and the freedom to engage by himself or in association
with others in any lawful occupation, profession trade, business or
enterprise. Group association does advance the enjoyment of certain rights.



For instance, effective advocacy of both public and private points of view,
particularly controversial ones, is undeniably enhanced by group association.
Freedom of expression includes not only the individual's right to speak, but
also his right to advocate, and his right to join with his fellows in an
effort to make that advocacy effective. (See _NAACP v. Alabama_ (168); per
Haarlan J. in _NAACP v. Button_ (169)). Freedom of speech, freedom of assembly
and freedom of association are cognate rights. However the right to freedom of
association is a general, independent constitutional right recognized
specifically by Article 14(1) (c), and not merely one that is keyed to the
exercise of the right of free speech.



Freedom of association is protected in two distinct senses: (a) freedom of
expressive association and (b) freedom of intimate association. _(Roberts v_.
_United States Jaycees_ (170) _._ There is no indication in the petitions as
to how Article 14(1) (c) was violated.



In the _Roberts case_ (170) __ Brennan J. pointed out that in one line ‑of
decisions the Court had concluded that "choices to enter into and maintain
certain intimate human relationships in safeguarding the individual freedom
that is central to our constitutional scheme," should be protected. This type
of freedom of association is concerned with the formation and preservation of
certain highly personal relationships connected with family relationships and
personal decisions such as the freedom to choose one's spouse. The freedom of
intimate association is deemed important enough to be

145



constitutionally protected because certain kinds of personal bonds play a
critical role in the culture and traditions of a nation by "cultivating and
transmitting shared ideals and beliefs; they thereby foster diversity and act
as critical buffers between the individual and the power of the State.
Moreover, the constitutional shelter afforded such relationships reflects the
realization that individuals draw much of their emotional enrichment from
close ties with others. Protecting these relationships from unwarranted state
interference therefore safeguards the ability independently to define one's
identity that is central to any concept of liberty. The personal affiliations
that exemplify these considerations [are] distinguished by such attributes as
relative smallness, a high degree of selectivity in decisions to begin and
maintain the affiliation, and seclusion from others in critical aspects of the
relationship."



The Ratawesi Peramuna, lacking these qualities, seems remote from the concerns
giving rise to this constitutional protection. It was, as the petitioners say,
a "broad front" comprising persons from all sections of the community. As
Rathana (SC Application 149/92) states in paragraph 2.5 of his affidavit "we
tried to bring together the alternative forces in the opposition ‑
intellectuals, students, artists, youth, workers, farmers etc." There was
neither selectivity nor seclusion. There is no evidence of the number of
members., but Bandara states in his affidavit in Application 152/92 paragraph
2.1 that he "along with a large number of students" strongly supported it." I
therefore hold that the petitioners' freedom of association in the sense of
intimate association was not violated.



The right of association is not only guaranteed by the Constitution to protect
the freedom of intimate association but also as an indispensable means of
preserving other individual liberties concerned with a wide variety of
political, social, economic, educational, religious and cultural ends. The
associational rights connected with certain matters are expressly referred to
**** in the Constitution. The right to form and join a Trade Union is referred
to in Article 14(d). The freedom in association with others to manifest his
religion or belief is referred to in Article 14(1) (e). The freedom **** to
enjoy and promote his own culture and to use his own language in association
with others is referred to in Article 14(1) (f). And the

146

  
freedom so engage in association with others in any lawful occupation,
profession, trade, business or enterprise is referred to in Article 14(1) (g).
However no specific mention is made of the freedom of expressive association.
What the Constitution does is to state in Article 14(1) (a) that every citizen
is entitled to the freedom of speech and expression, including publication,
and then recognize the indispensable means of preserving individual liberties
guaranteed by the Constitution, including the fundamental right of the freedom
of speech and expression, by declaring in Article 14(1) (b) the fundamental
right of freedom of peaceful assembly; and in Article 14(1) (c), the
fundamental right of freedom of association. In essence the petitioners'
complaint in the matters before us is that their right of association for the
advancement of certain beliefs and ideas was violated by their arrest and
detention.



There was in the matters before us no direct call to desist from expressive
activities as there was in _Mudiyanselage Tillekeratne Bandara Ekanayake v.
Edison Gunatilake and the Attorney­General_ (171) _._ The fact that the
respondents took no direct action to restrict the right of the petitioners and
members of the Ratawesi Peramuna to associate freely in orderly group activity
however, does not end the matter. Freedoms such as these are protected not
only against obvious and heavy‑handed frontal attack, but also from being
smothered or stifled or chilled by more subtle interference. We need to
consider the probable deterrent effect of the arrest and detention even though
such effect may have been unintended. In delivering the opinion of the Court
in _NAACP v. Alabama, (supra)_ Justice Harlan said:



"it is beyond debate that freedom to engage in association for the advancement
of beliefs and ideas is an inseparable aspect of the "liberty" assured by the
Due Process clause of the 14th Amendment, which embraces freedom of speech. Of
course, it is immaterial whether the beliefs sought to be advanced by ****
association pertain to political, economic, religious or cultural matters, and
state action which may have the effect **** of curtailing the freedom to
associate is subject to the closest scrutiny. The fact that Alabama [has]
taken no direct action [to] restrict the right of petitioner's members to
associate

147  


freely does not end inquiry into the effect of the production order, [1] in
the domain of these indispensable liberties, whether of speech, press or
association, the decisions of this Court recognize that abridgement of such
rights, even though unintended, may inevitably follow from varied forms of
governmental [action]."



In the matters before us, the arrest and detention of the petitioners must be
regarded as entailing the likelihood of a restraint upon the exercise by them
of their right to freedom of association in much the same way as
manifestations of hostility to their activities by the armed persons who stole
their posters at Matara. The arrest and detention was in my opinion likely to
adversely affect the ability of the petitioners to pursue their collective
effort to foster beliefs which they admittedly have the right to advocate, in
that it may induce some of them to withdraw from the Peramuna and dissuade
others from joining it because of fear of police action. It must also have
certainly had a chilling effect on the expressive and associational activities
of those who had the temerity to continue to be members of the Ratawesi
Peramuna.



The right to associate for expressive purposes, is not absolute. (See Article
15(4) and Article 15(7) quoted above). However, the Ratawesi Peramuna was not
an organization whose members or adherents were engaged in purposes
prejudicial to national security or the maintenance of public order or in
other unlawful activities. The Peramuna was not a proscribed organization. No
justification existed for the violation of the petitioners' associational
rights relating to their expressive activities.



**DECLARATION AND ORDER IN RESPECT OF ARTICLE 14(1) (C)**



I therefore declare that the fundamental right of the freedom of association
guaranteed by Article 14(1) (c) of the Constitution were violated by the Third
and Fourth respondents in respect of Malinda Channa Pieries, the applicant in
SC Application 146/92; M. D. Daniel, the applicant in S.C. Application 147/92;
Singapulli Hewage Dayananda, the applicant in S.C. Application 148/92;
Athureliyage Rathana (Ranjith), the applicant in S.C. Application 149/92;
Kuruwitage Nandana Perera, the applicant in S.C. Application

148  


151/91; Jayasinghe Mudiyanselage Janaka Priyantha Bandara, the applicant in
S.C. Application 153/92; Ranawake Arachchilage Patali Champika Ranawake, the
applicant in S.C. Application 154/92 and the following applicants in S.C.
Application 155/92, namely, Avalikara Galappathige Muditha Mallika
Wimalasuriya, Gileemalage Janaka Priyantha Dayaratne, Karunaratne
Paranavithana, Weerasekera Mudalige Anura Weerasekera, Rev. Kalupahana
Piyarathana, Rev. Ambalanthota Premarathana and Rev. Kuthulgala Upali.



I make order that each and every one of the persons named in the preceding
paragraph shall be severally paid a sum of Rs. 5000 by the State for the
violation of the right of freedom of association guaranteed by Article 14(1)
(c) of the Constitution.



**WIMALASARA'S CASE IN RESPECT OF ARTICLES 14(1) (A) AND 14(1) (C)**



According to paragraph 2.3 of Wimalasara's affidavit dated 15th April 1992, by
the time he woke up in the morning on 27th February 1992, the other
petitioners "had already started the discussion." Wimalasara says: "I went
back to bed since I was still very ill." When the Police arrived at 2 p.m. he
was still asleep and "woken up and taken by a man carrying a gun to the room
where the others were."



Wimalasara, in support of his affidavit dated 3rd November 1992 made in
response to the affidavits of the Third and Fourth respondents, submitted the
affidavit of Jayalin Silva dated 3rd November 1992 who came to the temple at
about the time of the arrest to visit Wimalasara who was in ill‑health.
Jayalin Silva states that Wimalasara was fetched from the residential quarters
of the priests and taken to the place where the meeting was being held.



In paragraph 4 of his affidavit dated 3rd November 1992, Wimalasara states as
follows: "I totally deny the police version that officers stood by the windows
of the room, listened to our conversation and took down notes. I state that
this is a fabrication by the police including the alleged conversation that
took place in the room. I specifically deny that we talked of overthrowing the
government."

** ** 149  


Seneviratne (146/92, 5.3) expressly states that Wimalasara "did not
participate in the discussion."



How was this man who says he was "very ill" and went to sleep, (other
petitioners too state that Wimalasara was ill and asleep ‑ see e.g. Daniel,
147/92, 3.1; Dayananda 149/92, 3.6); Rathana (149/92, 2.10), Nandana Perera
(151 /92, 2.6); Bandara (152/92, 3.4); Chandarathana (153/92, 2.5); Ranawake
(154/92, 4.3); and Wimalasuriya 155/92, 3.4) waking up only when the police
arrested him at 2 p.m. and then taken to the meeting place where the
resumption of the meeting was interrupted, able to deny that the police
listened to " **our** conversation"? How did he know that? Why did he say "I
specifically deny that we talked of overthrowing the Government" instead of
simply and truthfully saying that he did not know what was going on?



What Wimalasara seems to have been earlier trying to point out was this (See
paragraph 2.2 of his affidavit dated 15th April 1992): He had come to know
Rev. Piyarathana (petitioner No. 5 in application 155/92) and through him Rev.
Rathana (petitioner in application 149/92), Daniel (petitioner in application
147/92) and Champika Ranawake (petitioner in application 154/92). Ranawake
came to the temple and asked for permission to have a discussion at the
temple. Since Piyarathana, Rathana, Daniel and Ranawake "were also going to
attend and", as he says, "since I was convinced that they were not
subversives, I didn't mind." Wimalasara, appears to have been detached from
the political activities of the other petitioners not only on the occasion of
the arrest, but also generally.



Rev. Rathana in his affidavit (149/92 paragraph 2) says that he informed
Wimalasara of the proposed meeting, Rathana and Ranawake (154/92 in paragraph
3.9) say: "He was only aware that we were going to have a discussion on the
following day. He knew nothing about the nature of the discussion. He is not a
political activist. We did not make much of this since some of us have been
frequenting this temple and since it was noted for political meetings, being
the temple of Rev. Pohaddaramulle Pemaloka who was killed by the JVP ..."

150  


Significantly, Wimalasara alone makes no mention in this affidavit of previous
knowledge of, or participation in, the activities of the Peramuna or of its
so‑called "crises."



**DECLARATION IN WIMALASARA'S APPLICATION IN RESPECT OF ARTICLES 14(1) (A) AND
14(1) (C)**



In the circumstances I hold that Rev. Thalpitiya Wimalasara, the applicant in
S.C. Application 150/92 was in no way deprived by the respondents of his right
of free speech guaranteed by Article 14(1) (a) of the Constitution. He did not
participate in the discussion simply because he was as he says "very ill" and
chose to go to sleep and not because he was prevented by the respondents from
speaking or listening at the meeting.



Nor was he deprived by the respondents of his right of freedom of association
guaranteed by Article 14(1) (c). There was no suggestion of any violation of
the right of intimate association. Nor was there any association for
expressive purposes. He was a friend of some of the petitioners and did not,
as he says "mind" them meeting at the temple, but he was not a member of the
Ratawesi Peramuna and, as Rathana and Ranawake say, "he knew nothing about the
nature of the discussion." Wimalasara did not in his petition or earlier
affidavit filed in support of his petition claim to be united to the members
of the Peramuna by any community of interest. He had in no way joined them or
combined with them for any purpose nor was he connected with them in thought
in the enterprise undertaken by the Ratawesi Peramuna.



The fact that Wimalasara was not a participant at the meeting nor affiliated
with the Peramuna were taken into account in ordering enhanced payments to be
made to him for the violation of his rights guaranteed by Articles 13(1) and
13(2) of the Constitution. At least as a matter of fairness Wimalasara could
not have had it both ways, despite his manifestly false second affidavit of
3rd November 1992\. Either he was in with them or he was not. The evidence,
including his own was that he was not of the Ratawesi Peramuna fold.

**151  
 **

**COSTS**

  
I make order that Malinda Channa Pieris, the applicant in S.C. Application
146/92; M. D. Daniel, the applicant in S.C. Application 147/92; Singapulli
Hewage Dayananda, the applicant in S.C. Application 148/92; Athureliye Rathana
(Ranjith), the applicant in S.C. Application 149/92; Rev. Thalpitiye
Wimalasara, applicant in S.C. Application 150/92; Kuruwitage Nandana Perera,
the applicant in S.C. Application 151/92; Jayasinghe Mudiyanselage Janaka
Priyantha Bandara, the applicant in Application 152/92; Pallimulla Hewa
Geeganage Pradeep Chandanaratne, applicant in S.C. Application 153/92;
Ranawake Arachchige Patali Champika Ranawake, applicant in S.C. Application
154/92 and the following applicants in S.C. Application 155/92, namely,
Avalikara Galappathige Muditha Malika Wimalasuriya, Gileemalage Janaka
Priyantha Dayaratne, Karunaratne Paranavithana, Weerasekera Mudalige Anura
Weerasekera, Rev. Kalupahana Piyarathana, Rev. Ambalanthota Premarathana and
Rev. Kuthulgala Upali be each and severally paid by the State a sum of Rs.
5000 as costs.



**WIJETUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**GOONEWARDENE, J.**



In his judgment Amerasinghe J. has dealt with the issues that arise for
consideration and there is nothing I need add in that regard. I concur with
him as to his findings and the relief granted to the petitioners.



_Relief ordered._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/38.html_  

