##  Munasinghe v. Dr. Joe Fernando and Others - SLR - 378, Vol 1 of 1996
[1993] LKSC 38; (1996) 1 Sri LR 378 (21 June 1993)

**378**

**MUNASINGHE  
****v** **.  
DR. JOE FERNANDO AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S. C. APPLICATION NO. 365/93.  
NOVEMBER 21 AND DECEMBER 06, 1994.

_Fundamental Rights - Discrimination ‑ Constitution, Article 12(1) ‑ Tender
procedure ‑ Validity of tender procedure when there is only one potential
bidder._ __

A Cabinet appointed Tender Board called for bids for the supply of 25 metric
tonnes of Lambda‑Cyhalothrin 10% water dispersible powder, an insecticide for
use in the Anti ‑ Malaria Campaign of the Ministry of Health. The 6th
Respondent, Imperial Chemical Industries (plc) a company incorporated in the
United Kingdom ICI was the only tenderer. The Petitioner, who is the
accredited agent in Sri Lanka of Chemagri International Inc. a company
incorporated under the laws of the State of Florida, and carrying on business
_inter alia_ as a supplier of anti-malarial insecticides filed this
application complaining that the invitation for bids was an infringement and
that the proposed award of the tender to the 6th respondent was an imminent
infringement of its fundamental right under Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

The grounds set up were:

(1) All other comparable anti‑malarial insecticides were excluded from the
tender without due cause.

(2) Only the 6th Respondent and its nominees and agents were able to tender
for Lambda‑Cyhalothrin because it was a patented product, and that even the
tender specifications were tailored to suit the packing requirements of the
6th Respondent by asking for supply in units of 62.5 grams.

**Held:**

(1) In calling for bids the Respondents did not exclude all other antimalarial
insecticides and 62.5 gram packs were specified for convenience of use as this
was the quantity required for one tank charge and obviated the necessity of
measuring out the quantities in the field.

**379**

(2) The selection of Lambda‑Cyhalothrin was after a village scale trial. WHO
had approval Lambda‑Cyhalothrin and this approval was sufficient for village
scale' testing and purchase although the 'hut test' had been done before the
WHO approval. There was no impropriety in the but test.

(The testing process involves two stages: First, the insecticide is subjected
to a "hut" test, using a but specially built for the purpose. If the results
are promising then a "village scale" trial is conducted by spraying the
insecticide on selected samples of houses in a highly malarial area).

Observations proved that Lambda‑Cyhalothrin was more effective because there
was an unacceptable degree of resistance to Malathion (which had superseded
DDT).

(3) The petitioner failed to establish that the selection of Lambda­
Cyhalothrin powder was flawed or arbitrary or discriminatory.

(4) The bids were invited using the generic name of the active ingredient as
10% Lambda‑Cyhalothrin water dispersible powder.

(5) ICI or associate companies had patents in about 22 countries, but not in
Sri Lanka, in respect of

> (a) cyhalothrin which was the starting material with which Lambda­
> Cyhalothrin was produced.
>
> (b) two processes for making Lambda‑Cyhalothrin and
>
> (c) lambda‑Cyhalothrin itself.

ICI had a much more valuable but secret and unpublished process for making
Lambda‑Cyhalothrin but enjoyed no patent protection for it.

(6) The petition failed to establish that there was a legal obstacle ‑ though
undoubtedly there were serious practical difficulties ‑ in the way of any
person, not associated with ICI, submitting a bid.

(7) Bids had been invited from "formulators" namely firms or organisations
which were engaged in making the finished product; not from "manufacturers"
(i.e. producers of the active ingredient), or dealers in the finished product.
Formulators were required to submit their certificates of quality: one from
the manufacturer as to the quality of the active ingredient which he supplied
to the formulator and the other from the formulator as to the quality of the
finished product.

**380**

Only two ICI associate companies were in fact able to tender. However the fact
that there can be only one qualified tenderer does not mean that there is a
denial of equality to other persons, for the reason that such persons are not
qualified and so they are not in the same class. It is true that the sole
qualified person thereby enjoys a monopoly, but that only means that he
belongs to a class which consists of one person (and, in this case, which was
properly constituted). Since the impugned act dealt with the entire class,
there was no discrimination among members of the class. And, where as in this
case, the right is reserved to annul the bidding process and to reject all
bids, it is possible to avert any financial loss which would result from
accepting an unduly high bid submitted by a lone tenderer.

(8) The situation in which there is only one potential supplier is not in any
way comparable to the situations in which FR 799(2) permits a deviation from
normal tender procedures. Resort to tender procedure would not thwart the
purpose of getting the product and would have the advantage of openness. The
quality of the product would be the same whether it is obtained through public
tender or private negotiation. There was no good reason here to deviate from
tender procedures.

**Cases referred to :**

1 _._ __ _Ceylon_ _Paper Sacks v. JEDB ‑ _SC 220/92A SCM 2.7.93

2 **.** _Tatty de Silva, v. Atukorale_ [1993]1 Sr LR  283 ,

3\. _Jayawardena_ _v. Dharmaratna _(1951) 54 NLR 424

4\. _Julius v. Bishop of_ _Oxford_ __ (1880) 5 AC 214

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights guaranteed
by Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

_L. C. Seneviratne_ _P.C_. with ****_D. N. Thurairajah_ _, Prasanna
Jayawardena , and S.D. Yogendra _for the Petitioner. ****

_Douglas Premaratne P.C.,_ A.S.G. with ****_Chanaka_ _de Silva S.C._ for 1st
to 5th Respondents.

_H. L. de_ _Silva P.C._ with _Romesh_ _de Silva P.C._ and _Harsha_
_Amerasekera_ for the 6th respondent.

_Cur._ _adv .vult._

**381**

January 31,1995.

**FERNANDO, J.**

By a notice dated 18.6.93, published on 21.6.93, a Cabinet‑ap­pointed tender
board consisting of the 1st to 3rd Respondents (who were the Secretary,
Ministry of Health, State Secretary, Ministry of Ports and Shipping, and the
Deputy Director, National Planning Divi­sion) called for bids for the supply
of 25 metric tonnes of "Lambda­Cyhalothrin 10% water dispersible powder", an
insecticide for use in the Anti‑Malaria Campaign of the Ministry of Health.
The 6th Respondent, Imperial Chemical Industries (plc) a company incorporated
in the United Kingdom ("ICI"), was the only tenderer; its offer was at the
rate of US$ 70 per kilogram. The Petitioner, who is the accredited agent in
Sri Lanka of Chemagri International Inc, a company incorporated under the laws
of the State of Florida, and carrying on business _inter alia_ as a supplier
of antimalarial insecticides, filed this application under Article 126
complaining that the invitation for bids was an infringement, and that the
proposed award of the tender to the 6th Respondent was an imminent
infringement, of its fundamental right under Article 12(1).

The Petition referred to two aspects of this alleged infringement. Firstly, it
was averred that all other comparable antimalarial insecticides were excluded
from the tender without due cause; and secondly, that only the 6th Respondent
and its nominees and agents were able to tender for Lambda‑Cyhalothrin,
because it was patented product, and that even the tender specifications were
tailored to suit the packing requirements of the 6th Respondent, by asking for
supply in units of 62.5 grams.

Notices were published in the newspapers in June 1993 calling for tenders as
follows:

16.6.93 Malathion | **:** | 600 metric tonnes  
---|---|---  
21.6.93 Fenitrothion | **:** | 150 metric tonnes  
21.6.93 Lambda‑Cyhalothrin | **:** | 25 metric tonnes  
  
It would be unreal to consider the disputed tender in isolation; it is clear
that in calling for bids the Respondents did not exclude all other
anti‑malarial insecticides.

**382**

The Respondents have averred, and the Petitioner has not denied, that 62.5
gram packs were specified, for convenience of use, because this was the
quantity required for one tank charge, and it was difficult for staff to
measure such small quantities accurately in the field; and that there was a
similar specification in regard to Fenitrothion.

Thus I need consider only the following submissions made by Mr. L. C.
Seneviratne, P.C., on behalf of the Petitioner:

1\. the tests conducted prior to the decision to select Lambda­Cyhalothrin
powder for use in the Anti-Malaria Campaign were seri­ously flawed; that
decision was unfairly favourable to the 6th Respondent, and therefore
discriminatory; and hence the tender process, based on that decision, was
vitiated by the same defect;

2\. even if that decision had been properly made, yet Lambda­Cyhalothrin
powder was a product which could only have been sup­plied by one supplier (or
with its permission); hence competitive tenders, which are of the very essence
of the tender process, were not possible, and resort to the tender procedure
tended to create a monopoly; in those circumstances resort to the tender
process was in violation of Article 12(1); and

3\. the only proper course of action, was to have obtained authority from the
Cabinet, under Financial Regulation 799(2), to negotiate with and to purchase
direct from that particular supplier.

Most of the facts are not in dispute. Different insecticides have been used,
from time to time, to control the malaria mosquito. Since the malaria mosquito
acquires, with time, immunity or resistance to any insecticide, such changes
are inevitable. Originally, DDT was used with great success, but had to give
way in the late 1970's to Malathion. Apart from other factors ‑ such as cost,
pilferage for agricultural use, inadequate supervision, poor public
acceptance, and the like ‑ in some areas, by 1990, a problem of declining
effectiveness had arisen. Accordingly there was already a need for
alternatives. Even otherwise, it was only prudent to be ready with
alternatives for use in such an even­tuality. The practice followed was to
test WHO‑registered insecticides under local conditions, using material
provided by the manufacturers

**383**

or their local agents, at their cost. Three other insecticides had been
tested, including Lambda‑Cyhalothrin and Fenitrothion; two more were in the
process of being tested; and a hut trial had been conducted in respect of yet
another, but a village scale trial had not been carried out due to lack of
interest on the part of the manufacturer.

During this period, the problem was especially serious in the North ­Western
Province, which had about 40% of the reported malaria cases, Kurunegala being
the District with the highest number of cases. Thus it became necessary to
conduct tests in the Kurunegala and Puttalam Districts, and thereafter to
obtain supplies by late September 1993, to be used by October‑November when
the incidence of malaria began its seasonal rise.

The testing process involves two stages. First, the insecticide is subjected
to a "hut" test, using a but specially built for the purpose. If the results
are promising, then a "village scale" trial is conducted, in which the
insecticide is sprayed on selected samples of houses in a highly malarial
area. According to the 4th Respondent, the Director of the Anti‑Malaria
Campaign, in the latter test "the impact on the population upto a maximum of
one year is observed"; and since "the complete testing of a new insecticide in
the country takes around 1 1/2 to 2 years" it is impossible to wait until all
available insecticides are tested before a final decision to introduce a new
insecticide is taken.

Mr. Seneviratne submitted that these tests could only have been done with
insecticides approved by the WHO. Although I do not think that the WHO
approvals were mandatory, I have no doubt that it was both proper and prudent
to follow the WHO recommendations. He contended that Lambda‑Cyhalothrin had
not been approved by the WHO at the time it was used for the "hut" test, and
that this vitiated the test. In regard to the "village **** scale" test done
in 1992, it is clear that by August 1991 the WHO had issued an interim
specification approving Lambda‑Cyhalothrin, and Mr. Seneviratne did not
dispute that this constituted a sufficient approval, both for "village scale"
testing and for purchase; thus there was no shortcoming, on account of any
lack of WHO approval, when the "village scale" test was done in 1992. The
documents produced in this case do not show when the interim specification was
issued, and so we do not know whether it came into force

**384**

only after the "hut" test was done. There is also no material to support Mr.
Seneviratne's contention that it was contrary to WHO‑guidelines, or otherwise
improper, to conduct the "hut" test without Lambda-Cyhalothrin having been
approved. Indeed, in August 1991 Anti‑Ma­laria operations in Sri Lanka were
reviewed by a WHO External Evaluation Team, which referred to the then ongoing
experimental "hut" tests with Lambda‑Cyhalothrin, and recommended "Village
Scale" trials with Lambda‑Cyhalothrin; its report does not suggest that the
"hut" tests had been conducted without any necessary WHO approval of
Lambda­Cyhalothrin. The Petitioner has failed to establish that there was any
impropriety in the "hut" test.

Mr. Seneviratne contended that the "Village Scale" test was not conducted for
the requisite period of time. This test was carried out in the Kurunegala
District, and involved trials of Lambda‑Cyhalothrin and Malathion in two
distinct villages with similar populations. The recommended period of spraying
for Lambda‑Cyhalothrin was once in six months, and for Malathion, once in
three months. Both villages were studied from January to November 1992, and
statistics were maintained for that period. Lambda‑Cyhalothrin was sprayed in
April, and October, in one village while Malathion was sprayed in April, July
and October in the other. The report submitted by the Entomologist of the
Anti‑Malaria Campaign showed that Lambda‑Cyhalothrin was much more effective
both in reducing the number of malaria cases as well as in controlling the
mosquito itself.

Relying on the averment in the affidavit of the 4th Respondent, that "the
impact on the population upto a maximum of one year is observed", Mr.
Seneviratne urged that no conclusion could have been drawn from the test until
the impact of the second spraying of Lambda­Cyhalothrin had been observed for
a period of about an year; alterna­tively, he argued, that the 4th Respondent
should have waited, at least, for one year after the first spraying of
Lambda‑Cyhalothrin (i.e. for about six months after the second). On this basis
he claimed that the report which was submitted by the Entomologist in January
1993 had been hastily prepared, with the intention of favouring the 6th
Respondent's product. I find myself quite unable to agree with this
interpretation of the 4th Respondent's affidavit. Observing the impact on the
population for an year does not mean studying the situtaion for one year
**after**

**385**

spraying; on the contrary, it indicates that the main purpose of the test was
to ascertain and compare the position both **before** and **after** spraying.
Insofar as Lambda‑Cyhalothrin was concerned, an eleven month period of
observation revealed that Lambda‑Cyhalothrin was effec­tive, for six months
after spraying, in reducing the numbers of both malaria cases and mosquitoes.
The 4th Respondent's affidavit thus does not support Mr. Seneviratne's
contention at all. It only meant that the "village" test should take
approximately twelve months, and consequently that it would take 1 1/2 to 2
years to do both the hut test and the village scale test. Whether or not a
longer period was desir­able, or a more rigorous test was possible, I am
unable to say as the available material consists only of the 4th Respondent's
affidavit. I hold that there was no flaw in regard to the test.

Kurunegala being a District which had previously been treated with Malathion,
this test did not prove that Lambda‑Cyhalothrin was intrinsically superior to
Malathion; however, it strongly supported a conclusion that there was already
an unacceptable degree of resistance to Malathion, which made
Lambda‑Cyhalothrin a better alternative in the circumstances. At the same
time, Fenitrothion was selected for use in the Puttalam District, and tenders
were called for both insecticides in June 1993.

I therefore hold that the Petitioner has failed to establish that the
selection of Lambda‑Cyhalothrin powder was flawed, or arbitrary, or
discriminatory.

I turn now to Mr. Seneviratne's second contention that the tender procedure
should not have been resorted to. What was tested was a powder formulated with
Lambda‑Cyhalothrin by ICI, and sold under the brand name "ICON". However, the
product for which bids were invited was not "ICON"; instead the product was
described (using the generic name of the active ingredient) as "10%
Lambda‑Cyhalothrin water dispersible powder". It is common ground that this
meant that the finished product should consist, as to 10%, of the active
ingredient, Lambda‑Cyhalothrin, the remaining 90% consisting of other
substances which would make it a water dispersible powder, having specified
properties.

**386**

It is necessary to consider the Petitioner's submission as to the extent of
the 6th Respondent's patent rights. The Petitioner submitted two affidavits
from its expert, and the 6th Respondent one. Ultimately, there was no dispute
that ICI or associate companies had patents in about 22 countries, but not in
Sri Lanka, in respect of (a) Cyhalothrin which was the starting material with
which Lambda‑Cyhalothrin was produced, (b) two processes for making
Lambda‑Cyhalothrin from Cyhalothrin, and (c) Lambda‑Cyhalothrin itself.
Further, ICI had a much more efficient and valuable process, which was secret
and unpublished, for making Lambda‑Cyhalothrin, but enjoyed no patent
protection for it. The Petitioner's expert further stated that there was no
published information as to the nature of the formulation previously tested in
Sri Lanka (i.e. "ICON"), and that it was not possible for a competitor (in the
short period of three months between invitation for bids and supply) to
develop a formulation having a comparable analysis and prop­erties, since this
involved substances and processes which were not published; however, the
formulation itself was not patented; this was not disputed. He further claimed
that "while an active ingredient is still subject to patent protection the
patentee generally does not make it available, except under special agreements
to preferred licensees . . but instead makes it available only as formulated
material", and that "in any country where there is a patent in force on the
active ingredi­ent, it is generally not permissible for an unlicensed third
party . . . . to formulate that compound into a formulation". These assertions
sug­gest that patent protection would indirectly extend to formulation as
well. However, the first of these claims is an unproved assertion of fact,
particularly in relation to Lambda‑Cyhalothrin, and it is not sug­gested that
the patent laws prevent a third party acquiring the active ingredient in the
market. The second is a statement of (foreign) law, unsupported by even a
reference to any legal text; and I doubt whether the protection conferred by a
patent extends so far as to prevent a third party using the patented product
to make another product.

The Petitioner has failed to establish that there was a legal obstacle ‑
though undoubtedly there were serious practical difficulties‑in the way of any
person, not associated with ICI, submitting a bid.

This was not all. Bids had been invited from " formulators", namely firms or
organisations which engaged in making the finished product;

**387**

not from "manufacturers" (i.e. producers of the active ingredient), or dealers
in the finished product. Formulators were required to furnish two certificates
of quality: one from the manufacturer as to the quality of the active
ingredients which he supplied to the formulator, and another from the
formulator as to the quality of the finished product. Obviously, this would
have further restricted the number of persons able to tender. Mr. Seneviratne
referred to an extract from the Farm Chemicals Handbook, 1992 (which he said
was an authoritative publication in regard to pesticides) according to which
there were only two formulators of LC powder, under the names "ICON" and
"KARATE": both were ICI associate companies. He also referred to a Korean
com­pany, but this turned out not to be a formulator.

On the material placed before us, I hold that only two ICI associ­ate
companies were in fact able to tender. In such circumstances, Mr. Seneviratne
submitted, competitive tenders were not possible, and resort to tender
procedure was in violation of Article 12(1), citing my dissent in _Ceylon
Paper Sacks v. J. E. D. B.,_(1) _._ However, in that case I did not hold that
resort to tender procedure was in violation of Article 12(1), but, on the
contrary, that in the process of evaluating the ten­ders there had been a
breach of the Financial Regulations, which resulted in a violation of Article
12(1). Independently of the Financial Regulations, the fact that there can be
only one qualified tenderer does not mean that there is a denial of equality
to other persons, for the reason that such persons are not qualified and so
they are not in the same class. It is true that the sole qualified person
thereby enjoys monopoly, but that only means that he belongs to a class which
con­sists of one person (and, in this case, which was properly consti­tuted).
Since the impugned act dealt with the entire class, there was no
discrimination among members of the class. And where, as in this case, the
right is reserved to annul the bidding process and to reject all bids, it is
possible to avert any financial loss which would result from accepting an
unduly high bid submitted by a lone tenderer.

Mr. Seneviratne's alternative submission was based on the "Guidelines and
Checklist for Tender", dated 17.8.90, issued by the Secretary to the
President, in order "to ensure competitiveness and to inspire confidence in
the public with regard to the fairness and equitability of Government
decisions on tenders"; it was pointed out that the Fi

**388**

nancial Regulations had been framed "to engender the widest possible
competition in all tenders and to secure the most competitive prices/ rates",
and that "the specifications should be designed so as to make the tender as
competitive as possible and should neither preclude nor favour any particular
tenderer or tenderers". As I observed in _Ceylon Paper Sacks v. J. E. D. B.,
_( _supra_ ) this document does not purport to be issued by virtue of any
legislative or executive authority, and cannot add to or vary the provisions
of the Financial Regulations. Mr. Seneviratne relied on FR 799(2), which
provides:

" (2) General authority for deviation from procedures prescribed for Stores
and Supplies. ‑ (a) In urgent and exceptional circumstances, when real and
appreciable injury would be caused to the activities of the Department by
delay in following normal procedures for obtaining stores and supplies, or
when the normal procedures are inappropriate to the type of articles required
and the provisions of F.RR 794 to 796 are also inadequate to meet the
contingency, the authorities mentioned in (1) above, may, within the limits
prescribed, authorize deviation from the procedures prescribed for the
procurement of stores provided the reasons therefor are explicitly recorded in
writing."

It is clear that there are two distinct situations in which FR 799(2) permits
a deviation from normal tender procedures. The first relates to circumstances
which are "urgent and exceptional", in which serious loss or prejudice will be
caused by reason of the time taken in follow­ing tender procedures. It was not
suggested that there was any such situation in the present case, and it was
clear that the insecticide could be obtained well in time despite following
tender procedures.

The question for determination, therefore, is whether the second condition was
satisfied ‑ that normal tender procedures were "inappro­priate to the type of
article required"; and, if so, whether it was mandatory for the appropriate
authority (here, the Cabinet of Ministers) to permit a deviation from public
tender procedures by authorising private negotiations. (Admittedly, the
provisions of FR 794 to FR 796 were inapplicable.) It seems to me that there
may well be situations in which the appropriate authority is obliged to
authorise a deviation. One example would be where special equipment is
required to combat terror-

**389**

ism, crime or smuggling, but calling for tenders may result in publicity which
would enable defensive measures to be taken, which would significantly reduce
the usefulness of such equipment; in such cases even though the tender process
would ensure the best quality and price, the very purpose of getting the goods
would be thwarted by the publicity attendant on the tender procedure. Again,
there are commodities the prices of which fluctuate considerably, for various
reasons; for such commodities, it may be that a "spot" price for a contract,
to be concluded at once, would be more favourable than a bid which is open for
acceptance for several days or even weeks. There may be other articles for
which there is, at any given time, an established price ‑whether determined by
some internationally recognised institution, or by local price control. In all
such cases, there is much to be said for the view that normal tender
procedures are "inappropriate" having re­gard to the articles required.

In the examples I have considered resort to public tenders would thwart the
purpose of getting the product, or would not secure the best product at the
most favourable price; accordingly, private negotiations would seem to be
preferable, and, I will assume, may perhaps even be mandatory.

The situation in which there is only one potential supplier is not in any way
comparable. Resort to tender procedure would not thwart the purpose of getting
the product; and would have the advantage of openness. The quality of the
product would be the same whether it is obtained through public tender or
private negotiation. In regard to price, there is no reason to assume that a
supplier who enjoys a monopoly would quote a higher price at a public tender
than in private negotiations; and in any event, if he does quote an unduly
high price, his bid can be rejected and the appropriate authority can
thereafter be requested to authorise a deviation.

But even assuming that the second condition in FR 799(2) is sat­isfied where
there is only one potential supplier, yet it does not follow that it is
mandatory to authorise deviation from tender procedures ‑ for it is a settled
rule of interpretation that "may" in a statute confers a discretion, and will
only exceptionally be held to be mandatory (Maxwell, Interpretation of
Statutes,l2th edition, p 234). It will be held to be

**390**

mandatory only if there is good reason, as for instance if the context so
requires, or if the purpose of the statute will not otherwise be achieved (as
in Tatty de Silva v. Atukorala,(2); see also Jayawardena v. Dharmaratne(3)).

"May" is like the words " it shall be lawful", which

" . . . . . . confer a faculty or power, and they do not of themselves do more
than confer a faculty or power. But there may be some­thing in the nature of
the thing empowered to be done, something in the object for which it is to be
done, something in the condi­tions under which it is to be done, something in
the title of the person or persons for whose benefit the power is to be
exercised, which may couple the power with a duty, and make it the duty of the
persons in whom the power is reposed, to exercise that power when called upon
to do so. .

and in relation to FR 799(2), I would add, to exercise the power when it is
shown that "usual procedures are inappropriate"‑

" . . . . And the words 'it shall be lawful' being according to their natural
meaning permissive or enabling words only, it lies upon those, as it seems to
me, who contend that an obligation exists to exercise his power, to show in
the circumstances of the case something which ,according to the principles I
have mentioned, creates this obligation." (Julius v. Bishop of Oxford .(4))

The matters I have referred to in the preceding paragraphs show that there is
no good reason to displace tender procedures. I hold that it was not mandatory
to deviate from tender procedures.

I have not overlooked Mr. Seneviratne's submission that, because tender
procedures were resorted to, a higher price (US $70 per kilo­gram) had to be
paid than the market price of US $52.50 per kilogram. Apart from a passing
reference in an unsigned and undated document there was no satisfactory
evidence of the market price in mid‑1993\. The allegation that the 6th
Respondent's bid was too high cannot therefore be made the basis for
challenging the decision to call for tenders.

**391**

Mr. H. L. de Silva submitted in reply that in any event the Petitioner had no
_locus standi_ to question the decision to resort to tender procedures,
because whether it was by public tender or private negotiation the Petitioner
was not qualified to make an offer, and was therefore not in the same class;
whichever option was selected, the Petitioner's right was not affected. As the
petition fails on the merits, it is unnecessary to decide this question of
status.

The Petitioner's application fails, and is dismissed with costs in a sum of
Rs.3,000/‑ payable to the 6th Respondent.

**DHEERARATNE, J.** ‑ I agree.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.

_**Application dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/38.html_  

