##  Bank of Ceylon v. The Ceylon Bank Employees Union (On Behalf of
Karunatilaka) - SLR - 47, Vol 1 of 2003 [2002] LKSC 38; (2003) 1 Sri LR 47 (12
September 2002)

**47**

**BANK OF CEYLON** ****

**v.** ****

**THE CEYLON BANK EMPLOYEES UNION** ****

**(ON BEHALF OF KARUNATILAKA)** ****

** **

SUPREME COURT

GUNASEKERA, J.

ISMAIL, J., AND

YAPA, J.

SC APPEAL No. 30/2002

HC(LT)HCA 199/97

LT CASE No. 23/K/2400

12TH SEPTEMBER, 2002



_Industrial Dispute - Notice of special leave to appeal to the Supreme Court
-Rule 8(2)(a) of the Supreme Court Rules - Failure to file a caveat opposing
special leave to ap_ _Whether such failure would disentitle respondent's_
_right to be heard at hearing of appeal._

48

The High Court dismissed the appeal of the appellant ("the employer") against
the order of the Labour Tribunal which granted re-instatement and back wages
to Karunathilake ("the workman") represented by the respondent ("the Union").
The employer sought special leave to appeal to the Supreme Court from the
decision of the High Court.



The Registrar of the Supreme Court failed to send the Union, notice of the
application for leave to appeal within five days after it was lodged calling
upon the Union to file a caveat if it intended to oppose special leave as
required by Rule 8(2)(a) of the Supreme Court Rules, but gave the said notice
after about forty five days from the lodging of the application. As the
workman had changed his address the Union was unable to trace him with the
result special leave to appeal was granted _ex-parte._ However, when the Union
learnt that the appeal had been fixed for hearing, the Union retained counsel
to appear for the Union. At the hearing the Senior State Counsel for the
employer took up an objection that the Union was not entitled to be heard as
it had failed to file a caveat opposing the grant of special leave.

**Held:**



In terms of Rule 8 the failure to file a caveat would disentitle the Union
from opposing special leave to appeal. However, it does not preclude the Union
from being heard at the hearing of the appeal.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court (Preliminary Objection),

_S. Rajaratnam,_ Senior State Counsel for appellant.

_Shirley Fernando,_ PC with _Ruwan D. V. Dias_ and _Palith Perera_ for
respondent.

_ _

_Cur. adv. vult._

December 13, 2002

**GUNASEKERA, J.**



The Applicant Respondent Union made an application to the Labour Tribunal,
Kurunegala on behalf of its member R.A. Karunathilaka on 10.10.1989 alleging
that the services of its mem­ber had been unlawfully terminated by the
Respondent Appellant on 6.9.1983 and by way of relief prayed for reinstatement
with back wages. The Respondent Appellant by its answer took up the posi-

49

tion that the worker's services were terminated for justifiable rea­sons in
that he had committed various fraudulent acts set out there­in and prayed that
the application be dismissed. After a prolonged inquiry the learned President
by his Order dated 30.9.1997 held that the services of the workman had been
terminated unjustifiably and directed that the workman be reinstated with back
wages in a sum of Rs. 2,64,135.60. An appeal was filed against the said Order
by the Respondent Appellant on 26.11.1997 and the said appeal was dismissed on
28.9.1998 for non prosecution. Thereafter on 13.2.1999 an affidavit was filed
on behalf of the Respondent Appellant praying for the restoration of the
appeal for reasons stat­ed and after considering submissions made on behalf of
both par­ties the appeal was restored to the Roll of Appeals. The appeal was
taken up for hearing on 6.2.2002 and after a consideration of the submissions
made by Order dated 13.12.2001 the learned Judge of the High Court upheld the
Order made by the learned President of the Labour Tribunal and directed that
the workman be reinstated with effect from 1.2.2002.



An application for special leave to appeal to this Court from the Order
dismissing the appeal dated 13.12.2001 was made on 24.1.2002, and notices to
be served on the Applicant Respondent were tendered only on 13.3.2002 which
notices were posted under registered cover on 15.3.2002 contrary to the
provisions of Rule 8 of the Supreme Court Rules 1990 which required the
notices to be despatched within 5 working days after the application has been
lodged. The notices specified that the application for the granting of special
leave would be considered by Court on 28.5.2002 and specified that the
Applicant Respondent should file a caveat within 14 days of the receipt of
such notice if he was intending to oppose the grant of special leave as
provided for in Rule 8(2)(a) of the said Rules.



On 28.5.2002 the Applicant Respondent was absent and unrepresented having
failed to file a caveat expressing its intention to oppose the grant of
special leave. The Court after considering the submissions made by learned
counsel for the Respondent Appellant made an ex-parte Order granting special
leave to appeal on the following question "Did the High Court err in law in
affirming the Order for reinstatement made by the Labour Tribunal consider-

50



ing the findings made by the High Court that the employee was guilty of
several instances of negligence and dereliction of duty, and fixed the date of
hearing the appeal as 25.7.2002. On that day too the Applicant Respondent was
absent and unrepresented and the hearing of the appeal was refixed for
12.9.2002 and the Court directed the Registrar to issue notice on the
Applicant Respondent that the hearing of the appeal was refixed for 12.9.2002.



It appears from the docket that on 10.9.2002 an attorney-at-law had filed a
proxy of the Applicant Respondent together with the written submissions on its
behalf.



When this appeal was taken up for hearing on 12.9.2002 learned Senior State
Counsel who appeared for the Respondent Appellant objected to the Applicant
Respondent being represented at the hearing and contended that the Applicant
Respondent was not entitled to be heard on account of the fact that the
Applicant Respondent had not filed a caveat opposing the grant of special
leave.



In the written submissions filed on behalf of the Applicant Respondent learned
President's Counsel has submitted that although the application for the grant
of special leave had been filed on 24.1.2002 that contrary to Rule 8 which
requires that notices on the Respondent has to be despatched within 5 working
days of the lodging of the application, in the instant case contrary to the
said Rule that notice has been despatched only on 15.3.2002 nearly 45 days
after the lodging of the application. It was his contention that both Rule 8
and the prescribed form in schedule 1 to the Rules requires the Respondent to
file a caveat only if he intends to oppose the grant of special leave.



It was submitted by learned President's Counsel that the notice that had been
despatched on 15.3.2002 had been received by the Respondent only 19.3.2002 as
evidenced by Document 'A' filed with the written submissions. On the same day
the Secretary of the Respondent's Union had written to the workman to meet him
and the office copy of the said letter had been produced marked 'B'. The
workman had not contacted the Secretary _m_ bad Mi received the letter. Upon
inquiries made the Secretary had learnt that the workman had changed his
address. Thereafter the

51



Respondent had received a copy of the written submissions filed on behalf of
the Appellant and a notice from the Registrar on 1.8.2002 that this appeal had
been listed for hearing on 12.9.2002 as evi­denced by document 'C. Thereupon
the Respondent's Union had retained Counsel to represent the Respondent at the
hearing of this appeal. It was contended by learned President's Counsel that
the Supreme Court Rules 1990 do not make any provision as to the consequences
that would arise upon the failure of the Respondents to file a caveat provided
for in Rule 8(2) unlike the provision in Rule 30(1) which provides for the
consequences upon the failure to file written submissions which states that
'no party to an appeal shall be entitled to be heard unless he has previously
lodged 5 copies of his written submissions' (hereinafter referred to as
"submissions") complying with the provisions of this Rule.



I have carefully considered the submissions made and exam­ined the Rules and I
find that the purpose of giving notice of an application for the grant of
special leave to a Respondent is to enable him to express his intention to
oppose the grant of special leave to appeal and in my view, the failure of the
Respondent to file a caveat is that he would be precluded from opposing the
grant of special leave when the application is considered for that purpose. I
see no basis for the objection taken as the failure to file a caveat opposing
the grant of special leave does not preclude the Respondent from being heard
at the hearing of the appeal. For the reasons stated I overrule the objections
taken by the Appellant and permit counsel for the Respondent to represent the
Respondent at the hearing of this appeal.

**ISMAIL, J.** - I agree.

**YAPA, J.** **** - I agree.

_Preliminary objection overruled._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/38.html_  

