##  Sriyani Silva v. Iddamalgoda, Officer In Charge, Police Station Paiyagala
and Others - SLR - 63, Vol 2 of 2003 [2000] LKSC 39; (2003) 2 Sri LR 63 (23
August 2000)

63

SRIYANI SILVA  
v.  
IDDAMALGODA, OFFICER IN CHARGE, POLICE STATION  
PAIYAGALA AND OTHERS

SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

YAPA, J., AND

J.A.N. DE SILVA, J.

SC NO. 471/2000 (FR)  
13TH JUNE AND 14TH JULY, 2003

_Fundamental Rights - Death by torture of person arrested by police - Right to
life - Articles 11, 13(2), 13(4) and 17 of the Constitution \- Right of heirs
or dependants to complain against violation of rights - Purposive construction
of Article 126(2) read with Article 4(d) of the Constitution._



The petitioner is the widow of an army deserter (deceased) against whom there
was also an open warrant signed by the Magistrate for possession of illicit
liquor and distilling equipment.



On 12.06.2000 the 2nd respondent OIC (Crimes) Paiyagala Police Station,
arrested the deserter and took him to the police station where he was detained
until the 17th. The petitioner and deceased's mother and sister stated that
they visited the deceased on 12th, 13th, 14th and 15th and observed the
deceased

64

  
  
being assaulted and with serious injuries. The deceased also told them that he
had been assaulted by police officers. On the 15th the deceased's sister
complained to the Assistant Superintendent of Police, Kalutara. The police
produced the deceased before the Magistrate on the 17th which was a Saturday
and he was remanded until the 29th and sent to Kalutara prison from where he
was transferred to Welikada remand prison on the 18th where he died on the
20th.

  
According to the post-mortem report the deceased had twenty injuries on all
parts of the body, his head, chest, abdomen and every section of every limb.
His upper right arm was swollen and black. The cause of death was "acute renal
failure due to muscule cutaneous trauma".

According to the police, the deceased was arrested on the 16th after using
rea­sonable force. They denied assaulting him as alleged.  


On 18.07.2000 an attorney-at-law had filed the application on behalf of the
deceased when in fact it was the wife who had given instructions. When the
application was supported on 23.8.2000 the court was informed of the facts,
namely that the instructions given were to pursue the application for
compen­sation to the dependants. Accordingly, permission was granted by court
to amend the application by substituting the petitioner, in view of Rule 44(4)
of the Supreme Court Rules. The petitioner claimed relief in terms of Articles
11, 13(2) and 17 read with Article 126 of the Constitution.

**Held :**

1\. The petitioner's version was credible. The police version was
contradicto­ry, improbable and had to be rejected. The deceased died of
torture by the police and that prevented him from seeking relief personally
under Article 126(2).  


2.             Articles 11 and 13(4) by necessary implication recognize the right to life. Hence if a person died by reason of torture or unlawful death (by the exec­utive) the right of any person to complain against violation of a fundamen­tal right guaranteed by Article 17 read with Article 126(2) should not be interpreted to make the right illusory; but Article 126(2) should be inter­preted broadly especially in view of Article 4(d) which requires the court to "respect, secure and advance" fundamental rights.  


3.             The right of every person recognized by Article 17 to apply under Article 126 in respect of the infringement of a fundamental right is an independent fundamental right.  


4\. The deceased's fundamental rights under Articles 11,13(2) and 17 were
infringed by the 2nd respondent; and also by the 1st respondent on the ground
of culpable inaction to monitor the activities of his subordinates. The
deceased's rights accrued or devolved on the petitioner and their minor child.
The deceased was put to death "in order to prevent him totally

65



and permanently from complaining " On that ground also Article 126(2) should
be interpreted expansively.  


5\. On the question of compensation, a person who has a "bad record" is
enti­tled to the same rights as any other person. The deceased was entitled to
have the allegation against him determined by a competent court, after a fair
trial. As such there is no reason to mitigate the compensation due to the
deceased's dependants on the ground of deceased's character.

**Cases referred to :**

1.                _Lakshman_ v _Fernando_ SC 24/90 SCM 29.9.95.  


2.                _Sanjeewa_ v _Suraweera_ SC 328/2002 (FR) SCM 4.4.2003.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringements of fundamental rights.

_J.C. Weliamuna_ with _Shantha Jayawardena_ and _Charuka Samarasekera_ for
petitioner.  


_Manohara de Silva_ with _W.D, Weeraratne_ for 1st respondent.  


_Saliya Peiris_ with _Upul Kumaraapperuma_ for 2nd and 4th respondents.  


_K.A.P. Ranasinghe,_ State Counsel for 5th to 7th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

August 8, 2003.  
**  
FERNANDO, J.**

The petitioner in this case is the widow of M.K, Lasantha Jagath Kumara ("the
deceased"). Admittedly, he was arrested by the 2nd respondent, the Officer-in-
Charge (Crimes) of the Paiyagala Police, in June 2000, and died on 20.6.2000
whilst in remand custody at the Magazine Prison, Welikada, The petitioner
alleges that the deceased died in consequence of torture by the Paiyagala
Police during an excessive period of detention and was thereby prevented from
filing a fundamental rights application under Article 126, in violation of his
fundamental rights under Articles 11, 13(2) and 17. In this application under
Article 126 filed 10 by her, she claims - for herself and for their minor
child \- the

66

compensation which the deceased would have received but for his untimely
death.

**THE PETITIONER'S VERSION**

According to the petitioner's affidavit, she married the deceased in June
1997; in September he joined the Army and served at the Puttur Army camp,
Jaffna; their child was born in 1998; and after 22.1.1999 he did not report
back for service.



It is admitted that an open warrant had been issued against the deceased by
the Magistrate's Court of Kalutara, in case No. 20 4097/99 relating to the
possession of illicit liquor and distilling equipment.



The deceased was arrested at about 7.00 a.m. on 12.6.2000 at the petitioner's
family home at Weragala, Paiyagala, by the 2nd respondent (who was accompanied
by a sergeant and a constable) as being an Army deserter. They tied his hands
with a rope. The deceased asked the petitioner to send a message to his family
home, whereupon the 2nd respondent slapped him three or four times and put him
into the Police jeep. Thereafter the petitioner and her mother went to the
Paiyagala Police. At first she was not so allowed to see the deceased, but
later he was brought and shown to her, given three or four slaps, and put back
in the cell. Later still, she was allowed to go near the cell and to speak to
him for five min­utes. When asked whether the Police had assaulted him, he
replied in the affirmative.



On the 13th, the petitioner went to the Police station at 8.30 a.m., midday,
and 4.00 p.m., bringing his meals, but it was only on the third occasion that
she was allowed to see him. He said that he was in pain, and could not eat as
he was feeling nauseous. He asked her to request the Police to hand him over
to the Military Police.



On the 14th, in the morning and again in the afternoon, the petitioner went to
the Police station. In the afternoon she was told that the deceased had been
taken to the Head of the Crimes Section for questioning, and that she too
could go there. She saw him there, and noticed that his right arm was terribly
swollen, the part above the elbow being quite black; that he was finding it
difficult

67

  
to talk, and to get up from his chair; and that both legs were swollen below
the knee. He was feeling nauseous, and the 2nd respondent said that he had
been vomiting frequently for two days, and asked her to get a polythene bag
for him to vomit as well as some medicine from a pharmacy to stop him
vomiting. On that occasion he vomited blood, and was given a king coconut to
drink. That fell to the ground because he could not hold it as all his fingers
were swollen. The 2nd respondent ordered that he be taken back to the cell,
but he could not stand up. When she tried to help him, he shouted out not to
touch him in the abdominal region. Back in the cell, when he had the chance to
speak to her privately, he said that he had been severly assaulted by Police
officers.

  
The mother and the sister of the deceased also submitted affidavits, giving
details of their visits to the Police, substantially cor­roborating the
petitioner's narrative, especially as to the pitiful condition in which he
was. Certain other facts emerged from their affi­davits. On the 13th, Police
officers told them that the petitioner would not be produced in Court, but
handed to the Military Police.



The sister further stated that on the 15th she and her sister complained to
the Assistant Superintendent of Police, Kalutara. He did not record their
complaint but telephoned the Paiyagala Police and ordered that the deceased be
handed over to the Military Police. That evening when she went to the
Paiyagala Police she 70 was told that the deceased had been taken out of the
station. Some time later she saw the deceased being brought back in a Police
jeep \- unable to walk, and bent in two. The 4th respondent, a con­stable,
pushed him into the cell. She then asked the 2nd respon­dent why the deceased
was being assaulted in that way without being produced in Court. He replied
that the deceased would be produced on the 16th. Later she asked him for
permission to take the deceaed to a doctor. He refused, and asked her to meet
Dr A who lived nearby and to obtain some medicine from him. Dr A refused to
prescribe for a patient whom he had not seen, particularly one who had been
assaulted by the Police.

On the 16th, the sister went to the Magistrate's Court, where she was told
that since the 16th was a public holiday suspects would only be produced at
the Magistrate's residence. The 2nd respondent later informed her that the
deceased" would be produced

68

on the 17th. On the 17th, she went to the Police station and shouted out,
threatening to complain to the Human Right Commission if the deceased was not
produced in Court that day. The 2nd respondent then had the deceased brought
out and stat ed that he was being taken to Court, and that it was unnecessary
go for her to go to Court as bail could be obtained on the 29th. When she
asked him why the deceased was not being given some medical treatment, he
replied that he would get treatment at the prison. After the deceased was
handed over to the Prison authorities, he stated that he had not complained to
the Magistrate about his injuries through fear of Police assault, then and
later. He also said that the 4th respondent and six other Police officers had
assaulted him. On the 18th, the Military Police told the sister that the
Paiyagala Police had not yet informed them of the arrest and deten tion of the
deceased.  
                                                         

It is not disputed that the deceased was produced before the acting
Magistrate, Kalutara, by the 4th respondent, sometime before noon on the 17th
(Saturday), upon a typed report relating to case No 4097/99, signed by the 1st
respondent and dated 17.6.2000. However, in the body of the report he referred
to pro­duction on Court "on 2000.6.16 today", **** showing that production on
the 16th **** had been in contemplation when that report was typed. Further,
according to the journal entry of the 17th, the 4th respon­dent had informed
the acting Magistrate that there were several pending cases against the
deceased, and had objected to bail; and 110 he had added that the deceased was
due to be handed over to the Army, and that notice had been given. The
deceased was remand­ed till the 29th. The 4th respondent handed over the
deceased to the Kalutara remand prison on the 17th. On the 18th, the deceased
was transferred to Welikada, where he died on the 20th.  


The Judicial Medical Officer, Colombo, submitted his post­mortem report, which
revealed that the deceased had twenty injuries (contusions and abrasions) on
all parts of the body: on his head, chest and abdomen, and on every section of
every limb -upper arm, fore arm, hand, thigh, knee joint, leg, and foot. His
120 upper right arm was swollen and black in colour. The cause of death
according to the Coroner was "acute renal failure due to muscle cutaneous
injuries following blunt trauma".

**69**

On 18.7.2000, an attorney-at-law filed an application under Article 126, which
was described, both in the caption and in the body of the petition, as being
on behalf of the deceased. Among the reliefs sought was compensation in a sum
of one million rupees for the dependants of the deceased. The attorney-at-law
had no con­tact with the deceased before his death, and therefore could not
130 have obtained instructions from the deceased to file that applica­tion,
and I pointed this out to learned counsel when he first sup­ported the
application on 23.8.2000. He then stated that instruc­tions had in fact been
given by the widow, the present petitioner, and that the relief she sought was
compensation for the depen­dants. He was given permission to amend.
Accordingly the present amended petition was filed by the widow, as
petitioner, and was supported on 3.10.2000 when the following order was made:  


"The petitioner's complaint is that her husband was subject to such extreme
torture that he died soon after. Mr Weliamuna submits that in these
circumstances the necessary implication of Article 11 is that any dependant of
the deceased should be entitled to relief, particularly in the context of
Article 14.1 of the Convention against Torture to which, he says, Sri Lanka is
a party. The fact that a person other than the victim may in some
circumstances be able to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court is implicit in
Article 13(4). In these circumstances, as an impor­tant question of
jurisdiction arises, we grant leave to proceed in respect of the alleged
infringement of Articles 11, 13(2) and 17."



At first sight, viewed from the perspective of the Civil Procedure Code, it
might appear that this Court had permitted an application filed on behalf of a
deceased person - a nullity in law to be replaced, under the guise of
amendment, by an entirely dis­tinct application by a purported successor in
interest, after the lapse of the period of limitation. However, the rules
applicable to funda­mental rights applications are much less strict. Rule
44(4) of the Supreme Court Rules, 1990, provides:



"No application shall be dismissed on account of any omission or defect in
regard to the name of the petitioner, the signing of 160 the petition, or the
proxy, if the Court is satisfied that the person whose fundamental right ...
is alleged in such petition to

70



have been ... infringed expressly or impliedly authorised or approved, or
ratified the filing of such application."



Despite the defect in the name of the petitioner - that it was filed on behalf
of the deceased - it was clear that it was the widow who had authorised the
filing of the petition, and that defect was capable of being cured. That was
what this Court permitted, in keeping with the spirit of that Rule. Whether
the widow had enforce­able rights accruing upon or flowing from the death of
her husband was a question of law, to be determined at hearing.

**THE RESPONDENTS1 VERSION**



The three affidavits relied on by the petitioner did not implicate the 3rd
respondent, who is therefore discharged. Affidavits were filed by the 1st, 2nd
and 4th respondents, who denied or pleaded unawareness of most of the
averments in the petition and affidavit of the petitioner. They did not
specifically respond to the affidavits of the mother and the sister, but I
will take them as denied by impli­cation.



While stating that he had not ordered the arrest of the 180 deceased, the 1st
respondent stated in his affidavit that according to the Police records the
deceased had been arrested on the 16th and not on the 12th, and had been
produced in Court on the 17th. He pleaded that there were "no marks or any
indication that he had  
been assaulted", that "he did not appear to be suffering from any ailment";
that the deceased had not been assaulted or tortured, and that he did not
witness any assault or torture; and that neither the deceased nor any one else
complained of torture or assault, or of any need for medical treatment. He did
not say anything about his movements and conduct between the 12th and the
17th.



In his affidavit the 2nd respondent claimed that he arrested the deceased on
the 16th, but did not explain the circumstances in which he had set out from
the Police station. As for the arrest, he claimed that the deceased brandished
a knife and tried to stab "us", and attempted to escape, whereupon he had to
strike the deceased several times on his right arm to make him drop the knife,
using minimum force. The deceased then surrendered. He gave no explanation for
the other injuries which the deceased had. Soon

71



 after arrest he recorded the deceased's statement at 10.45 a.m., on the basis
of which the deceased was taken at 11.25 a.m. to various 200 places from which
stolen property had been recovered. He annexed and pleaded as part and parcel
of his affidavit his notes of arrest recorded (in the grave crime information
book) at 9.45 a.m., but not his second set of notes recorded at 9.50 a.m. and
pasted in the minor offences information book at 4.00 p.m. on the 17th.



Both respondents annexed, in bulk, a host of IB extracts, con­sisting of
statements, complaints and notes.



The 4th respondent's affidavit was similar to the 2nd respon­dent's, and
contained details relating to the deceased being pro­duced in Court and handed
over to the prison authorities. He stated that the deceased made no complaint
of ill-treatment to the Magistrate.

  
  
The 6th respondent, the Inspector-General of Police, failed to file an
affidavit either his own or that of any responsible officer aware of the
facts. It must be assumed that he found himself unable to deny the allegations
made in the petition (a) that the C.I.D. had informed the Magistrate's Court
that they were unable to investigate the death as they were busy with other
matters, and (b) that it was very likely that the Police would not investigate
a killing in Police custody. The petitioner has not alleged any infringement
220 by him, and accordingly it is unnecessary to consider his liability on the
basis of inaction.

** **

**CREDIBILITY OF THE TWO VERSIONS**  


The 1st and 2nd respondents failed to respond specifically to the affidavit of
the sister of the deceased, which referred to several significant matters
calling for some explanation from them. Firstly, the sister stated that on the
15th she had complained to the A.S.P., Kalutara, who had telephoned and
ordered the Paiyagala Police to hand the deceased to the Military Police. She
also stated that on the 18th the Military Police had told her that they had
not been informed of the arrest. The journal entry of the 17th proves that
there was in fact either an order or a decision to hand the deceased to the
Military Police. The 1st and 2nd respondents failed to produce any document or
entry pertaining to that matter, probably for the reason that that question
arose before the 16th, showing

72



that the deceased had been arrested before the 16th, and that in fact the
Military Police had not been informed. Secondly, the sister claimed that on
the 15th the 2nd respondent had told her that the deceased would be produced
in Court on the 16th, The 1st respondent's report to Court showed that
production had been contemplated on "2000.6.16 today". Finally, she asserted
that on the 15th, on the 2nd respondent's directions, she did ask Dr A for
medicine. The 1st and 2nd respondents should have been more forthcoming on
these matters, perhaps even to the extent of obtaining affidavits from the
A.S.P. and Dr A.



There are other contradictions and shortcomings in the respondents' version.
In an endeavour to make up for the omis­sions in their affidavits they have
tendered IB extracts in bulk. Those cannot be treated as primary evidence.
Apart from that infir­mity, those extracts reveal further shortcomings. The
2nd respondent's "Out" entry at 7.00 a.m. on the 16th recorded that he was
leaving, with an armed Police party, in a private vehicle, with no mention of
make, registration number, ownership, or driver's name, and without any
reference to mileage. Subsequent entries showed that the Paiyagala Police had
at least two jeeps, and that whenever they were used the registration number,
mileage and driver's name were recorded. It is difficult to believe that at
7.00 a.m. in the morning both jeeps were unavailable, and that a con­venient
private vehicle was available. The respondents could eas­ily have produced the
records pertaining to the jeeps to show what  they were used for, first, on
the 12th at 7.00 a.m. (when the deceased was arrested according to the
petitioner), and second, on the 16th at 7.00 a.m.

That "Out" entry did not indicate, directly or indirectly, that the journey
was to search for or arrest the deceased, but, rather, to investigate
information received about a suspect wanted for serious offences. The 2nd
respondent's "In" entry at 9.45 a.m. expressly stated that that investigation
was unsuccessful, and that thereafter while patrol the area he had seen the
deceased whom he had recognised as an Army deserter, for whom an open warrant
had been issued in case No 4097/99, and who was wanted for serious offences.
Those notes did not even suggest that in giving the deceased reasons for
arrest the contents of that warrant had been

73



read out - naturally, because the journey was not in connection with the
deceased, and hence there was no reason to take the warrant with him. However,
in the second set of notes, purportedly written five minutes later, at 9.50
a.m., (and pasted in a different IB the next day at 4.00 p.m.) it was stated
that before they set out on the 12th the 2nd respondent had explained to the
others that they were seeking an Army deserter against whom there was an open
warrant, etc, and that immediately after subduing the deceased he had read out
the open warrant to the deceased.

Another shortcoming related to the most serious complaint against the deceased
- of attempted rape and other offences -allegedly recorded at 5.00 p.m. on the
12th. No reference was made to that complaint in the 2nd respondent's notes,
or in the deceased's statement purportedly recorded by the 2nd respondent at
10.45 a.m. on the 16th - although that statement went into great detail in
respect of every other complaint. That suggests that at whatever time the
deceased was questioned, that complaint had not yet been recorded - and that
tends to confirm the petitioner's version that the arrest was at 7.00 a.m. on
the 12th.



According to the petitioner, the deceased did not resist arrest, and sustained
no injury at the time of arrest, although he did receive a few slaps. The
respondents claimed that the deceased sustained some injuries because the
Police had to use minimum force to subdue him. There are serious
inconsistencies in the Police versions. Going in chronological order, the 2nd
respondent stated in his 9.45 a.m. notes that he had dealt the deceased some
blows with his baton; and that he had carefully examined the 300 deceased and
found contusions on his body which were the result of the deceased having
fallen to the ground while grappling with them, as well as signs of contusions
resulting from blows received several days previously. In his 9.50 a.m. notes
he stated that he had dealt the deceased several blows on his right arm, and
on examination found that he had swellings on his right arm, abrasions as a
result of falling to the ground, and chicken pox and other old scars.
According to the notes made at 9.50 a.m. by the sergeant who accompanied the
2nd respondent, he too had dealt the deceased a few blows with a stick, and on
examining him found 310 that there were abrasions on both arms above the
elbow, and

74



 scars of blows received some days previously. However, the constable who took
him into custody soon after all those notes were made noted the fact that he
had examined the deceased - but apparently found none, because he made no
record of any injuries. The deceased was taken out at 11.25 a.m. and brought
back to the station at 4.10 p.m., when he was handed over to a different
constable, who had examined him, and found contusions on the upper left arm
but no other visible injuries. It is highly probable that the deceased did
have several visible injuries. In any event, the 1st  respondent's claim that
there were no marks or any indication that he had been assaulted" is quite
unacceptable.



The respondents attempted to suggest that most of the injuries had been
sustained in prison custody. They relied heavily on the deceased's statements
recorded on the 17th at the Kalutara prison in the presence of the 4th
respondent, and on the 18th at Welikada. In the former the deceased was
recorded as having stated that the swelling of his arm was due to blows by the
Police and not by any others, without mentioning any other injury. In the
latter, he had stated that he had been arrested by the Paiyagala Police on the
12th and had been kept in custody till the 17th; and that he had been
assaulted by about ten officers - he named the 2nd respondent and "Sergeant
Ananda" (who has not been identi­fied); that his arms and legs were paining;
and that he wished medical treatment. It is probable that the former
statement, made in the presence of the 4th respondent, was incomplete due to
the fear of further Police assaults, which he had already expressed to his
sister.

I have no hesitation in accepting the petitioner's version, which is
consistent, and even finds corroboration in important respects from the
material produced by the respondents - whose version is teeming with
contradictions and inconsistencies. I hold that the deceased was arrested on
the 12th, and unlawfully kept in custody until the 17th; and that during that
period he was subjected to repeated brutal assaults by Police officers - who
ignored the pleas of family members, manifested callous indifference to his
pain and suffering, and denied him even minimal medical treatment - which
resulted in his death, thereby preventing him applying to this Court for
relief. Even a sentence of death, imposed after trial and conviction

**75**

by a competent Court, must be carried out with a minimum of 350 pain and
suffering. The deceased was denied even that right.

**RIGHT TO SUE IN RESPECT OF DECEASED'S RIGHTS**

The deceased's fundamental rights under Articles 11, 13(2) and 17 had been
seriously infringed, entitling him to obtain sub­stantial compensation had he
been able to make an application under Article 126. However, the infringement
was so serious that he did not live long enough even to give instructions to
file such an application. Article 126(2) gives a person, who alleges that a
fundamental right "relating to such person" has been infringed, the right (by
himself or by an attorney-at-law) to apply to this Court. Several questions
arise: does Article 11 include, by impli­cation, a right to life? If the right
to life is infringed, are the depen­dants of the deceased entitled to claim
compensation for that infringement? In respect of the infringement of
fundamental rights, particularly Articles 11, 13(2) and 17, if the victim dies
before making an application, does the right to sue accrue to or devolve on
his heirs?



Although the right to life is not expressly recognised as a fundamental right,
that right is impliedly recognised in some of the provisions of Chapter III of
the Constitution. In particular, Article 13(4) provides that no person shall
be punished with death or imprisonment except by order of a competent court.
That is to say, a person has a right not to be put to death because of
wrongdoing on his part, except upon a court order. (There are other exceptions
as well, such as the exercise of the right of private defence.) Expressed
positively, that provision means that a person has a right to live, unless a
court orders otherwise. Thus Article 13(4), by necessary implication,
recognises that a person has a right to life - at least in the sense of mere
existence, as distinct from the quality of life - which he can be deprived of
only under a court order. If, there-  fore, without his consent or against his
will, a person is put to death, unlawfully and otherwise than under a court
order, clearly his right under Article 13(4) has been infringed. In regard to
every such instance, upon the infringement taking place, the victim will cease
to be alive, and therefore unable to bring an action. If I were to hold that
no one else - next-of-kin, intestate heir, or dependant -

76

  
is entitled to sue the wrongdoers, that would mean that there is no remedy for
causing death in violation of Article 13(4); and that the right to life
impliedly recognised by that Article is illusory, as there is no sanction for
its infringement. That would also create anomalies:  that there is a sanction
for the lesser infringement, i.e. of imprisonment contrary to Article 13(4),
but none for the much graver infringement, of causing death; and that in
regard to causing death, there is a remedy for an imminent infringement, but
not for an actual infringement. The choice, therefore, is either to interpret
Article 13(4) narrowly, as if the words "death or" were not there or to
interpret "person" in Article 126(2) broadly, as including the lawful heirs
and/or dependants of such person, either to interpret the fundamental right
restrictively or the Constitutional remedy expansively. Article 4(d) requires
this Court to respect, secure and advance fun- damental rights, and that
requires me to reject the former course, and to adopt the latter. Where there
is an infringement of the right to life implied in Article 13(4), Article
126(2) must be interpreted - in order to avoid anomaly, inconsistency and
injustice - as permitting the lawful heirs and/or dependants to institute
proceedings.  


Likewise, Article 17 recognises that every person is entitled to make an
application under Article 126 in respect of the infringement of a fundamental
right. That is an independent fundamental right, for the infringement of which
relief will be granted: _Porage_ _Lakshman_ v _Fernando_ (1). If a person is
temporarily prevented from making, or pursuing, such an application, he will
certainly be enti­tled to complain that his fundamental right under Article 17
has been infringed. But if he is put to death in order to prevent him -totally
and permanently \- from complaining, can it be that no one else can complain?
For the reasons already stated, here, too, Article 126(2) must be interpreted
expansively.  


Article 11 guarantees freedom from torture and from cruel and inhuman
treatment or punishment. Unlawfully to deprive a person of life, without his
consent or against his will, would certainly be _inhuman_ treatment, for life
is an essential pre-condition for being  human. In any event, if torture or
cruel treatment or punishment is so extreme that death results, to hold that
no one other than the vicitim can complain will result in the same anomalies,
inconsistencies and injustice as in the case of Articles 13(4) and 17\. Here,
too,

**77**

I hold that Article 11 (read with Article 13(4)), recognises a right not to
deprive of life - whether by way of punishment or otherwise \- and, by
necessary implication, a right to life. That right must be interpreted
broadly, and the jurisdiction conferred by the Constitution on this Court for
the sole purpose of protecting fundamental rights against executive action
must be deemed to have conferred all that is reasonably necessary for this
Court to protect those rights effectively (cf. Article 118(b)).



There is yet another reason which compels that conclusion. Article 14.1 of the
_Convention Against Torture, and Other Cruel,_ _Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment_ provides:



"Each state party shall ensure in its legal system that the vic­tim of an act
of torture obtains redress and has an enforceable right to fair and adequate
compensation, including the means for as full rehabilitation as possible. In
the event of the death of the victim as a result of an act of torture, his
dependants shall be entitled to compensation."



The interpretation that the right to compensation accrues to or devolves on
the deceased's lawful heirs and/or dependants brings our law into conformity
with international obligations and standards, and must be preferred.

## PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY OF RESPONDENTS

I am satisfied on the evidence that the 2nd respondent lawful­ly arrested the
deceased on the 12th, but made false entries to cover up the fact that he was
in unlawful custody thereafter, till the 17th; that he thereby facilitated the
torture and the cruel treatment to which the deceased was subjected; and that
he was a willing participant in the events which led to the death of the
deceased.



As for the 1st respondent, learned Counsel on his behalf urged that he had not
participated in or authorised, and had no knowledge of any act of torture or
cruelty, and that no one had complained to him about any such act. However,
his assertions that the deceased had "no marks or any indication that he had
been assaulted", and that "he did not appear to be suffering from any

78



ailment", cast serious doubts on his credibility. Those assertions 460 imply
that he did see the deceased, in which event he could not have helped noticing
the injuries which the deceased had. Further, the deceased was being held in
custody subject to the 1st respondent's orders, and it was his duty to
consider the need for further detention as well as to check on the deceased's
condition. The 1st respondent gave no reason why the deceased continued to be
kept in custody after 4.10 p.m. on the 16th although no further investigation
was needed. The 1st respondent had knowledge of the deceased's condition,
neglected to provide him medical treatment, and failed to have him produced in
Court at least on the 470 16th.

In any event, the 1st respondent's responsibility and liability was not
restricted to participation, authorisation, complicity and/or knowledge. As
the officer-in-charge, he was under a duty to take all reasonable steps to
ensure that persons held in custody (like the deceased) were treated humanely
and in accordance with the law. That included monitoring the activities of his
subordinates. He did not claim to have taken any steps to ensure that the
petitioner was being treated as the law required. Such action would not only
have prevented further ill-treatment, but would have ensured a speedy 4so
investigation of any misconduct as well as medical treatment for the
petitioner. The 1st respondent is, therefore, in any event liable for his
culpable inaction.

# ORDER

Counsel for the respondents submitted that only reduced compensation, if any,
should be awarded because of the deceased's "crimiriar' record". They sought
to distinguish Sanjeewa v Suraweera(2), where Rs 800,000 was awarded as
compensation and costs to a petitioner who was similarly treated but who had
the good fortune to survie his ordeal, on the basis that that petitioner 490
did not have a "bad record". The 1st and 2nd respondents should have
concentrated their efforts to have the allegations against the deceased
determined by a competent Court, after a fair trial. Until then the deceased
was entitled to the benefit of the presumption of innocence. But even assuming
that the deceased had a bad record, the present case is more serious because
the deceased

79

lost his life, and, indeed, the opportunity to redeem his bad record.

I hold that the deceased's fundamental rights under Articles 11, 13(2) and 17
have been infringed by the 1st and 2nd respondents, and other Police officers,
and that his rights have accrued to or devolved on the petitioner and their
minor child (M.K. Lakshitha Madusankha). I award them a sum of Rs 800,000, in
equal shares, as compensation and costs, of which a sum of Rs 700,000 shall be
paid by the State and Rs 50,000 each by the 1 st and 2nd respon­dents
personally, before 31.12,2003. The sum of Rs 400,000 to which the minor child
is entitled shall be invested in the name of the minor child on the terms that
the interest shall be paid monthly to the petitioner for the maintenance of
the child and that the principal sum shall be paid to the child on majority. I
direct the Registrar to 510 forward a copy of this judgment to the National
Police Commission for necessary action, particularly in the light of Article
4(d) of the Constitution.

**YAPA, J.** \- I agree.

**DE SILVA, J.** \- I agree.

_ _

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/39.html_  

