##  Sumanasena v. L.M. Herft - SLR - 342, Vol 2 of 1991 [1991] LKSC 39; (1991)
2 Sri LR 342 (18 December 1991)

**342**



## SUMANASENA

**v.**

**L. M. HERFT**

** **

SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J., KULATUNGA, J. and DHEERARATNE, J.,

S. C. NO. 11/89.

C. A. NO. 473/81 (7).

D. C. COLOMBO 3380 RE.

OCTOBER 25, 1991.



_Lease ‑ Is it lease of business or of premises?_



The Plaintiff instituted an action against the defendant for recovery of the
business of a motor repair garage together with its machinery, equipment and
material and for ejectment from the place where the business was being carried
on.



The plaintiff averred that by a written non‑notarial agreement the said
business was leased out to the defendant for a term of five years on a monthly
rental. The defendant pleaded that the Agreement was executed with a view to
circumventing the rent laws and that he, as the lawful tenant of the premises,
was protected by the provisions of the Rent Act.



**Held:**



If the occupation of the premises is subordinate to the rights conveyed in
respect of the business, then the occupier is a lessee or assignee of the
business, and a licensee but not a tenant of the premises. The non‑notarial
agreement was a lease of the business not of the premises.



**Cases referred to:**



1.                  _Andiris Appuhamy v. Kuruppu_ (1963) 65 NLR 21   


2.                  _Abdul Latiff v. Seyed Mohammed_ (1967) 72 NLR 20   


3.                  _Nicholas Hamy v. Janes Appuhamy_ (1950) 52 NLR 137   


4.                  _Charles Appuhamy v. Abeysekera_ (1954) 56 NLR 243 



5.                  _Pieris v. Jafferjee_ (1959) 57 CLW 30 



6.                  _Pathirana v. De Silva_ (1978) 79(2) NLR 265 



7.                  _Jayasinghe v. Goolam Hussain_ (1955) 56 NLR 243 



8.                  _Devairakkan v. Samarasinghe_ (1962) 65 NLR 18 



9.                  _Sediris Singho v. Wijesinghe_ (1965) 70 NLR 185 



10.              _Nizam v. Mustaffa_ [1981] 1 Sri. L. R. 58 



11.              _Abeypala v. Abeyakirthi_ [1981] 1 Sri. L. R. 87



**343   **

**  **

12\.       _Gunaratne v. Gaffoor_ [1982] 2 Sri. L. R. 719



13\.       _Graham v. Local and Overseas Investments_ _(Pvt.) Ltd._ 1942 A. D.
95 at 108



**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_H. L. de Silva, P.C._ with _R. Mannikkavasagam_ for Defendant ‑ Appellant.



_A. K. Premadasa, P.C._ with _P. A. D. Samarasekera, P.C._ for substituted

Plaintiff ‑ Respondent.

_Cur.adv.vult._

_ _

December 18, 1991.



**DHEERARATNE, J.:**



The plaintiff (respondent) as executor of the estate of one S. U. Herft,
instituted this action against the defendant (appel­lant) for recovery of the
business of a motor repair garage together with its machinery, equipment and
material and for ejectment of the defendant from premises No. 275, Nawala
Road, Rajagiriya, being the place where the said business was being carried
on. The plaintiff averred that by a written non­notarial agreement dated
15.01.1970, (produced at the trial marked P11) S. U. Herft leased out the said
business to the defendant for a term of 5 years on a monthly rental; that S.
U. Herft died in April 1974; and that the defendant was unlaw­fully
over‑holding the said lease after its expiry. The defendant pleaded that the
agreement was executed with a view to avoid the provisions of the Rent
Restriction Ordinance in force at that time arid that he being the lawful
tenant of the premises No. 275 was now duly protected by the provisions of the
Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972. The trial judge as well as the Court of Appeal held
with the plaintiff on the footing that what was let to the defendant was a
business and as such the defendant's occupation of the premises was ancillary
to the letting of the business thereby making him only a licensee and not a
tenant of the premises.

**  **

### 344



            Time and again courts have been called upon to decide on the true nature of transactions embodied in documents similar to P11 with a view to finding out whether the relationship of landlord and tenant was created thereby or not. It is right to say that on examination of the reported judgments the Appel­late Courts have reached three broad conclusions having con­sidered the relevant written agreements and the circumstances surrounding the transactions. They are:__



(i)         That the agreement was a sham or a blind to circumvent the rent
laws and the effect of the agreement was the creation of a tenancy in respect
of the premises. _Andiris Appuhamy v. Kuruppu_ (1), (lease of a business) and
_Abdul Latiff v. Seyed Mohammed_ (2) (partnership agree­ment).



(ii)        That the effect of the agreement was the creation of a tenancy in
respect of premises let along with equipment and was not the letting of a
business as a going concern ‑ _Nicholas Hamy v. James Appuhamy_ (3).



(iii)       That the effect of the agreement was not the creation of a tenancy
in respect of the premises, but, (a) an assignment of rights in a business ‑
_Charles Appubamy v. Abcysck­era_ (4), _Peiris v. Jafferjee_ (5), and
_Pathirana v. De Silva_ (6) or (b) a lease of a business ‑ _Jayasinghe v.
Goolam Hussain_ (7) _Devairakkan v. Samarasinghe_ (8) _Sediris Singho v.
Wijesinghe_ (9) _Nizam v. Mustaffa_ (10) _Abey­pala v. Abeyakirthi_ (11) and
_Guneratne v. Gaffoor_ (12).



In passing I may observe that in Charles _Appuhamy v. Abeysekera_ (supra)
Nagalingam S.P.J. was of the view that the transaction in that case, although
so called, was not a lease in the true sense of the term, for, he said "a
lease relates to the letting and hiring of immovable property". Perhaps in
making that observation Nagalingam S.P.J. was influenced by the dis­tinction
drawn in the English Language between the words "lease" and "let" the former
being used in relation to



**345**



immovable property only. (20th Century Chambers Diction­ary), But according to
the common law it would appear that the letting and hiring of things
**_Locatio Conductio Rerum_** is called a lease (Wille Principles of South
African Law, 5th edi­tion, page 396). Voet Book xix; title 2; section 3;
(Gane's Edi­tion) says "all things can be let out which are the subject
mat­ter of commercial transactions whether Corporeal or **Incorporeal ".**
(See observations of _Watermeyer J.A. in Gra­ham v. Local and Overseas
Investments (Pvt.) Ltd._ (13). The long line of cases which followed _Charles
Appuhamy v. Abey­sekera_ (supra) has proceeded on the basis that a business
could lawfully form the subject matter of a lease.



Be that as it may, whether a transaction is a lease of a bus­iness or an
assignment of rights in a business, the common principle which has emerged
from the last category of cases appears to be that if the occupation of the
premises is subor­dinate to the rights conveyed in respect of the business,
then the occupier is a lessee_or assignee of the business, and a licen­see,
but not a tenant of the premises. This principle was lucidly expressed by
Nagalingam S.P.J. in Charles Appuhamy v. Abeysekera (supra) at page 246 as
follows:‑



"On a proper reading of the document PI it is impossible to resist the
conclusion that the transaction entered into between the parties was one not
of letting any immovable property for the purpose of enabling one party to
carry on a business, nor the letting of the building to that party with the
option to him to carry on or not the business previously carried on there, but
of placing the "lessee" in‑charge of a business that had been carried on for
the sole purpose of its being continued as a going concern and with a view to
its being delivered back as such going concern together with the advantages
gained or accrued thereto in the meantime, and as ancillary to the object
which the parties had in contemplation it was that possession of the premises
was delivered. The defendant's position was no more than that of a licensee
and is far removed from that of a tenant"



### 346

**  **

            It is seen that an essential feature of a lease of a business or an assignment of rights in a business is the existence of an on going business which is the subject matter of such lease or the assignment. Mr. H. L. de Silva P.C. for the appellant sub­mits that neither the terms of the lease P11 nor the attendant circumstances to the transaction demonstrate the existence of an on going business at the commencement of the lease. It is pointed out that the absence of the word "business" in the agreement P11 is conspicuous, and suggests that the subject matter of letting is premises called a garage with equipment as in the case of _Nicholas Hain v. James Appuhamy_ (supra). But one cannot easily overlook the words "all that licensed motor garage now being run at premises No. 275, Nawala Road" in the agreement, although the word business is not used. It is also pointed out that unlike in the cases of _Jaya­singhe v. Goolam Hussain_ (supra) and _Pathirana v. De Silva_ (supra) that the agreement P11 does not inhibit the lessee from carrying out any other business in the premises. However, according to P11 on termination of the agreement the lessee had covenanted to handover in good condition the "said gar­age" together with machinery and equipment. According to the definitive clause in tile recital of the agreement P11 it is seen that the reference to the ‘said garage' means the licensed motor garage "now being run at premises 275" together with machinery and equipment. It is significant that the only des­cription of the immovable property in the lease P11 is confined to its assessment number like in the case of _Charles Appuhalny v. Abeysekera_ (supra) showing its relative insignificance in the transaction.



Documentary evidence produced in the case disclosed that S.U. Herft obtained a
certificate of conformity from the local authority in 1967 to run a welding
shop in the premises; he purchased a fair amount of machinery and equipment
from several sources in 1967 which was reasonably required to run a well
equipped workshop; for the years 1968, 1969 and 1970 he obtained licences from
the local authority to run a motor vehi‑



**347**



cle repair shop; and from 1967‑1975 he had a running account with the Ceylon
Oxygen Company on a deposit made for the purpose of obtaining oxygen which was
undoubtedly necessary to run a workshop. Evidence also disclosed the fact that
S.U. Herft fell ill and was paralised somewhere in 1969 which in all
probability impelled him to lease out the business. He leased the business
initially to 2 persons jointly for a period of two years on a written
agreement similar to P11 which was pro­duced at the trial. That lease was
prematurely terminated and on its termination S.U. Herft leased out the
ongoing business activity of the garage on  Pl 1\. The defendant carried on
the garage for the year 1970 on the licence obtained by S.U. Herft from the
local authority to run a motor repair garage and he made use of Herft's
deposit with the Ceylon Oxygen Company for several years for his regular
purchases of oxygen.



Much emphasis was placed on behalf of the appellant that almost immediately
after the lease was executed, the defendant got the business registered with
the Registrar of Business Names under the new title "new Piyasena Garage" and
an opening ceremony was held for which printed cards were sent to the
invitees. It was suggested that the commencement of a business under a new
name was inconsistent with the existence of a lease of a business which lead
been carried on in the pre­mises earlier. I am unable to agree with this
suggession. In _Pathirana v. De Silva_ (supra) the fact that the terms of the
agreement expressedly prohibited the assignee from using the original name in
which the business was carried on did not persuade Samarakoon C.J. to hold
that there was no letting of an ongoing business. On tile other hand in
_Devairakkan v. Samaranayake_ (supra) the fact that no alteration was sought
to be made in the Business Names Register by the lessee weighed in the mind of
Herath J. among other factors, as pointing to the existence of an ongoing
business which was leased out. Reliance was also placed on behalf of the
appellant on the receipts issued by S.U. Herft to the defendant in respect of
the rent paid which read "house rent in respect of



**348**





premises No. 275, Nawala Road" as demonstrating that there was a tenancy in
respect of the premises. It seems to me that whatever appeared in printed
receipts they were referable to the covenant in P11 regarding the payment of
rent in respect of the business. Further as the Court of Appeal rightly
observed, using those printed receipts taken from a house rent receipt book
was something particularly a sick man might well have done without much
concern as to what the printed words would have signified.



A close consideration of the agreement P11 makes it clear that its object was
the leasing out of the existing business of a garage; a consideration of the
surrounding circumstances as revealed by evidence fails to convince me that an
object differ­ent from that which was envisaged in the agreement was achieved.
(vide _Pathirana v. De Silva (supra)_.)



For the above reasons the judgment of the Court of Appeal is affirmed and the
appeal is dismissed with costs.



**Fernando, J. ‑**   I agree.



**Kulatunga, J. ‑**   I agree.



_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/39.html_  

