##  Balasingham v. Kalaivany - SLR - 378, Vol 2 of 1986 [1986] LKSC 39; (1986)
2 Sri LR 378 (1 August 1986)

**

378

BALASINGHAM  
v.  
KALAIVANY

**

SUPREME COURT.  
ATUKORALE, J., SENEVIRATNE, J. AND H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.  
S.C. No. 50/85, C.A. No. 62/80.  
M.C. KALMUNAI 58228.  
JUNE 13, 1986.

_

Maintenance-Application for cancellation of order under section 5 of the
Maintenance Ordinance

_

So long as the marital tie subsists an order for maintenance made in favour of
a wife will be cancelled only if-

(a) the wife is guilty of a more or less continuous course of adulterous
conduct and not merely isolated acts of adultery - there being a clear
distinction between 'committing' adultery and 'living in adultery' which is
what s. 5 of the Maintenance Ordinance requires.

(b) the wife was living in adultery at or about the time of the application
for cancellation of the order for maintenance.

**

Cases referred to :

** _

(1) Wijeysinghe v. Josi Nona - (1936) 38 NLR 375.

(2) Arumugam. v. Athai - (1948) 50 NLR 310.

(3) Pushpawathy v. Santhirasegarampillai - (1971) 75 NLR 353.

(4) Simo Nona v. Mehas Singho - (1923) 26 NLR 61.

(5) Manickam v. Arputha Bhavani Rajam - (1980) Cr. L.J. 354

(6) Kista Pillai's Case - (1938) Mad. WN 829.

_ **

APPEAL** from an Order of the Court of Appeal.

_

S. Sinnathamby_ for the appellant.

Respondent absent and unrepresented.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**379**

August 1, 1986. **  
ATUKORALE, J.

**

The facts relevant for consideration of this appeal are as follows. The
respondent, who is the wife of the appellant, made an application to the
Magistrate's Court on 24.7.1973 for an order of maintenance in her favour.
After inquiry the Magistrate on 27.2.1975 ordered the appellant to pay the
respondent a monthly allowance of Rs. 50 as maintenance. The appellant
appealed against this order to the then Supreme Court which on 24.3.1977
dismissed his appeal. On 9.9.1977, the day on which the parties were noticed
to appear in the Magistrate's Court for the purpose of communicating the order
of the Supreme Court, the appellant moved court for a cancellation of the
order on the ground that the respondent had on 29.5.1975 contracted a second
marriage with one Sathanantharajah with whom she was living in adultery. D 1
establishes the fact of registration of such a marriage. It is conceded that
this purported marriage is void as being bigamous. The oral evidence of
Sathanantharajah, who testified on behalf of the appellant, proves that he and
the respondent in consequence of this 'marriage' lived together only for about
one month and that thereafter in June 1975 the respondent refused to live with
him; that in July 1976 he filed a divorce case against the respondent on the
ground of her malicious desertion and that on 26.1.1978 decree was entered ex
parte dissolving the 'marriage' on such ground.

The appellant's application for a cancellation of the maintenance order was
made under s. 5 of the Maintenance Ordinance (Chap. 91, Vol. IV, L. E.) as
amended by Act No. 19 of 1972, the relevent portion of which reads as follows

"5. On proof that any wife in whose favour an order has been made under S. 2
is living in adultery .... the Magistrate shall cancel the order".

The learned Magistrate following mainly the decision of the Supreme Court in
Wijeysinghe v. Josi Nona (1) held that the appellant had failed to establish
that the respondent was living in adultery at the time the application for a
cancellation of the order was made and accordingly refused to cancel the
order. On an appeal by the appellant the Court of Appeal affirmed the order of
the learned Magistrate and dismissed the appeal. The appellant has now
appealed to this court there from.

**380**

Several decisions of our Supreme Court have considered and construed the
meaning of s. 5 of the Maintenance Ordinance. The effect of these decisions is
that where a husband seeks to cancel an order for maintenance in favour of his
wife on the ground that she 'is in adultery' he must, to obtain an order of
cancellation, establish

That-

(i) the wife is guilty of a more or less continuous course of adulterous
conduct and not merely isolated acts of adultery - there being a clear
distinction between 'living' in adultery and 'committing' adultery, vide
Arumugam v. Athai (2) and Pushpawathy v. Santhirasegarampillai (3), and that

(ii) the wife was so living in adultery at the time the application for a
cancellation of the order was made, vide Simo Nona v. Mehas Singho (4),
Wijeysinghe v. Josi Nona (supra) and Pushpawathy v. Santhirasegarampillai
(supra).

Learned counsel for the appellant whilst not seeking to canvass the
correctness of this legal position sought to distinguish these decisions on
the ground that they dealt with cases of isolated acts of adultery and
contended that where a wife in whose favour an order for maintenance has been
made commences and continues, in pursuance of a second though bigamous
marriage, to live in adultery, for however short a period of time (in the
instant case for about a month) with her second 'husband', the order in her
favour is liable to be cancelled for the reason that by her conduct she
evinces an intention of finally repudiating all the rights and obligations
flowing from her lawful marriage. Such a wife, learned counsel maintained,
forfeits her claim to support from her lawful husband. He placed much reliance
on the Indian decision in Manickam v. Arputha Bhavani Rajam (5) in support of
his contention.

In that case the husband challenged the entitlement of his wife for
maintenance on the ground that she had been and was, at the time of her
application for an order of maintenance in her favour, living in adultery with
his brother. The application for maintenance was filed by the wife on
3.12.1975. There was cogent evidence to show that she, lived in adultery with
the husband's brother till 28.5.1975. The Magistrate granted her maintenance
on the basis that there was no evidence to show that the wife was, on the date
of the application, living in adultery since her adulterous union continued
only up to

**381**

28.5.1975. In revision the Madras High Court after a close scrutiny of the
fetters sent by the wife to her paramour considered it significant that all
the letters written by her were between June and July 1973 showing that she
had not put an end to her adulterous conduct even after 28.5.1975. Further
there was the evidence of the husband's brother himself who expressed a
sustained desire to take the wife with him and live with her. On a total
consideration of the facts in that case the learned High Court Judge held that
the husband had established that his wife was leading a continuous adulterous
life with her paramour and also that she was living in such adultery even at
or about the time of the filing of the application for maintenance. The order
for maintenance in her favour was therefore set aside. In construing the
provisions of s. 125(4) of the Indian Criminal Procedure Code (1974), which
corresponds to s. 4 of our Maintenance Ordinance and reads as follows

"No wife shall be entitled to receive an allowance from her husband under this
section if she is living in adultery..."

the court, whilst observing that the plain and ordinary meaning of the words
would seem to imply that the wife must be living in adultery at the time she
files the application, held after a consideration of previous decisions of
several Indian High Courts that the correct construction is that the wife must
have lived in adultery at or about the time of her filing the application and
not necessarily on the date of the application itself. In the course of his
judgment the learned High Court Judge stated:

"The quintessence of all the judicial pronouncements is to the effect that
when the husband challenges the claim for maintenance of his wife, alleging
that his wife is living in adultery, the husband ought to begin his case and
prove the allegation of such adulterous life on the part of the wife by
letting in evidence of her continued adulterous conduct at or about the time
of the application and then the wife against whom such a charge is made ought
to be given an opportunity to rebut such allegation. Pandranga Rao, J., in
Kista Pillai's Case (6) whose decision has been oft quoted with approval, held
in that case that the continued adulterous conduct on the Part of the woman at
or about the time of the application would mean such conduct shortly before or
shortly after the application was made, interpreting the word 'shortly' in a
reasonable manner. What is reasonable would depend upon the facts and
circumstances of

**382**

each case. In my opinion, it would be quite meaningless and even absurd to
interpret the words 'is living in adultery' in the sense that the husband, in
order to succeed in his defence against the maintenance claim, must prove that
his wife was living in adultery on the date of the application itself."

In the circumstances of that case the period of interregnum between 28.5.1975
and 3.12.1975 (the date of the application for maintenance) during which the
wife was not proved to have had sexual relationship with her paramour was not
considered as having snapped the relationship between herself and her paramour
so as to hold that she was not guilty of the act of 'living in audltery'. Nor
could this temporary cessation of relationship between the two be attributed
to the fact that the wife had returned to a life of purity or that she had
turned to a new virtuous life. The basis therefore upon which the High Court
set aside the order of the Magistrate granting maintenance to the wife is that
there was proof' to establish that the wife was living in adultery at or about
the time of the filing of the application for maintenance.

This decision far from supporting the contention of learned counsel for the
appellant in the instant case seems to me to militate against it. The refusal
of the High Court to grant maintenance to the wife in that case was founded
not upon the fact that she by her adulterous conduct with another man,
(whether in consequence of an illegal union or not is immaterial) had
manifested her intention of finally repudiating the rights and obligations
attaching to the marriage but because she was proved to have lived an
adulterous life at or about the time she filed the application for
maintenance. By a parity of reasoning, both under s. 125 (5) of the Indian
Code and s. 5 of our Ordinance which warrant a cancellation of an order
already made in favour of a wife, if she 'is living in adultery', there must
be proof not only of the wife's subsequent adulterous conduct but also of such
adulterous conduct at or about the time the application is made for the
cancellation of the order. It would no doubt appear to be contrary to all
moral principles to grant or to refuse to cancel an order for maintenance in
favour of a wife who is shown, at some stage prior to the making of the
relevant application, to have lived in adultery whether in pursuance of a
bigamous union or not. But as a proposition of law I am unable to accept the
soundness of the learned counsel's contention. That a husband should be called
upon to support his wife

**383**

knowing that she has been unfaithful to him, though even on one occasion only,
appears to be repugnant to the moral standards of our society. Whether it be a
single act of adultery or her living in adultery over a period of time would
not make a difference for in either event she is guilty of a serious breach of
her matrimonial obligations. In either event her conduct is tantamount to a
violation of the sanctity of the matrimonial bond. But a perusal of the
provisions of our Maintenance Ordinance, as amended, makes it quite clear that
the subsistence of the marital tie is the foundation of the Magistrate's
jurisdiction to make and enforce an order of maintenance against the husband.
As long as the marital tie continues to subsist the husband's obligation to
make payment upon the order continues. As long as the woman's status as a wife
continues, the order in her favour operates. It is only on proof that the
marital tie has been legally terminated upon a dissolution of the marriage
that the order ceases to be operative unless the court makes order for its
cancellation in terms of s. 5 or s. 10 of the Maintenance Ordinance. Proof of
a repudiation or abandonment of matrimonial rights and obligations on the part
of the wife by virtue of her conduct would not per se render the maintenance
order invalid or unenforceable. To uphold such a contention would result in
nullifying to a large measure the jurisdiction conferred on a Magistrate's
Court by the Maintenance Ordinance. S. 5 mandates the cancellation of a
maintenance order made in favour of a wife on proof of the circumstances
stipulated therein. In the instant case the application of the appellant to
cancel the order was made under this section. The learned Magistrate and the
Court of Appeal quite rightly have refused to do so since the application was
made about 2 years after the respondent had ceased to live in adultery with
her paramour and as such there was no proof that she was living in adultery at
or about the time of the application for cancellation. At the hearing before
us learned counsel for the appellant drew our attention to s. 10 and suggested
that the facts and circumstances of the instant case may warrant a
cancellation of the order under that section. I am unable to agree. It
empowers a Magistrate to cancel an order for maintenance 'on proof of a change
in the circumstances of any person for whose benefit or against whom an order
for maintenance has been made'. This section appears to me to deal with a
situation where there is a change in the financial circumstances of a party.
This seems to be the primary purpose of the section. But it may also empower a
court to order cancellation of an order in favour of a wife on proof that she
has lost her legal status as a wife, for instance, consequent upon a decree

**384**

divorce. A change in the legal status of the husband or wife is certainly a
change in the circumstances of either party. But I do not think this section
empowers the court to cancel an order made in favour of the wife on the basis
that she has been guilty of immoral conduct at some point of time in the past
even though such conduct may have manifested a repudiation by her of the
matrimonial obligations so long as her marital tie subsists in law.

For the above reasons the judgment of the Court of Appeal is affirmed and the
appeal is dismissed but without costs.

**

SENEVIRATNE, J.** \- I agree.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.** \- I agree. _  
  
Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/39.html_  

