##  Ramalingam v. Thangarajah - SLR - 693, Vol 2 of 1982 [1982] LKSC 39;
(1982) 2 Sri LR 693 (19 October 1982)

# 693

**  RAMALINGAM**

**v.**

**THANGARAJAH**

SUPREME COURT

SHARVANANDA, J., VICTOR PERERA, J., AND COLIN THOME, J.

S.C. 6/82; CA 2460/80; P.C. AKKARAIPATTU PCA/398

SEPTEMBER 29, 1982



    Primary Courts Procedure Act, Sections 66 to 76 ‑ Duty of Judge in disputes as to possession ‑ Consequence of failure to keep to time limits laid down in Act.



The respondent owned a land in extent 8A.1R.22P and had been cultivating it
for decades but appellant dispossessed him of the land, on 6.10.79 and
continued in possession. The Officer in Charge of the Police Station having
failed to bring about a settlement filed information on 10.12.79.



Inquiry was fixed by , the Judge for 17.1.80. Inquiry was postponed from time
to time and witnesses were examined and cross examined at length till the
Judge brought about a settlement on 24.9.80.



# 694



The appellant complains that the above proceedings offend the mandatory
provisions of Part VII of the Primary Courts Procedure Act and are therefore
null and void.



**Held ‑**



(1) That a Judge should in an inquiry under Section 66 confine himself to the
question of actual possession on the date of filing information except in a
case where a person who had been in possession of land had been dispossessed
within a period of two months immediately preceding filing of information.



(2) That where the, information filed and affidavits furnished under section
66 are sufficient to make a determination. under Section 68 further inquiry
embarked on by the Judge was not warranted by the mandatory provisions of
Section 72 and Eire in excess of his special jurisdiction.



(3) that non‑compliance by Court of the provisions of Sections 66 and 67 does
not divest Court of jurisdiction conferred on it by Section 66(2).



**Cases referred to:**



(1) _Kanagasabai v. Mailvaganam (1976) 78 NLR 280, 283.  
 _

(2) _Nagalingam v. Lakshman de Mel (1975) 78 NLR 231, 237._



**APPLICATION** in revision of order of the Primary Court of Akaraipattu.



_S.C. Crossette Thambiah_ with _K. Thevarajah_ and _S.H.N. Reeza_ for
appellant.  


_K. Kanag ‑Iswaran_ for respondent. .



_Cur. adv. vult._



October 19, 1982



**SHARVANANDA, J.**



This is an appeal from a judgment of the Court of Appeal dismissing the
appellant's revision application to have the proceedings No. 398 in the
Primary Court of Akkaraipattu declared null and void.



On 10.12.79, the Officer‑in‑Charge of the Police Station, Akkaraipattu filed
information under section 66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of
1979 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) regarding a dispute relating to the
possession of a land, between the petitioner-­appellant (hereinafter referred
to as appellant) and the res­pondent‑respondent, (hereinafter referred to as
respondent), in the Primary Court of Akkaraipattu. He stated in the
information that he had inquired into a complaint made by the respondent on
22.10.1979 to the effect that he owned a land 8 acres, 1 rood and 22 perches
in extent which he had been cultivating continuously for decades and that the
petitioner had entered this land forcibly and was cultivating the same.
According to the information, the Officer‑in‑Charge had summoned both parties
to the Police Station and had tried to effect a peaceful settlement, but his
efforts had failed and he feared a



**  695**



serious breach of the peace as a result of the dispute. The appellant and,
respondent appeared in Court on that date and filed their respective
affidavits but annexed no documents thereto. In hi s affidavit the appellant
stated that he was cultivating and possessing the said land from 1977. On the
other hand the respondent in his affidavit dated 8.12.79 stated that while he
was in possession of the land the appellant had "on 6.10.79 without any manner
of right put him out of the land forcibly and cultivated the land" and prayed
that he be restored to possession.



The Judge, Primary Court fixed the matter for inquiry on 17.1.80. On that date
the inquiry commenced and counsel for the respondent led the evidence of one,
David, Land Officer. Though this witness stated that he did not know who
cultivated the land after 1974, the record shows that his evidence had gone on
for a fair amount of time. After his lengthy evidence the inquiry was
postponed to 22.2.80. On that date, on the application of both parties for a
postponement on the ground that their lawyers were not present, further
inquiry was re‑fixed for 6.3.80. On 6.3.80 however the inquiry was postponed
for want of time for 28.4.80 on which date the Court, stenographer was not
available and inquiry was put off again for 23.6.80. On the latter date the
respondent gave evidence at length as to how he came into possession of the
land and was in possession of it from 1976, till he was, forcibly dispossessed
by the appellant on 6.10.79. The respondent's evidence covers eleven pages of
the record. Thereafter one Stanislaus, Cultivation Officer gave evidence for
the respondent. This witness in examination in chief, referred to the
cultivation of the land by the respondent in 1978 but stated that the
appellant cultivated the land during the 1979 cultivation season which started
in October 1979\. This witness was cross‑examined and re‑examined at length.
His evidence covers about fifteen pages of the record. His evidence was not
concluded that day when further inquiry was refixed for 25.6.80. The inquiry
could not be taken up on 25.6.80, nor on 2.7.80 nor on 11.7.80, on which dates
the case was postponed, as the. stenographer was on leave. On 11.7.80 on the
application of both parties for a long date "as. they had to go to
Kataragama", the inquiry was refixed for 6.8.80. On this date too the inquiry
had to be postponed as the stenographer was on maternity leave and the inquiry
was fixed for 10.9.80. On this date too the Attorney for the appellant moved
for a postponement on the ground that his Senior Counsel had gone abroad, and
that some documents pertaining to



#  696



the case were with him. The Judge then inquired from the appellant's Attorney,
whether he could assist the Court "as the‑ inquiry had to be completed within
three months, in terms of section 67(1) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act
No. 44/79". On the Attorney expressing willingness, the cross‑examination of
Stanislaus was resumed. After Stanislaus, the next witness called was one
Sambanther who testified to a complaint made by the appellant to, the
Assistant Government Agent on 10.8.78 regarding the land in dispute. This
witness however stated that he did not know who was in possession of the land
at the relevant times. Further inquiry was fixed for 24.9.80. On this date the
lawyers for the parties were absent, but "as they had not sent any intimation
to Court about their appearance", the Judge, proceeded with the inquiry. The
respondent called as his witness one Vasantharasapillai, who stated quite
early in the course of his examination‑in‑chief that he cultivated this land
from 1972‑75 but did not know who cultivated the land after that. On the
respondent closing his case with that witness's evidence the appellant got
into the witness box and stated that he cultivated the land for the 1977/78
and 1979/80 seasons and for the last cultivation season. Then the appellant
was cross examined by  the respondent. Thereafter ‑ the appellant called one
Mailvaganam to give evidence on his behalf, This witness stated that he knew
the land in dispute and that the appellant was possessing it. In
cross‑examination this witness was shown two receipts marked 1R4 and 1R5. On
the witness denying the signature appearing on the said receipts, the
respondent stated that he would be calling the Examiner of Questioned
Documents to prove the signature. When he was further being cross examined at
length by the respondent the witness fainted. The record sets out what
happened then:-



"Inquiry put off. I release him on bail in Rs. 1000/‑ in default of bail
remand him for two weeks.  


At this stage the respondents propose to settle the case. Case is settled on
the following terms:



### Terms of Settlement  


Both respondents agree that the 1st respondent Thangarasa should possess 4
acres and 32 perches from the northern boundary of this land and the balance
portion to be possessed by the 2nd respondent ‑ Ramalingam."



# 697



In consideration, of the motion of the 1st respondent to withdraw his
application to have the signature of the witness Mylvaganam on 1R4 and 1R5
examined by the Examiner of Questioned Documents, the Judge cancelled the bail
on the witness and warned and discharged him."



The appellant complains that the above proceedings offend the mandatory
provisions of Part VII of the Primary Courts Procedure Act and are null and
void.



Before I proceed to discuss the main contentions urged by the Counsel for the
appellant, I would like to express my disapproval of the order for bail made
by the Primary Court Judge on Mailvaganam. This order is absolutely
unwarranted in law and cannot be. justified The witness was not facing any
criminal charge for him to be subject to any remand. An order of this nature
tends to discourage witnesses coming forward to give evidence. Courts should
not hold out such threats or terrors to witnesses. Such an arbitrary order is
not calculated to do any credit to a Court of Justice. Judges should be chary
of making such orders.  


The lackadaisical fashion in which the inquiry has been carried on reveals a
lack of appreciation on the part of the Primary Court Judge and attorneys of
the parties concerned, of the proper scope and objective of an inquiry under
Part VII of the Act. Had the Judge addressed himself to the relevant issues
involved in the case he could have spared himself the exercise of the long and
protracted, inquiry which was characterised by digressions into irrelevancies
and was conducted in disregard of the time limits prescribed by the provisions
of the Act. On the undisputed facts of the case, as disclosed by the
affidavits of the parties, the determination and order under section 68 of the
Act could have been made on the first day of the inquiry itself. According to
the affidavits filed by the appellant and respondent, prior to the
commencement of the inquiry it was common ground and, it was not disputed that
on the date of the filing of the information under section 66 of the Act,
namely _10.12.79_ the appellant was in possession of the land in dispute and
had been in, such possession at least from 6.10.79. The respondent alleged in
his affidavit that he was forcibly dispossessed of the land by the appellant
on 6.10.79. Thus, on the respondent's own admission the appellant had entered
into and commenced possession of the land prior to the period of two months
immediately before the date on which the information was filed viz. prior to
_10.10.79_. On this uncontested fact



# 698



of possession by the appellant from 6.10.79, the Judge could have and should
have made his, determination and order under section 68 of the Act in favour
of the appellant and terminated the proceedings. In law, that was the only
order which the Judge could have made, on the facts; no additional evidence
was necessary or relevant to enable the Judge to make the said determination
and order.



In an inquiry into a dispute as to the possession of any land, where a breach
of peace is threatened or is likely under Part VII, of the Primary Courts
Procedure Act, the main point for decision is the actual possession of the
land _on the date of the filing of the information_ under section 66; but,
where forcible dispossession took _place within two months before the date on
which the said information was filed_ the main point is. Actual possession
prior to that alleged date of dispossession. Section 68 is only concerned with
the determination as to who was in possession of the land or the part on the
date of the filing of the information under section 66. It directs the Judge
to declare that the person who was in such possession was entitled to
possession of the land or part thereof Section 68(3) becomes applicable only
if the Judge can come to a definite finding that some other party had been
forcibly dispossessed within a period of two months next proceeding the date
on which the information was filed under section 66. The effect of this
sub‑section is that it enables a party to be treated to be in possession on
the date of the filing of the information though actually he may be found to
have been dispossessed before that date provided such dispossession took place
within the period of two months next proceeding the date of the filing of the
information. It is only if such a party can be treated or deemed to be in
possession on the date of the filing of the information that the person
actually in possession can be said not to have been in possession on the date
of the filling of the information. Thus, the duty of the Judge in proceedings
under section 68 is to ascertain which party was or deemed to have been in
possession on the relevant date, namely, on the date of the filing of the
information under section 66\. Under section 68 the Judge is bound to maintain
the possession of such person even if he be a rank trespasser as­ against any
interference even by the rightful owner. This section entities even a squatter
to the protection of the law, unless his possession was acquired within two
months of the filing of the information.



That person is entitled to possession until he is evicted by due process of
law. A Judge should therefore in an inquiry under Part



# 699



VII of the aforesaid Act, confine himself to the question of actual possession
on the date of filing of the information except in a case where a person who
had been in possession of the land had been dispossessed within a period of
two months immediately before the date of the information. He is not to decide
any question of title or right to possession of the parties to the land.
Evidence bearing on title can be considered only when the evidence as to
possession is clearly balanced and the presumption of possession which flows
from title may tilt the balance in favour of the owner and help in deciding
the question of possession.



On the other hand, if the dispute is in regard to any right to any land other
than right of possession of such land, the question for decision, according to
section 69(1), is who is entitled to the right which is subject of dispute.
The word "entitle" here connotes the ownership of the right. The Court has to
determine which of the parties has acquired that right, or is entitled for the
time being to exercise that right. In contradistinction to section 68, section
69 requires the Court to determine the question which party is entitled to the
disputed right preliminary to making an order under section 69(2).



The procedure of an inquiry under Part VII of the Act is sui generis. The
procedure to be adopted and the manner in which the proceedings are to be
conducted are clearly set out in Sections 66, 71 and 72 of the Act. Section
66(2) mandates that the special jurisdiction to inquire into disputes
regarding which information had been filed under Section 66(1) should be
exercised in the manner provided for in Part VII. The proceedings are of a
summary nature and it is essential that they should be disposed of
expeditiously. The importance of a speedy completion of the inquiry which
culminates in the order under Section 68 or 69 is underscored by the specific
time‑schedule prescribed by the provisions of the Act. Section 66(3), requires
the Court to appoint a date "which shall not be later than three weeks from
the date on which the parties were produced or the date fixed for their
appearance under Section 66(1), directing the parties to file affidavits
setting out their claims and annex thereto any documents on which they rely.
When such affidavits are filed the Court is required on application made by
parties to grant them time not exceeding two weeks to file counter affidavits
with documents, if any. Sub‑section 6 provides that where no application has
been made for filing counter affidavits or on the date fixed for filing
counter affidavits the Court should endeavour, before fixing the case



# 700



for inquiry to induce the parties to arrive at a settlement of the dispute and
if there is no such settlement Court should fix the case for inquiry on a date
not later than two weeks of the date fixed for filing affidavits or counter
affidavits as the case may be. Section 67 specially postulates that the
inquiry should be concluded within three months of its commencement and the
Judge should deliver his order within one week of its conclusion. It is
incumbent on the Judge to conform to these time limits and to discountenance
any elaborate and prolonged inquiry in breach of the time limits.



In this connexion what I said with reference to the provisions of section 62
of the Administration of Justice Law No.44 of 1973 (now repealed) in
_Kanagasabai Vs. Mailvanaganam,_ (1) apply equally well to the Section 66 and
68 of the Act which correspond to them: ‑



"Section 62 of the the Administration of Justice Law confers special
jurisdiction on a Magistrate to make orders to prevent a dispute affecting
land escalating and causing a breach of the peace. The jurisdiction so
conferred is a quasi‑criminal jurisdiction. The primary object of the
jurisdiction so conferred on the Magistrate is the prevention of a breach of
the peace arising in respect of a dispute affecting land. The section enables
the Magistrate temporarily to settle the dispute between the parties before
the Court and maintain the status quo until the rights of the parties are
decided by a competent civil Court All other considerations are subordinated
to the imperative necessity of preserving the peace. At an inquiry under that
section the Magistrate is not involved in an investigation into title or right
to possession, which is the function of a civil Court. The action taken by the
Magistrate is of a purely preventive and provisional nature in a civil
dispute, pending final adjudication of the rights of the parties in a civil
Court. The proceedings under this section are of a summary nature and it is
essential that they should, be disposed of as expeditiously as possible
.........



The scheme embodied in this Part is geared to achieve the object of prevention
of a breach of the peace. Section 68(2) enjoins the Judge to decide the
dispute which gave rise to the threat to a breach of the peace, provisionally
and to maintain the status quo until the right of parties are decided by a
competent Civil Court. Section 72 prescribes the material on which the
determination and order under section 68 and 69 of the Act is to be based. The
determination should, in the



#  701

**  **

main, be founded on "the information filed and the affidavits and documents
furnished by the parties". Adducing evidence by way of affidavits and
documents is the rule and oral testimony is an exception to be permitted only
at the discretion of the Judge. That discretion should be exercised
judicially, only in a fit case and not as a matter of course and not be
surrendered to parties or their counsel. Under this section the parties are
not entitled as of right to lead oral evidence. Section 72 provides: ‑



"A determination and order under this Part shall be made after examination and
consideration of ‑



(a) the information filed and the affidavits and documents furnished;  


(b) such other evidence on any matter arising on the affidavits or documents
furnished as the Court may permit to be led on that matter;  


(c) such oral or written submissions as may be permitted by the Judge of the
Primary Court in his discretion.



The information, affidavits and documents of parties will identify their
respective positions in regard to the issue of possession at the time of the
filing of the information, for the purpose of the determination and order
under section 68. If the question of possession or dispossession by any of the
parties at the relevant time is disputed then the Court may permit oral
evidence of the parties and their witnesses directed to that question only,
for the purpose of ascertaining the true position. It is imperative that the
Judge should so contain the inquiry and not allow parties to enlarge or
convert the inquiry into a full scale trial of civil issues, as in a civil
case.



Hence, where the information filed and the affidavits furnished under Section
66(2)  were sufficient to make a determination under Section 68, the further
inquiry embarked upon by the Judge was not warranted by the mandatory
provisions of section 72 and was in excess of his special jurisdiction. The
Judge should have made his determination on the first day of the inquiry
itself, namely 17.1.80, that the appellant was in possession of the land and
made order that the appellant was entitled to possession of the said land.



The question was raised as to what was the consequence of the failure of the
Judge to observe the time‑limits prescribed for the various acts and steps
leading to the determination and order under



#  702



Section 68. It is significant that the prescription of time is preceded by the
word 'shall'. The obligatory nature of the requirement that the particular
step/act should be taken or done within a fixed time is indicated by the word
'shall'. This expression is generally used to impose a duty to do what is
prescribed, not a discretion to comply with it according to whether it is
reasonable or practicable to do. Prima facie the word 'shall' suggests that it
‑ is mandatory, but that word has often been rightly construed as directory.
Everything turns on the context in which it is used; and the purpose and
effect of the section in which it appears. It is to be noted that the statute
does not declare what shall be the consequence of non‑compliance by Court with
regard to this requirement's as to time limit prescribed by the law. Are these
procedural rules to be regarded as mandatory, in which case disobedience will
render void or voidable what has been done or as directory, in which case
disobedience will be treated as an irregularity not affecting what has been
done? It is to be observed that this obligation with regard to time limit is
imposed on court, over whose acts or omissions the parties do not have any
­control. Maxwell on 'Interpretation of Statutes' 11th Edition, at page 369
appositely states‑



"Where the prescription of a statute related to performance of a public duty
and where invalidation of acts done, in neglect of them would work serious
general inconvenience or injustice to persons who have no control over those
entrusted with the duty yet not promote the essential aims of the legislature,
such prescriptions seem to be generally understood as mere instructions for
the guidance and government of those on whom the duty is imposed, or, in other
words, as directory only. Neglect of them may be penal, indeed, but it does
not affect the validity of the acts done in disregard of them. It has
often‑been held, for instance, when an Act ordered a thing to be done by a
public body or public officers and pointed out the specific time when it was
to be done, then the Act is directory only and might be complied with after
the prescribed time."



In this context, one may also invoke the maxim "Actus curiae neminem gravabit"
(an act of Court shall prejudice no man). In my opinion this maxim which is
founded upon justice and good sense may be appropriately applied to salvage a
determination and order made under section 68, where the Judge has failed to
observe the time‑limits imposed by the legislature for the various procedural
steps



#  703



prescribed by it. The Judge is certainly to be blamed but a party in whose
favour such an order is made should not suffer for the Judge's default.



A passage from my judgment in _Nagalingam vs. Lakshman de Mel,_ (2), in
respect of a similar situtation where the Commissioner of Labour had not made
his order within the time prescribed under the Termination of Employment of
Workmen (Special Provisions) Act No. 45 of 1971 has application to the present
problem.



"The delay should not render null and void the proceedings and affect the
parties, as the parties have no control over the proceedings. It could not
have been intended that the delay should cause a loss of jurisdiction, that
the Commission had to give an effective order of approval or refusal. In my
view, a failure to comply literally with the aforesaid provisions does not
affect the efficacy or finality of the Commissioner's order made thereon. Had
it been the‑intention of the Parliament to avoid such order nothing would be
simpler than to have so stipulated. "



I am therefore of the view that the provisions as to time limits in Section 66
or 67, though the word 'shall' there suggests that they are mandatory, should
be construed as being directory and that non‑compliance by Court of the
provisions of Section 66 or 67 of the Act does not divest the Court of the
jurisdiction conferred on it by Section 66(2) to make the determination and
order under Section 68.



Another contention urged by counsel for the appellant is that an order based
on the settlement arrived at by parties on 24.9.80, after the time prescribed
by Section 67 of the Act, cannot be treated as an order to which Section 73
would apply. It is not necessary to decide on the correctness of this
contention as admittedly the Judge has not made any order on this settlement
in question and hence there is no foundation for the imposition of any penalty
under Section 73.



For the reasons set out above I set aside all proceedings had in this case on
and after 17.1.80, including the proceedings for alleged contempt of court,
purporting to be held under Section 73 of the Act and direct the Judge to
determine nunc pro tune, under Section 68 that the appellant was on the date
of the filing of the information in possess‑ion of the land in dispute in
extent 8 acres 1 rood and 22 perches and to make order declaring that the
appellant is entitled to the possession of the said land. I allow the appeal
and set aside



#  704



the order of the Court of Appeal and send the case back to the Judge, Primary
Court, with the order that he should comply with the aforesaid direction.



The respondent will pay the appellant Rs. 750/‑ as costs of this Court and of
the Court of Appeal.



**VICTOR PERERA, J.** ‑ I agree.  


**COLIN ‑THOME, J**. ‑ I agree.



#### _Proceedings after 17.1.80 set aside and  
 _

_case sent back for order._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/39.html_  

