##  Thavanayaki v. Mahalingam - SLR - 391, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC 39;
(1981) 1 Sri LR 391 (6 November 1981)

**391**

**THAVANAYAKI  
v.  
MAHALINGAM**

**SUPREME COURT  
SHARVANANDA, J., WIMALARATNE, J.,  
& RATWATTE, J.,  
S. C. APPEAL NO. 64/80  
C. A. APPEAL NO. 741/78  
M. C. POINT PEDRO NO. 14572  
NOVEMBER 6, 1981  
**  
_Maintenance-Marriage by Hindu rites - Paternity - Maintenance for applicant -
maintenance for child -Corroboration s. 6 of Maintenance Ordinance - s. 157 of
Evidence Ordinance.  
_  
The failure of the applicant to establish a marriage by Hindu rites can affect
only her claim for maintenance but, this will not entail automatic rejection
of the evidence in regard to paternity.  
  
It is well settled that the requirement of s. 6 of the Maintenance Ordinance
that in order to justify the award of maintenance, the evidence of the mother
should be corroborated in some material particular by "other evidence" is
satisfied by any kind of corroboration admissible in law, including previous
statements made by the mother to third persons and admissible under s. 157 of
the Evidence Ordinance subject of course to the limitations stipulated in that
section that such statements are made at or about, the time the sexual
intimacy was continuing between the parties.  
  
The corroborative value of such previous statements can of course be of
varying character dependent upon the circumstances of each case.  
  
What is required in a maintenance case is that the totality-of such items of
corroborative evidence must be such as to satisfy the Magistrate that the
evidence of the mother. that the child begotten has been the result of her
intimacy with the respondent is the truth and nothing but the truth. The
corroborative evidence should be to the satisfaction of the Magistrate. The
evidence, of opportunity, the evidence of previous statements and the evidence
of the conduct of the respondent can constitute satisfactory corroboration.  
  
**Cases referred to:**  
  
_(1) Angohamy v.. Kirinelis Appu (1911) 15 NLR 232.  
  
(2) Ponnammah v. Seenithamby (1921) 22 NLR 395.  
  
(3) Mahesan v. Chellammah (19391 19 CL Rec. 31:  
  
(4) Wijeratne v. Kusumawathie (1948) 49 NLR 354.  
_  
**APPEAL** from Judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_A. Thiagarajah_ for applicant-appellant.  
  
_V. S. A. Pullenayagam_ for respondent-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**392**

December 1; 1981.  
**WIMALARATNE, J.  
**  
The applicant claimed maintenance from the respondent alleging that they were
married according to Hindu customary rites, that a female child Imayalini was
born on 28.1.76 and that the respondent who was the father of the child failed
to maintain them. The respondent denied marriage and paternity. At the trial
the applicant failed' to establish a marriage according to Hindu rites, but
led evidence to show that she lived in the respondent's house on terms of
intimacy for about six years before the child was born. The learned
Magistrate, whilst refusing her -application for maintenance for herself, held
that her evidence of intimacy with the respondent was corroborated in material
particulars by other evidence to his satisfaction, and ordered a sum of Rs.
50/- per month as maintenance for the child.  
  
The respondent appealed, and the Court of Appeal allowed his appeal for the
reason that the Magistrate, in attempting to answer the question regarding the
paternity of the child, "starts on a false premise that the applicant's
position was that she was factually married, and she had a belief that there
was a de facto marriage. There was no justification for this assumption." The
Court of Appeal also formed the view that there was no satisfactory evidence
to corroborate the evidence that she and the respondent were on terms of
intimacy, and that the child was begotten in consequence.  
  
Learned Counsel for the applicant-appellant had contended that the Court of
Appeal has erred on both matters; and it seems to us that Counsel's contention
ought to prevail. It is true that the applicant came to court alleging that
she was factually married to the respondent according to Hindu rites. It is
because she failed to establish such marriage that the Magistrate refused her
application for maintenance for herself. But it does not necessarily follow
that her evidence that she was on terms of intimacy with the respondent in the
belief that she was married ought automatically to have been rejected, for to
do so would be to penalise an innocent child in whose favour maintenance was
claimed. The learned Magistrate has not assumed a de facto marriage. On the
contrary he has proceeded to determine the question as to whether applicant
and respondent were on terms of intimacy, and has thereafter looked for
corroboration of her evidence. It is therefore necessary to determine whether
the Magistrate was justified in accepting the applicant's evidence.

**393**

Briefly the facts are these. The applicant is the youngest daughter of one K.
Kandasamy, whose wife died .about 1969. As her other brothers and sisters were
married and living separately, she was looked after by her mother's brother
Thamotherampillai who resided in the adjoining house with is wife and two
unmarried sons, the younger of whom was Mahalingam, the respondent. She was
about 16 years and Mahalingam who was about 20 was yet a student but was also
helping his father in his cultivation. Although a common fence separated the
two houses, a gate provided easy access from one house to the other. The
applicant stated that it was her uncle Thamotherampillai who after her
mother's death invited her to live in their house on the promise that
Mahalingam would be married to her, and that Mahalingam's parents accepted her
as their daughter-in-law. Having seen and heard both the applicant and
Mahalingam in the witness box the learned Magistrate has accepted the evidence
of the applicant. He has expressed the view that "considering the relationship
between the parties her (the applicant's) failure to prove a valid marriage in
keeping with modern law does not make her. a liar and thereby destroy her
genuine belief that she was married to the. respondent," because according to
ancient Hindu custom where a girl thinks that another person is her husband
and if there is an understanding between them they were considered validly
married. It seems unnecessary for present- purposes to embark upon an analysis
of the requirement of a valid marriage according to ancient customs among the
Hindus. It would suffice to note that after seeing and hearing the witnesses
the Magistrate was quite satisfied that the applicant was virtually living in
both houses, that she was treated as their daughter-in-law by the respondent's
parents, and that she and the respondent lived together as husband and wife
for a period of about six years before the child was born.  
  
Having accepted the applicant's evidence of the fact of intimacy. with the
respondent the learned Magistrate has looked for corroboration "in some
material particulars to his satisfaction" as required by section 6 of the
Maintenance Ordinance (Cap. 91). There was no direct evidence of corroboration
of the fact of intimacy but three items of circumstantial evidence 'appear to
have satisfied the Magistrate. They were evidence of opportunity, evidence of
previous statements made by the applicant to others and evidence of the
conduct of the respondent and of her mother.  
  
The applicant's evidence, that she virtually resided in the respondent's house
received corroboration from two independent witnesses, Chandrasekera, a
teacher who was a stranger, and

**394**

Nagaratnam, a farmer who lived close by. Their testimony was believed by the
Magistrate; and their evidence went a long way to show that the applicant was
very often in the respondent's house. The applicant and respondent were of
marriageable age; and related as first cousins. In fact the respondent's elder
brother was at the same time engaged to be married to the daughter of another
brother of Thamotherampillai. The respondent produced some householder's lists
according to which the applicant's name appeared as a member not of
Thamotherampillai's household but of her father Kandasamy's. The Respondent
said in evidence that after her mother's death the applicant resided in a
different village, Atchuvely from 1969 to 1976, and that for about 8 or 9
years he had not even spoken to her. The Magistrate has disbelieved the
respondent, and it would be wrong for an Appellate Court on a reading of the
depositions alone to reverse a Magistrate's finding on a question of fact of
that nature.  
  
The second item of corroboration consists of certain previous statements made
by the applicant. The Magistrate has believed that when she was pregnant the
applicant told the respondent that she was pregnant by him, and that the
respondent told her that "somehow or other he will accept me in January
(1976)". She also told the respondent's mother of her condition, and the
mother took her to a native physician and obtained medicine for the purpose of
destroying the foetus: On 11.11.75 she was seven months pregnant. When she
informed her father he drank an insecticide and committed suicide because of
the disgrace she had brought upon the family. On that date the respondent and
his brothers and parents had joined in driving her out of their house. An
inquest was held on the death, of Kandasamy. The applicant told the coroner in
evidence that she had been on terms of intimacy with the respondent for 8
months.  
  
Learned Counsel for the respondent has attacked the receipt by the Magistrate
as corroboration of any previous statements made by the applicant, and has
contended that if such previous statements are not acted upon, then there is
no evidence to corroborate the applicant's evidence in any material
particulars.  
  
It is often said that a witness cannot corroborate himself. Hence there is an
old general rule in English Common Law under which a witness may not be asked
in chief whether he has formerly made a statement consistent. with his present
testimony. He cannot narrate such statement if it was oral, or refer to it if
it was in writing (save for the purpose of refreshing his memory) and other
witnesses may not be called to prove it - see Cross on Evidence

**395**

(506 Ed) 236.. Two reasons for this rule have been adduced. One is the ease
with which evidence of this nature could be manufactured; the other is that
this type of evidence would be superfluous, for the assertions of a witness
are to be regarded in general as true, until there is some particular reason
for impeaching them as false.  
  
When the British introduced the Indian Evidence Act, No.. 1 of 1872 and the
Ceylon Evidence Ordinance, No. 14 of 1895, they departed from this rule and
incorporated section 157, in terms of which "in order to corroborate the
testimony of a witness, any former statement made by such witness, whether
written or verbal, relating to the same fact at or about the time when the
fact took place or before any authority legally competent to investigate the
fact, may be proved". One notes the care and precautions which the framers
have adopted in order to overcome the possibility of fabrication. The previous
statement had to be either one made "at or about" the time when the fact
sought to be corroborated took place or had to be made before a "competent
authority."  
  
In an early case, that of Angohamy v. Kirinelis Appu (1911) 15 N L R 2320),
-Wood Renton, J. expressed the opinion that when section 7 (present section 6)
speaks of the corroboration of the evidence of the mother it must be taken to
include any kind of corroboration. In other words section 157 of the Evidence
Ordinance applied to section -7 of the Maintenance Ordinance. Having certain
doubts about this view Shaw, J. referred "the very important point" as to
whether previous statements made by the mother of an illegitimate child to
third persons as to the paternity of the child are sufficient corroboration
for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of section 7 of the Maintenance
Ordinance, to a full Court. A Full Bench comprising Bertram, C. J., Ennis and
de Sampayo, J.J. in the case of Ponnammah v. Seenithamby (1921) 22 NLR 395(2),
whilst not agreeing with the Magistrate 'hat the statement made by the girl to
the mother and afterwards to the local Headman, can be considered as being
made at or about the time of the intimacy, Bertram, C. J. expressed the view
that "if a statement is made. at or about, the time when sexual intimacy is
continuing between the parties, then it seems to me that under section 157 of
the Evidence Ordinance, a statement by the woman to another person alleging
that intimacy is corroboration within the meaning of the section." Commenting
on the view taken by Wood Renton, J. that. section 157 of the Evidence
Ordinance applied to section 7, Bertram, C. J. stated "and that, I take it,
must be accepted as the law" at p. 398:

**396**

One would have though that the. Full Bench decision settled the law as to the
admissibility of previous statements as corroboration of the mother's
evidence. But twenty years later Nihill, J. in Mahesan v. Chellammah (1939)
XIX C. L. Rec. 31 (3) characterised as "difficult" the question of the
admissibility of the girl's statement to her mother. With !respect, any
difficulty had been resolved by the Full Bench in 1921 and the difficulty seen
by Nihill, J .did not arise. It seems to e that the law is well settled after
the Full Bench decision, and that is, that the requirement of section 6 of the
Maintenance Ordinance that in order to justify the award of maintenance, the
evidence of the mother should be corroborated in some material particulars by
"other evidence" is satisfied by any kind of corroboration admissible in law,
including previous statements made by the mother to third persons and
admissible under section 157 of the Evidence Ordinance, subject of course to
the limitations stipulated in that section.  
  
The corroborative value of such previous statements can of course be of
varying character, dependent upon the circumstances of each case, for a person
may equally persistently adhere to falsehood once uttered, if there be a
motive for it. Previous statements would only constitute one type of
corroborative evidence. There can be several others, too numerous to
enumerate. What is required in a Maintenance case is that the totality of such
items of corroborative evidence must be such as to satisfy the Magistrate that
the evidence of the mother that the child begotten has been the result of her
intimacy with the respondent is the truth, and nothing but the truth. As
Basnayake, J. (as he then was) pointed out in Wijeratne v. Kusumawathie (1948)
49 N L R 354 (4):- ",In considering in appeal the question of corroboration
under section 6 of the Maintenance Ordinance, I think the court, should give
due weight to the words 'to the satisfaction of the Magistrate.' These words
in my view require that, if there is evidence which if believed supports the
Magistrate's conclusion that the mother of the child is corroborated in some
material particular, this Court should not on a reading of the depositions
interfere on the mere question of the degree of corroboration" at p. 355.  
  
One notes the care with which the Magistrate has given the benefit of all
reasonable doubts to the respondent. He has, for example, not taken into
account the evidence of the applicant given before the coroner on 11.11:75 on
the ground that it` was not a statement made "at or about" the time of the
intimacy, whereas it was, because the Magistrate had accepted her evidence
that she was living in the. respondent's house up to that day.

**397**

The third item of corroborative evidence is the conduct of the respondent.
When she informed him of her pregnancy he promised "somehow or other to accept
her in January." That evidence as well as the evidence that the respondent's
mother took the applicant to a native physician has been believed by the
Magistrate. One could not expect the applicant to have called the respondent's
mother, for that may have been disastrous to her own case. On the other hand
the respondent ought to have contradicted that evidence by calling his mother
as a witness.  
  
To sum up, it would appear that although the applicant failed to establish a
marriage according to Hindu custom, she did convince the Magistrate that she
lived with the respondent for a period of six years, and that the child
Imayalini was born as a result of their intimacy. The Court of Appeal
therefore erred when it rejected. the Magistrate's finding of fact, for in
reaching that conclusion the Magistrate had not gone on any assumption of
marriage, but had considered the evidence of their relationship independently.
The Court also erred when it said that the Magistrate had misdirected himself
on the matter of corroboration. The Magistrate was satisfied that the evidence
of opportunity, the evidence of previous statements and the evidence of the
conduct of the respondent constituted satisfactory corroboration of the
applicant's evidence. The Court of Appeal was not justified in disturbing
those findings of fact.  
  
For these reasons I would allow this appeal, and restore the order made by the
Magistrate awarding the applicant a sum of Rs. 50/- per month as maintenance
in respect of the child Imayalini. The applicant will also be entitled to the
costs of this appeal which I would fix at Rs. 500/-.  
  
**SHARVANANDA, J. - I** agree.  
  
**RATWATTE, J - I** agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_  

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/39.html_  

