##  Hatton National Bank Limited v. Helenluc Garments Ltd. and Others - SLR -
365, Vol 2 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 39; (1999) 2 Sri LR 365 (9 September 1999)

365

**HATTON NATIONAL BANK LIMITED  
v.  
HELENLUC GARMENTS LTD. AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.,  
PERERA, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. (CHC) 7/97

H.C. (CIVIL) NO. 19/96 (1)  
MAY 11, 1999

_Contract - Banking facilities \- Overdrafts secured by mortgage of property
and guarantee - Prescription of action by the Bank in respect of overdrafts
and mortgage - Prescription Ordinance - Action against guarantors - Waiver of
the right to plead prescription._

The appellant Bank (the plaintiff) by its plaint dated 27.5.96 instituted
action against the 1st respondent (the 1st defendant) and the 2nd to 6th
respondents (2 to 6 defendants) for recovery of monies advanced on overdraft
facilities provided to the 1st defendant company. As security for monies
advanced on overdrafts, the 1st defendant had by a mortgage bond dated
21.12.82 mortgaged and hypothecated certain movable properties to the Bank.
The rights under these transactions which were initially with the Dubai Bank
were later assigned to another Bank and finally to the plaintiff. By a
guarantee dated 27.01.82 the 2nd to the 6th defendants agreed to pay all
monies due from the 1st defendant to the Bank. The Commercial High Court
dismissed the action on the ground that it was prescribed.

The action had been filed on the basis that the demand on the overdraft
facilities was made on 21.05.96. The cause of action arose on such demand;
hence prescription would begin to run from that date both as regards the
monies due on overdrafts as well as the mortgage bond which was given as
security for repayment of the sums payable by the 1st defendant.

**Held:**

1\. Overdrafts are loans by the banker to the customer, and in general no
demand is necessary, so that time runs against the banker in respect of each
overdraft from the time when it is made. A bank cannot, therefore, recover
against a customer on an overdraft which has lain dormant for

**366**

the prescriptive period which in Ceylon, in the absence of a written contract,
would be three years. The overdraft facility in dispute was granted at or
about the time the hypothecary bond was signed and hence the claim is
prescribed.  
  
As regards the mortgage bond, ten years had lapsed from the. date of the
mortgage or hypothecation. As such the action based on the bond is prescribed
in terms of section 5 of the Prescription Ordinance.

2\. The 2nd to the 6th defendants had in the guarantee made by them agreed to
waive the plea of prescription. Such an agreement is valid and enforceable
whether it is made before or after the period of limitation. Hence, the
plaintiff is entitled to pursue the action against those defendants.

**APPEAL** against the judgment of the (Commercial) High Court, Colombo.

_Romesh de Silva, PC with Palitha Kumarasinghe for plaintiff-appellant._

_Defendants-respondents absent and unrepresented._

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 09, 1999  
**WIJETUNGA, J.**

This is an appeal by the plaintiff-appellant from the judgment of the
Commercial High Court, Colombo, dated 9.5.97 dismissing the plaintiffs action,
after ex parte trial.

The plaintiff, by its plaint dated 27.5.96, sought to recover from the
defendants-respondents, jointly and/or severally, a sum of Rs. 6,702,067/31,
together with interest thereon at 24% from 1.1.96 until payment in full.

It was pleaded in the plaint infer alia that at the request of the 1st
defendant, the Dubai Bank Ltd. provided loan/overdraft/banking facilities to
the 1st defendant, and as security for repayment, the 1st defendant by
Mortgage Bond No. 1232 dated 21.12.82 attested by D. M. Swaminathan, Notary
Public, mortgaged and hypothecated certain moveable property to the said Bank.

367

The said Dubai Bank Ltd. by deed of Assignment No. 2548 dated 27.9.89 attested
by V. Murugesu, Notary Public, assigned all rights under the said Mortgage
Bond No. 1232 to the Union Bank of the Middle East Ltd.

The said Union Bank of the Middle East Ltd., subsequently known as the
Emirates Bank International Ltd. by deed of Assignment No. 621 dated 17.9.92
attested by R. de S. Munasinghe, Notary Public, assigned all rights under the
said Mortgage Bond to the plaintiff.

By guarantee dated 27.1.82, the 2nd to 6th defendants agreed to pay all moneys
due from the 1st defendant to the Dubai Bank Ltd.

By the Deeds of Assignment aforementioned, all rights under the said guarantee
too came to be assigned to the Union Bank of the Middle East Ltd. and
thereafter to the plaintiff.

As the 1st and/or the 2nd to 6th defendants failed and neglected to pay the
aforesaid sum of Rs. 6,702,067/31 together with interest, the plaintiff
instituted action for the recovery of the same.

The learned High Court Judge dismissed the action on the ground that the
plaintiffs action was prescribed in law.

It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the overdraft facilities
given to the 1st defendant became payable only upon demand and thus no cause
of action arose on the principal transaction until a demand for payment was
made by the plaintiff. As the Mortgage Bond was given as security for
repayment of the sums payable by the 1st defendant, no cause of action arose
on the bond too until such a demand was made. It was, therefore, contended
that the cause of action arose from the date of demand and not from the date
of the bond; and the demand having been made on 21.5.96, prescription would
begin to run only from that date.

In regard to the contention that the overdrafts became payable only on demand,
I would refer to Weeramantry: Law of Contracts, vol. II, section 873 at page
833 which states that "overdrafts are loans by

**368**

the banker to the customer, and in general no demand is necessary, so that
time runs against the banker in respect of each overdraft from the time when
it is made. A bank cannot therefore recover against a customer on an overdraft
which has lain dormant for the prescriptive period which, in Ceylon in the
absence of a written contract, would be three years".

This view finds support in Chitty on Contracts (27th ed. - 1994) vol. I
section 28 - 025 at page 1338 where it states that "An overdraft is a loan by
the banker to the customer. At common law, in the case of an overdraft
repayable on demand, a demand was in general not a condition precedent to
bringing an action and time ran against the banker in respect of each advance
from the time when it was made".

In the absence of any material to show that the parties to this action had
contracted otherwise, I am of the view that a demand was not a condition
precedent to an action based on the principal trans action. No evidence has
been led as to when this overdraft was granted. The learned trial Judge was
right in thinking that it was granted at or about the time the hypothecary
bond was signed and that the claim was prescribed.

As regards the Mortgage Bond, the relevant provision of the Prescription
Ordinance applicable is section 5. Dr. Weerarnantry (ibid) at section 866,
page 821 has admirably paraphrased that section in one long sentence as
follows:

"No action shall be maintainable -

(a) for the recovery of any sum due upon any hypothecation or mortgage of any
property or

(b) upon any bond conditioned for -

i. the payment of money;  
ii. the performance of any agreement or trust; or  
iii. the payment of penalty

369

unless the same be commenced -

(a) in the case of an instrument payable at or providing for the performance
of its condition within a definite time, within ten years of the expiration of
such time and

(b) In all other cases -

i. within ten years from the date of such instrument or mortgage or
hypothecation, or  
ii. of last payment of interest thereon, or iii. of the breach of the
condition."

On the facts of this case it would appear that the date from which
prescription would commence to run is the date of the instrument. The learned
trial Judge was therefore right in holding that an action based on the
hypothecary bond is prescribed.

I shall now consider the position of the 2nd to 6th defendants in regard to
the question whether the cause of action against them is time-barred.

It is relevant to consider the effect of clause 16 of the guarantee (P7),
where the 2nd to 6th defendants specifically agreed that "we and each of us
hereby agree that so long as the monies herein mentioned or any part thereof
is owing by the Customer to the Bank or has not already been paid to the Bank
by the Customer or by us the liability of us and each of us to pay the same
shall subsist and the monies herein mentioned shall be recoverable from and be
the liability of us and each of us jointly and severally notwithstanding
anything to the contrary herein or in any rule of law or equity or the
Prescription Ordinance or any statute contained and we hereby further agree
that we or any of us shall not plead the Prescription Ordinance or any of its
provisions or any rule of statute or other law as a bar to the Bank suing us
or any of us for the recovery of the monies herein mentioned or any part
thereof' \- (emphasis added).

**370**

Weeramantry (ibid) in section 844 at page 797 states under the heading:
'Agreements not to plead limitation' that "it is not contrary to public policy
for parties to enter into an agreement not to plead limitation. Such an
agreement is valid and enforceable in English Law if supported by
consideration, whether it be made before or after the limitation period has
expired. The same observation holds good for our law, except that such an
agreement need not be supported by consideration".

Chitty (ibid) dealing with the English Law on 'Agreements not to plead the
statute' also states at section 28 - 080 at page 1365 that "an express or
implied agreement not to plead the statute, whether made before or after the
limitation period has expired, is valid if supported by consideration, and
will be given effect to by the Court".

The plaintiff can therefore claim the benefit of the aforementioned clause of
the agreement not to plead limitation, insofar as the 2nd to 6th defendants
are concerned, and I would accordingly hold that the provisions of the
Prescription Ordinance would not operate as a bar to the plaintiff suing them
for the recovery. of the moneys due under the guarantee.

For the reasons stated above, I would set aside the judgment of the learned
High Court Judge dated 9.5.97 and remit the case to the High Court. Since the
2nd to 6th defendants have defaulted in their appearance, I direct that
appropriate steps be taken in terms of section 85 of the Civil Procedure Code
as regards the plaintiff's case against those defendants.

There will be no costs.

**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.

**PERERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal in respect of 2nd to 6th defendants-respondents allowed.  
 _

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/39.html_  

