##  Marian and Another v. Upasena - SLR - 177, Vol 3 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 39;
(1998) 3 Sri LR 177 (28 July 1998)

**177**

**MARIAN AND ANOTHER  
v.  
UPASENA**

SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.,

WIJETUNGA, J. AND

BANDARANAYAKE, J.

S.C. APPLICATION NOS. 495 AND 496/96

JUNE 26, 1998

_Fundamental rights - Possession of Political posters - Arrest and detention
under emergency regulations - Articles 13 (1), 13 (2) and 14 (1) (a) of the
Constitution._

The two petitioners were arrested by the 1st respondent the officer in-charge
of the Wellawatta Police Station for possession of posters containing slogans
stating that Chandrika was responsible for making the May day a black day for
which she should pay compensation and exhorting the public to fight against
privatisation / war despite assaults by Chandrika's police. According to the
1st respondent he arrested the petitioners as the posters contained material
aimed at influencing the Armed Forces from engaging in the war and also
enticing the people to react violently against the President, the Government
and the Police. The petitioners were arrested under emergency regulations. The
police failed to produce them before a Magistrate within the period prescribed
by law.

Held:

The impugned posters appeared to be a legitimate exercise of the freedom of
expression, and therefore, no offence; and there was no justification for
delaying to produce the petitioners before a Magistrate.

**AN APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_D. W. Abeykoon P.C with Miss Chandrika Morawaka_ for the petitioners.

_J. Jayasuriya, S.S.C_ for the respondents.

Cur. adv. vult.

178

July 28, 1998.

**FERNANDO, J.**

These two applications, alleging infringements of Articles 13 (1), 13 (2), and
14 (1) (a), were taken up together as they related to a single incident.

The 1st respondent, the Officer-in-charge, Wellawatte Police, says that he was
on mobile duty near the Green Path traffic lights on 22.5.96, when, at about
8.00 p.m. he noticed two persons (the petitioners in the two applications) on
a motor cycle; the pillion rider was without a helmet, so he signalled the
rider to stop; he became suspicious of them, and upon searching the pillion
rider, found him to be in possession of a tin of paste, a brush, and 25
posters containing one or the other of the following slogans:

The 1st respondent believed that the posters were calling upon the public to
act violently against actions of the Government and the President, and also
attempting to influence the members of the Armed Forces from performing their
duties in respect of the ongoing war, and to resist the police and to fight
against the (Government. He arrested the petitioners, having explained to them
that the posters contained material aimed at influencing the Armed Force from
engaging in the war and also enticing the people to react violently against
the President, the government and the police, and that they were being
arrested under the Emergency Regulations. He took them to the Cinnamon Gardens
Police in order to hand them over, but the Officer-in-charge said that the
place of arrest fell within the Kollupitiya Police area; and he handed them
over to the Kollupitiya Police at 10.00 p.m.

179

The Officer-in-charge, Kollupitiya, says that he was satisfied that the
petitioners had been arrested for offences under the Emergency Regulations,
and therefore detained them for further investigation and action. The pillion
rider was smelling of liquor. He considered it advisable to produce both for
examination by the J.M.O. At about 2.00 a.m. in the morning, both were then
produced before a J.M.O. of Colombo, who resides at Panadura, whose report
confirms that the pillion rider was smelling of liquor - which is no offence.
The Officer-in-charge, Kollupitiya, says that when they were brought back, at
3.30 a.m. he was informed that the place of arrest was within the Cinnamon
Gardens area, and at 1.30 p.m. they were handed over to that Police station.
They were produced before a Magistrate only at 4.35 p.m. Although the Police
objected to their release, the Magistrate released them on bail.

At the hearing, learned Senior State Counsel conceded that the first poster
was innocuous, but (stressing the word ) submitted that the second was an
incitement to violence, and that it bore the meaning which the 1st respondent
attributed to it.

Learned President's Counsel for the petitioners submitted that the petitioners
were members of the Nava Sama Samaja Party, and that the posters were a sequel
to the revocation of the permission granted to that Party to hold a
procession, which was the subject-matter of S.C. (F R) Application No. 470/96,
SCM 17.7.97. He contended that the impugned poster merely called for a
legitimate struggle, just as in the case of any other claim or demand for
rights.

We indicated to learned Senior State Counsel that the impugned poster appeared
to be a legitimate exercise of the freedom of speech, and therefore no
offence; that even if the 1st respondent initially thought otherwise, and
needed some time to consider the meaning of the words used in the impugned
poster, yet the matter could and should have been clarified within the hour;
and that in any event there was no justification for delaying, until the next
afternoon, to produce the petitioners before a Magistrate.

However, after judgment was reserved, the parties have filed a consent motion
in each case, agreeing:

180

". . . to settle this case by the respondents paying Rs. 5,000 as an ex gratia
payment to the petitioner... this payment is made without any attachment of
personal responsibility of the respondents concerned.

We accordingly make order directing the respondents to pay a sum of Rs. 5,000
as compensation to each of the two petitioners.

**WIJETUNGA, J**. - I agree.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

Relief granted.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/39.html_  

