##  Superintendent of Pussella State Plantation, Parakaduwa v. Sri Lanka
Nidahas Sevaka Sangamaya - SLR - 108, Vol 1 of 1997 [1996] LKSC 39; (1997) 1
Sri LR 108 (18 March 1996)



**108**

**SUPERINTENDENT OF PUSSELLA STATE**

**PLANTATION, PARAKADUWA**

**v.**

**SRI LANKA NIDAHAS SEVAKA SANGAMAYA**



SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C J.,

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J. __

S.C. APPEAL NO. 86/95

H. C. AVISSAWELLA NO. 6/93

MARCH 5, 1996 _._



_Industrial Dispute ‑ Status of Workman ‑ Casual or permanent ‑ mere lable-
"casual employee" not sufficient._



The respondent Union on behalf of M. a workman, applied to the Labour Tribunal
for relief in respect of the termination of services of the workman who was an
employee of the appellant. The appellant's case was that the workman was
initially employed in a temporary capacity and was thereafter continued as a
casual worker after which his services were terminated; hence he had no right
to relief.



Held:



Whilst __ there is no legal objection to __ the employment of temporary or
casual __ employees who do not have the rights of permanent employees, the
mere label is not sufficient to classify a workman as a casual employee, if
the real __ character of his __ employment is that of a permanent employee.,



**Cases referred to:**



1  _Merril Fernando & Co., v. Deimon Singho _(1988) 2 Sri L. R. 242, 245.



2\.  Lanka Walltiles Ltd., v K.A. Cyril S.C. Appeal 55/88 S.C. Minutes of 9th
June  1992; BASLJ Reports (1992) Vol. IV Part II P. 40.



3 _  Ratnasabapathy v. Asilin Nona _61 N.L.R. 548.

_ _

4 _  Nanayakkara v. The Director General Central Cultural Fund _S.C. Appeal
33/91 S.C. __ Minutes of 27th January, 1995 _._

_ _

5. _Free Lanka Trading Co., Ltd., v. Commissioner of Labour_ 79 N.L.R. (II) 158 _._



**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court of Avissawella _._



_L.C. Seneviratne, P.C._ with _Lakshman Perera, H. V. Situge, Miss V. H. K.
Wickramasighe_ for appellant.



_Daya Guruge_ with _Nimal Jayasinghe_ for respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._



109



March 18, 1996  


**G .P .S. DE SILVA ,C. J.,**

**_ _**

The respondent union on behalf of M. R. Melinghton, a workman applied to the
Labour Tribunal for relief in respect of the termination of services of the
said workman who was an employee of the appellant (The Superintendent of
Pussella State Plantation) and the Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation who
was the 2nd respondent to the application.



The Labour Tribunal held that the workman was initially employed in a
temporary capacity and was thereafter continued as a casual worker after which
his services were terminated; hence he had no right to relief. Consequently,
the application was dismissed. On an appeal by the union the High Court
reversed the order of the Labour Tribunal holding that on the facts of the
case, the character of employment of the workman was that of a permanent
employee and ordered that he be reinstated with back wages. Hence this appeal.



In 1992 the workman was 27 years of age. He says that his parents had been
employed on the Galpussellawa Estate for about 30 years and lived in the
estate quarters provided by the estate, until retirement.



The workman was recruited in May 1990 along with others (the total number
being about 17 men) to make logs of and remove about 3000 rubber trees which
had fallen due to a gale. He says that they completed that work in about one
month. But he continued to be employed thereafter until 01.04.91. During that
period he was paid monthly, but on a daily rate of Rs. 48/‑. He had been
employed as a labourer for removing uprooted trees, weeding, clearing roads,
tapping rubber, replanting trees and applying fertilizer. It is clear that
such work was given to him only on a limited number of days in a month. Hence
he had received wages ranging from Rs. 420/‑ to Rs. 850/‑ a month. He has thus
worked on 173 days when his services were terminated.



Subject to one contradiction the workman also said that he occupied the
quarters where his father resided during his employment on the estate. This,
however, was denied by witness Chandrasiri, Field Officer who testified for
the appellant‑employer.

 110



In support of his claim to permanent status, the workman said that Employees'
Provident Fund deductions, Trade Union subscriptions, defence levy and welfare
society contributions were made from his wages; and that he was also paid new
year and festival advances. A monthly deduction of Rs. 35/‑ was also made from
the petitioner's wages as charges due to the Dhobi who washed the clothes of
the estate labourers.



The witnesses for the employer admitted the fact that the workman was given a
variety of jobs as deposed to by him. But they maintained that such work was
only casual in that they so employed him when permanent workmen were not
available. Witness Chandrasiri said that this workman's name appeared in R1,
the register of casual employees; and that casual employees are not entitled
to the facility of purchasing goods on credit from the estate Co‑operative
Society subject to payments due for such goods being deducted from their
salary at the end of the month and remitted to the Society.



The president of the Labour Tribunal held that the workman was not entitled to
reinstatement or compensation. In making his decision he relied on views
expressed by S. R. de Silva in 'Legal Framework of Industrial Relations in
Ceylon', _Merril Fernando & Co. v. Deimon Singho_(1) __ and the decision of
this Court in _Lanka Walltiles Ltd. v. K. A. Cyril._ (2) According to these
authorities, a temporary employee employed for a particular job or a casual
employee viz. a person whose employment is "by chance and without regularity"
does not enjoy the rights available to permanent employees.



The High Court was of the opinion that on the facts, the employment of the
workman was of a continuous nature; R1 the casual register was a document
maintained for the benefit of the employer; the true character of his
employment was permanent; and that the authorities relied upon by the tribunal
had no application to this case. Accordingly, the High Court directed
reinstatement with back wages, on the basis of Rs. 1248/‑ a month, calculated
at the daily rate of Rs. 46/‑.



Mr. L. C. Seneviratne P.C. for the appellant argued that it was legitimate for
the employer to have engaged the services of the

111



workman initially on a temporary basis and thereafter as a casual worker. He
relied particularly on the _Lanka Walltiles Ltd. case (Supra)._ It was
submitted that in that case the facts were very much similar to the instant
case, but this Court set aside the order made by the Court of Appeal in favour
of the workman being of the opinion that as the employment originally offered
to the workman was of a temporary nature, he cannot claim wrongful termination
of employment.



Mr. Daya Guruge for the respondent union relied on the judgment of T S.
Fernando J. in _Ratnasabapathy v. Asilin Nona_ (3) where it was held that
whether a workman is casual or a regular employee is a question of fact to be
decided on evidence. Mr. Guruge submitted that the Labour Tribunal President
had misdirected himself on the evidence but the High Court made the correct
decision.



In _Nanayakkara v. The Director General Central Cultural Fund_ (4) (where the
workman had been employed as a casual worker for a longer period than in the
instant case viz. three years), this court held that the mere label is not
sufficient to classify a workman as a casual employee. The Court cited _Asilin
Nona's case (Supra);_ also _Free Lanka Trading Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of
Labour_ (5) where it was held that an agreement which is facade, to avoid the
obligation of the employer and which described the employee as an "independent
contractor" would be disregarded by Court; and such workman would be entitled
to the protection under the Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special
Provisions) Act No. 45 of 1971.



Although _Asilin Nona's case (Supra)_ is __ helpful on the principle to be
followed in deciding the true nature of employment, the facts there are not
similar; for that was a claim under the workmen's Compensation Ordinance where
the deceased who had been employed to repair a house for about 5 weeks on
daily pay died of an accident in the course of employment. Compensation was
allowed on the basis that he was a regular employee.



I am of opinion that the _Lanka Walltiles Ltd. case (Supra)_ can be
distinguished. There too the workman enjoyed facilities which are claimed in
the instant case such as EPF contributions. The Court opined that such factors
were equivocal. But the important fact is that

112



the workman was employed on a casual basis as a "fitters mate" for the
establishment of a new factory, during the period of installation of machinery
at the work site. The Court was of the view that on the basis of the workman's
own evidence there was insufficient evidence to show that the workman
continued to work, after the production commenced. The evidence in the case
before us is different.



It is also relevant to note that in this case, the evidence given on behalf of
the employer, itself shows that the description of the workman as a casual
employee was a facade. The employer's witnesses have said that as a mater of
policy the employment of the workmen in the casual register was being
interrupted every month; that for that purpose they were not permitted to work
throughout the month; and that this policy was maintained by the
establishment, on legal advice.



It seems to me, thereafter, that whilst there is no legal objection to the
employment of temporary or casual employees who do not have the rights of
permanent employees, in the instant case the facts show that the description
of the workman as "casual" is not true; and that the real character of his
employment is that of a permanent employee; hence I am in agreement with
conclusion of the High Court in that regard and the order made for
reinstatement.



However, the order for the payment of back wages, at the rate of Rs. 48/‑ per
day is not justified. In fact, the workman did not engage in regular work. he
was content to receive wages on a "casual" basis; there is no evidence that
since the termination of his services on 01.04.91, he remained unemployed.
Hence, I would vary the order of the High Court for the payment of back wages
and direct that the workman be reinstated as a permanent employee, without
back wages with effect from 15.04.1996. Subject to this variation, I dismiss
the appeal and affirm the judgment of the High Court. The appellant is
directed to pay the respondent union costs in a sum of Rs. 1500/‑.



**KULATUNGA .J.** ‑ I agree.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Appeal dismissed, subject to variation of the order for payment of back
wages._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/39.html_  

