##  Sisira Kumara v. Sergeant Perera and Others - SLR - 162, Vol 1 of 1998
[1995] LKSC 39; (1998) 1 Sri LR 162 (23 March 1995)

**162**

**SISIRA KUMARA  
v.  
SERGEANT PERERA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
PERERA, J. AND  
SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE. J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 258/94  
DECEMBER 3RD, 9TH, 1997.  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Article 1 of the Constitution - Assault on a person in
police custody .  
_  
The petitioner was arrested by the 2nd respondent a police officer and taken
to the Wellawatte Police Station, another Police Officer, the 3rd respondent
ordered the petitioner to sit on a bench, abused him and struck his face
thrice. The medical evidence supported the allegation of assault.  
  
**Held:  
**  
The assault to which the petitioner was subjected amounted to torture'
violative of his rights guaranteed by Article 11 of the Constitution.  
  
**Case referred to:**  
  
1\. _Wijayasiriwardene v. Kumara_ , _Inspector of Police, Kandy and two
others_   (1998) 2 Sri LR 312.

**163**

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Gamini Perera_ for the petitioner.  
  
_L. C. M. Swamadhipathi_ for the 3rd respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

December 19. 1997.  
  
**SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
**  
According to the petitioner, on 10.09.1994, while he was washing his clothes
at a public water tap close to his house, one Somapala, had abused him. Later,
Somapala had come armed with a knife and a stone and had started chasing the
petitioner. The petitioner had gone inside his house and closed the door. He
had heard a commotion outside his house, and the petitioner had wanted to go
to the Police Station to make an entry. However, his wife prevented him from
doing so as Somapala was his neighbour. The same evening around 9.45 p.m. the
2nd respondent took the petitioner to the Wellawatte Police Station. At the
Police Station, the 3rd respondent had ordered the petitioner to sit on a
bench and while abusing him had hit him hard thrice, on his face. The
petitioner was kept in the cell until 11.09.1994 and around 4 p.m. on the 11th
September he was taken to the Magistrate's bungalow and he was told that he
could be bailed out on Rs. 1,000 security or would be remanded until
15.09.1994. Thereafter he was taken to the Mahara Remand Prison and on the
12th September he was released on bail. The petitioner was asked to appear
before the Magistrate's Court of Mount Lavinia on 15.09.1994 and on the 15th
September, the case was postponed to 23.03.1995.  
  
The petitioner claimed that his fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles
11 and 13 (1) of the Constitution were violated by the actions of the
respondents. This court granted leave to proceed only in respect of the
alleged violation of Article 11 of the Constitution.  
  
The respondents do not dispute the fact that the petitioner was arrested
around 9.15 p.m. on 10.09.1994. The 2nd respondent in his affidavit gives the
reasons for arresting the petitioner. His position is that while he was on
mobile duty, he received instructions from the Police Station to proceed to
premises No. 80/9, Peterson Road, Wellawatte immediately as there had been
some incident. On his arrival he received information that one Somapala had
been assaulted by the petitioner and that the said Somapala had been admitted
to the hospital. The petitioner was arrested by the 2nd respondent and

**164**

was brought to the Police Station where he was detained until he was produced
before the Magistrate on the following day. The respondents position is that
the 3rd respondent was not involved in the arrest of the petitioner. The
petitioner concedes this position. However, the petitioner's complaint is that
the 3rd respondent hit him thrice on his face, and this is completely denied
by the 3rd respondent.  
  
In support of his contention, the petitioner has produced affidavits, from his
wife, S. Priyanthi Fernando (P1) and father-in-law, S. Wilfred Fernando (P2).
Both aver that the 3rd respondent hit the petitioner on his face. The 3rd
respondent, on the other hand, relies on an affidavit of the Sub Inspector,
who recorded the statement of the petitioner (3R1) and he avers that the 3rd
respondent did not assault the petitioner as alleged by him.  
  
The petitioner was referred to the Eye Surgeon (P3) and the ENT Surgeon (P4)
of the General Hospital by the JMO, Colombo on 16th September 1994. The
"history" as given in the medical reports and the observations as set out in
the Consultant's reports read thus:

History : | Assault in Police custody on 10.09.1994 night. Treated by GP for
pain on 13.09.1994. Pain . . . Rt. eye.  
---|---  
  
Consultant's Report : |  
Traumatic Uveitrs . . .  
  
  
History : | Assault in Police custody on 10.09.94 night. Treated by GP on
13.09.94 for pain.  
  
c/o noise in the Rt. ear-pain.  
  
Consultant's Report : |  
R/ear drum intact. Mild hearing loss 30db. R/ear joint tender.  
  
  
Review in 3 weeks.

The 3rd respondent's position is that the medical report does not reveal any
serious injuries on the petitioner. I cannot agree. The petitioner's position
is that the 3rd respondent hit him on his face thrice and in my view the
medical reports (P3 and P4) corroborate the

**165**

learned Counsel for the 3rd respondent submitted that even if the 3rd
respondent hit him thrice on the petitioner's face that would not amount to
"torture". The learned Counsel's submission is that 'all acts of assault do
not amount to torture just because there is some physical element involved.
There must be a minimum level of severity'. In support of his argument he has
cited Wijayasiriwardene v. Kumara, Inspector of Police, Kandy and two others
"(1), where it was held that the use of force does not per se amount to cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment. While agreeing with the view expressed in
Wijayasiriwardene's case, I cannot agree with the submission that the
petitioner's allegation is far short of the required minimum level of severity
and therefore does not amount to "torture".  
  
There is no evidence before this Court to show that there was any need for the
Police Officers to use 'minimum force' to keep the petitioner under control.
According to the material placed before us, the petitioner was taken to the
Police Station and he was seated on a bench, when the assault took place. The
medical evidence provides strong corroboration of the petitioner's version of
the assault.  
  
In the circumstances, I hold that the petitioner has succeeded in establishing
the infringement of his fundamental right guaranteed under Article 11 of the
Constitution.  
  
The petitioner in his petition avers that Sergeant Ranjan (3rd respondent)
made him sit on the bench in front of the Crimes Division and thereafter hit
him hard thrice on his face. This had happened after waiting for 1 1/2 to 2
hours at the Police Station. The petitioner's wife (P1) and father-in-law (P2)
who had seen this incident have submitted affidavits to this Court in support
of the' petitioner's case.  
  
According to the 1B extracts of 10.09.1994, the petitioner was taken into
custody at 20.15 hrs. and was handed over to Police Sergeant Chandana Kapila
Kumara at 21.35 hrs. Sergeant Chandana Kapila Kumara in his affidavit avers
that the 2nd respondent brought the petitioner to the Police Station at about
21 hrs and handed him Over at 21.35 hrs (3R2). Accordingly the assault should
have taken place between 10.30 - 11.00 p.m. on 10th September 1994. The 3rd
respondent avers that on 10.09.1994 he returned to the Police Station at 19.30
hrs and went out on patrol at 23.15 hrs. The 3rd respondent, therefore, was at
the Police Station during the time of the assault

**166**

and the petitioner had identified the 3rd respondent as the person who
assaulted him. On a consideration of the totality of the facts and
circumstances of this case I direct the 3rd respondent to pay the petitioner a
sum of Rs. 5,000 as compensation and Rs. 1,000 as costs. I also direct the
State to pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 1,000 as compensation.  
  
The Registrar is directed to forward a copy of this judgment to Inspector
General of Police.  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ. - I agree.  
**  
**PERERA, J. - I agree.  
**  
**Relief granted.**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/39.html_  

