##  Saleem v. Hatton National Bank Ltd. - SLR - 409, Vol 3 of 1994 [1994] LKSC
39; (1994) 3 Sri LR 409 (29 August 1994)

409

  
SALEEM  

**v.  **

**HATTON NATIONAL BANK LTD.**  

  


SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 51/94

C.A. NO. 251/88 &

NO. 257/88

L.T. NO. 5/14776/86

JUNE 18 AND JULY 28, 1994.



Industrial Dispute - Termination - Compensation - Principles applicable - Can
compensation be awarded where termination is justifiable? Difference between
compensation and damages.

_ _

**Held:**

** **

In making orders in cases of termination of services, the court in consonance
with the spirit of labour law and practice and social justice is guided by
three cardinal principles, namely, the jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal is
wide, relief under the Industrial Disputes Act is not limited to granting
benefits which are legally due and the duty of the tribunal is to make an
order which may appear to it to be just and equitable.



Damage always signifies recompense given to a party for the wrong that has
been done to him. On the other hand, compensation includes recompense for
pecuniary loss or damage which involves no breach of duty.

**410**



A Labour Tribunal may order compensation upon a termination of services even
where such termination is justified and no distinction as to whether such
termination was upon a closure of an industry or for misconduct as a
disciplinary . measure can be imposed in considering a claim for compensation.



Compensation will be ordered if there are special circumstances which would
make it just and equitable to order such relief even where the termination of
services is justified.



**Cases referred to:**

** **

1\. Somawathie v. Backson's Textile Industries Ltd. 79 (1) NLR 204.

_ _

2 _. Shell Company of Ceylon Ltd. v Pathirana_ (1962) 64 NLR 71.

_ _

3. _United Engineering Workers Union v Devenayagam_ (1967) 69 NLR 289, 300. 

_ _

4. _Highland Tea Co. of Ceylon Ltd. v. The National Union of Workers_ (1967) 70 NLR 161.

_ _

5 _. Ceylon Workers Congress v. Superintendent of Roeberry Estate_ (1967) 70
NLR 211.

_ _

6 _. The Caledonian (Ceylon) Tea and Rubber Estates Ltd. v. Hillman_ (1977) 79
(1) NLR 421, 427, 429, 430, 431, 433.

_ _

7 _. Ceylon Cold Stores Ltd. v. Industrial and General Workers' Union_ (1982)
Sriskantha's Law Reports Vol. 1 p. 7.

_ _

8. _Watareka Multi Purpose Co-operative Society Ltd. v. Wickremachandra_ (1968) 70 NLR 239.

_ _

9. _The Group Superintendent Dalma Group v The Ceylon Estate Staffs Union_ (1971) 73 NLR 574.

_ _

10 _. Rumblan v. The Ceylon Press Workers' Union_ (1973) 75 NLR 575.

_ _

11 _. Ceylon Transport Board v Wijeratne_ (1975) 77 NLR 481, 489.

_ _

12 _. Piliyandala Polgasowita Multi Purpose Co-operative Society v. Liyanage_
(1970) 74 NLR 138.

_ _

13 _. Premadasa Rodrigo v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation_ (1991) 2 Sri LR 382,
406.

_ _

14 _. Jayasuriya v. Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation_ S.C. Appeal 9189
- S.C. Minutes of 3.05.1991.

_ _

15 _. Ceylon Cold Stores v. Sri Nandalochana_ (1989) 2 Sri LR 254.



**APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.

_ _

_S. L. Gunasekera_ for appellant.



S. Sivarasa, P.C. with Shamil Perera and Sampatha Welgampola for respondent.



_Cur adv vult._



August 29, 1994.  


**KULATUNGA, J.**

** **

The appellant who was the Manager of the Badulla Branch of the Respondent Bank
successfully applied to the Labour Tribunal for relief against the termination
of his services. The tribunal ordered the

**411**



respondent to reinstate the appellant without back wages, in the alternative
to pay him compensation in a sum equivalent to 12 months salary i.e. Rs.
75,000/-. The appellant appealed to the Court of Appeal for enhancement of
relief whilst the respondent appealed against the order of the tribunal and
sought to have it set aside. The Court of Appeal held that the termination of
the appellant's services is justified and allowed the respondent's appeal. The
Court dismissed the appellant's appeal.



Special leave to appeal was granted only on the following question;
"notwithstanding the finding of the Court of Appeal that the termination of
the appellant's services is justified, is the appellant in any event entitled
to the payment of compensation?" The case for each party has been set out in
the written submissions tendered by learned counsel for the parties. I shall
first advert to the salient facts.



The appellant joined the Respondent Bank in 1970 as a clerk on a salary of Rs.
118/- per month plus cost of living allowance. The evidence shows that he was
hardworking and efficient. He had an unblemished record of service in the
course of which he received regular promotions and salary increases
culminating in his appointment as Manager, Badulla Branch with effect from
01.03.82. On the date of the termination of services (14.10.85) he was in
receipt of a salary of Rs. 6,250/- inclusive of allowances.



The appellant was dismissed on account of the loss of a sum of Rs. 100,000/-
of reserve money from the vault of the Bank, on or about 25.09.85. At the
domestic inquiry held against the appellant, it was alleged that he had
misappropriated the said sum; in the alternative, it was lost by reason of his
negligence including the failure to keep the safe continuously locked.
According to the respondent, the only misconduct established at the inquiry is
negligence based on the following omissions:



(a) failing to physically verify the cash in the safe according to the figures
in the cash reserve register whenever cash is removed or lodged in the safe
from time to time;

**412**



(b) failure to physically verify the cash in the safe from time to time.



Excess cash which is not required for the daily requirements of the Bank is
entered in the cash reserve register and deposited in a safe which is in the
vault of the Bank. This money is lent to other institutions such as the Bank
of Ceylon. Reserve cash is kept in Rs. 1001- notes made into bundles of rupees
one lakh (each bundle being the size of a loaf of bread).



At the domestic inquiry, the appellant conceded that whenever cash was
deposited in the safe or paid out it was his duty to count the bundles and
satisfy himself that the money in the safe tallied with the cash register. It
was the respondent's position that had such procedure been observed, the loss
which occurred would have been averted. It was suggested to the appellant that
by his failure to so check the balance cash in the safe he probably failed to
detect the fact that an over-payment of Rupees one lakh had been made when a
payment of Rupees one million was made to the Bank of Ceylon on 24.09.85. The
appellant denied the suggestion. However, both at the domestic inquiry and
before the Labour Tribunal he admitted having failed to check the balance cash
in the safe after the said payment. The balance after that payment should have
been 6 lakhs (six bundles) But on the 25th when he opened the safe to make a
further payment to the Bank of Ceylon, he found a bundle of one lakh missing.



Before the Labour Tribunal, the appellant said that there was no circular
which required him to count the money regularly and that it was impracticable
to count so much money whenever it was deposited in the safe or paid out. He
had physically checked the cash last on 12.09.85. Thereafter he functioned
continuously as Manager until the detection of the loss on the 25th. He
promptly reported the loss to the respondent and the Police. After his
interdiction, he appealed to the respondent to reinstate him and to deduct
from his salary in reasonable instalments the portion of the loss if any for
which the respondent considered him to be liable.



In his appeal to the respondent, the appellant sought to explain the loss on
the basis that it had resulted from the abuse of

**413**



confidence by one or more of his subordinates. This presumably is a reference
to the second officer Rajapaksha, the accountant Bansajaya who were associated
with the appellant in performing his duties whenever reserve cash was
deposited or paid out and other officers who had some times acted for the
appellant or the second officer.



To reach the safe, one must first open the door of the vault. That door has
two locks one of which is a combination lock the numbers of which are known
only to the appellant. The other lock is opened with an ordinary key which is
with the second officer. Next, there is a grill door the key of which is with
the second officer. The safe is reached by opening the grill door. The safe
has a combination lock which is only known to the appellant. It has another
lock for which the key is with the second officer. In the result, the safe
cannot be opened except jointly by the appellant and the second officer. The
appellant said in evidence that whenever cash is deposited or issued, it is
counted by all the three officers involved namely, the accountant, the second
officer and the appellant. Of them, the respondent held the appellant and the
second officer responsible for the loss and dismissed both.



If as the appellant says there was six lakhs (6 bundles) in the safe after the
issue of cash on the 24th, then the sum of one lakh (one bundle) which was
lost had been stolen thereafter, some time before 8.30 a.m. on the 25th when
the shortage was detected. The appellant said that the numbers of the
combination locks were Known to the officers who used to act for him or the
second office and suggested that they could have stolen the money having
entered the vault using also duplicate keys turned out for that purpose. This
is incredible, having regard to the security in the Bank and the need to turn
out two sets of duplicate keys. What is more on the night of the 24th there
was in the safe a total of about 20 lakhs when the monies other than reserve
cash are also taken into account. If so it is unlikely that there was a theft
of cash in the course of which only one lakh was removed.



It was in these circumstances, that the Court of Appeal took the view that on
the basis of the available evidence the appellant was in breach of his
fiduciary duty towards the bank and upheld his

**414**



dismissal. We took the view that the said decision is justified and hence gave
leave on the limited question of compensation.



Some of the defences urged by the appellant appear to indicate a lack of
candour and militate against his claim to relief notwithstanding the fact that
the termination of his services is justified. But on reflection, I have
decided not to penalise him for these defences, which he may have put forward
on legal advice. Learned counsel for the appellant submits the following
matters in favour of granting relief to the appellant.



(1) The appellant had an unblemished record of service since his appointment
in 1970.  


(2) His services were not terminated for any act of dishonesty.

  
(3) He made a prompt report of the loss to his superiors and made a complaint
to the Police.

  
(4) His appeal for reinstatement coupled with a request to deduct a portion of
the loss from his salary, in monthly instalments.

  
By way of emphasis, counsel states that the applicant's services were
terminated for one single lapse in an otherwise exemplary career. He adds that
no human being, whether employed in a fiduciary capacity or not, is perfect or
could reasonably be expected to be perfect for all human beings at some stage
or other make some mistake. Counsel submits that the Court of Appeal failed to
consider the above matters and the question whether notwithstanding the
justification of the termination of services the appellant is entitled to
compensation. He relies on the decision in Somawathie v. Backson's Textile
Industries Ltd.(1)



Learned President's Counsel for the respondent submits that "compensation"
connotes the payment of a sum of money to compensate for a wrong done. Hence,
where there is no finding that a termination is unjustified, compensation
should not be awarded. He also submits that the payment of compensation in
this case would be totally incompatible with the facts. Counsel states that
this proposition is supported by a long line of decided cases with the
exception of Somawathie's case (Supra) which is distinguishable on the facts.

**415**



In view of the conflicting submissions of counsel this Court has to decide
whether in the light of the decided cases and the relevant provisions of law,
relief in the nature of compensation is available to the appellant. As the
decisions show, this is not the first occasion where payment of compensation
has been objected to on similar grounds. Whilst the question is not free from
difficulty, it appears that in each case the Court has evolved a formula for
making the order which it considered to be consonant with the spirit of labour
law and practice and social justice. In doing so, the Court has been guided by
three cardinal principles namely, the jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal is
wide; relief under the Industrial Disputes Act is not limited to granting
benefits which are legally due; and the duty of the tribunal is to make the
order which may appear to it to be just and equitable.



Thus in Shell Company of Ceylon Ltd. v. Pathirana (2) Abeyesundera J. held
that in an application for relief under S. 31 B(1) of the Act, a Labour
Tribunal has jurisdiction under S. 31 B(4) read with S. 31 C(1) to grant
relief to a workman in spite of the fact that his services have been lawfully
and justifiably terminated by his employer. In that case, the' workman's
services were terminated on payment 2 weeks' wages in lieu of notice, payable
under the contract of service. The Labour Tribunal ordered the payment of 6
weeks' wages. The Court dismissed an appeal by the employer.



In United Engineering Workers Union v. Devanayagam (3) the Privy Council
approved the decision in Shell Company case. (Supra) and held that the power
of the Labour Tribunal is not limited to granting benefits which are legally
due. Their Lordships said:

  
"Section 31 B(1) does not say that a workman can apply for relief in respect
of the wrongful termination of services. It merely says that he can apply in
respect of the termination of services. The omission of the word "wrongful" is
significant".



In The Highland Tea Co, of Ceylon Ltd, v. The National Union of Workers (4)
the services of an estate labourer was lawfully terminated. At the same time
his innocent wife's employment on the estate was also discontinued. Alles J.
held that the termination of her employment was itself justified, in the
interest of discipline. However, she was paid Rs. 3001- as compensation. This
was followed by

**416**



Ceylon Workers Congress v. Superintendent of Roeberry Estate (5) where Alles
J. explained that the payment of "compensation" to the innocent wife is "more
in the nature of some kind of compensation for past services in keeping with
the spirit of labour practice prevailing today". The Labour Tribunal has
jurisdiction to grant such relief under S. 31 B(4) read with S. 31 C(1) of the
Act.



Somawathie v. Backson's Textile Industries Ltd.(1) Rajaratnam J. held that
even where the termination of the services of a workman is justified he may be
granted relief or redress which is just and equitable. The Court was of the
view that the applicant could be paid some compensation within the
contemplation of S.33(1)(d). In that case, the applicant who was admittedly a
good worker was discontinued for engaging in female gossip which the Court
opined "was not such a serious act of misconduct". The Court ordered the
payment to her of a sum of Rs. 1,500/- (being a little over half a year's
salary) as compensation.



We next have The Caledonian (Ceylon) Tea and Rubber Estates Ltd. v. Hillman
(6). The former Supreme Court held that where the termination is justified in
view of the closure of the employer's business (for which the employee is in
no way responsible) compensation may be paid under S. 33(1(d) read with
Sections 31 B(1), (4) and 31 C(1) of the Act "in respect of the loss suffered
by the employee." Sharvananda J. (as he then was pointed out that S. 31(1)(d)
employs the term "compensation" and not "damages". He said -  
  
"Damage" always signifies recompense given to a party for the wrong that has
been done to him. On the other hand 'compensation' includes recompense for
pecuniary loss or damage which involves no breach of duty".



To illustrate the wider meaning of "compensation", Sharvananda, J. referred to
the workmen's Compensation Ordinance and the Land Acquisition Act.



The decision in Ceylon Cold Stores Ltd. v. Industrial and General Workers'
Union (7) turned on different facts. In that case an employee of a bakery was
detected by a security officer to be in possession

**417**



of a few sundry articles of small value allegedly stolen from the stores of
the bakery. He was dismissed. Rodrigo J. (Abeywardene J. agreeing) held that
the dismissal was justified. However, in view of the fact that the employee
had an unblemished record of 20 years' service he was given relief in a sum of
Rs. 7,800/- payable by the employer worked out at the rate of 1 1/2 months
salary for each year of service for the first ten years and one month's salary
for each year of service for the balance. The judgment made no reference to
any section of the Industrial Disputes Act or any decided case.



I shall now examine the decisions relied upon by Counsel for the respondent
for resisting the grant of compensation to the appellant. In the cases cited
the decisions are to the effect that in the absence of an unlawful or
unjustified termination of services compensation cannot be ordered. However, I
find that each such decision has turned on the particular facts of the case.
Hence, it does not appear that the dicta cited can be regarded as laying down
any strict rule.



Thus in Watareka Multi Purpose Co-operative Society Ltd. v. Wickremachandra
(8) the services of a probationary workman was terminated for inefficiency.
There was no allegation of malice or unfair labour practice. Tennakoon J. (as
he then was) held that in such a case, it was an error of law to award
compensation.



In The Croup Superintendent Dalma Group v. The Ceylon Estate Staff Union (9)
termination was due to a closure of the estate. The employer offered the
workman reasonable alternative employment which the workman refused. Alles, J.
held that the Labour Tribunal had no power to order the employer to pay ex
gratia a sum of money as compensation for loss of career.



In Rumblan v. The Ceylon Press Workers' Union (10) the workman was dismissed
for causing damage to a machine that would cause continuous damage to the
employer. The Labour Tribunal held that the dismissal was justified but
awarded compensation. Kretser J. held that no compensation can be awarded.



In Ceylon Transport Board v Wijeratne (11) Vythilingam J. observed that where
dismissal is justified, no compensation can be ordered. This is obiter for the
reason that it was a case where the dismissal

**418**



was held to be unjust and the decision was concerned with the mode of
assessing compensation in lieu of reinstatement.



The next case cited is Piliyandala Polgasowita Multi Purpose Cooperative
Society v. Liyanage (12). This is another case in which the employee's
services were discontinued during his period of probation. It was discovered
that he had been earlier charged in a Magistrate's Court for offences
involving dishonesty and dealt with under S. 325 of the Criminal Procedure
Code. Alles J. held that the termination of services was justified and that
the employee was not entitled to an alternative order of compensation.



Counsel also refers to certain observations of Sharvananda J. in Hillman's
case (Supra) in relation to a submission of Counsel for the employer that
where the termination is justified, there is no justification to award
compensation. Sharvananda J. said (79 (1) NLR 421 at 427).



"... The proposition will hold good if the termination is justified on the
ground of misconduct of the employee and such termination is by way of
disciplinary measure". These observations are obiter; in any event they do not
disclose an intention to lay down an invariable rule.



Finally, counsel cites a passage from the judgment in Premadasa Rodrigo v.
Ceylon Petroleum Corporation(13) where Amerasinghe, J. adopts with approval,
the observations of Sharvananda, J. in Hillman's case (Supra) that if the
employee's conduct has induced the termination he cannot have a just claim to
compensation for loss of career. This is a case in which this Court upheld the
concurrent findings of the Labour Tribunal and the Court of Appeal that the
dismissal of the workman is justified on the ground of serious disobedience.
The observations relied upon by counsel were made in that context; and no
general principle can be formulated.



Learned counsel for the respondent also seeks to distinguish the instant case
from the other cases where compensation was granted to workmen whose services
had been justifiably terminated for misconduct, by way of disciplinary action.
His argument is that in this

**419**



case the dismissal relates to the loss of a large sum of money from the care
and custody of the appellant where as in the other cases such as Somawathie's
case (Supra) and Ceylon Cold Stores Ltd. (Supra), the dismissal was for
misconduct which was not of a serious nature. Hence, no order for compensation
should be made in favour of the appellant. This is a submission which merits
consideration.



I am of the view that if the principle of giving relief established in the
relevant decisions is sound, then the question whether compensation is
legitimate in a particular case would depend on the facts and circumstances of
such case; and a decision on the question whether having regard to the nature
of the misconduct compensation may be ordered has to be judged in the context.
Hence, in a case where the dismissal relates to loss of money, the amount
involved would not, by itself, be conclusive.



The effect of the decided cases Js that a Labour Tribunal may order
compensation upon a termination of services even where such termination is
justified is correct; and no distinction as to whether such termination was
upon a closure of an industry or for misconduct as a disciplinary measure can
be imposed in considering a claim for compensation.



On the question whether the appellant deserves compensation, I am of the view
that there are special circumstances which would make it just and equitable to
order such relief. Besides the considerations which have been urged by Counsel
for the appellant, it is relevant to note that the employer has dismissed both
the appellant and the second officer. This then is a case of shared
responsibility even though as the Manager of the Bank, the appellant must
accept primary responsibility for the loss. He was negligent but as rightly
submitted by counsel, no dishonesty has been alleged against him and it is
just one of those mistakes a human being is liable to make in a life time. I
hold that the appellant is entitled to the payment of appropriate compensation
in the circumstances of this case and having regard to his unblemished record
of service.



On the question of compensation, counsel for the appellant has assessed it at
Rs. 219,198/- in the light of decision in Jayasuriya v. Sri Lanka State
Plantations Corporation(14) In that case,

**420**



compensation was ordered in favour of an employee whose dismissal was held to
be unjustified. As such the quantum of compensation suggested by counsel
cannot be supported.



I would consider it just and equitable to order compensation on the basis of
the appellant's period of service. He joined the respondent Bank on 20.11.70.
He participated in a strike on 01.09.72. Consequently, he was deemed in terms
of emergency regulations to have vacated his employment as from that date. He
was re-employed on 18.12.72 and continued in service until his dismissal on
14.10.85. On these facts, his period of service falls short of 15 years by
about 4 1/2 months. I consider it fair for the purpose of determining
compensation to disregard this deficiency and to make an order on the basis of
15 years. During his employment he was in receipt of benefits under the
Employees' Provident Fund and the Employees' Trust Fund. His salary as at the
time of his dismissal was Rs. 6,250/- inclusive of allowances. I consider it
just and equitable to direct the respondent to pay compensation in a sum of
Rs. 46,875/- computed at the rate of 112 months' salary for each year of
service, on the analogy of computing gratuity in cases where the employee
enjoys Provident Fund benefits - Vide Ceylon Cold Stores v. Sri Nandalochana
(15).  
  
Accordingly, I allow the appeal only on the question of compensation and
direct the respondent to pay the appellant the sum of Rs. 46,875/- (Rupees
forty six thousand eight hundred and seventy five). Subject to this variation,
the judgment of the Court of Appeal is affirmed. The respondent is directed to
deposit the said sum with the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, Badulla on or
before 30.07.94; whereupon the appellant will be entitled to withdraw the
same. The respondent is also directed to pay the appellant costs in a sum of
Rs. 1,500/- (Rupees One Thousand Five Hundred). The relief granted by us will
not prejudice the appellant's rights in respect of the EPF and ETF
contributions in terms of the law.



**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/39.html_  

