##  Samarasinghe v. Air Lanka Ltd. and Others - SLR - 259, Vol 1 of 1996
[1993] LKSC 39; (1996) 1 Sri LR 259 (26 March 1993)

**259**

**SAMARASINGHE  
****v** **.  
AIR LANKA LTD. AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
PERERA, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO 275/93.  
02 & 07 MARCH 1994.

_Fundamental Rights ‑Constitution Article 12(1)‑Equality and discrimination
with reference to recruitment and promotion._ __

The post of International Relations Manager was created by upgrading
Petitioner's present post. He had been recommended for appointment by a duly
constituted panel of high ranking ‑ officials including the Consultant himself
‑ after internet advertisement. The fact that he lacked a part of the
stipulated experience at the time of his application should not have stood in
the way. It was not an insuperable obstacle. In any event the 13th Respond

**260**

ent who was appointed in preference to him had no experience at all. Further
the avowed policy of Air Lanka was to fill such vacancies, to the maximum
extent possible, by internal candidates. Yet the Petitioner was not only
denied his promotion, but he now finds himself condemned in these proceedings
by the very management that took steps towards creating a post with a view to
promoting him.

The allegations of incompetence, inefficiency and lack of responsibility
levelled against the Petitioner are without foundation.

The Petitioner had a legitimate expectation of being appointed International
Relations Manager.

The 1st Respondent had a legitimate interest and a public duty in ensuring
that the best candidate was appointed. The salutary procedures and provisions
for doing so were totally disregarded and the 13th Respondent was appointed
for reasons that had no rational connection with the object of appointing the
best qualified person. The Petitioner was consequently not only treated
unequally, but also offensively discriminated against. The dis­crimination was
both unwarranted and invidious.

There was no vacancy advertised by Air Lanka in respect of which the 13th
Respondent could have made an application. He has secured his appoint­ment as
International Relations Manager otherwise than through the recog­nized
procedure for such recruitment. There is no justification for making such
appointments by private negotiation, under a veil of secrecy. The 13th
Respondent does not have the basic requirements necessary for appoint­ment as
a Manager, Grade M.1. The appointment depended upon the viola­tion of the
Petitioner's constitutional right to equality by the demonstration of undue
partiality towards the 13th Respondent. I have no hesitation, there­fore, in
holding that his appointment is invalid. I direct that the appointment of the
13th Respondent be terminated forthwith.

**_Per_ Wijetunga, J.** ****

"The principle of equality applies from the stage of one's **** recruitment to
the state sector right upto the end of one's career. It applies to the ever
important matter of promotions too. This Court has, in dealing with the
equality provisions of the Constitution, insisted that while there should be
proper schemes of recruitment and promotion, their implementation should not
be tainted by caprice, bias or prejudice. Favouritism on the one hand or the
evil eye on the other, necessarily militate's against the very concept of
equality and should, therefore, be abhorred. There must, in the public
interest, al-

**261**

ways be honesty, openness, and transparency in regard to executive or
administrative acts.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_R.K.W._ _Goonesekera_ __ with _Jayantha_ _de Almeida Guneratne_ and _Francis
Gunawardene_ for Petitioner.

_K. C. Kamalasabayson D. S. G._ with _Mohan Peiris_ S. S. C. for 1st, 6th and
12th Respondents.

_L.C. Seneviratne P.C._ with _Max Bastiansz_ for 7th to 11th Respondents.

_Varuna_ _Basnayake P.C._ with _S. J. Mohideen _for 13th Respondent.

_Cur._ _adv. vult._

02 June, 1994.

**WIJETUNGA, J.**

The Petitioner who is the Senior International Relations Executive of the 1st
Respondent, Air Lanka Ltd. (Air Lanka) complains of the violation of his
fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the Constitution by reason
of the appointment of the 13th Respondent to the post of International
Relations Manager.

The Petitioner had joined Air Lanka on 16.11.88 as International Relations
Executive, a post in Grade E IV of the cadre. The vacancy had been duly
advertised in the newspapers and the Petitioner claims that he was selected
from among hundreds of applicants, after several interviews held by different
panels. He had thereafter been promoted Senior International Relations
Executive, Grade E V, on or about 20.12.89. He holds a Bachelor of Arts degree
in Government from the  University of  Essex and a Master of Arts degree in
International Af­fairs from  Columbia University. The Petitioner claims that
in or about October, 1992, he made a request that his position as Senior
Interna­tional Relations Executive be upgraded to Manager level and in
re­sponse to the said request the Consultant, International Relations and
Legal ('Consultant') had a Staff Vacancy Notice dated 23.11.92 (P3) published,
inviting applications on or before 7.12.92 from confirmed staff of the Company
for the said post. The vacancy was to be filled by internal recruitment. One
of the requirements was five years experience at Air Lanka, out of which two
years should have been in the Senior Executive (E V) grade. The Petitioner
duly submitted his appli-

**262**

cation through the Consultant, who was his head of department, and was
interviewed on 13.1.93 by a panel of high ranking officials consti­tuted for
the purpose. He was the only applicant interviewed. On or about 23.2.93, the
Petitioner came to know through the Senior Man­ager, Human Resources
Development (Human Resources Manager) that though the interview panel had
recommended his appointment, the Board of Directors at the time comprising the
2nd to 6th Respond­ents, had decided to defer the said appointment. The
Petitioner then handed over a letter of protest to the 2nd Respondent, dated
2.3.93 (P5).The Secretary to the Board of Directors informed him on 22.3.93
that the Board would meet him at a Board Meeting scheduled for 25.3.93, but
the said meeting did not take place. The Secretary's subsequent intimation to
the Petitioner that his case would be taken up at the next Board Meeting also
did not materialise. On or about 6.4.93 the Peti­tioner was informed by the
Consultant that the Board was considering appointing the 13th Respondent to
the said post. He inquired from the Petitioner whether in the circumstances he
would wish to be trans­ferred to another department as a Senior Executive.
When the Peti­tioner indicated that he did not favour such a course of action,
he was asked by the Consultant whether he would like a Manager‑level posi­tion
in either the Corporate Planning or Marketing Divisions. This sug­gestion too
was rejected by the Petitioner who indicated to the Con­sultant that he was
interested only in the post of International Rela­tions Manager, since this
was the post which was in keeping with his qualifications, experience and
expertise. Thereafter, he handed over a letter dated 24.4.93 (P6) to the
Consultant, complaining against the treatment that was being meted out to him
and requesting him to inform the 2nd Respondent to deal with the matter in
accordance with established and normal administrative procedures. Despite the
pro­tests of the Petitioner, the 13th Respondent was appointed to the post of
International Relations Manager on or about 3.5.93.

The Board of Directors of Air Lanka was reconstituted in or about May, 1993.
The Petitioner made a fresh appeal to the new Board of Directors comprising
the 6th to 11th Respondents. He also made this application to Court in terms
of the provisions of Article 126(2) of the Constitution.

In response to the Petitioner's application, the 1st to 6th Respond

**263**

ents in their objections took up the position that Air Lanka was not an
instrument and/or agent of the State and that the Petitioner was not entitled
to maintain this application as the alleged acts or omissions complained of do
not fall within the phrase 'executive or administrative action.' They further
stated that the appointment of the 13th Respondent was proper, valid in law
and not in violation of any fundamental right. With regard to the
circumstances leading to the appointment of the 13th Respondent, affidavits
were submitted from the former Chairman, a former Director and the Human
Resources Manager. An affidavit from the Consultant was also submitted.

The 7th to 11th Respondents who are the Chairman and members of the new Board
of Directors (the 6th Respondent who was a Director of the former Board being
a member of the present Board as well), state that at the time they took
office as Directors of Air Lanka, the contract of employment of the 13th
Respondent had already been made and he had assumed office as International
Relations Manager. They submit that they were advised that they are bound by
the said contract. They further state that they had not taken a decision in
regard to the appeal made to the new Board of Directors by the Petitioner as
this application was pending before Court. It is their submission that the
decision not to promote the Petitioner does not amount to an actionable
violation of the Petitioner's fundamental rights entitling him to re­lief
under Article 12 of the Constitution.

The 13th Respondent admits that he assumed duties as Interna­tional Relations
Manager on 3.5.93. He states that he was admitted and enrolled as an
Attorney‑at‑Law in November, 1989. In 1990, he became a graduate student at
the Institute of Air and Space Law at McGill University, Canada, his academic
and professional qualifica­tions having been considered sufficient to exempt
him from the re­quirement of a bachelor's degree. The course was of two years
dura­tion and he was awarded a Master's degree.

Prior to being appointed International Relations Manager, he was first
interviewed by the Consultant and later by a panel comprising the 2nd
Respondent, then Chairman of Air Lanka, the Human Resources Manager and the
Chief Financial Officer. Their recommendations were approved by the Board of
Directors, subject to his appointment being

**264**

on a contract basis and limited to a period of two years initially. He denies
that he has been unduly favoured and states that his appointment has been made
on merit.

The 13th Respondent points out that the Petitioner's academic quali­fications
are of a general nature and not specially oriented to aeronau­tical law or
organization, that the Petitioner is not an Attorney‑at‑Law and that he also
lacked the minimum 5 year employment qualification with Air Lanka. He submits
that he has been advised that the petition does not disclose grounds entitling
the Petitioner to relief under the provisions of Article 12 of the
Constitution.

Although the learned Deputy Solictor‑General, at the commencement of his
argument, gave indications that he would maintain that the acts of Air Lanka
did not constitute executive or administrative action, he withdrew from
pursuing the question of jurisdiction and confined himself to the facts.

Counsel for the other respondents too made no serious attempt to persuade the
Court that the acts complained of did not amount to executive to
administrative action within the meaning of Articles 17 and 126 of the
Constitution. In any event, this question has been dealt with exhaustively by
this _Court in Rajaratne v. Air Lanka Ltd.,_ (1) and I see no reason to take a
different view.

I have already set out the sequence of events leading to the exclusion of the
Petitioner from appointment as International Relations Manager.

Although the former Board of Directors failed to enlighten this Court of the
circumstances in which the 13th Respondent came to make his application for
this post, learned President's Counsel for the 7th to 11th Respondents who are
members of the present Board of Directors, with exemplary correctness,
submitted an affidavit on 7.3.94 from the present Company Secretary and
Secretary to the Board of Directors, together with copies of certain documents
relevant to this matter.

It appears from the material so furnished that one Tissa Abeyratne, the former
International Relations Manager of Air Lanka, had addressed

**265**

a letter dated 21.11.91 (7 R4) to the former Chairman, the 2nd Re­spondent in
these proceedings, enclosing a resume of the 13th Re­spondent's career, while
the latter was still a student at Mc Gill Univer­sity, recommending him "for a
management position.....in the marketing ‑ legal field." By letter dated
25.1.92 (7R5) addressed to Tissa Abeyratne by the Consultant, to whom the said
letter had been referred, the Consultant has stated, inter alia, as follows:

"Chairman passed on to me your letter to him regarding Lasantha Hettiarachchi.
We discussed the matter and I indicated to him that the applicant shows
promise and should be invited over for a chat when he returns to Sri Lanka. It
appears from your letter that he will be returning to Sri Lanka (if he has not
done so already) after concluding his Masters.

I agree with you totally that he deserves a very close look for he shows signs
of a person who could contribute very much to Airlanka. I would, therefore,
suggest that you request him to contact me in Colombo and we could then have a
preliminary chat with a view to finding out where exactly he could serve
Airlanka best. He seems to have qualifications which would serve both the
Legal Division as well as International Relations. You have also referred to a
Marketing‑Legal field. Perhaps you could amplify on that."

Although the letter refers to Lasantha Hettiarachchi, the 13th Re­spondent, as
the "applicant", he had made no application at that stage. The 13th
respondent's ‘application' (7R6) is as follows :‑

> "Lasantha Hettiarachchi  
>  437891
>

>> > > > > > 101/1 ‑ 3/1 S.G.' s  
>  Quarters  
>  Kew Road, Colombo 2.
>
> 26 March, 1993.
>
> Mr. Dunstan Jayawardene  
>  Chairman/Managing Director

266

> Airlanka Ltd.  
>  York Street,  
>  Colombo 1.  
>  Sri Lanka.
>
> Dear Mr. Jayawardene,

Further to our telephone conversation and the subsequent meet­ing I had with
Mr. Shibly Aziz, I would like to submit an application to be considered for
the post of manager in the International Relations department of Airlanka.

In the course of my meeting with Mr. Aziz, he explained to me the present
structure of the International Relations department, the possible entry level
for a person with my qualifications and experience, and the type of emolument
package I could expect from Airlanka.

I have come back to Sri Lanka with the intention of staying. I am prepared to
give the best of my best years to our national airline if presented with the
proper opportunity and the commensurate compensation package.

I am looking forward to meeting with you and further discussing the
possibility of working in International Relations at Airlanka. A copy of my
resume and copies of two letters of recommendation are submitted herewith for
your perusal. I would be very grateful for an early response on this matter.

> Thank You.  
>  Yours sincerely,  
>  (Signature)

The affidavit of the Human Resources Manager indicates that in accordance with
the directive of the then Chairman/Managing Director, the 13th Respondent was
called for an interview on 31.3.93 with the Chairman/Managing Director, Chief
Financial Officer and the Human Resources Manager and his application "was
accordingly recommended to the Board on a 02 years contract on a Rs.
20,000/‑monthly pay plus Rs. 2190/‑ entertainment allowance with official
transport from home

267

to office in lieu of reimbursement of 30 gallons of fuel." The reason given
for the post not being advertised in the newspapers is that "the recruitment
was done only to find a person for a limited period of time."

It was the submission of the learned Deputy Solicitor ‑ General' who appeared
for the former Board of Directors, that what he called the "non appointment"
of the Petitioner and the appointment of the 13th Respondent were separate
issues and that there was no nexus between them. He contended that if the
matter was so viewed, the question of discrimination would not arise.

But the material before us is to the contrary. The letter of Tissa Abeyratne
dated 21.11.91 (7R4) addressed to the then Chairman/Man­aging Director was
without doubt a step towards sponsoring the 13th Respondent, who was yet at
McGill University, for a suitable position at Airlanka. The Consultant's
letter to Tissa Abeyratne dated 23.1.92 (7R5) shows that discussions had
already been held between the Chair­man and the Consultant as to the
possibility of finding a suitable posi­tion for him. The Consultant, even at
that stage, had expressed the view that the 13th Respondent "seems to have
qualifications which would serve both the Legal Division as well as
International Relations". The application of the 13th Respondent dated 26.3.93
(7R6) refers to a telephone conversation between him and the Chairman and a
subse­quent meeting that he had with the Consultant, further to which he was
submitting his 'application' for the post of Manager, International Relations.

In the meantime, the Petitioner had been interviewed on 13.1.93 by a panel of
high‑ranking officials including the Consultant, who had recommended him for
the said post. The Petitioner had learnt on or about 23.2.93 through the Human
Resources Manager that although the interview panel had recommended his
appointment, the Board of Directors at that time had decided to defer the
same. He had even handed over a letter of protest (P5) dated 2.3.93. It was on
6.4.93 that the Petitioner had learnt that the Board was considering
appointing the 13th Respondent.

The Consultant's affidavit too indicates that a few months after the
Petitioner was recommended for the said post, the former Chairman

**268**

had asked him to meet and assess the 13th Respondent and ascertain his
suitability to join the Department as Manager. He further states that he met
the 13th Respondent "a few times" and "was satisfied . . . that he would be
suitable for a management position at International Relations and thereafter
conveyed (his) views to the then Chairman" and that he believes that "the
former Chairman had also interviewed him (the 13th Respondent) and come to the
same conclusion."

Thus it is seen that the Consultant as well as the Chairman had satisfied
themselves as regards the 13th respondent's suitability for the post even
before he submitted his 'application'. It is futile, there­fore, to suggest
that there was no nexus between the failure to appoint the Petitioner and the
appointment of the 13th Respondent: The latter displaced the Petitioner from a
position for which he had earlier been regarded as qualified. The appointment
of the 13th Respondent was necessarily conditional upon the removal of the
Petitioner as a competitior.

The failure to appoint the Petitioner is sought to be justified by the former
Board on the basis that the Petitioner was unsuitable for management
responsibilities at that point in time. The Chairman in his affidavit states
that he recalls that at the Board Meeting at which the recommendation to
promote the Petitioner was discussed, the Board unanimously decided not to
take action on the recommendation as in its view the Petitioner was not yet
ready for a promotion. He further states that it was the view of the members
of the Board that "steps be taken to look for someone suitable, even from
outside Airlanka, since the only applicant who had applied pursuant to the
Internal Staff Va­cancy Notice was the Petitioner himself."

We do not know whether the Chairman at the time, namely the 2nd Respondent,
made the Board of Directors aware of the lurking, albeit shadowy, presence of
the 13th Respondent in Air Lanka from 1991/ 1992, as regards whose suitability
for this post he had already formed a favourable opinion. That would have
obviated the necessity "to look for someone suitable". The minutes of that
Board Meeting, which are so vital to the matter under consideration, have
curiously not been furnished to us.

**269**

The alleged unsuitability of the Petitioner has to be examined in the light of
certain other averments in paragraphs 6 and 7 of the former Chairman's
affidavit. He says that within the last year of his tenure as
Chairman/Managing Director, the Consultant brought to his notice and that of
Mr. Wijayatilake, the 4th Respondent, who was another fellow-Director, certain
difficulties he experienced, due to constraints of time, of effectively
supervising and managing the work of this Department and he requested him to
provide him with a capable Manager to take over some of his responsibilities,
leaving him to serve in the capacity of a Consultant for which he was
originally recruited. He discussed this matter with several senior Managers of
Air Lanka who were famil­iar with the work performed by the International
Relations Department, including the former Chief Marketing Officer as well as
the present Chief Marketing Officers, and it was the general consensus that
some one from outside the International Relations Department should be brought
in at managerial level, since the most senior person in the International
Relations Department, namely the Petitioner, was unsuit­able for management
responsibilities as yet. He says that he as well as Mr. Wijayatillake fully
concurred with these views, since both of them had first hand experience of
the work and disposition of the Petitioner.

Mr. Wijayatilake too, in his affidavit, states with specific reference to
paragraphs 6 and 7 of the Chairman's affidavit that it sets out correctly the
factual position and the conclusions which the Chairman and he had reached
with regard to the Petitioner.

If, therefore, the general consensus was that the Petitioner was not suitable
for the post of International Relations Manger, one fails to see why the
management decided to engage in the futile exercise of inviting applications
from within, being well aware that the only likely internal candidate for that
position would be the Petitioner himself. Moreover, as specifically admitted
by the former Chairman and the Board of Directors in their statement of
objections, it was the Petitioner who, in or about October, 1992, requested
that his position as Senior International Relations Executive be upgraded to
Manager level and it was in response to that request that the Consultant had a
Staff Vacancy Notice (P3) published, in terms of which the said vacancy was to
be filled by internal recruitment.

**270**

On the other hand, if the Board was not satisfied as regards the suitability
of the Petitioner and was really looking for a more qualified person for this
important post, it should in the best interests of Air Lanka have called for
applications from outside as well, without hav­ing recourse to what now
appears to be a sham recruitment procedure by internal advertisement.

Nor does the matter end there. The interview panel that recom­mended the
Petitioner for promotion had consisted of the Consultant himself (who had
functioned as the Petitioner's Head of Department since February, 1990), the
Training Coordinator of Air Lanka, the Financial Advisor to the Chairman and a
representative of the Ministry of Policy Planning and Implementation. There is
no gainsaying that the Consultant, directly under whom the petitioner worked,
would have had the best opportunity of assessing the Petitioner's suitability
for this post. As already mentioned, it was the Consultant who had taken steps
to upgrade the Petitioner's post by calling for applications from within,
knowing very well that the Petitioner would be the obvious choice. The
Petitioner's application (P4) had been submitted through the Consult­ant
himself, who had recommended the same. But, the Consultant now says in his
affidavit of 12.8.93 that some very senior Managers at Air Lanka and the then
Chairman and Mr. Wijayatillake, Director, were not satisfied with the
Petitioner's performance and that he had, on many occasions, informed the
Petitioner of these criticisms and had advised him to remedy his shortcomings,
stating that he too had observed them.

If that was the Consultant's own assessment of the Petitioner, I fail to see
why he should have taken steps to upgrade his post and even recommend him for
appointment, particularly if, as he now claims, he was aware that the Chairman
"was very dissatisfied with him (the Petitioner) "and he too shared the
concerns of the Chairman and Mr. Wijetillake about the Petitioner's
inadequacies.

The Petitioner, in his counter affidavit dated 1.9.93, replying to the
affidavits of the Respondents, categorically denies that during his serv­ice
he had ever been faulted or found wanting in his work. He further dismisses as
false and malicious, the allegations that he was unsuit­able for management
responsibilities, or lacked competence and con-

**271**

fidence, or showed inability to effectively handle situations which required
quick responses and reactions, or was careless and irresponsible. The
Petitioner also points out that he received a promotion after one year in
service and had earned his increments on time ‑ which is inconsistent with the
position that he was inefficient or incompetent or that his work and conduct
was in any way‑unsatisfactory and that on no occasion had there been any
adverse comments in regard to the performance of his duties.

If the Petitioner was found wanting, as it is now alleged, one would have
expected the management to bring those matters to the Petition­er's notice in
writing and even warn him suitably. On the contrary, the management not only
gave him a promotion but even took steps to upgrade his present post.

The Petitioner further states that during his career at Air Lanka he has been
nominated by the Chairman, with the agreement of the Consultant, to attend
about 35 airline meetings and about 30 bilateral (gov­ernment‑to‑government)
meetings. Even in July 1993, after the 13th Respondent had assumed duties, the
Petitioner had accompanied the Consultant for a bilateral meeting in Japan.

The former Chairman, in his affidavit, states that notwithstanding the
Petitioner's good academic background which furnished him with an aptitude for
research, he had noticed in him a "lack of competence and confidence in other
areas relating to international relations and an inability to effectively
handle situations which required quick responses and reactions" and that the
Petitioner "often found it difficult to bring to situations a pragmatic
approach, a major disadvantage in success­fully handling communications or
negotiations with other airlines and aviation authorities." He also "found him
at times careless or irrespon­sible in matters entrusted to him." He says that
he had discussed these matters with the Consultant who informed him that he
was also mindful of them and that he was trying his best to assist the
Petitioner to overcome some of these difficulties, though he was unsure
whether these could be remedied in a short time. In the meantime, the
Chair­man says, "we decided to give him as much exposure and experience so
that he could overcome them."

**272**

If so, one wonders whether such enormous expenditure of public funds in
allegedly helping some one to overcome his personal deficiencies can be
justified? The Government of Sri Lanka admittedly holds approximately 95%
shares of Air Lanka and even the other shareholders are state sector
institutions such as the Bank of Ceylon, Peo­ple's Bank, National Savings
Bank, Salu Sala and the National Insurance Corporation. The material furnished
by the Respondents, however, does not warrant this condemnation of the
Petitioner. He was obviously included over and over again in the delegations
because he had a positive contribution to make and not for altruistic
purposes.

According to the promotion/recruitment procedure at Air Lanka (P7), where the
level of a post to be filled is that of a Departmental and Sectional Manager,
the specific approval of the Chairman/Managing Director must be obtained to
fill such vacancy. One can, therefore, assume that the steps taken to fill the
post of International Relations Manager by internal recruitment had the
sanction of the Chairman/Managing Director. It appears from the affidavit of
the Human Resources Manager that, though the panel which interviewed the
Petitioner had recommended him for selection, special approval was necessary
for their recommendation as the Petitioner lacked the stipulated five years
experience. That apparently was the reason why the matter was brought to the
notice of the Board at all.

It is admitted that the Petitioner had the requisite two years expe­rience in
the Senior Executive Grade (E V). At the time of his application, however, he
had completed only four years service at Air Lanka. The subsequent affidavit
of the Human Resources Manager indicates that the practice had been for Board
approval to be obtained in such situations; and, such approval was ordinarily
granted. In fact, a recom­mendation made in regard to a post of Manager (M 1)
by the same panel which interviewed the Petitioner had also been put to the
Board for their approval, since the person recommended had lacked the
stipu­lated experience of two years in the Senior Executive Grade (E V), and
the Board had approved his appointment at the very meeting at which the
recommendation in respect of the Petitioner was turned down. The fact that the
Petitioner was short of the stipulated experience by one year at the time of
his application would, therefore, not have stood in his way; the management
itself does not seek to justify his non‑ appointment on that basis.

**273**

I shall now consider another aspect of the matter before us. The Consultant
admits the receipt of the Petitioner's letter dated 24.4.93 (P6), which refers
to two meetings between the Consultant and the Petitioner, both said to have
been initiated by the Consultant, which have a direct bearing on the
circumstances surrounding the non‑ap­pointment of the Petitioner to the post
in question. The Petitioner recapitulates the suggestions said to have been
made by the Consultant at these two meetings in considerable detail. He
requests the Consultant "to inform the Chairman of the contents of this letter
and to transfer to him (his) request that this matter be handled through
normal adminis­trative procedures such as were applied at the time of (his)
recruitment".

The Consultant, in his affidavit dated 12.8.93, dealing with the said letter
states at paragraph 11 as follows:

"I pointed out to the Petitioner that the said letter contained inac­curacies
particularly relating to the offer of alternative posts to the Petitioner and
the role attributed to Mr. Tissa Abeyratne (as Mr. Abeyratne did not recommend
that Mr. Hettiaratchi should be taken to Airlanka). I requested the Petitioner
to correct them as otherwise I shall have no alternative but to send my
comments to the Chairman when forwarding P6. Though the Petitioner agreed to
consider this and revert to me, he has still not done so."

The Chairman and Directors of the former Board (other than the 6th Respondent)
went out of office in May, 1993. It does not appear that the letter P6 was
forwarded even to the Chairman of the present Board of Directors, with or
without the Consultant's comments. Despite the Consultant's observations to
the contrary, the letter 7R4 of 21.11.91 shows that Tissa Abeyratne did not in
fact recommend the 13th Respondent to the then Chairman for a management
position at Air Lanka.

P6 certainly was not a letter that could have been left uncontradicted if it
contained "inaccuracies", judging by its contents which were damaging not only
to the Consultant, but to the management itself. But yet, there the matter
remains. One cannot, therefore, help but accept that it sets out accurately
what went on behind the

**274**

scenes, particularly as the Petitioner stands vindicated in regard to the
matter of Tissa Abeyratne's recommendation regarding the 13th Respondent.

So also, the letter of protest dated 2.3.93 (P5), handed over by the
Petitioner to the then Chairman, the receipt of which has been admit­ted,
which states, _inter alia_ , as follows :

" . . . . . . I have no reason to think that the decision to defer my
promotion was due to any deficiencies in my educational back­ground, sense of
responsibility, loyalty to the company, discharge of duties or staff
relations. If one or more of these deficiencies was identified, I am sure that
it would have been brought to my notice at some time during the past few years
. . . ."

There again, the management chose not to respond, thus giving credence to the
Petitioner's denial of the allegations now made against him.

It would be relevant at this stage to look at the qualifications and
experience of the 13th Respondent. He had obtained his Master's degree from
McGill University in October, 1992. His experience as an Attorney‑at‑Law in
Sri Lanka had been from November, 1989 to October, 1990, a period of less than
one year; and his work as a lawyer did not involve aviation or related
matters. He had no working experience whatsoever with any Airline.

In regard to the suitability of the 13th Respondent for appointment to this
post, the then Chairman states that the Consultant who was requested to assess
his suitability gave a very favourable assess­ment, which the Consultant
informed him was arrived at after **several** meetings which he had with the
13th Respondent.

The Consultant, however, states that he met the 13th Respondent a **few**
times and was satisfied that he would be suitable for a manage­ment position
at International Relations.

The then Chairman further states that he too met the 13th Respondent and was
very favourably impressed with his academic qualifications and his overall
personality and disposition.

**275**

From the application of the 13th Respondent, it appears that he has had **a
meeting** with the Consultant prior to his applying for the post. He goes on
to say that he was looking forward to meeting with the Chairman and further
discussing the possibility of working in International Relations.

In his affidavit, the 13th Respondent states that prior to his appointment he
was interviewed first by the Consultant and later by an interview panel
comprising the then Chairman, the Human Resources Manager and the Chief
Financial Officer.

The opportunities available to the management to assess the suitability of the
13th Respondent were thus limited to those mentioned above.

The Human Resources Manager, by way of justification of the pro­cedure adopted
in appointing the 13th Respondent, states that "there are instances when the
services of officers are needed to meet short term manpower requirements, they
have been employed on contract basis without calling for applications for such
posts in the press. Such steps have been taken only when the services of
highly specialised personnel such as pilots, engineers and similar
professionals are needed due to exigencies of service". He further states that
"the post was not advertised in the press since the recruitment was done only
to find a person for a limited period of time."

One cannot see the logic of his reasoning. Initially, steps were taken by the
Consultant to upgrade the post of Senior International Relations Executive
held by the Petitioner to that of International Re­lations Manager, at the
instance of the Petitioner himself and such appointment was sought to be made
by internal recruitment. The pro­posal was not intended to increase the cadre
in the Department. In terms of the manual on promotion/recruitment procedure
(P7), it is Air Lanka's policy that "to the maximum extent possible, vacancies
within the approved establishment shall be filled by internal candidates". The
Petitioner in his counter affidavit states that it was the intention of the
Consultant that with the Petitioner's appointment to the upgraded post of
Manager (M 1), the post that he held (at E V) would be abolished.

**276**

If the Board was not satisfied with the recommendation made by the interview
panel in regard to the appointment of the Petitioner, the only legitimate
course open to it was to call for applications from external candidates,
through proper advertisement. There is no justifica­tion whatsoever for making
such appointments by private negotiation, under a veil of secrecy. Had it not
been for the very proper step taken by learned President's Counsel for the
present Board of Directors, even the circumstances surrounding the
'application' of the 13th Respondent would still have remained a mystery. We
now know that while the 13th Respondent was yet a student at McGill
University, moves were afoot to find him a suitable place at Air Lanka. His
appointment to the post in question was purely on the basis of his academic
and profes­sional qualifications, in total disregard, from a management point
of view, of the _sine qua_ _non_ of experience.

The stipulated qualifications and requirements for a Sectional Manager, Grade
M I at Air Lanka are:

**Internal (Promotions)** ‑ 5 years experience at Air Lanka out of which 2
years should be in Senior Executive (E V) grade.

**External (Recruitment)** ‑ A degree from a recognized university and 5 years
managerial experience.

The emphasis placed on experience is thus quite evident.

The Petitioner's complaint is that his fundamental right to equality within
the meaning of Article 12(1) of the Constitution had been vio­lated by the 1st
and/or 2nd to 6th Respondents. The principle of equal­ity applies from the
stage of one's recruitment to the state sector right up to the end of one's
career. It applies to the ever important matter of promotions too. This Court
has, in dealing with the equality provi­sions of the Constitution, insisted
that while there should be proper schemes of recruitment and promotion, their
implementation should not be tainted by caprice, bias or prejudice.
Favouritism on the one hand or the evil eye on the other, necessarily militate
against the very concept of equality and should, therefore, be abhorred. There
must, in the public interest, always be honesty, openness, and transparency in
regard to executive or administrative acts.

**277**

The Petitioner, as is evident from the circumstances referred to above, had a
legitimate expectation of being appointed International Relations Manager. The
post had been created by upgrading his present post. He had been recommended
for appointment by a duly constituted panel of high ranking‑ officials,
including the Consultant himself. The fact that he lacked a part of the
stipulated experience at the time of his application would not, as shown
above, have stood in his way. It was not an insuperable obstacle. In any
event, the person appointed in preference to him had no experience at all.
Further, the avowed policy of Air Lanka was to fill such vacancies, to the
maximum extent possible, by internal candidates. Yet, the Petitioner had not
only been de­nied his promotion, but he now finds himself condemned in these
pro­ceedings by the very management that took steps towards creating a post
with a view to promoting him.

It must be emphatically stated that the material furnished to this Court by
the management does not, in the absence of any contempo­raneous record showing
that the Petitioner had been found wanting in any respect and that appropriate
action had been taken in that behalf, justify the condemnation of the
Petitioner. The inability of the manage­ment to furnish such documentary
evidence inevitably leads to the presumption that there was no such material
available. Even after the Petitioner categorically denied all such
allegations, by way of counter affidavit, characterising them as false and
malicious, and in the face of **** his assertion that there had been no
occasion for any adverse comments on the performance of his duties, the Human
Resources Manager in his counter affidavit of 23.9.93, could not contradict
the Petitioner, although he made some inconsequential observations in regard
to other matters of much less relevance and importance.

The allegations of incompetence, inefficiency and lack of responsibility
levelled against the Petitioner are thus without foundation. They evidently
are _ex post facto_ explanations in an attempt to justify the arbitrary and
irrational manner in which the 13th Respondent's appointment was made. They
clearly show that the Petitioner was looked upon **** with an evil eye,
whereas the 13th Respondent was regarded with peculiar favour. The 1st
Respondent had a legitimate interest and a public duty in ensuring that the
best candidate was appointed. The salutary procedures and provisions for doing
so were totally disregarded

**278**

and the 13th Respondent was appointed for reasons that had no rational
connection with the object of appointing the best qualified person. The
Petitioner was consequently not only treated unequally, but also offensively
discriminated against. The discrimination was both unwarranted and invidious.

I, therefore, hold that the Petitioner's fundamental rights under Article
12(1) of the Constitution have been violated as aforesaid.

This brings me to the question of validity of the 13th Respondent's
appointment. There was no vacancy advertised by Air Lanka in respect of which
the 13th Respondent could have made an application. He has secured his
appointment as International Relations Manager otherwise than through the
recognized procedure for such recruitment. He does not even have the basic
requirements necessary for appointment as a Manager, Grade M 1. The
appointment depended upon the violation of the Petitioner's Constitutional
right to equality by the dem­onstration of undue partiality towards the 13th
Respondent. I have no hesitation, therefore, in holding that his appointment
is invalid. Ac­cordingly, I direct that the appointment of the 13th Respondent
be terminated forthwith.

Learned President's Counsel for the 7th to 11th Respondents sub­mitted that
even in the event of the Court holding that there had been discrimination, it
should still refrain from appointing the Petitioner to the post in question.
It was his contention that in the matter of assess­ment of the suitability of
candidates for a post, the Court should not substitute its decision for that
of the Board of Directors. He drew our attention to the fact that the new
Board of Directors, appointed in May, 1993, had refrained from taking a
decision in regard to this matter as this application was pending before
Court. He, therefore, urged that it be left open to the present Board to
choose a suitable candidate, sub­ject to whatever conditions the Court may
impose.

Although the Court has a wide discretion in terms of Article 126 (4) of the
Constitution in granting relief and making such directions as it may deem just
and equitable, I do, in the circumstances of this case, refrain from making an
order of appointment. Instead, I make order and direct that steps **** be
taken forthwith by the 1st and 6th to 11th

279

Respondents to fill the resulting vacancy in accordance with the 1st
Respondent's policy aforementioned and in terms of its promotion/recruitment
procedure (P 7), and that the appointment of the International Relations
Manager be made within three months of the date of this order.

I further direct that the application already made by the Petitioner be taken
as an application for the said post, subject to any additional material he may
submit, and be considered on its merits and that the opinions/views expressed
by any member of the former Board of Directors or by any official of the 1st
Respondent including the Consultant in the course of these proceedings
concerning the Petitioner be totally disregarded.

Having regard to the wholly unwarranted discrimination and the needlessly
offensive manner in which the failure to appoint the Petitioner was sought to
be justified, I award the Petitioner a sum of Rs.50,000/‑ as a solatium for
the violation of his fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution, payable by the 1st Respondent.

I further order that the 1st Respondent pay the Petitioner a sum of Rs.
5,000/‑ as costs.

**AMERASINGHE, J. ‑ **I **** agree.

**PERERA, J.** ‑ I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/39.html_  

