##  Lanka Multi Moulds (Pvt) Ltd. v. Wimalasena, Commissioner of Labour and
Others - SLR - 143, Vol 1 of 2003 [2002] LKSC 39; (2003) 1 Sri LR 143 (8
October 2002)

**143**



**LANKA MULTI MOULDS (PVT) LTD** ****

**v.** ****

**WIMALASENA, COMMISSIONER OF LABOUR** ****

**AND OTHERS** ****

SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

EDUSSURIYA, J., AND

WIGNESWARAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL No. 60/2001

C.A. APPLICATION No. 20/96

8TH OCTOBER, 2002



_Termination of Employment - Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special
Provisions) Act - Meaning of "prior consent" in section 2(1) -Commissioners'
power under section 6 to order re-employment of the workmen and to order
payment of wages and other benefits - Construction of "may" and "and" in
section 6 as regards relief- Whether these words are conjunctive or
disjunctive - Commissioner's duty to give reasons._



The 2nd respondent ("the workman") a British national was employed by the
appellant company ("the employer") on 1.9.92 on contract for a period of 3
years, subject to termination with 3 months' notice by either party. The
agreement restrained the workman from working for a competitor in a rival
business for 2 years on pain of liquidated damages in a sum of £2500/-



On 29.4.94 the employer terminated the employment of the workman with effect
from 30.7.94. However, the workman was exempted from working in June and July
but was paid his salary for that period. He was also granted cost of
repatriation in a sum of Rs. 193,000/- and relieved from the obligation not to
work for a competitor.



He was paid one month salary as gratuity. He left the island on 18.6.94 having
complained to the Commissioner of Labour on 17.06.94 against his termination.
He did not agree to the retrenchment but merely signed for the payments made.



On 22.11.95 the 1st respondent ("the Commissioner") ordered re-instatement of
the workman with effect from 15.01.96 with back wages for 17 1/2 months from
30.7.94 to 15.1.96 a sum of Rs. 3,533,750/- (at the rate of Rs. 202,500/-a
month).

144

The Court of Appeal affirmed the order that the termination of employment is
illegal for want of prior consent of the workman under section 2(1 )(a) of the
Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special Provisions) Act, No. 45 of 1971
('The Act"). The Court quashed the order for re-instatement and reduced back
wages to 13 months, viz. the balance period of his contract of service, on the
ground that in fixing back wages the Commissioner failed to give reasons or to
adduce reasons in court.

**Held :**

1\. "Prior consent" required by section 2(1 )(a) of the Act need not
neces­sarily be contained in a single sheet of paper. It could be inferred
from the attendant circumstances in each case.  


_Quaere -_ In the instant case the offer of benefits in writing by the
employer and the receipt thereof by the workman who signed receipts for the
several payments did not constitute "prior consent in writing" to termination
within the meaning of section 2(1 )(a) of the Act.  


2.                     In interpreting section 6 of the Act which gives the Commissioner the power to order re-instatement in respect of an unlawful termination and to order payments and benefits in view of such termination, the word "may" should be construed to confer a discretion on the Commissioner and that "and" shall be interpreted disjunctively; hence the Commissioner has the power to order wages and benefits without making an order for re-instatement. The Commissioner's decision is not unfettered. He must give reasons for his decision.  


3.                     The payments and benefits received by the workman on termination could reasonably be assumed as equivalent to nine months salary against thirteen months computed by the Court of Appeal. Hence the salary ordered by the Court should be reduced to Rs. 810,000/-

**Case referred to :**

1.     _Samalanka v Weerakoon_ (1994) 1 Sri LR 405

2.     _Karunadasa v Unique Gemstones Ltd_ (1997) 1 Sri LR 256

3.     _Ceylon Printers v Commissioner of Labour_ (1998) 2 Sri LR29

4.     _Mendis v Perera_ (1999) 2 Sri LR110.148

5.     _Yaseen Omar v Pakistan International Airlines_ (1999) 2 Sri LR 375

6.     _Brook Bond Ceylon Ltd v Tea Rubber_ (etc) Workers Union (1973) 77 NLR 6

7.  _Ratnanayake v Fernando_ SC 52/86 SCM 20.5.91

145

_Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ for appellant

_Nimal Malalsekera_ for 2nd respondent

_S. Barrie,_ State Counsel for 1st respondent

#  

# Cur. adv. vult

January 29, 2003

**FERNANDO, J.**

This appeal involves three questions of law in regard to the interpretation of
sections 2 and 6 of the Termination of the Employment of Workmen (Special
Provisions) Act, No. 45 of 1971 ("the Act")



The 2nd Respondent-Respondent ("the 2nd Respondent") is a British national who
was employed by the Petitioner-Appellant company ("the Petitioner") on a
monthly salary of 2,500 sterling pounds, under a contract commencing on
1.9.1992 for "an initial period of three years", subject to termination by
either party by giving three months notice. One of the terms of the con­tract
was that the 2nd Respondent undertook not to work for any competitor (or have
any interest in a rival business) in Sri Lanka for a period of two years after
the termination of his employment, without the written consent of the
Petitioner, and that in the event of any breach of that undertaking the 2nd
Respondent would pay as liquidated damages a sum of Rs.1,500,000.



In April 1994 the Petitioner discussed with the 2nd Respondent an impending
decision to terminate his services. By his letter dated 22.4.1994 the 2nd
Respondent expressed his dis­may about such termination. By letter dated
29.4.1994 the Petitioner informed the 2nd Respondent of its decision to
termi­nate his services, and gave him three months notice of termina­tion,
effective 30.7.94; and it further undertook to enter into a sep­arate
agreement regarding the settlement of all amounts due as

146

  
 remuneration, benefits, leave, repatriation costs, etc. He was given an
employment certificate dated 30.5.94, which stated that consequent to a
recently concluded joint venture agreement and merger with another company
which provided for a transfer of technology, the services of the 2nd
Respondent had become redundant. By another letter dated 30.5.94 the
Petitioner agreed to pay the 2nd Respondent (a) his salary for June and July
1994, although he was released from the obligation of reporting for work in
June and July, and was permitted to leave Sri Lanka on 18.6.94 (b) one month's
salary as gratuity, and (c) the costs of repatriation to the United Kingdom,
amounting to about Rs. 193,000. He did not expressly signify his agreement by
suitably endorsing or replying to those letters; all he did was to sign
receipts in respect of all those payments. On 17.6.94 he made a complaint to
the Commissioner of Labour, the 1st Respondent, under section 6 of the Act.



In the meantime, after discussion, the Petitioner had also issued a letter
dated 26.5.94 giving the 2nd Respondent its writ­ten consent to work for any
competitor and to have any interest in a rival business in Sri Lanka without
having to wait for a period of two years after the termination of his
employment.



The relevant provisions of the Act are as follows:-



"2(1) No employer shall terminate the scheduled employ­ment of any workman
without - (a) the prior consent in writ­ing of the workman....



6\. Where an employer terminates the scheduled employment of a workman in
contravention of the provisions of this Act the Commissioner _may_ order such
employer to continue to employ the workman with effect from a date specified
in such order in the same capacity in which the workman was employed prior to
such termination _and_ to pay the workman his _wages and all other benefits_
which the workman would otherwise have received if his services had not been
termi­nated and it shall be the duty of the employer to comply with such
order." [emphasis added]



By his order dated 22.11.95 the 1st Respondent held that the 2nd Respondent
was "workman" within the meaning of the

147



 Act, and had not at any stage submitted a letter expressing a wish that his
services be terminated. He ordered, in terms of section 6 of the Act, that the
2nd Respondent be reinstated with effect from 15.1.96, and paid back wages for
171/2 months (from 30.7.94 to 15.1.96) in a sum of Rs. 3,543,750 (at the rate
of Rs. 202,500 per month). He made no reference whatever to the fact that the
2nd Respondent's contract was to expire on 31.8.95 and to the termi­nal
payments and concessions.



The Petitioner applied to the Court of Appeal for Certiorari to quash that
order. The Court of Appeal held that the Petitioner had failed to establish
that the termination of the services of the 2nd Respondent had been with his
"prior consent in writing", and that therefore the 1st Respondent had
jurisdiction to entertain the complaint, but that -



"It is obvious from the order that the Commissioner has not given his mind at
all to the question that the contract was 'initially' for three years. In
directing that the 2nd Respondent be reinstated with effect from 15.1.1996 the
Commissioner had effectively and unlawfully extended the duration of the 2nd
Respondent's contract of employment with the Petitioner indefinitely and
beyond the fixed term period of three years which had already expired on
30.7.1995 [31.8.95?]. As such the Commissioner has pur­ported to undermine the
contractual volition of the contract­ing parties and exceeded the jurisdiction
vested in him by statute.



It is to be noted that no proper reasons had been adduced in support of the
Commissioner's impugned order and therefore relevant adverse inference will
have to be drawn against the order. No steps were taken to even produce the
reasons before this Court and the Court has to come to the conclusion that he
has no defensible reasons to give."



The Court of Appeal confirmed the order that the termina­tion was illegal,
quashed the order for reinstatement, and held that the 2nd Respondent "was
entitled only to get wages for the balance period of his three-year contract,
viz, for thirteen months."

148

The 2nd Respondent did not seek special leave to appeal against the order
denying him reinstatement and restricting back wages, and this appeal
proceeded on the basis that he was not entitled to reinstatement.



On behalf of the Petitioner it was contended that:-

1.                     The Petitioner's letter dated 29.4.94 and 30.5.94, the 2nd Respondent's acceptance of the several amounts paid to him, and his signature on the receipts for those payments, constituted "prior consent in writing" to termination, within the meaning of section 2(1 )(a) of the Act;  


2.                     While the Commissioner had a discretion whether or not to order reinstatement under the first limb of section 6 , he was not entitled to make an order for compensation under the second limb unless he had first made an order for rein­ statement; and  


3.                     In any event, in making an order under the second limb of section 6, the Commissioner was under a duty to consider the circumstances of the termination and the benefits received by the 2nd Respondent, and to give reasons for his decision, but failed to do so.

I am inclined to agree that the "prior consent" required by section 2(1 )(a)
need not necessarily be contained in a single sheet of paper. If for instance
an employer were to make a writ­ten offer of a "golden handshake", stating "if
you agree to the ter­mination of your services, please accept the enclosed
cheque for X rupees as your terminal benefits and sign and return the annexed
receipt," the written offer together with the acceptance of the cheque and the
signing of the receipt would constitute a "prior consent in writing" to
termination within the meaning of section 2(1 )(a). However, it is not
necessary to decide that question because, as learned State Counsel submitted
on behalf of the 1st Respondent, there is a difference between consent to the
termi­nation itself (which is what section 2(1 )(a) requires), and an
agreement - as in this case - as to the quantum of terminal ben­efits in
circumstances in which the termination itself is no longer negotiable or has
already been unilaterally determined or effect

149

ed (which is not enough). The Petitioner's letters and the 2nd Respondent's
acceptance of the payments were all subsequent to the Petitioner's unilateral
decision to terminate the 2nd Respondent's services, and are not proof of
anything more than his agreement to the benefits payable consequent upon that
deci­sion. The 2nd Respondent did not give prior consent, in writing or
otherwise, to the termination of his services, but subsequently agreed to and
accepted the terminal benefits offered.



Learned Counsel for the Petitioner contended that the word "may" in section 6
conferred a discretion on the Commissioner to order the employer to continue
to employ the workman; that the word "and" had to be interpreted
conjunctively; and that an order for wages could not be made as an alternative
to, but only in addi­tion to, an order for continued employment. It was his
submission that section 6 authorized an order for "compensation" in addition
to reinstatement, but not as an alternative to reinstatement. Compensation, he
said, could only be awarded under section 6A, introduced by amendment in 1976,
upon a termination in conse­quence of _a closure_ of business. He drew our
attention to provi­sions of the Industrial Disputes Act which expressly
empower the award of compensation as an afternative to reinstatement, a
fea­ture lacking in section 6.



Section 33(1 )(a) of the Industrial Disputes Act affords some guidance. It
provides that awards and orders _" may _contain deci­sions as to wages _and_
all other conditions of service." The word "may" confers a discretion to make
a decision as to "wages", but it can hardly be argued that a decision as to
"other conditions of service" can be made if and only if there is first a
decision as to wages. If a tribunal has a discretion to grant relief in
respect of several matters - e.g. "wages, provident fund benefits, leave,
hours of work, _and_ transfers" \- it cannot be said that unless the tribunal
exercises the discretion to grant relief in respect of the first, no relief
can be granted in respect of the second, and that unless relief is granted in
respect of the first and the second, no relief can be granted in respect of
the third, and so on. The word "and" in such a context means "and/or".



Furthermore, section 6 must also apply in situations where reinstatement has
become impossible _pendente lite._ A workman

150



due to retire in one year's time might complain of wrongful termi­nation. The
anomalous consequence of the Petitioner's interpreta­tion would be that if the
Commissioner's order was made _before_ the due date of retirement, the workman
could be awarded rein­statement and back wages up to that date; but if it was
made even one day thereafter, he could get nothing. The contrary
interpreta­tion, however, avoids anomaly, inconvenience and injustice: if the
Commissioner finds himself unable to order reinstatement although he holds the
termination to be unlawful, he can never­theless order the employer to pay the
workman "his _wages and all_ _other benefits_ which the workman would
otherwise have received". It is unnecessary to consider whether that amounts
to "compensation" or not, because section 6 expressly empowers the
Commissioner to order payment of "wages" and "benefits". The Petitioner's
restrictive interpretation would create other anomalies too. Thus the
Commissioner may find that although termination was not justified the workman
was guilty of some lapse which mer­ited some punishment, and that therefore
part of the back wages should be withheld. However, the Petitioner's
interpretation would deprive the Commissioner of the equitable power to order
any­thing less than full back wages. In my view, the conferment of the power
to grant the greater relief includes the power to grant the lesser relief.



Accordingly, I hold that "may" in section 6 confers a discre­tion on the
Commissioner; that "and" must be interpreted disjunc­tively; and that the
Commissioner had the power to order payment of wages and benefits for the
balance period of the 2nd Respondent's contract without making an order for
reinstatement. The Court of Appeal was therefore entitled to order such
payment when setting aside the order for reinstatement.

I turn now to the quantum of back wages. Back wages can­not be awarded
mechanically without taking all the circumstances into consideration. If the
services of two workmen, with identical fixed-term contracts expiring in one
year's time, were terminated in identical circumstances, but one received from
the employer terminal benefits amounting to six months'

151

salary while the other received nothing, could the Commissioner award each of
them one year's back wages (giving the former a windfall of six months'
salary)? Again, if an employer asserted that the age of retirement was 55
years and retired a workman at that age, and immediately paid him pension,
gratuity, and other retrial benefits, could the Commissioner hold one year
later that the age of retirement was 57 and order reinstatement with one
year's wages and benefits, without giving credit for the retiral benefits
already received? It would be inequitable to interpret section 6 as requiring
a mechan­ical order for back wages from the date of wrongful termination up to
the date of reinstatement or the date on which the employment comes to an end.
There is no doubt whatever that the object which section 6 intended to achieve
was to annul an unlawful termination and to restore - insofar as it was
reasonably possible - the _status_ _quo:_ to put a workman in the position in
which he would have been if his services had not been terminated. If there had
been no ter­mination, the workman would not have received any terminal
ben­efits, and accordingly any terminal benefits actually received must be
refunded or set off. The workman cannot retain the benefits received by him
from the employer on the basis that the termina­tion was lawful, and at the
same time receive the additional bene­fits ordered by the Commissioner on the
contrary basis that the termination was unlawful. Accordingly, when his
termination is annulled, the _status quo_ must be restored, and for that
purpose the Commissioner must take into consideration all benefits which the
workman received on termination.  


In this case, upon the wrongful termination of his services the Petitioner
released the 2nd Respondent from his contractual obligation not to work for a
competitor in Sri Lanka for two years after termination. The 1st Respondent's
order for reinstatement, without any cancellation of that release, amounted to
an indefinite renewal of the original contract, with a significant variation,
name­ly on the terms that the 2nd Respondent was no longer restrained from
competing with the Petitioner immediately after termination. That shortcoming
was partly corrected when the Court of Appeal quashed the 1st Respondent's
order for reinstatement. However, when the Court of Appeal ordered back wages
for the full period of thirteen months from 31.7.94 to 31.8.95, that Court too
did not take into account the value to the 2nd Respondent of the benefit of
release from his obligation not to compete. It is likely that at the

152

 time of termination it was not worth Rs. 1,500,000 (over seven months'
salary), but it had some value which was not taken into consideration.
Further, neither the 2nd Respondent nor the Court of Appeal took into account
the facts that the 2nd Respondent was paid for the months of June and July
although he was allowed to leave Sri Lanka in mid-June, that he was paid one
month's salary as gratuity, and that he was paid certain cost of repatriation.



Although the Commissioner has a discretion in respect of both limbs of section
6, that is not an unfettered or unreviewable discretion. As the Court of
Appeal observed, he must give rea­sons for his decision. Although in
_Samalanka Ltd v Weerakoor (1),_ it was held by Kulatunga, J, (with G.P.S. de
Silva, CJ. and Ramanathan, J. agreeing) that the Commissioner was not under a
duty to give reasons, I took the contrary view in _Karunadasa_ v _Unique
Gemstones LtdS(2),_ (with Wadugodapitiya, J. and Anandacoomaraswamy, J.
agreeing). That decision was consid­ered and followed by Gunasekera J. in
_Ceylon Printers_ v _Commissioner of Labour (3)._ Since G.P.S.de Silva, CJ.
agreed with Gunasekera, J. on that occasion it is clear that he no longer
agreed with _Samalanka._ In _Mendis_ v _Perera (4)_ I observed that the _audi
alteram partem_ rule does not merely entitle a party to a purely formal
opportunity of placing his case before a tribunal, and that natural justice
would be devalued if the tribunal does not consider the evidence and the
submissions, evaluate it properly and not in haste, and give reasons for its
conclusions. However, in _Yaseen Omar v Pakistan International Airlines, (5),
Samalanda_ was followed, apparently without the attention of the Court being
drawn to the subsequent decisions to the contrary and the rele­vant citations.



It is therefore necessary to reiterate what has long been recognized: that the
statutory conferment of a right of appeal against the decision of a tribunal
has the effect of imposing a duty on that tribunal to give reasons for its
decisions _(Brook Bond Ceylon Ltd v Tea, Rubber (etc) Workers_ Union (6)
_Ratnayake_ v _Fernando (7))._ The conferment of a right to seek revision or
review necessarily has the same effect. As the decisions cited show, if the
citizen is not made aware of the reason for a decision he can­not tell whether
it is reviewable, and he will thereby be deprived

153



of one of the protections of the common law - which Article 12(1) now
guarantees. Today, therefore, the conjoint effect of the machinery for
appeals, revision, and judicial review, and the fun­damental rights
jurisdiction, is that as a general rule tribunals must give reasons for their
decisions.



In the absence of reasons, the order for back wages, even as modified by the
Court of Appeal, cannot stand. However, to remit the case to the 1st
Respondent for a fresh determination, seven years after his original order,
would not serve the end of justice. The payments and benefits received on
termination could reasonably be assessed as equivalent to nine months' salary
(at the rate of Rs, 202,500 p.m. fixed by the 1st Respondent). I there­fore
vary the order of the Court of Appeal by substituting for the thirteen months'
salary ordered by the Court of Appeal, four months' salary (Rs. 810,000); the
1st Respondent's order will be varied accordingly. Subject to that variation,
the appeal is dis­missed, but without costs.

**WIGNESWARAN, J.**

I have had the opportunity to read the judgement of my brother Fernando, J. He
referred to three submissions made by the Counsel for the Petitioner
pertaining to (i) "prior consent in writing" as per section 2(1 )(a) of Act
No. 45 of 1971, - (the Act), _vis-a-vis_ this case; (ii) the scope of the
preposition "and" in Section 6 of the Act; and (iii) the failure of the
Commissioner (1st Respondent) in this case to have considered the
circumstances of the termination and the benefits received by the 2nd
Defendant. Brother Fernando, J. proceeded to deal with each of the said
sub­missions in his judgement



With respect, there are certain matters therein I am unable to agree,
particularly his interpretation of the word "and" disjunc­tively in Section 6
of the Act. Hence this dissenting view

I agree with brother Fernando, J. that "prior consent" required by Section 2(1
)(a) need to be contained in a formal sheet of paper in every instance. "Prior
consent" could be implied from the attendant circumstances of each case.

154

In this instance, the 2nd Respondent was employed by Petitioner on a fixed
term contract. It provided for termination by either party giving 3 months'
notice. Such a notice was in fact given with the offering of benefits - more
or less a "golden hand­shake". (Vide para 3 of brother Fernando, J.'s
judgment). Such benefits were accepted. The 2nd Respondent by P22 did not pray
for reinstatement in his application to the Commissioner. He only prayed for
compensation for "termination" of employment. P23 confirmed this. The
application was made to the Commissioner even prior to termination. What
happened in this case _appears to be_ that the 2nd Respondent readily accepted
all benefits given to him by his employer in consequence of a forced cessation
of employment but wanting a little more like Oliver Twist, the 2nd Respondent
made an application on 17.06.1994 to the Commissioner of Labour, a day after
receiving his somewhat of a "golden handshake" (16.06.1994), and a day before
leaving the shores of the Island (18.06.1994). The cost of his air passage to
leave the Island was met by the employer. But as pointed out by brother
Fernando, J. "he did not expressly signify his agreement by suitably endorsing
or replying" the letters sent to him. He only signed receipts in respect of
the payments made. He felt that he was not adequately compensated for the
sudden termination while his contract was still valid.



The application to the Commissioner, (P22), did not men­tion the Section under
which relief was claimed. But what was claimed was compensation. At page 27 of
the proceedings the 2nd Respondent stated as follows in his examination in
chief before the Commissioner, Mr. M.R. Kannangara -

"Q \- What is the relief you request from the Commissioner to award you?

A - I am asking for the payments _for the remaining part of my contract of
employment._ In other words as stated earlier balance months.

Q - What is the other due you ask?

A - I was made to come to Sri Lanka for this inquiry.

155



|

\- How much have you spent?  
  
---|---  
  
A

|

\- 503 pounds for my flight. I spend nearly 100 dollars per day  
  
Q

|

\- How long have you stayed here?  
  
A

|

\- (illegible)  
  
Q

|

\- You ask expenses up to 4th February?  
  
A

|

\- Yes.  
  
Q

|

\- _You are not asking for reinstatement?_  
  
A

|

\- No."  
  
Curiously on the next date (27.01.1995) the examination-in-chief went contrary
to the evidence given on 26.01.1995. It ran as follows:

"Q - You have further stated that at the moment you are depending on the
social insurance paid to you by the U.K.?

A - Yes.

Q - In that situation what is the relief that you would ask from the
Commissioner?

A - Reinstatement with back wages.

Q - You know that after appearing before the Commissioner you would return to
U.K.?

A - Yes

Q - In the event the Commissioner makes an order for rein­statement it would
be necessary to travel back to Sri Lanka to resume employment?

A - Yes.

Q - Taking those matters into consideration what further relief would you ask
from the Commissioner?

A - The expenses or cost incurred in that travel, meaning, having to go back
to the U.K. and return to Sri Lanka to resume employment."

156

When the Court of Appeal quashed the order for reinstate­ment, the 2nd
Respondent did not seek special leave to appeal against the order denying him
reinstatement. Thus reinstatement was not in the contemplation of the 2nd
Respondent at the time of application nor seriously pursued thereafter. The
reason for the _volte face_ on 27.01.1995 appears to be the realization that
Section 6 of the Act did not permit the Commissioner to grant benefits unless
he made an order for reinstatement. Thus to my mind the Commissioner was
_legally_ correct to the extent that he granted wages and benefits only with
an order for reinstatement, while the Court of Appeal was _legally_ in error
in quashing the order for reinstatement and yet allowing consequential
benefits to stand.

In my opinion the word "and" in Section 6 of the Act must necessarily be
interpreted conjunctively and not disjunctively as done by brother Fernando,
J. The reasons are not far to seek.



The Section reads as follows:



"6\. _Where an employer terminates the scheduled employ­_ _ment of a workman
in contravention of the provisions of this Act, the Commissioner may order
such employer to contin­ue to employ the workman, with effect from a date
specified_ _in such order, in the same capacity in which the workman_ _was
employed prior to such _termination_ and _to pay the__ _ _workman__ _his wages
and all other benefits which the work­man would have otherwise received if his
services had not been so terminated; and it shall be the duty of the employ­_
_er to comply with such order. The Commissioner shall_ _cause notice of such
order to be served on both such employer and the workman. "_



The preposition "and" between the words "termination" and "to pay the workman"
must be interpreted conjunctively due to the wording appearing after the word
"and" _viz. "and _to pay the work­man his wages and all other benefits which
the workman would otherwise have received if his services had not been
terminated". The words "all other benefits" in this clause must be interpreted
_ejusdem generis._ The "benefits" contemplated are such benefits akin to wages
which were payable if the workman was still in ser-

  
157

  
vice. Benefits receivable by a person _out of service_ could not be included
therein. Wages mean remuneration payable while still at work or in service.
Arrears of wages could be ordered only for the period during which the workman
still continued to work or is deemed to have worked while being in service.
"Wages" implies the continued service of the workman. Compensation for
termi­nation of a contract prematurely will not fall into the category of
"wages" payable. In this instance the Commissioner could have ordered arrears
of wages coupled with reinstatement. An order for reinstatement (unless
otherwise ordered) gives continuity to the previous service of the workman and
he is entitled to the wages unpaid during a period of unlawful termination and
also to "all other benefits which the workman would otherwise have received if
his services had not been terminated". The moment his services are terminated
or deemed to be terminated or an order for rein­statement is quashed by a
higher Court, the benefits receivable by him may include arrears of wages upto
time of termination and other benefits which the workman would have been
entitled to receive upto the date of termination and may be even wages for a
period in lieu of a period of expected notice (of termination) but any other
benefits such as compensation or even gratuity which is a bounty paid on
discharge from service in acknowledgement of service rendered, would not fall
into the category of "other ben­efits which the workman would otherwise have
received if his ser­vices had not been terminated".



Thus when the Court of Appeal quashed the order of the Commissioner for
reinstatement, the payment ordred by the Commissioner only in consonance with
his order for reinstate­ment could not have been retained by the Court of
Appeal, because such payments could not fall within the category of "wages and
all other benefits" which the workman would other­wise have received if his
services had not been terminated.



Such payments are contemplated in Section 6A(1) which runs thus -



_" 6A (1) Where the scheduled employment of any work­man is terminated in
contravention of the provisions of this Act in consequence of the closure by
his employer of any trade, industry or business the Commissioner may order_

158

_  
such employer to pay to such workman on or before a spec­ified date any sum of
money as compensation as an alter­native to the reinstatement of such workman
and any gra­ tuity or any other benefit payable to such workman by such
employer."_



The Section speaks of a "sum of money as compensation as an alternative to the
reinstatement of such workman" and does not refer to wages. A sum of money
calculated on the basis of the amount of wages paid to the workman cannot
still be considered as wages. Such a payment is neither "wages" nor "other
benefits" a workman would otherwise have received if his services had _not_
been terminated".



When the Legislature brought in Section 6A into the Termination of Employment
of Workmen (Special Provisions) Act, No. 45 of 1971 by Section 4 of Law, No. 4
of 1976, there was no need for such Section if "compensation as an alternative
to the reinstatement of such workman and any gratuity or any other (similar)
benefit payable to such workman by such employer" was also contemplated under
Section 6. In fact the Legislature thought it fit to have a separate Section
(6A) without amending the word­ing of Section 6, due to the fact that
compensation, gratuity etc. fell outside the purview of Section 6. But Section
6A only refers to the closure of trade, industry or business by the employer
and its consequences.



In this case it could have been argued that there was in effect a closure of
the old business (or trade or industry) due to it being amalgamated or merged
with another business (or trade or industry). Compensation then may have been
payable under Section 6A _but not under Section 6._



The limited scope of the phrase "and all other benefits" etc. in Section 6
could be inferred when the contents of Sections 7 and 8 of the Act are
considered. Failure to comply with the provi­sions of Section 6 of the Act is
deemed to be an offence under Section 7 and is punishable. Section 8 refers to
additional pun­ishment. Section 8(1 )(b) is relevant. It runs thus:

159

_" 8\. (1) On the conviction of an employer for an offence __under section 7
in respect of any workman, such employ­_ _er shall be liable -_

_ _

_(a)_ __ to pay, in addition to any punishment that may be imposed on such
employer under that section, a fine of fifty rupees for each day on which the
failure is con­tinued after conviction thereof; and



(b) to pay such workman the remuneration and such other benefits which would
have been payable to him if he had been in employment on such day and on each
day of the period commencing on the date on which he should have been employed
according to the provisions of section 6 and ending on the date of conviction
of such employer."



The above Section clearly shows that Section 6 contem­plated reinstatement and
payment of arrears of wages and atten­dant benefits lost due to termination.
Such payments were direct­ed to be paid _with_ an order for reinstatement (cf
"payable to him if he had been in employment")

The wording of the above Section 8(1 )(b) implies that what was contemplated
by the word "wages" in Section 6 was remu­neration and not compensation. And
the "benefits" referred to in that Section were benefits payable to him while
he was in employ­ment or deemed to have been in employment after the order for
reinstatement (back wages etc.). Section 8 does not make any provision for the
recovery of compensation or gratuity.

On the other hand Section 6A(1) and (2) deal with compen­sation and recovery
of such compensation. It is my view therefore that Section 6 cannot be
interpreted to include compensation payable as an alternative to
reinstatement.



Section 33(1 )(a) of the Industrial Disputes Act cannot be juxtaposed with
Section 6 of the Act and compared since the clause after the word "and" in
Section 6 as above referred to, specifically refers to the previous part of
the Section which deals with reinstatement. There is no part, portion or
clause in Section

160

  
33(1 )(a) of the Industrial Disputes Act similar to the phrase "would have
otherwise received if his services had not been terminated" as in Section 6 of
the Act. Hence I find it inappropriate to bring in Section 33(1 )(a) of the
Industrial Disputes Act to interpret Section 6 of the Act. The meaning of a
doubtful word must be ascertained by reference to the meaning of words
associated with it. _{Noscitur_ _a sociis)._ The sense and meaning of a law
can be collected only by comparing one part with another and by viewing all
the parts together as one whole and not one part only by itself. _(Nemo enim_
_aliquam partem recte intelligere possit antequam totum iterum_ _atque iterum
perlegerit)._



Therefore Section 6 must be construed after viewing all the parts of the
Section together as one whole and not one part only by itself or by reference
to other sections in other statues which may not give a clue as to the meaning
of Section 6 as constitut­ed in the Act. Merely because a perceivably
deserving case can­not be granted relief in terms of Section 6, we should not
bend the law to go against the norms of interpretation.



I too am of view like brother Fernando, J. that the benefits granted to the
2nd Respondent by the employer were not suffi­cient. But he cannot retain the
benefits already received by him from the employer on the basis that the
termination was lawful, if he was to be granted any benefits by the
Commissioner. I am also of the view that the Court of Appeal could not have
quashed the order for reinstatement and yet retained benefits attendant to
reinstatement in terms of Section 6.I am also unable to determine in this case
that there was in fact a closure of the trade, industry or business on account
of merger without adequate evidence being placed before us.



As pointed out by brother Fernando, J. there are, no doubt, anomalous
consequences that could arise if the interpretation of Section 6 is restricted
to reinstatement and attendant benefits. But it is my view that benefits
_could_ be granted in such instances to meet the ends of justice without in
any way perverting the interpretation of Section 6. Thus in respect of the
case mentioned by brother Fernando, J. where termination takes place just
before the due date of retirement, the Commissioner could hold under Section 5
that the termination was illegal, null and void and

161

  
 then proceed to order reinstatement as on the date of retirement giv­ing the
workman all benefits right upto his date of retirement. Such a discretion is
vested in the Commissioner and of course he must give his reasons for doing
so. But to remit the present case to the 1st Respondent for a fresh
determination would not be prudent. The same _modus operandi_ on the other
hand could be used in this instance too.



I would therefore set aside the order of the Court of Appeal and correct and
amend the determination made by the Commissioner of Labour (P26) to read as
follows:-

Commencement of Service of Applicant -  
(2nd Respondent) in this case \- 01.09.1992  
Date of Termination \- 30.07.1994

Period of non employment as per contract

from 30.07.1994 to 31.08.1995 - 13 months

Monthly Wages paid \- Rs. 202,500/-

Date of reinstatement as per

Section 6 of the Act \- 31.08.1995 subject to

terms of contract (P6) pertaining to termination

Order regarding back wages

(arrears) and benefits \- 13 months' wages less all beneficial payments paid
by employer (on the basis that termination was lawful) assessed to amount to 9
months' salary (vide judgment by Fernando, J.) amounts to 4 months' wages
202,500 x 4 Rs. 810,000/-

It is to be noted that the date of reinstatement (31.08.1995) is the last
possible date of employment in terms of the work con­tract P6. The
determination of the work contract would take place accordingly on 3.08.1995
(the date of reinstatement).

162

I agree with the quantum of amount payable as ordered and all other views
expressed by brother Fernando, J. in his judgment save and except those
dissented from hereto before.

**WIGNESWARAN, J.**

**EDUSSURIYA, J.**



Having carefully considered the reasons given by my brothers Fernando J. and
Wigneswaran J. in their judgments I find myself in agreement with the judgment
of Fernando J.

**_Appeal dismissed subject to_ _variation of wages payable by appellant._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/39.html_  

