##  G.T.E. Directories Lanka (Pvt) Ltd. v. Mukthar Marikkar and Another - SLR
- 180, Vol 3 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 4; (1998) 3 Sri LR 180 (17 August 1998)

**180**

**G.T.E. DIRECTORIES LANKA (PVT) LTD.  
v.  
MUKTHAR MARIKKAR AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT

AMERASINGHE, J.,

DHEERARATNE, J.

GUNAWARDANA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 151/97

C.A. NO. 507/92 (F)

D.C. COLOMBO NO. 3210/SPL

JUNE 15, 1998

_Appeal - Intellectual Property Act, No. 52 of 1979 - Time for appeal under S.
182 of the Act - Civil Procedure Code - Sections 5 and 6 - Prescription
Ordinance - S. 10._

In terms of S. 182 of the Code of Intellectual Property Act, No. 52 of 1979, a
person aggrieved by a decision of the Registrar of Patents has a right of
appeal to the District Court. However, the Act does not provide a time limit
within which an appeal should be lodged or the appellate procedure.

**181**

**Held:**

The appeal which was, quite rightly, lodged by the appellant by filing a
plaint in the District Court constituted an action within the meaning of s. 6
of the Civil Procedure Code founded on a cause of action as defined in s. 5 of
the Code. In terms of s. 10 of the Prescription Ordinance, the appeal could be
filed within 3 years of the date of the decision of the Registrar.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Stassen Exports Limited v. Brooke Bond (Ceylon) Limited and Another_
(1990) 2 Sri LR 63.

_2\. Western Bank Limited v. Schindler_ (1977) ch 1 at 18.

_3\. Lowe v. Fernando_ (1913) 16 NLR 398 and 404.

_4\. Jalaldeen v. The Colombo Municipal Council_ (1908) 4 Appeal Court Reports
131.

_5\. Dodwell v. John_ (1918) 20 NLR 206.

_6\. Fuard v. Weerasooriya_ (1954) 56 NLR 12.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_K. Kanag-lswaran P.C, with N. R. Sivendran_ for appellant.

_S. Sivarasa P.C, with Barhee Ahamed and M. Mawjith_ for 1st respondent.

No appearance for 2nd respondent.

Cur. adv. vult

August 17, 1998.

**DHEERARATNE, J.**

This appeal raises an interesting question of law relating to the Code of
Intellectual Property Act. The 1st respondent filed application No. 44027 for
registration of a trade mark while General Telephone Directories Company (M)
SDN BHD of Malaysia (The Malaysian Company) filed its notice of opposition to
the said application. After hearing the parties the 2nd respondent Registrar
of Patents & Trade Marks, by his order dated 3rd January, 1990, refused the
said opposition and allowed the propounded mark to be registered. The
appellant, who by then had become the assignee of the interests of the
Malaysian Company, being aggrieved by the order of the 2nd respondent, by
plaint dated 10th December, 1990, appealed against that order to the District
Court, in terms of section 182 of the Code of Intellectual Property Act, No.
52 of 1979. The 2nd respondent

**182**

informed the District Court that he had no stake in the appeal and that he
would abide by whatever order made by court.

Section 182 of the 1979 Act does not provide a time limit within which an
appeal should be lodged; while conferring appellate jurisdiction on the
District Court, that section provides no specific appellate procedure. The
legislative predecessor of the present Act, the Trade Marks Ordinance No. 15
of 1952 (the 1964 Act was not brought into operation), too did not provide for
an appealable period but its subsection 12 (6) stated that an appeal shall be
made in the prescribed manner. Rule 98 made by the Minister under section 60
of that Ordinance and published in the Gazette No. 7559 dated 10.12.1926 (vide
Subsidiary Legislation 1956 vol.11) provided for an appeal from a decision of
the Registrar to be made within one month thereof. These rules published in
the Gazette in 1926 were later rescinded by the order of the Minister
published in the Gazette 60/20 dated 31.10.1979.

At the hearing before the District Court, it was contended on behalf of the
1st respondent that the appeal should be rejected as it has been filed out of
time. The learned District Judge upheld the objection and dismissed the action
of the appellant. He reasoned out that since section 182 did not provide for
an appealable period, the court must entertain an appeal within a reasonable
time; since the rescinded regulations made under the repealed Ordinance
specified a period of one month, that period should be reckoned as the
reasonable time. The Court of Appeal affirmed the order of the learned
District Judge and held that the previous law should be looked at, to provide
for what was thought to be a casus omissus. Although the Court of Appeal
thought it found support for the view it took, from the dicta of my brother
Amerasinghe, J. at pages 92, 95 and 96 of his exhaustive judgment in Stassen
Exports Limited v. Brooke Bond (Ceylon) Limited and another(1), I find nothing
in the dicta as lending support to that view. My brother Amerasinghe, J. was
clearly not dealing with cases of casus omissus in those passages quoted by
the Court of Appeal.

Perhaps at this point, it is apposite to remind ourselves the words of
Scarman, LJ. in the case of Western Bank Limited v. Schindler(2) where he said
:

Judicial legislation is not an option open to an English Judge. Our courts are
not required, as are, for instance, the Swiss courts (see the Swiss Civil
Code, articles 1 and 2), to declare and insert into legislation rules which
the judge would have put there, had

183

he been the legislator. But our courts do have the duty of giving effect to
the intention of Parliament, if it be possible, even though the process
requires a strained construction of the language used or the insertion of the
words in order to do so ... The line between judicial legislation, which our
law does not permit, and judicial interpretation in a way best designed to
give effect to the intention of Parliament is not an easy one to draw. Suffice
it to say that before our courts can imply words into a statute the statutory
intention must be plain and the insertion not too big, or too much at varience
with the language used by the legislature. The courts will strain against
leaving unfilled the casus omissus.

The Court of Appeal was of the view that failure to provide for an appealable
period in section 182 is tantamount to the appellant holding an unenforceable
right and therefore the rescinded regulation should be resorted to, in order
to give effect to the intention of the legislature. This view appears to be
erroneous. On the other hand, to contend that, since there is no period of
prescription specified, an appeal could be lodged at any time even after the
lapse of a number of years, is equally erroneous. In my view the solution to
the problem could be found within the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code
(CPC) and the Prescription Ordinance No. 22 of 1871.

In terms of section 8 of the CPC, unless specially provided for by the CPC or
any other law that proceeding may be taken by way of summary procedure, every
action shall commence by a course of regular procedure prescribed in the CPC.
The appeal in this instance, quite rightly, was lodged by the appellant in the
District Court by filing a plaint which conforms to the requisites of a plaint
in a regular action as specified in section 40. The 1st respondent filed his
answer, conforming with the requisites mentioned in section 75 of the CPC.

Section 6 of the CPC defines an action as -

Every application to a court for relief or remedy obtainable through the
exercise of the courts authority, or otherwise to invite its interference,
constitutes an action.

The net of the language of the definition is cast so wide, as to include
within it the appeal filed by the appellant. On the one hand appellant's
plaint is an application for relief or remedy obtainable through the exercise
of the court's authority; on the other hand

184

it is an application inviting the court's interference. The definition of a
cause of action in section 5 is also given in similar sweeping terms.

Cause of action is a wrong for the prevention or redress of which an action
may be brought, and includes the denial of a right, the refusal to fulfil an
obligation, the neglect to perform a duty, and the infliction of an
affirmative injury.

The advantage gained by the registration of the 1st respondent's trade mark
could amount to a wrong. It is a privation of the appellant's right. A wrong
is a combination of a right and its violation. See Lowe v. Fernando(3).
Proceedings against an assessment made to the Court of Requests in terms of
the Municipal Councils Ordinance were held to be an action within the meaning
of section 5 of the CPC. See Jalaldeen v. The Colombo Municipal Council (4).

The Prescription Ordinance No. 22 of 1871 governs the whole field of
jurisdiction of the Civil Courts of the Island. See decisions of the Privy
Council in Dodwell v. John(5) and Fuard v. Werasooriya(6). The cause of action
of the plaintiff attracts section 10 of the Prescription Ordinance as it is
not caught up by any other provision of the Ordinance. Section 10 reads :

No action shall be maintainable in respect of any cause of action not
hereinbefore expressly exempted from the operation of this Ordinance, unless
the same shall be commenced within three years from the time when such cause
of action shall have accrued.

For the above reasons I hold that an appeal under section 182 of the Code of
Intellectual Property Act could be filed within 3 years of the date of the
decision of the Registrar. The appeal is allowed and the order of the District
Court and the judgment of the Court of Appeal are set aside. In view of the
special circumstances of this case, parties will bear their own costs of this
court and of the court below. The Registrar of this court is directed to send
the record of this case back to the District Court as expeditiously as
possible.

**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNAWARDANA, J.** \- I agree.

Appeal allowed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/4.html_  

