##  Abeywardena v. Ajith De Silva - SLR - 134, Vol 1 of 1998 [1997] LKSC 4;
(1998) 1 Sri LR 134 (13 October 1997)

**134**

**ABEYWARDENE  
v.  
AJITH DE SILVA**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J., WADUGODAPITIYA. J.,  
WIJETUNGA, J., ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.  
AND SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. SPECIAL LA. NO. 457/96  
29TH JULY 1997.  
  
Appeal - Article 154 P (3) (b) of the Constitution - Sections 5 and 9 of the
High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 - Appeal
from an order of the High Court in the exercise of its revisionary
jurisdiction.  
  
The petitioner sought leave to appeal to the Supreme Court from an order made
by the High Court in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction.

**135**

**Held:  
**  
A direct appeal does not lie to the Supreme Court from the order of the High
Court in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction. An appeal from such
order should be made to the Court of Appeal.  
  
**Cases referred to :**  
  
1\. _Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam and others_ (1993) 2 Sri LR 355.  
2\. Abeygunasekara v. Setunge and others (1997) 1 Sri LR 62.  
3\. Yapa v. Ameer and another S.C. Spl. LA. S.C. minutes 5 March 1977.  
4\. In Re 13th Amendment to the Constitution (1987) 2 Sri LR 310, 323.  
5\. Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohamed (1966) 68 NLR 36, 38.  
6\. Attorney-General v. Podisingho 51 NLR 385, 388.  
7\. Somawathie v. Madawela (1983) 2 Sri LR 15, 26.  
8\. Thameena v. Koch (1969) 72 NLR 192.  
9\. S.L.B.C. v. De Silva (1981) 2 Sri LR 228 (CA).  
10\. Nadarajah v. Tilagaratnam (1986) 3 CALR 303 (CA).  
  
**APPLICATION** for Special Leave to Appeal from the judgment of High Court,
Anuradhapura.  
  
_Mohan Peiris with Shanaka Ranasinghe, Nuwanthi Dias, Nirosha Jayamaha,
Jayantha Fernando, Nishada Gamage_ for the petitioner.  
  
_Patrick Fernando with R. E. Thambiratnam_ for the respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

13th October, 1997  
  
**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.  
**  
This is an application for Special Leave to Appeal from the order of the
learned High Court Judge of Anuradhapura dated 5th August, 1996\. When this
application was supported for special leave before a Bench consisting of
Amerasinghe, J., Anandacoomaraswamy, J. and Gunawardena, J., Counsel for the
respondent raised a preliminary objection namely that the petitioner had filed
this application in the wrong forum, for the petitioner should have first
appealed to the Court Of Appeal and thereafter if he was unsuccessful come to
this court if he so desired. He relied on the decision of this court
(Kulatunga, J. with whom G. P. S. de Silva CJ., and Ramanathan, J. agreed) in
the case of Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam and others(1). In that case it was held
:  
  
1\. "The right of appeal is a statutory right and must be expressly created
and granted by statute.

**136**

2\. S. 9 of Act No. 19 of 1990 does not give a right of appeal to the Supreme
Court from an order of the High Court in the exercise of its revisionary
jurisdiction".  
  
He also relied on the decision of this court by the same Bench in the case of
Ananda Gordon Abeygunasekera v. Adikari Mudalige Don Mervyn Joseph Setunga and
two others(2).  In that case, this Court answered the following two questions
referred to this court by the Court of Appeal in the affirmative:  
  
(1) "Does the Court of Appeal have an appellate jurisdiction in terms of
Article 138 (1) of the Constitution as amended by the 13th amendment in
respect of a decision of the provincial High Court made in the exercise of its
revisionary jurisdiction?  
  
(2) Does a party aggrieved by a decision of the provincial High Court given in
respect of a matter coming within Part VII of the Primary Courts Procedure
Act, have a right of appeal  to the Court of Appeal in terms of Article 154 P
(6) of the Constitution as amended by the 13th amendment read with section 74
(2) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act?".  
  
In that case it was argued that Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam (supra) was wrongly
decided.  
  
Learned counsel for the respondent also relied on the decision of this court
(Fernando, J., Wadugodapitiya, J., Perera, J.) in Yapa v. Ameer and another
(3). Where the Court held that according to the decision in Gunaratne v.
Thambinayagam (supra) there is no such right of appeal and the Court agreed
with that decision.  
  
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the cases relied on by
learned counsel for the respondent were wrongly decided. In view of his
submission that Bench requested His Lordship the Chief Justice to consider
appointing a fuller Bench to consider the following question :  
  
"Does a direct appeal lie to the Supreme Court from an order of the High Court
in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction without appealing to the Court
of Appeal".

**137**

In view of this request His Lordship The Chief Justice nominated this Bench to
hear and determine the question of law.  
  
At the outset I must say that these three decisions are right and that if in
consequence of these decisions there would be an undesirable increase of
litigation, that is the matter for the legislature.  
  
In the instant case a dispute relating to land had been referred to the
Magistrate's Court of Anuradhapura in terms of section 66 (1) (b) of the
Primary Courts Procedure Act, No. 44 of 1979. The respondent in that case
raised an objection stating that the Magistrate lacked jurisdiction to inquire
into the matter. That objection was overruled and the respondent filed an
application in the High Court of Anuradhapura for the revision of the said
order. The learned High Court Judge allowed the application for revision and
set aside the order of the learned Magistrate. It is from the order of the
learned High Court Judge that the petitioner has filed this application in
this court for special leave to appeal.  
  
The question before this court is whether a direct appeal lies to this court
from an order of the High Court in the exercise of its revisionary
jurisdiction without first preferring an appeal to the Court of Appeal.  
  
There is no right of appeal from an order of the Primary Court Judge by reason
of the provisions of section 74 (2) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act, No.
44 of 1979. However, parties appeal to the Court of Appeal by way of revision
under Article 138 of the Constitution read with Article 145 to have the order
set aside. After the 13th Amendment, section 5 of the High Court of the
Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 read with Article 154P (3)
(b) of the Constitution (enacted by the 13th Amendment) entitled him to file
such application in the High Court of the province. The jurisdiction of the
High Court in the matter is concurrent. In Re the 13th Amendment to the
Constitution.(4) In the result, he may file an application in the Court of
Appeal or in the High Court. Article 154P establishes a High Court for each
province. Article 154P (3) (6) states as follows:-  
  
"Every such High Court shall-

**138**

notwithstanding anything in Article 138 and subject to any law, exercise,
appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of con­victions, sentences
and orders entered or imposed by Magistrate's Courts and Primary Courts within
the province".  
  
Article 154P (6) states as follows :-  
  
"Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law, any person
aggrieved by a final order, judgment or sentence of any such court, in the
exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3) (b),. . . may appeal to the
Court of Appeal in accordance with Article'1 138".  
  
After the 13th Amendment, appeals to the Court of Appeal from High Courts
established by Article 154P of the Constitution were governed by the Court of
Appeal (Procedure for appeals from High Courts established by Article 154P of
the Constitution) Rules, 1988 made by the Supreme Court and published in
Gazette Extraordinary No. 549/6 of 13.03.89. This was followed by Act No. 19
of 1990. Section 9 of Act No. 19 of 1990 provides for a direct appeal to the
Supreme Court from any final or interlocutory order, judgment, decree or
sentence of a High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution in
the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P (3)
(b) or s. 3 of the Act or any other law. s. 10 provides as follows :-  
  
(1) "The Supreme Court shall, subject to the Constitution be the final court
of appellate jurisdiction within Sri Lanka for the correction of all errors in
fact or in law which shall be committed by a High Court established by Article
154P of the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested
in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the Constitution or section 3 of
this Act, or any other law and the judgments and orders of the Supreme Court
shall, in such cases, be final and conclusive in all such matters.  
  
(2) The Supreme Court shall, in the exercise of its jurisdiction, have sole
and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal from any order, judgment, decree or
sentence made by a High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution,
in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in such High Court by
paragraph (3) (£>) of Article 154P of the Constitution section 3 of this Act
or any other law and it may affirm, reverse

**139**

or vary any such order, judgment, decree or sentence of such High Court and
may issue such directions to such High Court or Court of First Instance or
order a new trial or further hearing in any proceedings as the justice of the
case may require and may also call for and admit fresh or additional evidence
if the interests of justice so demands and may in such event, direct that such
evidence be recorded by such High Court, or any Court of First Instance".  
  
The cumulative effect of the provisions of Articles 154P (3) (b), 154P (6) and
section 9 of Act No. 19 of 1990 is that, while there is a right of appeal to
the Supreme Court from the orders, etc., of the High Court established by
Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction
vested in it by Article 154P (3) (b) or Section 3 of Act No. 19 of 1990 or any
other law, there is no right of appeal to the Supreme Court from the orders in
the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction. An appeal from an order of the
High Court in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction should be made to
the Court of Appeal. An appeal to the Supreme Court from the decision of the
Court of Appeal would lie, with leave.  
  
It is contended on behalf of the petitioner that the expression "appellate
jurisdiction" (as opposed to "Original Jurisdiction") would ordinarily include
the power to review decisions by way of appeal, revision or restitutio in
integrum. I do not agree with this submission. Article 154P (3) (b) refers to
"appellate" and "revisionary" jurisdiction, but "revisionary jurisdiction" is
omitted in section 9 of Act No. 19 of 1990. The omission, in my view, is not
inconsequential, for jurisdiction in respect of revision is distinct from
appellate jurisdiction (Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohamed (5) Vide also
Somawathie v. Madawela (6) and Attorney-General v. Podisingho (7)  
  
Prior to the enactment of section 3 of Act No. 19 of 1990, the remedy by way
of revision was not available against the order of a Labour Tribunal: Vide
Thameena v. Koch (8), S.L.B.C. v. De Silva (9) and Nadarajah v. Tilagaratnam
(10). Section 3 of Act No. 19 of 1990 vested in the High Court (in addition to
appellate jurisdiction), revisionary jurisdiction in respect of the orders of
Labour Tribunal and orders made under sections 5 and 9 of the Agrarian
Services Act. Further, while section 9 of Act No. 19 of 1990 does not give a
right of appeal to the Supreme Court from an order of the High Court made in
the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction, section 31D of the Industrial
Disputes Act as amended by Act No. 32 of 1990 (which also provides for direct
appeals to the Supreme Court) provides as follows :

**140**

"Any workman, trade union or employer who is aggrieved by any final order of a
High Court established under Article 154P of the Constitution, in the exercise
of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by law or in the exercise of its
revisionary Jurisdiction vested in it by law, in relation to an order of a
Labour Tribunal, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court with the leave of
the High Court or the Supreme Court first had and obtained".  
  
It will thus be seen that if a litigant invokes the revisionary juris­diction
of the Court of Appeal, he has one chance for an appeal to the Supreme Court,
whereas if he invokes the revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court he will
have two chances of appeal, one to the Court of Appeal and then to the Supreme
Court, except when the revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court is invoked
in relation to an order of a Labour Tribunal, in which case there is only one
appeal and that too to the Supreme Court only.  
  
It is further seen that the legislature did intend to have the right of appeal
to the Court of Appeal from a revisionary order of the High Court except when
the revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court is invoked in relation to an
order of a Labour Tribunal.  
  
In response to the question placed before this court, I hold that a direct
appeal does not lie to the Supreme Court from the order of the High Court in
the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction. An appeal from the order of the
High Court in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction should be made to
the Court of Appeal. Where a party is dissatisfied with the order of the Court
of Appeal, the party may, with leave of the Court of Appeal or when such leave
is refused by the Court of Appeal, with leave of the Supreme Court, appeal to
the Supreme Court.  
  
For the foregoing reasons I am of opinion that the preliminary objection must
be upheld.  
  
Special Leave to Appeal is therefore refused, with costs fixed at Rs. 5,250/-.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J. - I agree.**  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. - I agree.  
  
WIJETUNGA, J. - I agree.  
  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. - I agree.  
  
_Special leave to appeal refused._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/4.html_  

