##  De Costa v. Anz Grindlays Bank Plc. - SLR - 307, Vol 1 of 1996 [1996] LKSC
4; (1996) 1 Sri LR 307 (26 August 1996)

**307**

**DE COSTA  
****v** **.  
****ANZ GRINDLAYS** ** BANK PLC.**

SUPREME COURT.  
G. P.S. DE SILVA, C.J.,  
DHEERARATNE, J.,  
RAMANATHAN, J.,  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 108/95.  
C.A. NO. 873/94.  
L.T. NO. 2394/A.  
24 JUNE, 31 JULY AND 09 AUGUST, 1996.

_Industrial Law ‑ Gratuity ‑ Gratuity Act, No. 12 of 1983 ss. 6(2) (a), 10(1)
‑ Reference to Arbitration under Industrial Dispute Act s. 4(1) ‑ Jurisdiction
of arbitrator ‑ Was the reference made by the Minister _ultra vires?

_Industrial Dispute as defined in section 48 of the Industrial Disputes Act ‑
_ Amendment to section 33(1) (e) of the Industrial Disputes Act by section
17(2) of the Payment of Gratuity Act, No. 12 of 1983.

The suggestion that the" definition of industrial dispute" could never apply
to a dispute between an employer and an ex‑employee cannot be supported.
However when the awards relate to no dispute to which the employer and
employee had been parties, there was no industrial dispute which could have
been referred by the Minister for settlement by arbitration and consequently
the objection to jurisdiction in such a case can be well founded.

A dispute in regard to a claim for "gratuity' can arise only upon the
cessation of employment (as a retiral benefit or terminal benefit). The
contention advanced on behalf of the 1st respondent Bank that the Minister has
no power to refer the present dispute for settlement by arbitration because
the dispute arose after the appellant resigned from service is not well‑
founded in the context of a dispute relating to a claim for gratuity. Hence
the reference to arbitration under section 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes
Act, by the Minister was not in excess of his powers (not _ultra vires)._

The matter in dispute referred for settlement by arbitration was whether the
non‑payment of gratuity to Mr. D. A. de Costa at a higher rate than the legal
minimum as was paid to other employees by ANZ Grindlays Bank was justified.
The decision of the Commissioner of Labour refusing gratuity at the higher
rate could not have resolved or determined the "dispute" referred to
arbitration.

**308**

Where an Industrial Dispute is referred in terms of section 4(1) of the
Indus­trial Disputes Act for settlement by arbitration, section 17(1) requires
the arbitrator to make such award as may appear to him **just and equitable.**
The appellant complained of discriminatory or unequal treatment in regard to
the payment of gratuity and the arbitrator was required to determine whether
in the circumstances the non‑payment of the gratuity claimed was
**justified.** The amendment to section 33(1) (e) of the Industrial Disputes
Act by section 17(2) of the Payment of Gratuity Act No. 12 of 1983 does not
constitute a **jurisdictional bar** to the determination of the matter in
dispute referred to the arbitrator for settlement by arbitration in terms of
section 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act.

**Cases referred to:**

1\. _The Colombo Apothecaries Co_. _Ltd. v. Wijesooriya and Others_ 70 NLR
481.

2\. _State Bank of_ _India_ _v. Sunderalingam_ 73 __ NLR 514\.

3\. _Perera_ _v. Standard Chartered Bank and Others_ (1995) 1 Sri LR 73,91.

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_S. Sivarasa P.C_. with _A. R._ _Surendran_ __ and _G. Ranawaka_ for the
Appellant.

_S.L. Gunasekera_ _with Gomin Dayasiri_ for 1st Respondent.

_K. Sripavan DSG_ for 2nd and 3rd Respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult_ _._

August 26, 1996.

**G.P.S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

The Appellant was employed by the 1st respondent (ANZ Grindlays Bank) from 1st
June 1979 (X1). He resigned from the post of Manager, Grindlays Bank with
effect from **1st July 1991** **** (X5). **** His gratuity was computed on the
basis of 1/2 a month's salary for each year of com­pleted service in terms of
section 6(2) (a) of the Payment of Gratuity Act No. 12 of 1983. The amount so
computed as gratuity was credited to the Bank account of the Appellant on
23.7.91 and the appellant was informed of that fact. The Appellant was
dissatisfied with the basis upon which the Bank had computed his gratuity and
by letter dated **6.9.91** (X10) **** addressed to the General Manager of the
Bank he set out his position ‑"......... two of the employees (sic) resigned
after my leaving were paid gratuity at 2 month's gross salary for every year

**309**

of service and after adding further 5 years to the period of service. A lady
who resigned recently with 17 years of service was paid gratuity for 22 years
at 2 months gross salary. I therefore kindly request you to pay me also on the
same basis, that is, for 17 years and one month at 2 months gross salary for
each year." It is the case for the 1st respond­ent Bank that the dispute in
regard to the payment of gratuity arose after the appellant had resigned from
service. There was further corre­spondence between the parties in regard to
the question of enhancing the amount paid as gratuity, but no finality was
reached.

On 7.5.92 the Appellant made an application to the Commissioner of Labour for
an enhanced gratuity (P4). In paragraph 7 of P4 the Appellant stated that
"employees who had tendered their resignations subsequent to that of the
complainant (Appellant) had been paid on the scheme of 2 months salary (gross)
and that the failure on the part of the employer to pay the complainant on the
existing scheme vio­lates section 10(1) of the Gratuity Act". The Commissioner
of Labour, however, refused the application made by the appellant. (P4a).

On 21.2.94 the Minister of Labour referred the dispute between the Appellant
and the Bank "for settlement by arbitration to an arbitrator" in terms of
section 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act. The dispute which was referred in
terms of section 4(1) was "whether the non‑pay­ment of a gratuity to Mr. D.A.
de Costa (Appellant) at a higher rate than the legal minimum as was paid to
other employees by Grindlays Bank is justified, and if not to what reliefs he
is entitled. "At the commencement of the inquiry before the arbitrator
objections to the jurisdiction of the arbitrator to hear and determine the
matter in dispute were raised on behalf of the 1st Respondent Bank. The
arbitrator having heard submissions of both parties, overruled the preliminary
objections and in the course of his order stated, "it seems to me that it is
necessary to be acquainted with the antecedents and other circumstances, how
the resignation of the applicant came about, to decide whether the cases cited
are on all fours with the instant case. The cases cited seems to be concerned
more with the terms of employment, whereas the instant case seems to be one
which is not concerned at all with the terms of employment but is confined to
the one principle, that there had been discrimination in the payment of
gratuity ........"

**310**

Upon the arbitrator overruling the preliminary objections, the 1st Respondent
Bank moved the Court of Appeal by way of a writ of Cer­tiorari to quash the
order made by the Minister referring the dispute for settlement by arbitration
and the order of the arbitrator overruling the preliminary objections. The
Court of Appeal quashed the order of the Minister on the ground that the order
was _ultra vires_ section 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act and also quashed
the order of the arbitrator. This appeal is against the judgment of the Court
of Appeal.

Special Leave to appeal to this court was granted on the following questions:‑

(1) Whether the Court of Appeal erred in law in holding that the reference
made by the Minister in respect of the Appellant's claim for gratuity was
_ultra vires_ because the dispute arose only after the cessation of the
Appellant's employment by reason of resignation.

(2) Whether having regard to the fact that the Commissioner of Labour refused
the Appellant's application for an enhanced gratuity in terms of section 10(1)
of the Payment of Gratuity Act, the Minister had no power to make a reference
in respect of the Appellant's claim for gratuity and/or the arbitrator had no
jurisdiction to make any order in respect of such claim;

(3) Whether in any event the Minister had power to make the reference, and the
arbitrator had jurisdiction to make any order upon that reference, in view of
the provisions of section 33(1) (e) of the Industrial Disputes Act as amended
by the Payment of Gratuity Act.

On the first question set out above, Mr. S.L. Gunasekera for the 1st
Respondent Bank stressed that the definition of the term "industrial dispute"
speaks of a dispute between "an employer" and "a workman" and that the
definition of the term "employer" and "workman" uses the verbs "employs" ****
and "works". He emphasized that the verbs used are in the present tense.
Accordingly counsel argued that the expression 'industrial dispute" as defined
in the Industrial Disputes Act must necessarily be one that arose between the
workman and his

**311**

employer while the workman was in the employment of the employer. The argument
was that it was only a dispute that arose during the subsistence of the
contract of employment that falls within the definition of the term
"industrial dispute." In other words, a dispute between an employer and
ex‑workman does not fall within the definition.

Counsel relied in support of his submission on the judgment of Tennekoon, J.
(as he then was) in the case of _The Colombo Apothecaries Co. Ltd., v.
Wijesooriya and Others._ (1) __ It is relevant to note that the view expressed
by Tennekoon J., is the view of the minority of the Court. The majority of the
judges (TS. Fernando, J., G.P.A. Silva, J. Siva Supramaniam, J., and
Samarawickrema J.,) did not share this view. Referring to section 47 (c) Siva
Supramaniam, J., observed "with great respect, I find it difficult to agree
that the provisions of this section lead to a necessary inference that a
dispute connected with the termination of service can be referred to an
Industrial Court or a Labour Tribunal for settlement only if the dispute arose
while the relation­ship of employer and workman subsisted."

Samarawickrema J., in his judgment referred to the last part of the definition
of "workman" in section 48 of the Industrial Disputes Act and the provisions
of section 2(1), 3(1), 4(1), and 4(2) and stated, "it follows that for the
purposes of proceedings that may be commenced or initiated by the Minister
under section 4(1) of the Act, a workman includes a person whose services had
been terminated."

Mr. Gunasekera also relied strongly on the judgment of Alles J., in the case
of _State Bank of India v. Sunderalingam_ (2) __ where Alles, J. stated, "I
cannot see how this definition (i.e. the term "industrial dispute") can ever
apply to any dispute or difference between an employer and an ex‑employee who
has retired from the services of his employer. Referring to this case
Amerasinghe J., in _Perera_ _vs. Standard Chartered Bank and Others,_ (3) __
made the following observation, with which I am in agreement. "In the matter
before Alles, J., a trade union had applied on behalf of sub‑Accountants who
had retired from the services of the Bank 16 months earlier for the benefits
of a salary revision awarded in ID 306 and ID 306A.The dispute in ID 306 and
ID 306A did not concern sub‑Accountants and the awards made has no reference
to them. There was as Alles J., held, no dispute to which

**312**

they had been parties before they retired. In the circumstances, ad­mittedly,
there was no "industrial dispute" which could have been referred by the
Minister for settlement by arbitration. Consequently, the objection to
jurisdiction of the arbitrator was well founded in the cir­cumstances of the
case although, with great respect, **the suggestion that the definition of
"industrial dispute" could never apply to a dispute between an employer and an
ex**- **employee cannot be supported. " **(Emphasis is mine).

The material part of the definition of the expression "industrial dispute" in
section 48 reads thus :‑ "Industrial dispute means any dispute or difference
between and employer and a workman......connected with......the termination of
services .......of any person..........."

In considering the question whether the reference made by the Minister in
terms of section 4(1) was _ultra vires_ for the reason that the dispute arose
only after the cessation of the Appellant's employment, it is of the utmost
importance and relevance to note the nature of the matter in dispute. The
claim of the Appellant was in respect of the payment of gratuity and this was
the subject matter of the dispute, which was referred for settlement by
arbitration by the Minister in terms of section 4(1). Sharvananda, J., (as he
then was) in his dissenting judgment in _The National Union of Workers v. The
Scottish Ceylon Tea Company Ltd.,_ (4) considered "the connotation of the word
gratuity as used in sections 31B (1) (b) and 33(1) (e) of the Industrial
Disputes Act. "Having carefully reviewed the decisions in India and of this
Court, the learned Judge concluded, "It is manifest that the word 'gratuity'
has thus come to mean not only retiring allowance or **retiral** **benefit**
payable on retirement but also **termination benefit** payable on termi­nation
of a long and faithful service consequent to resignation prior to retiring
age. "(at page 178). (Emphasis added) (I wish to add that the majority view
that section 31B(1) (b) postulated only "retiring gratuity" makes no
difference for present purposes). Thus it is seen that a dis­pute in regard to
a claim for "gratuity" can arise only upon the cessa­tion of employment (as a
retiral benefit or terminal benefit). Therefore it seems to me that the
contention advanced on behalf of the 1st Respondent Bank that the Minister had
no power to refer the present dispute for settlement by arbitration because
the dispute arose after

**313**

the Appellant resigned from service is not well‑founded in the context of a
dispute relating to a claim for gratuity.

I accordingly hold that the Court of Appeal was in error in its view that the
reference made by the Minister in terms of section 4(1) was in excess of his
powers.

Turning now to the second matter upon which this court granted leave to
appeal, Mr. Gunasekera contended‑

(i) the Appellant has by P4 made an application to the Commissioner of Labour
in terms of section 10(1) of the Payment of Gratuity Act No. 12 of 1983 to
determine the quantum of gratuity payable to him;

(ii) in P4 he has set out the basis upon which he claimed the enhanced
gratuity;

(iii) the Commissioner of Labour has held an inquiry and determined that the
Appellant is not entitled to the enhanced gratuity (P4a);

(iv) the Appellant did not seek to canvass the decision of the Commissioner of
Labour.

In these circumstances, Mr. Gunasekera urged, that the "dispute" was
determined by the authority empowered by law to do so and that there did not
exist after the date of P4A (i.e.2.12.92) any "industrial dispute" that could
have been referred by the Minister in terms of section 4(1) of the Industrial
Disputes Act for settlement by arbitration to an arbitrator.

With these submissions I do not agree. The Commissioner of Labour was
concerned merely with the question whether there was a collective agreement,
award, or other agreement which governed the gratuity payable to the
appellant. On the other hand, the matter in dispute referred for settlement by
arbitration was "whether the non-payment of gratuity to Mr. D.A. de Costa at a
higher rate than the legal minimum **as was paid to other employees** by ANZ
Grindlays Bank is

**314**

justified. "(Emphasis added). Thus it is clear that the issue before the
Commissioner of Labour was fundamentally different from the dispute referred
to settlement by arbitration in terms of section 4(1) of the Industrial
Disputes Act. Therefore the decision of the Commissioner of Labour could not
have resolved or determined the "dispute" referred to arbitration.

Finally, there is the third question upon which this court granted leave to
appeal. Mr. Gunasekera submitted that the amendment to section 33(1) (e) of
the Industrial Disputes Act by section 17 (2) of the Payment of Gratuity Act
No. 12 of 1983 has deprived the arbitrator of jurisdiction to award a gratuity
to the Appellant who is entitled to a gratuity in terms of section 5 of the
Payment of Gratuity Act. It was Counsel's contention that the Appellant's
right to a gratuity arose not from the Terms of Service but from the Payment
of Gratuity Act. With these submissions I do not agree. Where an Industrial
Dispute is referred in terms of section 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act
for settlement by arbitration, section 17(1) requires the arbitrator to "make
such award as may appear to him **just and equitable ". **The Appellant
complained of discriminatory or unequal treatment in regard to the payment of
gratuity and the arbitrator was required to determine whether in the
circumstances the non‑payment of the gratuity claimed was **justified.** I
hold that the amendment to section 33(1) (e) of the Industrial Disputes Act
does not constitute a **jurisdictional bar** to the determi­nation of the
matter in dispute referred to the arbitrator for settlement by arbitration in
terms of section 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act.

In the result, the appeal is allowed with costs fixed at Rs. 2500/­and the
judgment of the Court of Appeal is set aside.

**DHEERARATNE, J.** ‑ I agree.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.

_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/4.html_  

