##  Ibrahim v. The Board of Trustees of the Jamiul Harirath Jumma Mosque and
Others - SLR - 368, Vol 1 of 1996 [1995] LKSC 4; (1996) 1 Sri LR 368 (7 March
1995)

**368**

**IBRAHIM  
****v** **.  
THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE  
JAMIUL HARIRATH JUMMA MOSQUE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
G.P.S. DE SILVA, C.J.,  
KULATUNGA, J. AND  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 97 /94.  
S.C. SPL. L. A. NO. 166/94.  
C.A NO 202 /86 F  
D.C. PANADURA CASE NO. 15212 /P.  
10 JANUARY & 7 MARCH, 1995.

_Partition ‑Prescription Title‑Family settlement by Administrator's Conveyance
distributing properties‑Does Family Settlement by deed constitute an
ouster?‑Effect of Partition decree on Administrator's Conveyance._

An administrators's conveyance distributing the family property will result in
an ouster. Even though by a later Partition decree the family settlement was
ignored and title on the amicable settlement effected by Administrator's
Conveyance would have been wiped out, continued possession on the basis of
acceptance of the family settlement will result in the parties in possession
acquiring prescriptive title.

**Cases referred to:**

1\. _Ponnambalam_ _v. Vaithialingam_ (1978) 79 NLR 166

2\. _Alexander v. Jayamanne _79 (2) NLR 184

3\. _Alithamby_ _v. Bastian_ [1984]1 Sri LR 243, 246.

4\. _Wijesena_ _v. Fernando_ 78 NLR 193.

5\. _Corea_ _v. Iseris Appuhamy _ (1911) 15 NLR 65

6\. _Wickramaratne_ _v. Alpenis Perera _ [1986]1 Sri LR 190, 194.

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_N. R. M. Daluwatta P.C._ with _Samantha Abeyjeewa _for Plaintiff‑ Appellant­
Appellant.

_K. H. J. Peiris _with _U. Gunawardena_ for 3rd, 5th, 6th, 9A and 10th
Defendants -Respondents‑Respondents.

_Cur. adv_ _. vult._ __

**369**

March 23, 1995.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.**

The Plaintiff‑Appellant instituted these proceedings to partition the land
described in the schedule to the plaint and shown in plan 1155 made by Y. B.
K. Costa, Licensed Surveyor, and produced marked "x". The land actually sought
to be partitioned is Lot 10 in final partition plan 2412 of the District Court
of Panadura in case No 211 ( Plan PI, made by Lucas H. de Mel, Licensed
Surveyor).

The case proceeded to trial on several points of contest, the main point of
contest being whether the contesting Defendants‑Respondents had acquired
prescriptive title to the corpus. The District Court held in favour of the
contesting Defendants‑Respondents, and dismissed the action. The Plaintiff‑
Appellant's appeal to the Court of Appeal was also unsuccessful. Hence the
present appeal by the Plaintiff‑ Appellant to this Court.

The facts unfold in this way: Kalutantrige Haramanis Peiris Goonetilleke was
the orginal owner of the larger land, Dawatagahawatte, in extent A 4 ‑RO‑
P10,(vide Plan 2412 dated 17.4.1950 and made by the said Lucas H. de Mel,
Licensed Surveyor), of which the corpus in the instant partition action, viz,
Lot 10, in extent AI‑ R2‑ P22(vide the said plan 2412 and plan 1155 dated
11.8.78 and made by the said Y. B. K. Costa, Licensed Surveyor and marked "x")
, forms a part. He transferred the said Dawatagahawatte to his two sons,
Cornelis Peiris Goonetilleke and Johanis Peiris Goonetilleke.

Cornelis Peiris Goonetilleke died, leaving as his heirs, his widow Dona Johana
Siriwardane Hamine, and his five children‑

(i) Herman Peiris Goonetilleke,

(ii) James Peiris Goonetilleke,

(iii) Albert Peiris Goonetilleke,

(iv) Richard Peiris Goonetilleke, and

(v) Leonora Peiris Goonetilleke.

Johanis Peiris Goonetilleke died , leaving as his heirs, three chil­dren, one
of whom was Aron Peiris Goonetilleke.

370

On 25.7.1946, Dona Johana Siriwardane Hamine, the widow of Cornelis Peiris
Goonetilleke (who was the Administratrix of the estate of Cornelis), executed
Deed No.1876, an Administrators Conveyance (marked 5 D4) for the purpose of
distributing the several1 lands owned by Cornelis amongst his heirs, including
herself. All the lands which had belonged to Cornelis were divided into Six
Schedules labelled A, B, C, D, E, and F and the distribution was as follows:‑

The lands in Schedule A went to Siriwardane Hamine

The lands in Schedule B went to Herman

The lands in Schedule C went to Leonora

The lands in Schedule D went to Albert

The lands in Schedule E went to James

The lands in Schedule F went to Richard.

Where the larger land Dawatagahawatte (in extent A4‑ RO‑ P10) was concerned,
by the said Administrators' Conveyance (5D4), half of it was given to James
and the other half to Richard, so that, by virtue of 5 D4 the entirety of
Dewatagahawatte became vested exclu­sively in James and Richard in equal
shares. This however, was in the teeth of the transfer of the said
Dawatagahawatte by Kalutantrige Haramains Peiris Goonatilleke to his two sons
Cornelis and Johanis.

A significant point here is that all the heirs of Cornelis signed the
Administraters Conveyance 5 D4, whereby each accepted what was given to him
and relinquished all rights to the rest.

Learned Counsel for the Respondents submitted that the Adminis­trator's
Conveyance (5D4) constituted a family settlements of Cornelis' lands and that
such settlement finally put an end to the co‑ownership of those lands by his
heirs. He cites the case of _Ponnambalam_ _v. Vaithialingam_ (1) __ in
support. He submits further, that a family settlement would amount to an
ouster even if not reduced to the form of an actual conveyance and cites
_Alexander v. Jayamanne_ (2) __ in support. He most strongly urges that,
inasmuch as the other children of Cornelis viz., Herman, Leonora and Albert
have in fact signed the Administrators' Conveyance (5D4), it " points
unequivocally to a voluntary abandonment which is stronger than ouster, and
brings to an end co‑ownership"; _Alithamby_ _v. Bastian._ (3) __

**371**

Things went awry however, when after the execution of the Administrator's
Conveyance (5D4), Aron Peiris Goonetilleke the son and heir of Cornelis'
brother, Johanis ( and in one way an heir of Cornelis) filed A partition
action , D. C Panadura Case No 211, to partition the ancestral land,
Dawatagahawatta, as he found his cousins enjoying it exclusively. This
partition case however, proceeded to a conclusion without any reference to the
Administrator's Conveyance (5D4) and wound up with a final decree dated
8.5.1951 (P2), allotting, in common, Lot 10, (which was a portion of
Dewatagahawatte) not only to James and Richard (who already owned and
possessed it) but also to Herman, Leonora and Albert who had already
relinquished all rights to it. It is common ground that the said Lot 10
constitutes the corpus of the present partition action, and was, after the
said partition decree (P2), owned in common by all five children of Cornelis
viz. the said Herman, Leonora, Albert, James and Richard.

The dispute in the instant case lies in the fact that whilst the Appellant
claims a share of the corpus by virtue of purchases made from the heirs of
Herman, Leonora and Albert, basing their title on partition decree (P2), the
Respondents claim title to the same corpus (Lot 10) from James and Richard,
basing their title on acquisitive prescription of Lot 10 by the said James and
Richard to the total exclusion of Herman, Leonora and Albert, after the
partition decree (P2).

The Appellant contends that rights, if any, acquired by James and Richard in
terms of the Administrator's Conveyance (5D4) were wiped out by the partition
decree in D. C Panadura Case No 211 (P2), and that the new title created in
the names of Herman, Leonora and Albert was capable of transferring ownership
to him.

The Respondents' position on the other hand, was that even though they concede
that the said final decree (P2) conferred title upon Herman, Leonora and
Albert, the latter never exercised rights of ownership in view of the family
settlement entered into by the Administrator's Con­veyance (5D4) and that
therefore even after the final partition decree (P2) was entered, James and
Richard continued to possess the said Lot 10, exclusively and adversely to all
others without recognising the rights of Herman, Leonora and Albert, and that
they (i.e James and Richard) thereby acquired prescriptive title to the said
Lot 10 subsequent to the partition decree(P2).

**372**

At this point, it may be necessary to consider the effect of the subsequent
partition decree (P2) on the earlier Administrator's Con­veyance (5D4). It was
conceded by learned Counsel for the Respond­ent that 5D4 was rendered void by
the operation of section 17 of the Partition Ordinance (which was the
operative law at the relevant time), as 5D4 was not written subject to the
partition action, D.C. Panadura No 211. It was also conceded that this
position was correct; but only to the extent of the disposition with regard to
Dawatagahawatte, and not as regards the disposition with regard to the other
lands in 5D4, which latter remained untouched by the partition decree (P2).
Thus, since the partition case 211 only related to Dewatagahawatte, Jams and
Richard lost their sole title to Dewatagahawatte which title they had
originally got from the Administrator's Conveyance 5D4.

It is however correct to say that even though the rights acquired by James and
Richard by virtue of 5D4 were wiped out by the partition decree (P2), the said
James and Richard were not precluded in law from acquiring fresh title,
subsequent to the partition decree (P2), by acquisitive prescription.

First, it seems to me, in this connection, that in the minds of Cornelis'
children, the family settlement of their father's lands by 5D4 was the
operative writing which was sacrosanct where they were con­cerned. The
children were united and friendly at all times, and there is no reason to
think that any of them would have wanted to violate the terms of 5D4; least of
all, for three of them, Herman, Leonora and Albert to deprive their brothers,
James and Richard of what they re­ceived under 5D4 and what Herman, Leonora
and Albert in fact aban­doned under 5D4.Therefore, to my mind, the reasonable
presumption in the circumstances would be that, in terms of the family
settlement, (5D4), James and Richard continued to physically possess the
_corpus_ as their own, to the total exclusion of Herman, Leonora and Albert.
It is also reasonable to presume that, inasmuch as Herman, Leonora and Albert
had relinquished and abandoned their rights to the corpus, having got in
exchange, rights in other lands, they were no longer interested in any way in
the corpus.

It must not be forgotten that the Partition Action 211 was not filed by any
member of Cornelis' family since their land matters were set‑

**373**

tled by 5D4. That action was filed by their cousin, Aron who wanted to
partition Dewatagahawatte because he found that James and Richard were
enjoying it exclusively. Not knowing about the family settlement 5D4, Aron
named all the five children of Cornelis as defendants to the Partition Case
211.

At the trial in the District Court, various suggestions were made by the
Appellant. One was that in addition to James and Richard, the others, viz.,
Herman, Leonora and Albert also physically possessed Lot 10. However, the
Learned District Judge after carefully examining the evidence on the point
rejected this contention.

The Appellant thereafter contended that James, by himself, physically
possessed Lot10, but that such possession was not solely on his own behalf,
but on behalf of Herman, Leonora, Albert and Richard as well. The Respondents
deny this and point out that Richard was a mental patient whose person and
property were both looked after by James, and that the exclusive possession by
James was in fact, on behalf of himself and his incapacitated brother Richard
only, and never on behalf of Herman, Leonora and Albert. The Respondents add
that it is common ground that there was amity and total friendliness amongst
the family members, and that, as the Learned District Judge observed, " It is
unimaginable that having got their share in the estate, Herman, Albert and
Leonora would also try to possess a share in a land given to James and
Richard".

The Appellant attemps to muster support for his contention that James
physically possessed Lot 10, after the partition decree (P2) for and on behalf
of himself and his sister and brothers as aforesaid, by drawing attention to
what happened at a subsequent stage in the partition action No.211, where
James and Richard had to eject some squatters from the _corpus_ , and for this
purpose joined Herman, Leonora and Albert. The Appellant says that this showed
common possession.

The Respondents, _contra_ , state as follows:‑ The partition action D. C.
Panadura No.211 was filed by Aron Peiris Goonetilleke. There is no evidence of
the participation of Herman, Leonora and Albert in the partition case No.211
up to the stage of entering final decree, presumably because, in terms of the
family settlement (5D4), they had no

**374**

claim to the _corpus._ Therefore, it was only James and Richard (who had been
given a half share each of Dawatagahawatte by (5D4) who filed their proxies
and statements of claim. It was after final decree (P2) was entered that the
question of ejectment of squatters from Lot 10 arose. Since Lot 10 was
allotted by P2 not only to James and Richard, but also to Herman, Leonora and
Albert, upon the Court so directing, the same Proctor who was appearing for
James and Richard, filed the proxies of Herman, Leonora and Albert, and
thereupon writ was allowed. The Respondents therefore submit that, far from
what the Appellant suggests, Herman, Leonora and Albert came into the case not
for the purpose of setting up a claim, in which case they ought to have come
in much earlier and filed their statements of claim but only to assist their
brothers James and Richard to overcome the legal impediment to the issue of
writ, since it was necessary that all the five co‑owners of Lot 10, as
declared by the final decree P2, should join in asking for writ.

Much was made in this connection by the Appellant, of 5D7 which is the Journal
Entry No:377 dated 7.1.52 which stated as follows:‑

"Writ of possession returned with report that possession of Lot 10 was
delivered to the 2nd Defendant on behalf of 1,3,4 and 5 Defendants."

James and Richard were the 2nd and 4th Defendants respectively, while Herman,
Albert and Leonora were the 1st, 3rd and 5th Defendants respectively.

While the Appellant insisted that this Journal Entry showed joint possession,
the Respondents submitted that if this item of evidence, is viewed from its
proper perspective, it would be apparent that both the legal necessity to file
the proxies of Herman, Leonora and Albert, and the necessity for the Journal
Entry (5D7) to state that possession was handed over on behalf of all stemmed
from the fact that the final decree (P2) created title in all five. The
Respondents stress that until acquisitive prescriptive title is created at a
future date, the final decree (P2) would be paramount and that therefore
whether they liked it or not, if James and Richard wanted the squatters
ejected from Lot 10, there was no alternative for them, but to conform to the
legal proce

**375**

dure necessary for the purpose. Learned Counsel for the Respondents cited a
_dictum_ by Sharvananda, J. in _Wijesena_ _v. Fernando_ (4) _  _to the effect
that it was necessary for a Court at times to take a "realistic" rather than a
"legalistic" view of facts, and submitted that the real question was, not
whether an act of a "legalistic" nature was done to conform to the final
decree (P2), but whether, in actual fact James accepted delivery of possession
on behalf of all, not as a mere formal­ity, but with intent to benefit Herman,
Leonora and Albert as well. The question Learned Counsel for the Respondents
further poses is, whether Herman, Leonora and Albert asserted title on their
own behalf and adversely to James and Richard so as to negative their earlier
aban­donment of their rights under the family settlement (5D4). The answer to
this question seems to be in the negative.

I have considered the above questions carefully and am compelled to the view,
having taken into account all the material set out above, that James possessed
Lot 10 on behalf of his incapacitated brother Richard and himself only, and
further, that he did so adversely to Herman, Leonora and Albert. I am also of
the view that in the circumstances of this case it cannot be said that James
accepted delivery of posses­sion on behalf of Herman, Leonora and Albert, as
set out in the Journal Entry (5D7), which entry was, I feel, an act of a
"legalistic" nature done in order to conform to the final decree (P2).

As may be seen then the main question that arises for decision, namely whether
the possession of Lot 10 by James and Richard was adverse to the other three
members of the family, viz., Herman, Leonora and Albert, must be answered in
the affirmative.

A further question arises as to whether ouster is necessary. This question
must be looked at in the context of this case having regard to the peculiar
facts of this case.

In the instant case, James and Richard originally entered into exclusive
possession of the larger land, Dawatagahawatte by virtue of the Administrative
Conveyance (5D4), the very purpose of which was to settle the lands amongst
the family members and to put an end to co‑ownership. As set out above, in
terms of 5D4, James and Richard were allotted Dawatagahawatte and the other
three children, viz, Herman,

**376**

Leonora and Albert relinquished and abandoned their rights to
Dawatatagahawatte. Therefore James and Richard entered upon the possession of
Dewatagahawatte as sole owners. As set out above, the partition decree in case
No.211 (P2) reduced their holding to Lot 10 only, but nevertheless James and
Richard continued to possess even the said Lot 10 as sole owners; the
Conveyance 5D4 being still valid and sacrosanct in the minds of the family
members who signed it. In these circumstances, it appears that there was, in
effect, an ouster of Herman, Leonora and Albert. Thus the entirety of the
co‑owned property after P2, was Lot 10, and it is clear that James and
Richard, having entered into exclusive possession thereof much earlier,
continued in possession of Lot 10 in the belief that they were the sole
owners, inasmuch as the other three had already relinquished and abandoned
their rights to it in writing and continued to be of the same mind even after
the partition decree, (P2).

In any event, even if ouster is considered a necessary ingredient in terms of
_Corea_ _v. Iseris Appuhamy_ ,(5) the Court of Appeal in _Wickramaratne_ _v.
Alpenis Perera_ (6) held that, "if in fact there was evidence that the
separation of the _corpus_ was with the prior approval of all the co‑owners,
then that fact may be sufficient evidence of ouster."

In the instant case, the "separation" occurred on 25.7.1946 after 5D4, and as
has been seen, such "separation" continued unbroken despite the partition
decree (P2). In terms of the above _dictum_ , it seems that, that fact alone
would amount to sufficient evidence of ouster. It must of course, be mentioned
that the Appellant has failed to present any convincing evidence to the
contrary.

Another fact relevant to this issue is that whereas neither Herman, Leanora
nor Albert, although declared to be co‑owners by P2, ever dealt with any
rights to the _corpus_ during their lifetime, it is in evidence that both
James and Richard executed deeds on the basis that they were the sole owners
of the corpus. Eg. Deed P9 (page 576) which was produced by the Appellant
himself was one of the earliest deeds written by James after partition decree
(P2) was entered. Thus in 1952 itself, James has dealt with the land as owner.
Also Deed 5D1 (page 630) was written in 1964 by Richard, also after the
partition decree (P2). Here too, Richard has dealt with the land as owner.
(This deed

**377**

was attacked as it was executed at the Mental Hospital.) Thereafter, on
28.8.1967, the Deed 2D1 (page 485) was executed by James, also as owner.

Another significant fact is that it was only on 15.12.1976 that the Appellant
made his first purchase from the heirs of the other three "co-owners". ( _viz_
:, Herman, Leonora and Albert) i.e., full quarter of a century after the
entering of the partition decree P2 on 8.5.1951. By that time, a successor in
title to James had, as shown by plan 5D8 of 8.9.1968, even gone into divided
possession of an extent of 2 Roods on the South by erecting a barbed‑wire
fence.

Thus, it appears that James Peiris Goonetilleke and his brother, Richard
Peiris Goonetilleke had been in exclusive possession of the _corpus_ from the
date of delivery of possession of the said Lot 10 on 7.1.1952, after partition
decree (P2), and that they had held the _corpus_ adversely to the other three
members of the family, _viz_., Herman, Leonora and Albert, and had thereby
acquired prescriptive title to the said Lot 10.

In the circumstances, I can see no basis for interfering with the concurrent
findings in favour of the Respondents.

I hold accordingly, and dismiss this appeal with costs.

**G.P.S. DE SILVA, C.J.** ‑ I agree.

**KULATUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.

**_Appeal dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/4.html_  

