##  Tea Small Factories Ltd. v. Weragoda and Another - SLR - 353, Vol 3 of
1994 [1994] LKSC 4; (1994) 3 Sri LR 353 (2 May 1994)

**353**

**  
TEA SMALL FACTORIES LTD.  **

**V.**

**WERAGODA AND ANOTHER**

  
SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C. J.

KULATUNGA, J AND

RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 10/93

H. C. KURUNEGALA, APPEAL NO. 75/92

L. T. NO. 23/KU/3107

DECEMBER 16, 1993 AND MARCH 07, 1994



_Industrial Dispute - Jurisdiction \- Transfer of case filed in Labour
Tribunal - Appeal - Conversion of Public Corporations or Government Owned
Business Undertakings into Public Companies Act, No. 23 of 1987, ss. 2(2),
3(2) (e) - Industrial Disputes Act, ss. 31 D(3), 31 DD, 32 D (3) - Validity of
proxy - Change of name - Time bar - Rules 7 and 28 of the Supreme Court Rules
1990._

_ _

The appellant was a public company incorporated by an order made under section
2 of the Conversion of Public Corporations or Government owned Business
Undertakings into Public Companies Act. No. 23 of 1987 to take over the
functions of the Factories Division of the Tea Small Holdings Development
Authority (TSHDA).



On 29.01.80 the 1st respondent workman attached to the Factories Division of
the TSHDA applied to the Labour Tribunal, Hatton against the termination of
his employment naming as respondents the State Plantations Corporation and the
TSHDA. When the case was pending in the L.T. Hatton an order was made under
section 2 of Act No. 23 of 1987 incorporating a public company in the name of
Tea Small Factories Limited to take over the functions of the Factories
Division of TSHDA.



Under s. 3(2) (e) of the Act, all actions and proceedings instituted by or
against the Corporation and pending on the day immediately preceding the
relevant date (i.e. date of publication of the order under s. 2(2) and
specified in the order made under s. 2(2)) shall be deemed to be actions and
proceedings instituted by or against the company. In view of this provision
Tea Small Factories Limited might have been either substituted or added as a
party in the proceedings before the Tribunal, but this was not done and the
case proceeded as between the original parties.



During the hearing the President of the Labour Tribunal was transferred to
Kurunegala whereupon the parties consented to the said President hearing the
application at Kurunegala. At the conclusion the Kurunegala L.T. President

**354**



ordered reinstatement with back wages. The TSHDA appeal to the High Court of
Kurunegala and the appeal was dismissed on the ground of jurisdiction. The Tea
Small Factories Ltd. then appealed to the Supreme Court.

.

The appeal was resisted on four grounds:



1\. Appeal was filed out of time under Rule 7 of the Supreme Court Rules 1990.



2\. The proxy filed on behalf of the appellant was invalid.



3\. The Tea Small Factories Ltd. could not have appealed in its name to the
exclusion of the TSHDA which was the party on record before the High Court.  
  
4\. The decision of the High Court that it has no jurisdiction to entertain
the appeal to that Court is justified in the light of the pro-visions of s.
32D(3) of the Industrial Disputes Act.

**  
Held:**

  
(1) Rule 7 of the Supreme Court Rules 1990 stipulating six weeks applies to
applications for special leave to appeal from a judgment of the Court of
Appeal. Appeals from the High Court to the Supreme Court (specially provided
by s. 31 DD of the Industrial Disputes Act No. 32 of 1990) are governed by
Rule 28. However neither s. 31 DD nor Rule 28 provides for the period within
which an aggrieved party may appeal to the Supreme Court. A week according to
content may be a calendar week beginning on Sunday and ending on Saturday or
any period of seven days. The first day of the period will be excluded and
consequently the last day will be included. The prescribed fee was tendered
with the appeal on the last day but as it was 4.00 p.m. it was accepted on the
following day. The appeal was therefore within time and the explanation for
the delay in the payment of the prescribed fee was acceptable. The appeal was
not time barred.



(2) The proxy has been signed by the Directors of the Tea Small Holders
Factories Ltd. but the name of the appellant company was Tea Small Factories
Ltd. But the name of the company was later amended to read as "Tea Small
Holders Factories Ltd. The defect in the proxy stands rectified by the
amendment of the name of the appellant.



(3) The 1st respondent's application to the Labour Tribunal has been specified
in the Order incorporating the appellant company and under s. 3(2) (e) of Act
No. 23 of 1987 it is a proceeding deemed to be instituted against the
appellant. Further the point raised is a mere technicality.



(4) In terms of s. 31 D(3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, the High Court
which is competent to hear the appeal is the High Court for the Province
within which the

**355**



tribunal which made the impugned order is situated. Hence the High Court,
Kurunegala had jurisdiction to hear the appeal.



**Cases referred to:**

_ _

1 _. Shah v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court,_ Coimbatore AIR 1978 SC 12,16.

_  
_ 2 _. Kailayar v Kandiah_ 59 NLR 117.

_  
_ 3 _. Udeshi v. Mather_ (1988) 1 Sri LR 12.

_  
_ 4 _. The State Timber Corporation v. Fernando_ Application No. 225/92 -
Supreme Court Minutes of 22.03.1993.

_  
_ 5 _. Kumarasinghe v. State Development & Construction Corporation _S.C.
Appeal No. 55/93 - Supreme Court Minutes of 22.10.93. __



**APPEAL** from judgment of the High Court of Kurunegala.

_ _

_D. S. Wijesinghe P.C. with Ms. D. Dharmadasa_ for appellant.

_ _

_R. K. W. Goonesekera with L. C. M. Swamadhipathy_ for 1st respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._



  
May 02, 1994.  


**KULATUNGA, J.**



The appellant, a public company incorporated by an order made under s. 2 of
the Conversion of Public Corporations or Government Owned Business
Undertakings into Public Companies Act, No. 23 of 1987 to take over the
functions of the Factories Division of the Tea Small Holdings Development
Authority appeals from the judgment of the High Court of Karunegala dismissing
an appeal against an order of the Labour Tribunal Kurunegala made to that
Court by the said Authority. The appeal was dismissed on the ground that since
the application of the 1st respondent (workman) was originally made to the
Labour Tribunal, Hatton, in the Central Province, the Provincial High Court
which had the jurisdiction to entertain the said appeal (in terms of s. 31 D
(3) of 1990) is the Provincial High Court of the Central Province; and the
Provincial High Court of the North Western Province has no jurisdiction to
entertain it. The facts are as follows:



On 29.10.90 the 1st respondent who was a workman attached to the Factories
Division of the Tea Small Holdings Development Authority made an application
to the Labour Tribunal, Hatton against

**356**



the termination of his employment. The respondents to the said application are
the State Plantations Corporation and the Tea Small Holdings Development
Authority. The case was numbered LT Hatton 10/7839/90 after which the inquiry
into the application commenced. During the pendancy of the inquiry an order
was published in Gazette No. 686 dated 25.10.91 under S. 2 of Act No. 23 of
1987 incorporating a public company in the name of "Tea Small Factories
Limited" to take over the functions of the Factories Division of the TSHDA.



Under s. 3(2) (e) of the Act, all actions and proceedings instituted by or
against the Corporation and pending on the day immediately preceding the
relevant date (i.e. the date of publication of the order under s. 2(2), and
specified in the order made under s. 2(2) shall be deemed to be actions and
proceedings instituted by or against the company. In view of this provision
Tea Small Factories Limited might have been either substituted or added as a
party in the proceedings before the Tribunal, but this was not done and the
case proceeded as between the original parties. During the hearing the
President of the Labour Tribunal was transferred to Kurunegala whereupon the
parties consented to the said President hearing the application at Kurunegala.
Thereafter, the case was given the abovementioned Kurunegala number; and at
the conclusion of the hearing the Labour Tribunal ordered the reinstatement of
the 1st respondent with back wages.



The appeal to the High Court from the said order of the Labour Tribunal was
preferred by the party on record, namely the Tea Small Holdings Development
Authority which appeal was dismissed by the High Court by its judgment dated
13.08.92. The appeal to this Court from that judgment was made by the "Tea
Small Factories Ltd." This appeal was resisted before us on the following
grounds:



1\. The petition of appeal has been filed out of time.



2\. The proxy filed on behalf of the appellant is invalid.



3\. The Tea Small Factories Ltd. could not have appealed in its name to the
exclusion of the Tea Small Holdings Authority who was the party on record
before the High Court.

**357**



4\. The decision of the High Court that it has no jurisdiction to entertain
the appeal to that Court is justified in the light of the provisions of s.32D
(3) of the Industrial Disputes Act.



On the objection regarding the time bar, learned Counsel for the 1st
respondent relying on Rule 7 of the Supreme Court Rules 1990 submitted that
the application for special leave to appeal in this case was filed on
24.09.92, after the lapse of the period prescribed by the said rule, namely
six weeks of the judgment in respect of which special leave to appeal was
sought. He argued that "six weeks" not being the equivalent of 42 days, the
date of the judgment should be included in computing time; hence the last
appealable date was 23.09.92. Counsel submitted that in any event the
appellant had failed to pay the requisite fee on 24.09.92 which fee was paid
only on 25.08.92 and as such no valid appeal has been filed even if the last
appealable date is 24.09.92.



In reply, learned Counsel for the appellant submitted that Rule 7 relied upon
by the respondent applies to applications for special leave to appeal from a
judgment of the Court of Appeal; that the judgment which is the subject of
this appeal is a judgment of the High Court; and that such appeals to this
Court (specially provided by s.31 DD of the Industrial Disputes Act No. 32 of
1990) are governed by Rule 28. However, neither the said s.31 DD nor rule 28
provides for the period within which an aggrieved party may appeal to this
Court. Counsel argued that in any event a 'week' means "the cycle of seven
days" as was held in Shah v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court Coimbatore (1).
According to Strouds Judicial Dictionary (Third Edt.) it is stated that (i)
"though a week usually means any consecutive seven days, it will sometimes be
interpreted to mean the ordinary notion of a week reckoning from Sunday to
Sunday and (2) probably, a week usually means **seven clear days** ". Counsel
also cited the decision in Kailayar v. Kandiah (2) where a consent decree
awarded certain rights to the plaintiff if he deposited a sum of money "within
a period of four weeks from today" it was held that the date of the order has
to be excluded in computing the last date on which payment could be made.

  
Maxwell (The Interpretation of Statutes) 12th Ed. p. 309 states -

**358**



"A 'week' may according to context, be a calendar week beginning on Sunday and
ending on Saturday or **any period of seven days.**  


Where a statutory period runs 'from' a named date 'to' another, or the statute
prescribes some period of days of weeks or months or years within which some
act has to be done, although the computation of the period must in every case
depend on the intention of Parliament as gathered from the statute, generally
the first day of the period will be excluded from the reckoning, and
consequently the last day will be included".



As regards the delay in paying the prescribed fee the appellant's position (as
set out in his written submissions) is that the petition of appeal was filed
at about 4.00 p.m. on 23.09.92. Whilst the Registry of this Court accepted the
petition, an officer told the Registered Attorney for the appellant that the
fee could not be accepted at that time and that it should be paid on the
following day; as such the appellant should not be penalised for "delay" in
the payment of the fee.



I accept the above submissions made on behalf of the appellant (both as
regards the time of appeal and the explanation for the delay in the payment of
the fee) and hold that this appeal is not time barred.



The validity of the appellant's proxy has been questioned for the reason that
it has been signed by the Directors of the "Tea Small Holders Factories Ltd."
whereas the name of the appellant company is "Tea Small Factories Ltd.". The
appellant's explanation of this discrepancy is that all along, the intention
was to name the new company "Tea Small Holders Factories Ltd." and the seal of
the company had been made accordingly. However, by mistake the company was
registered in the name of "Tea Small Factories Ltd.". But the name has since
been amended to read as "Tea Small Holders Factories Ltd." by a correction
published in Gazette No. 734/18 dated 01.10.92. Counsel for the appellant
submitted that the

**359**



registered Attorney always had the authority to act on behalf of the appellant
and the defect in the proxy, if any, stands rectified by the aforesaid
amendment of the name of the appellant. He cited Udeshi v. Mather (3) where it
was held:



"A defective proxy can be rectified and the acts done thereon ratified by the
principal where the defects are curable. The question is whether the Proctor
had in fact the authority of his client to do what was done on his behalf
although in pursuance of a defective appointment. If in fact he had his
client's authority to do so, then the defect is one which in the absence of a
positive legal bar, could be cured".



I am in agreement with these submissions and accordingly reject the objection
based on the alleged defect of the proxy.  


In support of the third objection to the appeal, Counsel for the 1st
respondent submitted that the correct procedure for appeal was that the Tea
Small Holdings Development Authority (party on record) should have lodged the
appeal and thereafter the present appellant ought to have moved to be added as
a party; and that it was not competent for the appellant to have filed this
appeal leaving out the original party on record. Counsel for the appellant
submitted that the 1st respondent's application to the Labour Tribunal has
been specified in the Order incorporating the appellant company and under
s.3(2) (e) of Act No. 23 of 1987 it is a proceeding deemed to be instituted
against the appellant. As such the failure to follow the procedure recommended
by Counsel for the respondent does not invalidate the appeal. I am in
agreement with this submission. In my view the point raised by Counsel for the
respondent is a mere technicality. Accordingly, I reject the third objection
raised against this appeal.



I am thus left with the question of the jurisdiction of the Provincial High
Court of the North Western Province to entertain the appeal made to that
Court. In this respect, I confirm the view this Court has taken in The State
Timber Corporation v. Fernando (4) and Kumarasinghe v. State Development &
Construction Corporation (5) that the opinion that the aggrieved party has no
right to appeal to



**360**



another High Court but the High Court of the Province within which the
tribunal to which the application was originally made is wrong. In terms of s.
31(D) (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, the High Court which is competent to
hear the appeal is the High Court for the Province within which the tribunal
which made the impugned order is situated. In the instant case, though the
application was originally made to the Labour Tribunal, Hatton, it was
transferred to the Labour Tribunal, Kurunegala, given a Kurunegala number and
decided there. I hold that the High Court, Kurunegala has the jurisdiction to
hear and determine the order made in such proceedings.



For the foregoing reasons, I allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the
High Court and direct the High Court to hear and determine the appeal against
the order of the Labour Tribunal on merits. For the avoidance of doubt, I
direct that the appellant would be competent to pursue the said appeal, as
appellant. The respondent is directed to pay the appellant a sum of Rs. 750%
as costs.

** **

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree.

** **

**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.



_Appeal allowed.  _

_  
Case sent back to High Court, Kurunegala for decision on merits._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/4.html_  

