##  Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam and Others - SLR - 355, Vol 2 of 1993 [1992]
LKSC 4; (1993) 2 Sri LR 355 (25 November 1992)

355

GUNARATNE **  
v.  
THAMBINAYAGAM AND OTHERS **

SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C. J.,  
KULATUNGA, J. AND  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. SPL APPL. NO. 14/92  
H.C. COLOMBO (RA) NO. 68/91 M.C.  
MOUNT LAVINIA NO. 69279  
(WITH S.C. APPEAL NO. 21/92)  
OCTOBER 12 & 13, 1992.

_     Appeal - Supreme Court Jurisdiction-Judgment of High Court of a Province
Exercising Revisionary Jurisdiction - Constitution - Article 154 P (3) (b) -
Act No. 19 of 1990. _

The petitioner in application No. 14/92 and the appellant in Appeal No. 21/92
each sought to canvass by way of direct appeal to the Supreme Court a judgment
of the High Court of Western Province made in the exercise of its revisionary
jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154 (3) (b) of the Constitution. For this
purpose they invoked the provisions of S. 9 of the High Court of the Provinces
(Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 which provides for a direct appeal to
the Supreme Court from any final or interlocutory order, judgment, decree or
sentence of a High Court established by Article 154 p of the Constitution in
the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154 (3) (b)
or S. 3 of the Act or any other law.

**Held** :

(1) The right of appeal is a statutory right and must be expressly created and
granted by statute.

(2) S. 9 of Act No. 19 of 1990 does not give a right of appeal to the Supreme
Court from an order of the High Court in the exercise of its revisionary
jurisdiction.

356

**Cases referred to** :

_1\. In Re the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution (1987) 2 Sri LR 310,
323._  
_  
2\. Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohamed 68 NLR 36, 38._  
_  
3\. Somawathie v. Madawela (1983) 2 Sri LR 15, 26._  
_  
4\. Attorney - General v. Podisingho 51 NLR 385, 388._  
_  
5\. Thameena v Koch 72 NLR 192._  
_  
6\. S. L. B. C. v. de Silva (1981) 2 Sri LR 228 (CA)._  
_  
7\. Nadarajah v. Tilagaratnam (1986) 3 CALR 303 (CA)._  
_  
8\. Bakmeewewa v. Raja (1989) 1 Sri LR 231 (SC)._  
_  
9\. Martin v. Wijewardena (1989) 2 Sri LR 250._  
_  
10.Gamhewa v. Maggie Nona (1989) 2 Sri LR 250._  
_  
11\. Mudiyanse v. Bandara SC Appeal 8/89 S.C. mins of 15.03.91._

  
_Preliminary objection to entertainment of appeal._  
_  
W. Dayaratne with Sarathchandra Liyanage for 3rd respondent - respondent -
petitioner._  
_  
S. Mahenthiran with Sampathy Welgampola for the 1st respondent - petitioner \-
respondent._  
_  
Other respondents absent and unrepresented._

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 25, 1992.  
**KULATUNGA, J.**

In this application and in SC Appeal No. 21/92, it is sought to canvass by way
of appeal a judgment of the High Court of Western Province made in the
exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154 P (3) (b)
of the Constitution. A preliminary objection was taken in each of these cases
that there is no right of appeal to this Court from such judgment as the
direct appeal provided to this Court by S. 9 of the High Court of the
Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990 is limited to any order,
judgment, decree or sentence of a High. Court of a Province made in the
exercise of its appellate Jurisdiction and hence this Court has no
jurisdiction to grant leave to appeal in this application or to hear and
determine the appeal in SC Appeal No. 21/92. Of consent, both these cases were
listed together as they involve the same point which can be disposed of by a
single judgment. At the hearing, learned Counsel for the parties in each case
made submissions and subsequently tendered written submissions as directed by
us.

357

In each of these cases a dispute relating to land had been referred to a
Magistrate (exercising the powers of the Primary Court) in terms of S. 66 (1)
(b) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979. After due inquiry, the
Magistrate made his determination, the object of which is to maintain the
status quo until final adjudication of the rights in a civil suit. S. 74 (2)
of the Act provides that an appeal shall not lie against such determination.
Prior to the 13th Amendment to the Constitution, a party aggrieved with such a
determination used to apply to the Court of Appeal to have it set aside by way
of revision in the exercise of the power of that Court under Article 138 of
the Constitution read with Article 145. S. 5 of the High Court of the
Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990 read with Article 145 P (3)
(b) of the Constitution (enacted by the 13th Amendment) entitled him to file
such application in the High Court of the Province. The jurisdiction of the
Nigh Court in the matter is concurrent. in Re the Thirteenth Amendment to the
Constitution . In the result, he may file his application in the Court of
Appeal or in the High Court.

Article 154 P establishes a High Court for each Province. Article 154 P (3)
(b) states

" Every such High Court shall - notwithstanding anything in Article 138 and
subject to any law, exercise, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in
respect of convictions, sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrates
Courts and Primary Courts within the Province "

Article 154 P (6) provides

" Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law, any person
aggrieved by a final order, judgment or sentence of any such Court, in the
exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3) (b)................ may
appeal to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article 138 "

The Court of Appeal (Procedure for appeals from High Courts established by
Article 154 P of the Constitution) Rules, 1988 made by the Supreme Court were
published in Gazette (Extraordinary) No. 549/6 of 13.03.89. The said Rules
provide the procedure to be followed in making appeals to the Court of Appeal,
inter alia, from orders made by a High Court in the exercise of its appellate
or revisionary jurisdiction under Article 154 P (3) (b).

358

This was followed by Act No. 19 of 1990 which by S. 4 thereof gave a person
the right of invoking the appellate jurisdiction of the High Court established
by Article 154 P and provided the procedure, inter alia, for making appeals to
that Court and for invoking its revisionary jurisdiction under Article 154 P
(3) (b):

S. 12 of Act No. 19 of 1990 makes provision for resolving some of the
anomalies arising by reason of the provisions of Article 154P which vested new
jurisdictions in the High Court, but concurrently with the existing
jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in the same sphere. Thus, where an appeal
or an application in respect of the same matter is filed in the Court of
Appeal and in the High Court and the hearing of such application by the High
Court has not commenced, the Court of Appeal may proceed to hear and determine
such appeal or application or where it considers it expedient to do so, direct
such High Court to hear and determine such appeal or application. Provided,
however, where an appeal or application which is within the jurisdiction of a
High Court established by Article 154 P of the Constitution is filed in the
Court of Appeal, the Court of Appeal may if it considers it expedient to do
so, order that such appeal or application be transferred to such High Court
and such High Court shall hear and determine such appeal or application.

S. 9 of the Act (with the marginal note " Appeals to Supreme Court from High
Court in certain cases ") provides for a direct appeal to the Supreme Court
from any final or interlocutory order, judgment, decree or sentence of a High
Court established by Article 154 P of the Constitution in the exercise of the
appellate jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154 P (3) (b) or S. 3 of the
Act or any other law. S. 10 provides that the Supreme Court shall be the final
Court of Appeal over the High Court exercising such appellate jurisdiction and
further provides that the new jurisdiction vested in the Supreme Court shall
be sole and exclusive.

The learned Counsel for the petitioner and the appellant in SC Appeal No.
21/92 submitted that particularly in the background of legislative provision
existing prior to the 13th Amendment, (viz. The Courts Ordinance, The
Administration of Justice Law, Article 138 of the Constitution and the
relevant statutes on Civil and Criminal Procedure) the expression " appellate
jurisdiction " (as opposed to " original jurisdiction ") would ordinarily
include the power to review decisions by way of appeal, revision or
restitution in integrum; that Article 154 P (3) (b) enacted by the 13th
Amendment vested "

359

appellate jurisdiction " in the High Court limited to appeal and revision of
the decisions of the Magistrates Courts and Primary Courts ; that S. 3 of Act
No. 19 of 1990 extended the exercise of such jurisdiction to orders made by
Labour Tribunals and orders made under Sections 5 and -9 of the Agrarian
Services Act No. 58 of 1979 ; and that in the context, the expression "
appellate jurisdiction in S. 9 of the Act should not be limited to an appeal
made 'eo nomine' but -should be interpreted to include the power of review by
way of revision.

Learned Counsel for the respondents, and particularly Mr. Mahenthiran in this
application argued : .

(a) that whilst " appellate jurisdiction " would conceptually include appeal
and revision, yet the power of revision is distinct from appellate
jurisdiction. He cited the dicta of Sansoni C.J. who delivered the majority
decision of the Divisional Bench in Mariam _Beebee v. Seyed Mohamed_ (2).

" The power of revision is an extraordinary power which is quite independent
of and distinct from the appellate jurisdiction of the Court. Its object is
the due administration of justice and the correction of errors, sometimes
committed by this Court itself, in order to avoid miscarriage of justice "

These dicta were cited with approval by Soza J. in a Divisional Bench decision
of this Court in _Somawathie v. Madawela_ (3).

These were cases in which the power of the former Supreme Court and this Court
to set aside a decree nisi in a partition action by revision was considered.
Much earlier in Attorney- _General v. Podisingho_ (4) (an application for the
revision of the order of a Magistrate in a criminal case), Dias J. said that
this power (which is a discretion) is exercised "where there is a positive
miscarriage of justice in regard either to the law or to the Judge's
appreciation of the facts " (P 388). It was held that this power is not
limited to cases where there is no appeal; and that " it is wide enough to
embrace a case where an appeal lay but which for some reason was not taken "
(P 390).

(b) (i) That prior to the enactment of S. 3 of Act No. 19/ 1990, the remedy by
way of revision was not available against the order of a Labour Tribunal.
_Thameena v. Koch_ (5) in which

360

Tennakoon J. said " I do not think the revisionary powers of this Court
extends to orders of Labour Tribunals " presumably for the reason that S. 753
of the old Civil Procedure Code and S. 356 of the Criminal Procedure Code to
call for and examine records was limited to examine records of only a Court.
This limitation was continued by S. 354 of the A.J.L. In terms of Article 145
of the 1978 Constitution the revisionary power of the Court of Appeal is
limited to examine and inspect records of only a Court of First Instance. It
was, therefore, held in _S. L. B. C. v. De Silva_ (6) and _Nadarajah v.
Tilagaratnam_ (7)hat the Court of Appeal has no power to review the order of a
Labour Tribunal by revision.

(b) (ii) That S. 3 of Act No. 19/1990 vested in the High Court (in addition to
appellate jurisdiction) revisionary jurisdiction in respect of the orders of
Labour Tribunals and orders made under Sections 5 and 9 of the Agrarian
Services Act. Learned Counsel submits that this " revisionary jurisdiction "
is a new jurisdiction vested in the High Court and that S. 9 of the Act which
provided for direct appeals to the Supreme Court expressly limits such appeals
to any order, judgment, decree or sentence of a High Court in the exercise of
its appellate jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154 P (3) (b) of the
Constitution (or S. 3 of the Act). As such, S. 9 does not touch the appellate
power of the Court of Appeal under Article 154P (6) in respect of orders of
the High Court in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction ; and the
remedy of the appellant was to have appealed to that Court in terms of the
relevant Court of Appeal Rules.

(c) That the right of appeal is a statutory right and must be expressly
created and granted by statute. Mr. Mahenthiran has cited in support the
decisions in - _Bakmeewewa v. Raja_ (8), _Martin v. Wijewardena_ (9), _Gamhewa
v. Maggie Nona_ (9), _Mudiyanse v. Bandara_ (10).

It is the contention- of Counsel that S. 9 does not give appellant a right of
appeal to the Supreme Court from an order of the High Court in the exercise of
its revisionary jurisdiction. In contrast S. 31 D of the Industrial Disputes
Act as amended by Act No. 32 of 1990 (which also provides for direct appeals
to the Supreme Court) provides:

**361**

" Any workman, trade union or employer who is aggrieved by any final order of
a High Court established under Article 154P of the Constitution, in the
exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by law or in the exercise
of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by law, in relation to an order
of a Labour Tribunal, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court with the leave
of the High Court or the Supreme Court first had and obtained"

Although during the hearing, it appeared that there was some absurdity or
injustice resulting from limiting appeals to this Court to the orders of a
High Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction by way of appeal, having
considered the above submissions I now have no difficulty in accepting the
submission the S. 9 imposes such a limitation. S. 9 of the Act and the
authorities would not permit the conferment of a right of appeal in respect of
revisionary orders of the High Court ; And hence there is no absurdity or
injustice which this Court is empowered to cure by interpretation.

If the multiplicity of litigation in this sphere is felt to be an anomaly, it
is a matter for the legislature. In fact, in a number of other situations
under the system introduced by the 13th Amendment and subsequent legislation,
the incidence of multiplicity of litigation is inevitable. Thus it appears -

(a) that in the light of the concurrent jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal
and the High Court which still exists, which fact is confirmed by S. 12 of Act
No. 19/1990, the identical dispute may be decided by the Court of Appeal or by
the High Court. A decision in the High Court would permit two appeals whilst a
decision in the Court of Appeal would permit one more appeal;

(b) that under S. 5 of the Agrarian Services Act No. 58 of 1979 as amended by
Act No. 4 of 1991, appeals on decisions on eviction of a tenant cultivator
from a paddy land have now to be made to the Board Review ; but appeals under
S. 9 of that Act may be made either to the Court of Appeal (as provided in
that section) or to the High Court as provided by S. 3 of Act No. 19 of 1990.
In respect of certain other orders under the Agrarian Services Act, a Writ
application may be made to the Court of Appeal under Article 140 or to the
High Court under Article 154 P (4) of the Constitution. The number of appeals
in such cases would vary depending on whether the order is made by the Court
of Appeal or the High Court.

362

(c) that under S. 31 D of the Industrial Disputes Act as amended by Act No. 32
of 1990, an appeal from the order of a Labour Tribunal may be made to the High
Court with a second appeal to the Supreme Court. Under S. 3 of the Act No. 19
of 1990, a revision application in respect of such order may be made to the
High Court in which event parties will be entitled to appeal to the Court of
Appeal from the order of the High Court and then to the Supreme Court.

For the foregoing reasons, I uphold the preliminary objection taken on behalf
of the Respondent and refuse leave to appeal, with costs.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J. -** I agree.

  
**RAMANATHAN, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Preliminary Objection upheld_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/4.html_  

