##  Ellawala v. Wijewardena and Another - SLR - 45, Vol 2 of 1991 [1991] LKSC
4; (1991) 2 Sri LR 45 (19 December 1991)

**45**

** **

## ELLAWALA

**v.**

## WIJEWARDENA AND ANOTHER



SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J., KULATUNGA, J. & DHEERARATNE, J.

S. C. SPL. LEAVE APPLICATION NO: 118/91

CA/LA (SC) NO: 15/91

CA NO: 323/89 (F) WITH

CA (REV) APPLICATION NO: 1031/89

DC COLOMBO CASE NO: 29901/TESTY

DECEMBER 10TH, 1991.



Appeal ‑ Special Leave to Appeal to Supreme Court ‑ Testamentary capacity ‑
Suspicious circumstances ‑ Failure to consult medical opinion on the
Testator's mental condition ‑ Duress and undue influence.

_ _

The deceased who was ill and hospitalised at a private hospital got down his
regular legal adviser/notary public and after necessary consultations and
instructions executed his last will having revoked his previous last will. He
bequeathed his assets to his wife and the younger daughter (the 1st
respond­ent) to the exclusion of his elder daughter (the petitioner) who was
married and was residing away from the parental home. The petitioner had been
dis­inherited under the previous last will as well executed several years
back. The petitioner challenged the last will on grounds of (a) lack of
testamentary capacity by reason of illness (b) duress and undue influence by
the deceased's widow; and (c) the last will was not lawfully executed. The
Dis­trict Judge upheld the objections and invalidated the last will, held that
the deceased had died intestate and dismissed the application for probate.



**46**



The Court of Appeal set aside the order of the District Judge and ordered that
the last will be declared proved and be admitted to probate. On an application
by the petitioner for Special Leave to Appeal from the Judgment of the Court
for Appeal,



**Held:**

**  **

1.                  The finding of the Court of Appeal did not call for review. The last will is a rational or natural will. The evidence does not warrant the suspicion that the testator lacked testamentary capacity; and the fail­ure of the attesting notary to consult the testator's medical advisers as to his mental condition before executing the last will was not, in the circumstances, a suspicious circumstance.



2.                  According to applicable principles of law, undue influence, if it is to vitiate the will, must be something in the nature of coercion or fraud existing at the time of the making of the will.





3\.         The fact that the son‑in‑law and the daughter of the attesting
notary public who are his partners and assistants were witnesses to the
signing of the last will, is, neither in law nor as a matter of ethics, a
matter affecting due execution. In the absence of any suspicion or impropriety
touching the attesting notary it is of no relevance on the question of
testamentary capacity.



**APPLICATION** to the Supreme Court for Special Leave to Appeal from judgment
of the Court of Appeal.



_Miss Maureen Seneviratne_ _P.C.,_ with _R. K. W. Goonesekera_ and _R.
Rajapaksa_ , _W. Wijewardana_ , _Miss K. Perera_ and _R. Perera_ for
Petitioner.



_P. A. D. Samarasekara_ , _P.C._ , with _R. de Silva_ , _P.C., G. Jayasinghe,
S. Mahendran_ and _A. R. Surendhran_ for Respondent.



_Cur.adv.vult._

December 19, 1991.



**KULATUNGA, J.**



At the close of the hearing of this application, we refused special leave to
appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal against which the intervenient
petitioner ‑ respondent ‑ petitioner (hereinafter called the
intervenient‑petitioner) sought to appeal and reserved the reasons for that
Order. We now state our reasons.



### 47



            The intervenient‑petitioner is the elder daughter of the deceased D. J. Wijewardene. At the time of the death of the deceased she had been married to one Mr. Ellawala and was residing away from her parental home. In the District Court she successfully challenged the last will of the deceased by which the deceased devised and bequeathed his assets to his wife and his younger daughter, the 1st  petitioner‑appellant-­respondent (hereinafter called the 1st  petitioner‑respondent) to the exclusion of the intervenient‑petitioner. The deceased also created a trust over one immovable property in favour of his grand daughters who are the children of the 1st petitioner­-respondent. The deceased appointed the 1st petitioner‑res­pondent and another person (the 2nd petitioner‑respondent) who is a close family friend of the deceased as the executors under the will.



On the application of the petitioners, the District Court entered order _nisi_
declaring the will proved and issued a limited grant of probate to the
petitioners necessary for the efficient and effective management of the
companies of which the deceased had been a share holder.



Upon the publication of the order _nisi_ , intervenient‑peti­tioner entered an
appearance and objected to the grant of pro­bate on the said will. After
inquiry the District Judge upheld the grounds of objection and made order (a)
declaring that the last will had not been duly proved and the same cannot be
admitted to probate, (b) holding that the deceased had died intestate, (c)
dismissing the application for probate, (d) declar­ing the limited probate
granted to the petitioners‑respondents null and void and recalling the same.
On an appeal by the petitioners‑respondents the Court of Appeal set aside the
order of the District Judge and directed that the order _nisi_ be made
absolute. The Court further ordered that the last will be declared proved and
be admitted to probate and probate be accordingly granted to the
petitioners‑respondents.



**48**



Special leave to appeal was sought on the basis that in the District Court the
intervenient‑petitioner had challenged the last will on the grounds (a) that
it was not the act and deed of the deceased in that he lacked testamentary
capacity by reason of illness, (b) that the last will was obtained by duress
and undue influence by the deceased's widow, and, (c) that the last will was
not lawfully executed in that the attesting notary had as witnesses to the
said will his daughter and son‑in‑law who with him are the registered
Attorneys‑at‑Law for the petitioners.



In seeking Leave to Appeal the intervenient‑petitioner is particularly
aggrieved by the observation of the Court of Appeal that in the instant case
the testamentary capacity of the testator was never in question; it has
neither been pleaded nor put in issue. Learned Counsel for the interveneint
‑petitioner submits that this opinion is plainly erroneous‑in that the lack of
testamentary capacity due to grave illness affecting the testator's mind had
been pleaded in the statement of objections; and that this very question arose
for decision under the first issue raised by the petitioners‑respondents
namely whether the disposition under consideration was a law­ful and valid
last will of the deceased. The counsel further submits that by forming an
erroneous opinion in the matter, the Court below deprived itself of the
opportunity of fairly considering the most vital issue in the case, namely,
the issue relating to testamentary capacity.



There is considerable force in the intervenient‑petitioner's submission that
the statement of objections and the issues were wide enough to allow the
question of testamentary capacity to be raised. Thus one of the objections
which was raised was that the last will was not the act and deed of the
deceased; and the statement of objections specifically states that at tie time
of the execution of the said will on 07.01.1985 the testator was an inmate of
a private hospital undergoing medical treatment for an illness to which he
succumbed on 14.01.1985.



### 49



            The opinion of the Court of Appeal to which the intervenient‑petitioner has taken exception appears to be the result of a failure to scrutinise, in the light of the pleadings and the issues raised, a submission on the question of testa­mentary capacity made by the counsel for the petitioner­-respondents. That opinion has also been influenced by certain answers given by Ellawala the husband of the intervenient‑petitioner in the course of which he said that the ground for attacking the will is undue influence exercised over the testator over the years to exclude the intervenient‑petitioner from benefiting under the. will. However, Ellawala does not appear to have taken up the position that undue influence is the sole ground for challenging the last will.



Notwithstanding the opinion complained of, we see no rea­son, in the light of
the available evidence, to permit an appeal on the question of, testamentary
capacity. The Court of Appeal itself has considered the evidence and concluded
that the last will with which we are concerned is a rational or natural will;
that the evidence does not warrant the suspicion that at the time of the
execution of the will the testator lacked testamen­tary capacity; and that Mr.
Murugesu, the attesting notary was not obliged to consult medical opinion on
the testator's state of mind before attesting the will, as was held by the
District Judge. In coming to this finding the Court of Appeal has been guided
by the correct principles of law set out in judicial deci­sions.



We are ourselves satisfied that the facts adduced before the District Court do
not establish suspicious features sufficient even to create a doubt as to the
testamentary capacity. Briefly the facts relied upon by the
intervenient‑petitioner are as follows:__



            **(a)        THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF THE TESTATOR**

**  **

The testator had been admitted to the Frazer Nursing Home, Colombo on
18.12.1984 and was under con­stant treatment. He had cirrhosis of the liver,
chronic



**50**



                        diarrhoea coupled with enlargement of the liver and the spleen and a heart condition due to a leak in the microvalve of the heart. According to the medical reports he was feeble. However, it has not been shown that this physical condition had in any way affected the mental condition of the testator. Thus on 02.01.1985 he got down Mr. Neelakandan and gave instructions to prepare a power of attorney which he wished to sign on 04.01.1985 as he contemplated going abroad for treatment. He also arranged for Mr. Murugesu to bring a copy of his previous last will as he wished to execute a new last will. On 04.01.1985 he signed the Power of Attorney and gave instructions for the preparation of a new last will; this he did after perusing the previous last will and the codicil. On 07.01.1985 Mr. Murugesu brought the new last will and the testator read it seated on the bed; he also wanted clarification of certain mat­ters which were explained after which he signed the last will. Mr. Murugesu knew that the testator was ill but found his mental capacity quite normal and that he was capable of making a decision and did not have the slightest doubt as regards his competence. This is supported by the evidence of Dr. A.T.S. Paul who had been a frequent visitor at the hospital though not in a medical capacity, and found the testator mentally quite alert.



**(b)**        **RELATIONS BETWEEN THE INTERVENIENT PETITIONER AND THE
TESTATOR**

** **

** **

They were estranged from about 1974\. In his pre­vious last will made in 1975
the testator left nothing to the intervenient‑petitioner. In a codicil in 1980
he con­firmed that will subject only to a change of execator­ship. There is
some tenuous evidence of attempts at reconciliation, spoken to by Ellawala,
the intervenient­petitioner's husband consisting only of four or five tel‑



### 51



ephone conversations between the testator and Ella­wala. The testator had no
contact at all with the intervenient‑petitioner.



**(C)               CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING THE EXECUTION OF THE LAST WILL**

**  **

The last will in question was attested by Mr. Murugesu the testator's regular
legal adviser. In mak­ing the previous will in 1975 the testator instructed
Mr. Murugesu to specifically exclude the intervenient­petitioner. The testator
said that she was a difficult character and gave many other reasons which Mr.
Murugesu did not wish to mention in Court. Mr. Murugesu thought that it was "a
paternal break". The testator told him that she was not worthy of being his
daughter. In the last will in question the testator again excluded the
intervenient‑petitioner and merely made some minor adjustments between his
wife and the other daughter, the 1st petitioner‑respondent. The fact that the
son‑in‑law and the daughter of the attesting notary public who are his
partners and assistants were wit­nesses to the signing of the last will is,
neither in law nor as a matter of ethics, a matter affecting due execu­tion.
The Court of Appeal has upon a consideration of authorities and judicial
decisions so concluded; and we agree with that opinion. In different
circumstances such execution might have been a suspicious circumstance.
However, in the absence of any suspicion or impropr­iety touching Mr.
Murugesu, it is of no relevance on the question of testamentary capacity.

** **

**(d)                FAILURE OF THE NOTARY TO CONSULT THE TESTATOR'S MEDICAL
ADVISORS**



The District Judge held that the attesting notary was obliged to consult the
testator's medical advisors as to his mental condition before the execution of
the



**52**



last will and that in the absence of such medical opin­ion the
petitioners‑respondents failed to establish that the last will was duly
executed. We are of the view that in the circumstances of this case such
failure or the failure to get a doctor to be a witness to the will is not per
se a suspicious feature where the notary had no doubt in his mind as to
testamentary capacity.



The District Judge was also of the opinion that the deceased was over a period
of time under the influence of his wife and had a poor degree of independence.
She was herself present at the time of the execution of the last will. The
Dis­trict Judge said that it was difficult to believe that the deceased had
not been influenced when he gave instructions for the preparation of the will.
Accordingly, he held that the will was obtained by duress or undue influence.
The Court of Appeal held that according to the applicable principles of law,
undue influence, if it is to vitiate the will, must be something in the nature
of coercion or fraud existing at the time of mak­ing the will; and that in the
instant case evidence of such undue influence is woefully lacking. We see no
reason to disagree with that finding.



In the result we are of the view that the application for special leave to
appeal does not raise any question fit for review by this Court.

**  **

**FERNANDO, J.** ‑ I agree.



**DHEERARATNA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**_Application refused._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/4.html_  

