##  Hameed Alias Abdul Rahman v. Weerasinghe and Others - SLR - 217, Vol 1 of
1989 [1989] LKSC 4; (1989) 1 Sri LR 217 (27 February 1989)

**

217

HAMEED _alias_ ABDUL RAHMAN  
V.  
WEERASINGHE AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, J.  
MARK FERNANDO. J. AND  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
S. C. APPEAL NO: 13/86.  
CA. NO: 104/78 (F).  
D. C. MATARA NO: 3433/L,  
FEBRUARY 27, 1989.

_

Landlord and tenant_ \- _Deceased tenant's wife's failure to attorn_ \-
_requisites of a plaint_ - _Averment and proof of title in a ret vindicatio
suit'_ - _Action on trespass where title is not disputed.

_

Where the tenant dies and his widow fails to attorn to the landlord, the widow
cannot claim tenancy rights.

Under the Civil Procedure Code it is only necessary to plead the relevant
facts constituting the action. It is not necessary to categorize the cause of
action.

In a vindicatory suit, it is necessary to aver and prove title but where title
is not disputed a plaintiff may sue only for ejectment. Although the plaintiff
had not pleaded his title, his averment that the widow of the deceased tenant
is in occupation without his permission and without paying rent is sufficient
to found an action on trespass. No objection having been taken at the trial to
any deficiency in the plaint re setting out title, it cannot be raised in
appeal.

**

Case referred to** :

_

Theivandran v. Ramanathan Chettiar -_ [1986] 2 Sri LR 21 9, 222.

**

APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.

_

N. R. M. Daluwatte, P.C,_ with _Mrs. D. K. Gabadage_ and _Manohara de Silva_
for Plaintiff-Appellant.

_

K. Abeypala_ for 1st Defendant-Respondent.

Substituted 2nd Defendant-Respondent and 3rd Defendant-Respondent are absent
and unrepresented.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**218**

March 16. 1989.

**

G. P. S. De Silva, J.

**

The plaintiff instituted these proceedings seeking the ejectment of the 1st,
2nd and 3rd defendants from the premises in suit and claiming damages at the
rate of Rs, 25/- per mensem from February, 1971. In her plaint dated 30th
December, 1971, she averred that (i) the tenant of the premises was E. J. A.
John who died on 5th January 1971, (ii) John had paid rent up to the end of
January, 1971, and (in) the 1st defendant was the widow of the deceased tenant
John. These facts were admitted by the 1st defendant in her answer. The
plaintiff further pleaded that after the death of John neither the 1st
defendant nor any of his heirs paid any rent nor sought her permission to
continue to occupy the premises as her tenant. As regards the 2nd and 3rd
defendants, it was the case of the plaintiff that the deceased John had sub-
let the premises to them without her knowledge.

The 1st defendant's position as set out in her answer and focussed in the
issue raised on her behalf at the trial was that upon her husband's death the
plaintiff accepted her as her tenant. After trial the District Judge held, (a)
that the 1st defendant was the tenant of the premises; (b) that the 2nd and
3rd defendants were not sub-tenants but were employees under the deceased
John. The action was accordingly dismissed.

The plaintiff thereupon lodged an appeal to the Court of Appeal. The Court of
Appeal affirmed the finding of the District Court that the 2nd and 3rd
defendants were employees under John and thereafter were employees under the
1st defendant and that they had no status independent of the 1st defendant. At
the hearing before us, Mr. Daluwatte for the plaintiff-appellant, did not
canvass this finding.

The Court of Appeal, however, reversed the finding of the District Court that
the 1st defendant is the tenant under the plaintiff. On this crucial issue"
the Court of Appeal expressed itself in the following terms:-

"On the evidence it is manifest that the first defendant has not attorned to
the plaintiff after the death of her husband nor had she obtained the
protection of the Rent Acts by way of any

**219**

application made under the statute. She has no privity of contract either
directly or by attornment nor is there a nexus created by operation of law".
This finding is amply supported by the evidence on record and Mr. Abeypala,
counsel for the 1st defendant-respondent, very properly did not challenge it.
Incidentally, I wish to add that the reference to the Rent Acts in the above
passage must be read as a reference to the Rent Restriction Act (Chap. 274 of
the 1956 Revised Edition of the Legislative Enactments), the action having
been filed in 1971.

Although the Court of Appeal arrived at the finding that the 1st defendant was
not a tenant under the plaintiff, as claimed by the 1st defendant, (and this
was the basis upon which the 1st defendant sought to justify her continued
occupation of the premises after the death of John) yet the action was
dismissed solely on the ground that the plaint "does not disclose a valid
cause of action as known to our law". The Court of Appeal concluded:- "The
plaint in this case is not based on a contract of tenancy nor does it contain
the elements required for a possessory or a vindicatory action  The absence of
a valid cause of action is a pure question of law and can be raised at any
stage". It was this part of the judgment of the Court of Appeal that-was
assailed by Mr. Daluwatte.

In the first place, it is right to state that the plea that the plaint does
not disclose a cause of action was not pleaded in the answers of the
defendants nor was an issue on this point raised at the trial. Section 40 of
the Civil Procedure Code sets out the requisites of a plaint. It provides
inter alia, that the plaint shall contain "a plain and concise statement of
the circumstances constituting each cause of action, and where and when it
arose " (Section 40(d). Thus it is clear that under our procedural law, there
is no need to categorize the cause of action as being based on a particular
form of action. All that is required is to plead the relevant facts
constituting the cause of action.

The question that arises on this appeal is whether this action cannot be
maintained for the reason that the plaint does not disclose a cause of action.
On a scrutiny of the plaint, I am of the

**220**

view that it discloses a cause of action based on trespass. Apart from the
averment that the 1st defendant is the widow of the deceased tenant, John,
there is the following significant statement in paragraph 5 of the plaint:-
"After the death of the said tenant E. J. A. John, his widow the 1st defendant
nor any of his heirs paid any rent nor sought the permission of the plaintiff
to continue as a tenant or tenants of the premises referred to above as
required by law". Admittedly, the provisions of section 18 of the Rent
Restriction Act were not complied with. The result was that the 1st defendant
could not thereafter have claimed the protection of the Rent Restriction Act.
What paragraph 5 of the plaint **in effect** avers is that upon the death of
John the 1st defendant's right to remain in occupation of the premises ceased.
In other words, the widow's continued occupation of the premises was unlawful.

It is true, as submitted by Mr. Abeypala, there are no averments in the plaint
setting out the plaintiffs title to the premises nor has the plaintiff sought
a declaration that she is the owner of the premises. This is no doubt a defect
in the plaint, but could the 1st defendant rely on it at the stage of appeal,
in the absence of a specific objection in the answer and the matter not having
been put in issue at the trial? I think not, particularly in view of section
46(2)-(d) of the Civil Procedure Code. Had the specific objection, namely that
the plaint does not disclose a cause of action, been taken in the answer, the
plaintiff may well have moved to amend the plaint. The plaint not being
happily worded, an appropriate amendment could easily have remedied the defect
in the pleadings. Moreover, the issues show the nature of the dispute between
the parties, namely the character of the occupation of the premises by the 1st
defendant. Was the 1st defendant a trespasser as averred by the plaintiff or
was she a tenant under the plaintiff? Therefore, even assuming that the issue
whether the plaint discloses a cause of action is a pure question of law, I am
of opinion that in the facts and circumstances of this case, it is not a
question that could properly have been raised at the stage of appeal and
answered in favour of the defendants. In doing so, the Court of Appeal was on
error.

**221**

Mr. Abeypala was right in his submission that in a rei vindicatio action the
plaintiff must aver and prove his title to the premises in suit. This is the
general rule, but in the instant case the pleadings, the issues and the
evidence on record clearly show that at no stage did any of the defendants
dispute the plaintiff's title to the premises. What is more, the deceased
tenant could not have disputed the plaintiff's title (Section. 116 of the
Evidence Ordinance). A fortiori, the 1st defendant, his widow and a member of
his family could not have disputed the plaintiff's title to the premises. In
these circumstances, the defect in the plaint ceased to be material.

The plaintiffs title not having been disputed by the 1st defendant, the burden
clearly was on the 1st defendant to show by what right she continued to occupy
the premises after the death of John. This principle was referred to by
Sharvananda, C. J. in _Theivandran vs. Ramanathan Chettiar,_ H ). "An owner of
a land has the right to possession of it and hence is entitled to sue for the
ejectment of a trespasser. . ..'. . Basing his claim on his ownership, which
entitles him to possession, he may sue for the ejectment of any person in
possession of it without his consent. Hence when the legal title to the
premises is admitted or proved to be in the plaintiff, the-burden of proof is
on the defendant to show that he is in lawful possession".

In the case before us, the 1'st defendant's position was that she was the
tenant under the plaintiff after her husband's death, and therefore her
possession was lawful. As stated. earlier, that plea was rightly rejected by
the Court of Appeal. The plaintiff, therefore, must succeed in her action for
ejectment and damages.

The appeal is accordingly allowed and the judgment of the Court of Appeal
dismissing the plaintiffs action is set aside. We direct that decree for
ejectment be entered as prayed for in paragraph (a) of the prayer to the
plaint dated 30th December,

**222**

1971\. The plaintiff is also entitled to damages from the 1st defendant in a
sum of Rs. 25/- per mensem from February 1971 till she is restored to
possession of the premises in suit. The 1st defendant must pay the plaintiff
costs of proceedings in the District Court as well as a sum of Rs. 750/-'as
costs of appeal both in the Court of Appeal and this Court.

**

mark Fernando, J.** \- I agree.

**

amerasinghe, J.** \- I agree.

_

**Appeal allowed. **

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/4.html_  

