##  Piyasiri and Others v. Nimal Fernando, A.S.P. and Others - SLR - 173, Vol
1 of 1988 [1988] LKSC 4; (1988) 1 Sri LR 173 (17 March 1988)

**

173

PIYASIRI &OTHERS  
v.  
NIMAL FERNANDO, A.S.P. & OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
ATUKORALE, J., L. H. DE ALWIS, J., AND H. A. G. DE. SILVA, J.,  
S.C. APPLICATIONS Nos. 221-234/86.  
AUGUST 28, 1987; NOVEMBER 20, 1987  
AND DECEMBER 1, 1987.

_

Fundamental Rights-Constitution, Article 13 (1)-Freedom from arbitrary arrest-
Right to be informed of reason for arrest.

_

A complaint alleging that customs officers working at the airport were
soliciting and accepting bribes and refraining from imposing duty that was in
fact due, was received and on the orders of the Bribery Commissioner an
investigation was commenced by the 1st respondent who was attached to the
Bribery Commissioner's department. He received information that bribes
collected by the officers were divided amongst them before they left the
airport after duty. Due to strict security measures within the airport it had
not been possible to detect any officers in the act of accepting bribes. It
had been decided therefore to search the officers when they were leaving the
airport after duty.

Accordingly; when the fourteen petitioners were returning after work they were
stopped near the Seeduwa Police Station, questioned, and asked to go to the
Seeduwa Police Station. They did so, in their own cars, followed by the 1st
respondent and other Police Officers. At the Police Station they were searched
and moneys in their possession were taken charge of by the '1st respondent.
They were then ordered to

**174**

proceed to the Bribery Commissioner's department. They did so in their own
cars. The 1st respondent` accompanied them. At the department their statements
were recorded and they were' released on' giving a written undertaking to
appear in the Magistrate's Court the following morning , .

The petitioners alleged that their fundamental rights under Article 13(1) of
the Constitution had been violated. '

The 1st respondent denied that he had arrested-the petitioners.

**

Held-

**

(i) There was in fact an arrest of the petitioners by the 1st respondent.
Custody does not necessarily import the meaning of confinement but has been
extended to mean lack of freedom .of movement brought- about not only by
detention but also by threatened coercion, the existence of which can be
inferred from the surrounding circumstances.

(ii) The arrest of the petitioners was highly speculative and.. was for the
purpose of ascertaining whether any of them could be detected to have
committed an offence of bribery. No Police Officer has the right to arrest a
person on a vague and general suspicion, not knowing the precise crime
suspected but hoping' to obtain evidence of the commission of some crime by
searching the petitioners after arresting them. The Law does not sanction such
a course of action.

(iii)It is a condition of lawful arrest that the party arrested should. know
on what charge or in suspicion of what crime he is arrested. The 1st
respondent could not have informed' the petitioners the charge on which they
were being arrested-for the reason that there was no credible information
available to him that the petitioners had committed an offence of bribery.

The arrests were therefore in violation of Article 13(1) of the Constitution.
**

Cases referred to :

**_

(1) Muthuweeran Namasivayam v. H.. G. Gunawardene -et al-S.C. 166/86 (S. C.
Minutes of 24.09.87)

(2) Christie v. Leachinsky (1947) A. C. 573

(3) Muttusamy v. Kannangara (1961) 52 NL.R. .324

(4) Mariadas Raj v. A. G. Vol. 2`Fundamental Rights Cases, pg. 397

(5) Corea V Queen (1954) 55 N.L.R. 457

_**

APPLICATION** under Article 125 of the Constitution.

_

Dr. Colvin R de Silva with D. S. Wijesinghe, Mrs. Manouri Muttetuwegama,
Tivanka Wickremasinghe, M. Jayampathy, Dinal Phillip and Miss Chamantha
Weerakoon for the Petitioners in Applications Nos. 221/86 to 227/86 & 233/86
to 234/86. .

D. S. Wijesinghe for, the Petitioners in Applications No. 228/86 to 231 /86.

Jayampathy Wickremaratne for the Petitioner in Application No. 232/86.

_

**175**

_

Sarath Silva, Deputy Solicitor General with K. C. Kamalasabayson, Senior State
Counsel and K. lndratissa, State Counsel for the Respondents.

Cur. adv. vult

_

March 17, 1988.

**

H. A. G. DE. SILVA, J.

**

The petitioners in these applications allege that the 1st respondent has
violated their fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 13(1) of the
Constitution and pray, that the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents be directed to
return to them the moneys taken from them and that each of them be granted
compensation in a sum of Rs. 500,000/- for wrongful arrest, loss of employment
humiliation and pain of mind suffered by them.

The petitioners are Assistant Charges Officers attached to the Customs
Department and whose functions include inter alias the examination of the
inward/outward passengers and their baggage's ; and the levying of import and
export Customs duties.

On 24th November 1986 the petitioners who work on a roster basis were on duty
at the Katunayake lnternational Airport from 9.00 a.m. till the same time the
next day. After their turn of duty, the petitioners left for Colombo, some in
their own cars while others travelled in the cars of their colleagues who had
similarly completed their turn of duty. When passing Seeduwa, and near the
Seeduwa Police Station, the vehicles in which they were travelling were
stopped by a Police Officer in uniform. Shortly, afterwards a person in
civilian clothes, who is the 1st respondent came towards their cars and
questioned their inmates as to whether they had' any foreign currency with
them. When questioned about his identity, the 1st respondent had stated that
he was an Assistant Super indent of Police attached to the C.I.D. No
identification card or document of authority was shown to them.

The 1st respondent wanted to search the vehicles in which they were travelling
as well as-their brief cases and questioned them whether they had any Whisky.
When they denied they were asked to stay there for a while. The petitioners
noticed that there were a number of other Police Officers in uniform in the
vicinity and they too were, engaged in stopping the vehicles carrying the
Customs Officers

**176**

from the Katunayake. International Airport to Colombo.

Shortly thereafter the 1st respondent ordered the petitioners to proceed to
the Seeduwa Police Station and. they did so followed by the 1st respondent and
other Police Officers in uniform.

At the Seeduwa Police Station they were searched and' the moneys in their
possession were taken charge of by the 1st respondent. No acknowledgement was
given in respect of the moneys taken from them but they were ordered to
proceed directly to he office of the Bribery Commissioner in Colombo. They
proceeded to the Bribery Commissioner's Department in the cars in which, they
were travelling accompanied by the 1st respondent. At the, Bribery
Commissioner's Department the petitioners, were not informed of any allegation
made against them by any person nor were they questioned in regard to any
offence they were alleged to have committed but statements were recorded with
regard to the moneys that they had in their possession. During the period
during which they were in the Bribery Commissioner' s Department which was
till about 10,00 p.m. that day they were kept under the. continuous control
and. orders of the Police whom they had no, alternative but to obey and even
their friends and relations who sought to contact them were not allowed to do
so. At 10.00 p.m. they were, permitted to leave'' only after they had given a
written undertaking to appear in the Magistrate's Court, Colombo, the
following morning,

The petitioners allege that the happenings on 24th November 1986was sequel to
an incident that took place on or about 7th November of that year wherein
there was a fight between two. Customs Officers and some police officers of
the Bribery Commissioner's Department including the 1st respondent and
consequent to this fight relations between the two sets of officers were
strained.

The 1st respondent on the other hand avers that on 11th November 1986,a person
submitted a written complaint to the Principal Collector of Customs alleging
inter alia that Customs Officers at the Katunayake International Airport were
in the habit of soliciting and accepting bribes and .retraining ,from imposing
Customs duty on passengers even when they were due: The Principal Collector of
Customs had endorsed on the said complaint a minute to the Bribery
Commissioner "to look into the aspects of bribery alleged against the
officers-", and directed the

**177**

complainant with the document to the Bribery Commissioner. The Bribery
Commissioner instructed him to record the complaint and to investigate into
the allegations of bribery made against the Customs Officers functioning at
the Katunayake International Airport. He recorded the statement of the
complainant and on 12.11.19-86 obtained a search warrant valid for one month
for the purpose' of carrying out necessary investigations, but in view of the
strict security arrangements within the Airport premises he found that- it was
not possible to detect any Customs Officers in the act of accepting bribes in
connection with their work. Thereafter- he received additional information
that the Customs 'Officers at the Airport were in the habit of collecting
bribes through the minor employees: of their Department and also through touts
to pass baggage of. passengers without the payment of duty or with the payment
of duty less than the amount legally due and. that the bribes so collected
were divided amongst the Customs Officers before they left the Airport after
their turn of duty. He reported this fact-to the Bribery Commissioner and
suggested that the Customs Officers be searched on 25th November 1986 when
they were leaving the Airport after duty. The Bribery Department approved this
course of action:

On 25th November 1986, he left Colombo with a party of police officers
attached -to the Bribery Commissioner's Department. Two of them were in
uniform while the others, including the 1 St. Respondent were in civilian
clothes. He instructed one of the officers to note the numbers of the cars of
the Customs Officers that were parked 'in a separate area and to stay near the
turn off to the Airport from the main. Colombo-Negombo road and to signal to
him when the cars passed. He instructed two other officers in uniform to stand
a distance apart and to signal the cars to stop. He then went up to the cars
and informed the occupants thereof that he was investigating allegations of
bribery against Customs Officers at the Airport and wanted each officer to
give his name and state the amount of local and foreign currency and the
description of the goods that they had with them. S. A. D. Somapala, the
Petitioner in (S.C.228/86) stated that he had about Rs. 10,000; K.
Hettiarachchi (S.C. 229/86) Rs. 5,000 ; P. H. Ratnaseela (S.C. 234/86) Rs.
3,000; N. B. S.- G.unasekera (S.C.233/86) some money but did not know even the
approximate amount; R: P. Hewagama ' (S.C. 230/86) approximate amount of money
riot known ; W. D' Piyadasa (S.C.226/86) Rs. 300; P. S. Senaratne (S.C.
22'4/86) Rs. 1,000; M. D. Piyasoma (S.C.225/86)

**178**

Rs. ,2,000; P. R. Atukorale (S.C.232/86) approximate amount' of money not
known; J. A. D. Aloysius Perera (S: C.231/86) .approximate amount of money not
known: W. Ponnamperuma (S.C. - 222/86) Rs. 2,000; one W. A. Dharmadasa Rs.
2;000; W: A. R. K. N. de Silva (S.C. 227/86) Rs. 2,000; B. A. Piyasiri (S C.
221/86) Rs. 2,000, B. J. S. Bopearachchi (S.C. 223/86) Rs. 2,000. He then
requested the Customs Officers to go to Seeduwa Police Station and there
search each of the said officers; their brief cases and the cars in which they
had been travelling: He found that S. A. D. Somapala who stated that he had
about Rs. 10,000 had, in his possession Rs. 19,520; K. Hettiarachchi. (Rs.
5,000) had Rs. 9;688; P. H. Ratnaseela (Rs. 3,000) had Rs. 4,330; N. B. S.
Karunasekera (approximate amount unknown) had Rs. 4,286; R. ;P. Hewagama
(approximate amount unknown) had Rs. 4,830; W, D..' Piyadasa (Rs. 300) Rs.
850; S. Somaratne (Rs. 1,000) had Rs. 6,000, 4 bottles of whisky, 1 silk- sere
and an imported doll about 2 ft. in height; N.. D. Piyasena (Rs. -2,000) had
Rs. .4;550:; P. D. Athukorale (approximate :amount unknown) had Rs. 2,170, 2
bottles of. Whisky marked Sri Lanka Duty Free and a pair of ladies shoes; J.
A. D.. Aloysius Perera (approximate amount unknown had Rs: 8,105 and two
flower vases; W. Ponnapperuma (Rs. 2,000) had Rs. 1,750; W. A. Dharmadasa (Rs.
2,000) had Rs. 4300; Singapore $ 335, U.S. $ 21, 2 sarees and a. packet
containing earrings; B. A. Piyasiri (Rs. 1,000) had Rs. 1,564; B. J. S.
Bopearachchi (Rs. 2,000) had Rs. 2;140;' in addition N. B. S. Karunasekera had
3 Inward Baggage Declarations made by passengers; P. R. Athukorale 2 Inward
Baggage Declarations.. These declarations, tendered by passengers, constituted
apart of the official documentation and had to be kept in the Customs Office
and these two officers were unable to give a satisfactory reason for their
possession of these official documents. Since the 1st Respondent was not
satisfied with the explanations given by each of the Petitioners to account
for their possession of large sums 'of. local and foreign currency, imported
articles and baggage declaration forms, he, informed them, that it was
necessary to question them further and to record their statements and
therefore requested them to proceed to the Bribery Commissioner's Department
at Colombo in- their respective cars:

At the Bribery Commissioner's Department, he questioned each of the
Petitioners and recorded their statements and they were permitted to leave
with. a request that they present themselves in the

**179**

Magistrate's. Court on .26th November 1986. With regard to, the incident on
7th November, 1986 the 1st Respondent states that it took place when two
Customs Officers who were under the, influence of liquor obstructed certain
Police Officers attached to the Bribery Commissioner's Department.

At the hearing of these applications. it was agreed to consolidate all the
applications, and submissions were made by Counsel on behalf of the
Petitioners in all' these applications':

Article 13 (1) of the Constitution which is alleged to have been infringed in
these, cases states that "No person shall be arrested except according to
procedure established. by law. Any person arrested shall be informed of the
reason for his arrest." .

It is the submission of the Petitioners that from the time they were signalled
to halt at Seeduwa on the Colombo-Negombo road at about 9.00 a.m. on 25th
November 1986 and at least till 10.00 p.m. that night when they were released
from the Bribery Commissioner's Department, they were under arrest. In fact
they go so far as to say that even their being permitted to leave the Bribery
Commissioner's Department did not amount to a release from arrest as they were
allowed to do so only on their giving a written undertaking to be present in
the Magistrate's Court of Colombo, the next morning. The 1st Respondent on the
other hand maintains that there was no arrest, formal or otherwise and that
the Petitioners were at no time confined or incarcerated and that their
movements were restricted, only for the limited purpose of searching them and
recording their statements and that immediately after the statements were
recorded they were permitted to leave with a request that they be present in
the Magistrate's Court on the next day.

The questions to be decided is (1) was there an arrest, of the petitioners by
the 1st respondent, (2) if there was such an arrest was it according to
procedure established by law and (3) were the Petitioners, if arrested,
informed of the reason for their arrest? -.'

Section 23(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 states how
an arrest is made. It says,

"In making an arrest the person making the same shall actually touch or
confine the body of the person to be arrested unless there

**180**

be a submission to the custody by word or action and shall inform the person
to` be-arrested of the nature of the charge or allegation upon which he is
arrested".

The explanation to that sub-section states that

"Keeping a person in confinement. or restraint without formally arresting him
or under the colourable pretension that an arrest has not been made when to
all intents and purposes such person is in custody shall be deemed to be an
arrest of such person:"

The only warrant that has been obtained by the. 1st respondent is P3 a search
warrant to search: the Customs: area, the restroom of the Customs Officers,
the Public Health Office and the office and restroom of the Immigration and
Emigration officers, all situated at the Katunayake International Airport:
Therefore if the 1st respondent was effecting an arrest of the petitioners, he
was doing so without a warrant, which: he was entitled to do as offences under
Part 11 of the Bribery Act have been made congnizable offences by Section 30
thereof, if all other legal requirements had been satisfied. -

Dr. Glanwille Williams in his article on "Requisites of a valid arrest" (1954)
Criminal Law Review 6 at page 8 et seq states-

"An imprisonment or deprivation of liberty, is a necessary element in an
arrest;-but this does not mean that there need bean actual confinement. If the
officer indicates an intention to make an arrest, as for example, by touching
the suspect on the shoulder, or by showing him a warrant of arrest, or in any
other way by making him understand that an arrest is intended, and if the
suspect then submits to the direction of the officer there is an arrest. The
consequence is that an arrest may be made by mere words and the other submits
.

"If an officer merely makes a request to the suspect, giving him to
-understand that he is at liberty to come or refuse, there is no imprisonment
and no arrest. If however the impression is conveyed that there is no such
option, and that `the suspect is compelled" to come., it is an arrest
.........

"............obviously it is not every imprisonment or detention that
constitutes an arrest. To be an arrest, there must be an intention to subject
the person arrested to the criminal process-to bring him within the machinery
of the criminal law and this intention

**181**

must be known -to the person arrested. Arrest is a, step, in law enforcement,
so that 'the arrester must intend to bring the accused into what is sometimes
called 'the custody of the law".

In the unreported case of Muthuweeran Namasivayam v. H. G. Gunawardene et al
(1) the petitioner alleged that while he was travelling in C.T. B. bus on the
day in question, on his way to Nawalapitiya, he was arrested by the 3rd
respondent; he was not informed the reason for his arrest etc, The 3rd
respondent denied having arrested the petitioner on that day. He stated that
he was investigating into a case of robbery of a gun from Rosella Farm. He had
reason to believe that the petitioner was acquainted with the fact and
circumstance relating to the said robbery and requested the petitioner to
accompany him to the Ginigathhena Police for questioning. At the Police
Station he was questioned in connection with this case and was released
immediately after his statement was recorded. Subsequently the 3rd respondent
had received information that the petitioner was involved -in 'acts which
constituted offences under the Emergency Regulations and then he arrested the
petitioner at the Watawala Railway` Station, after having explained the charge
against him, and took the petitioner to the Hatton Police Station where his
statement was recorded. Sharvananda, C.J. in his judgment with which I
concurred at page; 8 states "in my view when the 3rd respondent required the
petitioner to, accompany him to the Police Station and took him to the Police
Station, the petitioner was in law arrested by the 3rd respondent. The
petitioner was prevented by the action of the 3rd respondent from proceeding
with his journey in the bus. The petitioner was deprived .of his liberty to go
where he pleased. It was, not necessary, that there should have-been any
actual use of force; threat of force used to' procure the petitioner's
submission was sufficient. The petitioner did not go to the Police Station:
voluntarily".

If one applies the. principles gleaned from the above authorities it will be
seen that what: transpired in the instant case would amount to an arrest of
the petitioners by the 1st respondent at Seeduwa. It is the position of- the
1st respondent himself„ that as he found .it difficult to detect- any offences
of bribery at the Airport due to security restrictions, he intended, to accost
the petitioners on, their way to Colombo. It is for that reason that the
numbers of the Customs Officers cars were noted and he posted two officers to
signal to him, when the cars passed them, while the 1st respondent stationed

**182**

himself close to the Seeduwa Police Station with some Police Officers in
uniform on either side of the road signalling the cars carrying the Customs
Officers to halt. After going up to the cars and questioning the occupants
thereof of the approximate amount of money they had 'and whether they had
whisky, foreign currency, and any imported `-items, he asked them to proceed
to the Seduwa Police Station in order that they be searched." After the
search' at the Seeduwa Police Station they were directed to go in their own
vehilces to the Bribery Commissioner's Department in Colombo. The 1st
respondent too travelled to Colombo. At this stage it is significant to note
that in the report to court P1-P1A made under Section 115 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Act the O.I.C. of the Police attached to the Bribery
Department has stated that since the A.S.P. had suspicion's about the manner
in which the petitioner had come by the money and the other articles found on
them, they were brought to the Bribery Commissioner's Department situated in
Colombo. "

At the Bribery Commissioner's Department their statements were recorded and at
about 10 p.m. that day they were permitted to leave on their giving a, written
undertaking to present themselves the following day in the Magistrate's Court.

Learned Counsel for' the respondents submitted that nowhere in the report to
court P 1-P 1 A has it been mentioned that- any of the petitioners were taken
into custody or treated as a suspect, but it is quite 'clear from what
transpired that day that the 1st respondent thought that the large sums of
money found on the petitioners along with imported items of goods, had not
been adequately explained by `them and. hence he suspected them to have been
concerned in committing offences under the Bribery Act. Otherwise his actions
in directing them to go to the Bribery Department in Colombo, recording their
statements and getting a' written undertaking to be present the next day at
the Magistrate's Court, are unexplainable. Section 115 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act itself envisages in cases where the investigations cannot be
completed within a period of time a report of the case to be made to the
Magistrate and at the same time the Police Officer is expected to forward the
suspect to such Magistrate and the Magistrate is under sub-section 2 thereof
empowered to detain the suspect for 15 days or discharge him or require him to
execute a bond to appear if and when so required, and in the instant case that
is what ' the Magistrate has done; i.e., released them on bail to appear if
and when so required.

**183**

After the petitioners were signalled to stop by the Police Officers near the
Seeduwa Police Station, hey were, till they appeared in the Magistrate's Court
the next day under the coercive directions of the 1st respondent. Surrounded
by Police Officers, some of whom were in uniform it would have been fool
hardly to say the least for any of the petitioners to have attempted to
exercise their-right to the freedom of movement. Custody does not today,
necessarily import the meaning of confinement but has been extended to mean
lack of freedom of movement brought about-not only by detention but: also by
threatened coercion, the existence of which can be inferred form the
surrounding circumstances.

The next question to be decided is whether the arrests- have been made
according to procedures established by law. Inherent in this question is'
whether the arrest of the Petitioners was lawful.

Section 30 of the Bribery Act makes offences enumerated in Part II of the Act
cognizable offences for the purpose of the application of the provisions of
the': Criminal Procedure Code Act. Section 32 (1) (b) thereof states that Any
peace officer may without an: order from a Magistrate and without warrant
arrest any person.... who has been concerned in any cognizable offence or
against whom a reasonable complaint has been made or credible information has
been received or a reasonable suspicion exists of his having been so
concerned."

Implicit in this power given to a peace officer by Section 32(1), (b) is that
the person arrested must be a person concerned in. any cognizable offence or
against whom a complaint has been made or credible information has been
received etc. of his having been so concerned. In the instant case, could one
say that all these conditions were satisfied? According to the 18th Respondent
himself any belief or suspicion he had, was as a result of the complaint made
by a person to the P.C.C. who in turn referred it to the Bribery Commissioner
for investigation. The complaint as such was not against any named officer but
against all Customs Officers working at the Airport. The 18th Respondent
therefore could not have had any suspicion or credible information of the
commission of a bribery offence by any one or all of the Petitioners`. It was
a general allegation of bribery and as such under Section 32(1) (b) of 'the
Code of Criminal Procedure Act,

**184**

not one of the Petitioners could have been arrested unless all or any of them
were actually seen committing such an offence or-here was definite information
that any of all the Petitioners were concerned in the commission of such
offences. The arrest of the Petitioners in my view was highly speculative and
was for the purpose of ascertaining whether any of them-could be detected to,
have committed a bribery offence. No Police- Officer has the right to arrest a
person on vague general suspicion, not knowing -the precise crime suspected
but hoping to obtain evidence of the commission of some crime for which they
have the power to arrest. Even if such evidence comes to light the 'arrest
will be illegal because there will have been no proper communication of the
reason for the: arrest to the accused at the time of the arrest  .

Learned Counsel for the Respondent attempted to justify the action of the.
18th Respondent on the basis that what the 18th Respondent was doing was
investigating allegations-of bribery on the order of the Bribery Commissioner,
as he was empowered to do, under Section 3 of the Bribery Act 'but this
section presupposes that there are allegations of bribery against definite
individuals and not' allegations of a nebulous nature. In the result I am of
the view that the arrest of the Petitioners by the 18th Respondent was not
lawful.

The last matter that arises for consideration is whether as contemplated in
Article 13 the Petitioners were-informed of the reason for their arrest: It
was the, 18th Respondent's position that when he got the vehicles in which the
Petitioners were travelling stopped, he went up to the cars and informed the
Petitioners that he was investigating allegations of bribery made against
Customs Officers working at the Airport. It was the position of the
Respondent's Counsel that no information need have been given to the
Petitioners as at no time did the 18th Respondent intend arresting the
Petitioners.

This provision of .our Constitution reiterates what has been: the law on this
subject from the time of Christie v,. Leachinsky (2) where the House of Lords
held affirming the. judgment of the Court of Appeal "that (apart from special
circumstances, which did not sexist in this case), an arrest without warrant
can, be justified only if it is an arrest on a charge made known to the person
arrested and the pleas of justification failed.

**185**

It is a condition of lawful arrest that the party arrested should know on what
charge or on suspicion of what crime he is arrested. Therefore, just as a
private person arresting on suspicion must acquaint the party with the cause
of his arrest, so must a policeman arresting without warrant on suspicion
state at the time (unless the person is already acquainted with it), on what
charge the arrest is being made or at least inform him of the facts which are
said to constitute a crime on his part. Even if circumstances exist which may
excuse this, it is still his duty to give the information.'

The reason why it is incumbent on the police officer arresting to inform the
person arrested of the nature of the charge against him is that the latter has
.the opportunity of giving an explanation of any misunderstanding or of
calling attention; to-other persons for whom he may have been mistaken with
the result that further inquiries may save him from the consequences of false
accusation. It is therefore axiomatic that before one deprives a person -of
his liberty for whatever the period may be, it must be done in due course and
process of law.

The need to inform the person arrested of the charge which he is suspected of
having committed has been emphasised over and over 'again. Muttusamy v.
Kannangara (3); Mariadas Raj v. A. G. (4), Corea v. Queen (5) all reiterate
this principle.

In the instant case the 1st Respondent could not possibly have informed the
Petitioners, the charge on which they were being arrested for the reason that
here was no credible information available to him that the Petitioners had
committed any offence of bribery. What the 1st Respondent sought to do was to
arrest them on vague and general suspicion, not knowing the precise crime that
they are alleged to have committed but hoping to obtain evidence of the
commission of some offence of bribery by searching them after their arrest.
This the 1st Respondent has no sanction in law to do: I am therefore of the
view that these applications should be allowed as 1st Respondent has violated
the fundamental rights guaranteed to the Petitioners under Article 13(1) of
the Constitution. In the circumstances of this case, I am also of the view
that the ends of justice would be met if compensation in a sum of Rs. 500 Js
awarded to each- of the Petitioners and direct the State to make the payments
accordingly, There will be no costs. The moneys and articles taken charge of
from the petitioners could await the results of any proceedings, in the

**186**

Magistrate's Court or in a departmental inquiry, that may be taken. If no such
proceedings are taken, the Petitioners would be entitled to have such moneys
returned to them.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** \- I agree.

**

L. H. DE. ALWIS, J**. - I agree. _  
  
Application allowed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/4.html_  

