##  Ceylon Estate Staffs Union v. Land Reform Commission - SLR - 203, Vol 2 of
1987 [1987] LKSC 4; (1987) 2 Sri LR 203 (27 May 1987)

**

203

CEYLON ESTATE STAFFS UNION  
v.** **  
LAND REFORM COMMISSION**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C. J., ATUKORALE, J. AND H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.  
S.C. No. 7/86, C.A No: 1092/83.  
MARCH 30, 1987.

_

Certiorari-Industrial Disputes Act No. 43 of 1959 s. 4(1)-Arbitration Award-
Vesting of Estate in Land Reform Commission-Land Reform Law s. 42 (B)
5(a)-Land Reform (Special Provisions) Act No. 39 of 1981 s. 27A-Land Reform
Amendment Law No. 39 of 1975 s. 42H._

One Nandasena an employee of Halpe Estate belonging to Ceylon Rubber Co. Ltd.
was interdicted from his employment on 17-07.19 75 on being taken into custody
on an accusation of attempted murder by poisoning of the Superintendent of the
Estate. He was acquitted by the High Court on 13.09.77 on withdrawal of the
indictment but was not reinstated. On a reference to arbitration dated
21.01.81 under the Industrial Disputes Act No. 43 of 1959 s. 4(1) the
arbitrator made award on 28.02.83 ordering reinstatement and back wages. On
17.10.75 Halpe Estate vested in the Land Reform Commission (LRC) and
accordingly the rights and liabilities of the former-owners passed to the LRC.
By order of the President the Janatha Estates Development Board (JEDB) was
established and in terms of s. 27A of the Land Reform (Special Provisions) Act
No.39 of 1981 read with s. 42 H of the Land Reform Amendment Law No.39 of 1975
Halpe Estate was vested in the JEDB by order dated 12.03.1982. The liability
of the Commission in respect of the non-employment of Nandasena devolved on
the JEDB. The award of the arbitrator was against the LRC and made on 28.02.83
but on 12.03.82 Halpe Estate had vested in the JEDB. The Court of Appeal
issued a writ of certiorari quashing the award against the LRC. On appeal to
the Supreme Court an application to substitute the JEDB in the room of the LRC
was resisted on the ground of prejudice.

**

Held :**

(1) Add JEDB as a party.

(2) Justice requires that the JEDB in whom Halpe Estate is presently vested be
directed to perform the obligation of the LRC towards the workman as directed
by the award.

(3) Award amended to make JEDB liable.

**APPEAL** from order of Court of Appeal.

_

Mark Fernando P. C._ with _N. Abdul Rahman_ and _Miss S. Wijeyagunasekera_ for
the respondent.  
_  
Faiz Mustapha_ for JEDB.

_

Cur. adv. vult._

**204**

May 27, 1987.  
  
**SHARVANANDA, C.J.**

By application dated 7th September, 1983, the Land Reform Commission
petitioned the Court of Appeal for a mandate in the nature of a Writ of
Certiorari to quash the award dated 20.02.83 made by the Arbitrator,
Industrial Court on a reference to him of the dispute by the Minister of
Labour in terms of section 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act No. 43 of 1959.

By this award the Arbitrator ordered that

(a) the workman S. A. Nandasena, who was a member of the petitioner Union-the
Ceylon Estate Staffs Union (the Petitioner before this Court)-be reinstated by
the Land-Reform Commission from the date of his interdiction from work, namely
17.07.75

(b) that the, workman be paid all back wages consequent to reinstatement from
date of interdiction up to 31.03.83

(c) that the workman should be considered as having been in service during the
period of interdiction for the purpose of increment, promotion and any other
statutory payment.

The workman was an employee of Halpe Estate belonging to the Ceylon Rubber Co.
Ltd., in 1961 as an Assistant Factory Officer and Storekeeper. The estate was
managed by George Steuart & Co. Ltd., as managing agents. The workman was
taken into custody for suspected poisoning of the Estate Superintendent. He
was released on bail on 16.07.75. He asked for his job back on 17.07.75, but
by letter A1 he was interdicted. The workman was charged with attempted murder
and acquitted by the High Court. The indictment had been withdrawn on 13.09.77
as there was no prima facie case.

In the meantime on 17.10.75 Halpe Estate had vested in the Land Reform
Commission, under the Land Reform (Amendment) Law No. 39 of 1975, which
provided for the vesting of estate lands owned by public companies. Then the
workman demanded his job. He was not re-employed. The Ministry of Labour by
reference dated 21.01.81 referred the dispute to an Arbitrator. The matter in
dispute was whether the non-employment of the workman by the Management of the
Halpe estate was justified; if not to what relief the workman was

**205**

entitled. The parties to the dispute were Ceylon Estate Staffs Union
(petitioner to this court) which sponsored the workman's cause on the one part
and the Ceylon Rubber Co. Ltd. which owned Halpe Estate and the Land Reform
Commission which was vested with the estate on the other part.

As stated earlier Halpe Estate had vested in the Land Reform Commission on
17.10.75 in terms of section 42 (B) 5(a) of the Land Reform Law No.1 of 1972,
as amended by Land Reform Amendment Law No. 39/7.5.

Section 42(B) 5(a) provides

"Where any estate land is vested in the commission, the rights and liabilities
of the former owner of such estate land under any contract or agreement,
express or implied, which relates to the purposes of such estate land and
which subsists on the day immediately prior to the date of such vesting, and
the other rights and liabilities of such owner . . . . shall become the rights
and liabilities of the Commission. . ."

I agree with the Court of Appeal that the section applies to rights and
liabilities flowing from contracts of employment, as such rights and
liabilities relate to the running of such estate land. So the rights and
liabilities of the former owners, namely Ceylon Rubber Co. Ltd., vested in
terms of the above section on the Land Reform Commission on 17.10.75, and the
workman became an employee of the Land Reform Commission though he was under
interdiction.

Thereafter the President of Sri Lanka being in charge of the subject of the
State Agricultural Corporations Act No. 11 of 1972, by orders published in
Government gazette extraordinary No. 77/2-80 of 25.2.80 established
Corporations with the corporate name "Janatha Estates Development Board" Nos.
1-4 for the purposes set out in the First Schedule thereto.

In pursuance of the request by the Land Reform Commission, the Minister of
Agricultural Development and Research in terms of section 27A of the Land
Reform (Special Provisions) Act No. 39 of 1981 read with section 42H of the
Land Reform Amendment Law No. 39 of 1975 vested Halpe Estate in the Janatha
Estates Development Board by order notified in the Government gazette
extraordinary hereinafter referred to as 'JEDB' No. 183/10 - 1982 of 12.3.82.
By this order Halpe Estate became vested in the Janatha Estates Development
Board (hereinafter referred to as JEDB).

**206**

Section 27A (3) of the Land Reform (Special Provisions) Act No. 39 of 1981
provides that -

"Where any agricultural land or estate land or any portion thereof is vested
in a State Corporation by an order made under subsection (1) all the rights
and liabilities of the Commission under any contract or agreement, express or
implied, which relate to such agricultural land or estate land or portion
thereof, and which subsist on the day immediately prior to the date of such
vesting, shall become the rights and liabilities of such State Corporation".

By virtue of this provision, the liability of the Commission in respect of the
non-employment of the workman S. A. Nandasena devolved on the JEDB.

Upon the reference by the Minister, proceedings before the Arbitrator
commenced and oral evidence of the workman was taken on 2.12.81. The JEDB was
made a party to the Arbitration as agents of the L.R.C. and was discharged.
The fact that Halpe Estate had vested in the JEDB on 12.3.82 was communicated
to the Arbitrator after the proceedings, but in the course of written
submissions. The Arbitrator made his award on 28.2.83. By the said award he
ordered

(a) That the workman S. A. Nandasena be reinstated by the Land Reform
Commission from the date of the interdiction from work, namely 17.7.75;

(b) That the workman be paid all back wages from the date of interdiction up
to 31.3.1983, aggregating to Rs. 45,093.75;

(c) That the workman should be considered as having been in service during the
time of interdiction,

(d) That the sum of Rs.45,093.75 be deposited by the Land Reform Commission
with the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, Avissawella, within a week of the
date of the publication of the award in the Government gazette;

(e) Further held that the vesting of Halpe Estate in the JEDB from 12.3.82,
did not govern the dispute that was referred to him.

**207**

Dissatisfied with this award of the Arbitrator, the Land Reform Commission
moved the Court of Appeal for a writ of certiorari, quashing the award of the
Arbitrator on the ground that the rights and liabilities of the Commission
had, by Halpe Estate vesting in the JEDB devolved on the JEDB on 12.3.82.

The Court of Appeal by its order dated 22.1.85 held that the rights and
liabilities of the Land Reform Commission as de facto employer had passed on
to JEDB and that on the date of the award the Commission had ceased to be the
employer of the workman and had been relieved of liability by operation of
law. The Court held that the Arbitrator had erred in making the award against
the Commission and hence it quashed the award. The basis of the judgment of
the Court of Appeal was that the liability of the Land Reform Commission had,
prior to the date of the award, devolved on the JEDB and that as the Land
Reform Commission had ceased to be the workman's employer it could not carry
out the directions contained in the award. Being aggrieved with-the order of
the Court of Appeal the Ceylon Estate. Staffs Union has, with the leave of
this court preferred this appeal.

On the submission of counsel for the Commission, it appeared to this court
that the JEDB as successor of the Commission, should be added as a party and
be heard as to why it should not be substituted in place of the Land Reform
Commission in the award made by the arbitrator and be bound by the award. At
the hearing of this -appeal before this court, counsel appearing for the JEDB
objected to be added as, a party. He submitted that the JEDB was cited as a
party in the arbitration proceedings, though only as agents of the Land Reform
Commission and had quite correctly been discharged and that after the vesting
of the estate, namely after. 12.3.82, it had become a necessary party to the
arbitration proceedings, and that though it had become necessary to make it a
party to the proceedings, it was not added, as a party, and that in the
circumstances JEDB would be prejudiced, if in this appeal it is added as a
party for it to be bound by the award.

I see the force of the argument of counsel for JEDB. Ordinarily I would have
upheld the objection, but since the award was made on a Labour dispute and the
workman will be greatly prejudiced and grave injustice be caused to him if
the, award made by the Arbitrator is absolutely quashed only on the ground
that the liabilities of the Land Reform Commission had passed on to the JEDB
and that the latter has

**208**

not been made a party by the Arbitrator, as held by the Court of Appeal. The
workman should not suffer on account of the fact that the JEDB had become
vested with the ownership of the estate, subsequent to the Minister's
reference to arbitration. The objection of counsel for the JEDB is a technical
objection. There. is no question that as at the time of the reference to the
Arbitrator the Land Reform Commission was liable to the workman, for the
default of its original owner. But by the time the award came to be made in
1983 the JEDB had become the owner of the estate and had succeeded to the
rights and liabilities of the Commission. In terms of section 27A (3), the
liabilities of the Commission became the liabilities of the JEDB. The award
made by the Arbitrator related to that liability. Had JEDB been substituted in
place of the Land Reform Commission in the arbitration proceedings, the
Arbitrator would on the facts, have made the same award against JEDB.

In the circumstances justice requires that the JEDB in whom Halpe Estate is
presently vested, should be directed to perform the obligation of the Land
Reform Commission towards the workman as directed by the award. The workman
should not be driven from pillar to post and post to pillar in his quest for
justice especially as, had the JEDB been substituted in place of the
Commission before the arbitrator, the evidence shows that he would have made
the same award against the JEDB.

In the circumstances this court makes order adding JEDB a party to this
appeal, as the successor, in law of the Land Reform Commission.

Counsel for the JEDB conceded that the JEDB became liable to employ the
workman and pay him his wages and arrears as from the date Halpe Estate vested
in the Board. He disputed the Board's liability to pay the arrears of wages
prior to that date. He contended that section 27A (3) of Act No.39 of 1981 did
not make the liability of the Commission for such arrears the liability of the
Board.

We do not agree with this contention. We hold that by operation of law the
JEDB has succeeded to the rights and-liabilities of the Commission in respect
of the workman and that the liability in respect of which the award was made
became the liability of the JEDB and that JEDB will have to give effect to the
reliefs ordered by the award. Accordingly we substitute and add the JEDB in
place of the Land

**209**

Reform Commission in he award dated 22nd February, 1983 and make order
discharging the Land Reform Commission and directing the JEDB-

(a) To reinstate S. A. Nandasena from the date of interdiction from work,.
17.7.75;

(b) To pay S. A. Nandasena all back wages from the date of interdiction up to
31.3.1983 aggregating to Rs. 45,093.75;

(c) That S. A. Nandasena should be considered as-having been in service,
during the period of interdiction for purposes of increments, promotions and
any other statutory payments;

(d) To pay S. A.. Nandasena a further sum of Rs. 15,000 on account of all back
wages from 1.4.83 to 31.5.87:

(e) That a total sum of Rs. 60,093.75 be deposited by the JEDB with the
Assistant Commissioner of Labour, Avissawella on or before 30.6.87.

We have in the interests of justice taken the unusual course of amending the
award to make the JEDB liable. We formally dismiss the appeal against the Land
Reform Commission without costs, subject to the variation that we make order
as above against the JEDB who has been added as a party to this appeal.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** \- I agree.

**H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Award amended to make JEDB liable._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1987/4.html_  

