##  Bandaranaike v. Jagathsena and Others - SLR - 397, Vol 2 of 1984 [1984]
LKSC 4; (1984) 2 Sri LR 397 (12 December 1984)

**397**

# BANDARANAIKE

**v.**

# JAGATHSENA AND OTHERS

  
SUPREME COURT.

WANASUNDERA, J., COLIN‑THOME, J. AND CADER, J.

 S.C. APPEAL No. 58/82.

 M.C. HATTON No. 18725.

MARCH 5 TO 9, OCTOBER 22, 25, 26, 29, 30, 1984.



Criminal Law ‑ Unlawful assembly ‑ Insult, meaning of ‑ Mischief ‑ Penal Code,
sections 140, 484 read with 146, 410 read with 146 and 410 read with 32
‑Assessment of contradicted evidence.



Appeal ‑ Right of appeal of aggrieved person not a party to the original case
‑Article 128 of the Constitution ‑ Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of
1979, section 260 ‑ Judicature Act, No. 2 of 19 78, section 41 (1) ‑ Review of
questions of fact and law ‑ Articles 127, 128, 134(2) and 134(3) of the
Constitution.



The 1 st to the 6th respondents were charged in the Magistrate's Court of
Hatton on four counts with committing the offences of membership of an
unlawful assembly whose common object was to commit the offence of insult
against Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike and insult and mischief punishable under
sections 140, 484 and 410 read with 146 and 410 read with section 32 of the
Penal Code.



On the night of 13th May 1979 when Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike and her party
were in the Glencairn Bungalow at Dikoya the 1st to 6th respondents along with
some others had gone there and for about two hours indulged in singing obscene
songs insulting Mrs. Bandaranaike. On the directions of Mrs. Bandaranaike, one
Kamala Ranatunga who was with her had taken down a substantial part of the
words uttered on notepaper provided by her.

##  398



The Magistrate convicted the 1st to 6th respondents of the charges under
section 140 and 484 read with section 146 of the Penal Code and find the 1st,
2nd and 5th respondents Rs. 250 each and warned and discharged the others
ordering each of them to pay Rs. 200 as State costs.



The 1st to 6th respondents appeal to the Court of Appeal from the findings and
order against them of the Magistrate. Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike as a party
aggrieved was allowed to intervene in the proceedings before the Court of
Appeal and was heard by her lawyers. The Court of Appeal however acquitted all
the respondents and Mrs. Bandaranaike filed petition in the Supreme Court
seeking a review of the judgment of the Court of Appeal. By way of preliminary
objection her locus standi was challenged,



The respondents further challenged the evidence relating to their
identification and the credibility of the evidence of the prosecution
witnesses.

** **

## Held ‑



(1)        Under section 260 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of
1979 every aggrieved party has the right to be represented in "any criminal
court" by an attorney‑at‑Law and implicit in this right is the right to
address court and make submissions. This right is not confined to a Court of
First Instance; the expression "any criminal court" is wide enough to cover
all Courts including Appellate Courts having the necessary jurisdiction.
Section 41 (1) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978 lends support to this
interpretation. An attorney‑at‑law is entitled not only to assist and advise
his clients but also to appear, plead or act on behalf of them in every court
or other institution established by law for the administration of justice.



The Court of Appeal had rightly held that Mrs. Bandaranaike was an aggrieved
party and that this status did not cease with the conviction of the,
respondents in the Magistrate's Court. It was a status which continues until
the final disposal of the appeal. She was therefore entitled to be represented
in the Court of Appeal and her attorney‑at‑law was entitled to be heard in
that Court.



(2)        Under Article 128(2) the Supreme Court has a wide discretion to
grant special leave to appeal to itself from a judgment of the Court of Appeal
where in the opinion of the court the case or matter is fit for review by the
Supreme Court. Under Article 128(2) of the Constitution it is not necessary to
have been a party in the original Court to be granted a hearing in the Supreme
Court. Support for this view comes also from Article 134(2) and (3) of the
Constitution.



(3)        Under Article 127 of the Constitution the Supreme Court is the
final court with civil and criminal appellate Jurisdiction for the correction
of all errors in fact or in law committed by the Court of Appeal or any Court
of First Instance and may affirm, reverse or vary any order, judgment, decree
or sentence of the Court of Appeal. This wide power must be used with
circumspection. A court of appeal must attach the greatest weight to the
opinion of the judge who saw the witnesses and heard their evidence and
consequently should not disturb a judgment of fact unless it is unsound.
Unless (1) the verdict of the judge is unreasonably against the weight of
evidence, (2) there is a misdirection on the law or on the evidence, (3) the
court of trial has drawn the wrong inferences from matters in evidence, the
appeal court must not interfere with a judgment of fact.

##  399

** **

(4)        Whether words are insulting depend on a variety of circumstances
such as the context in which they were uttered, the intention, the tone and
the attitude of the person uttering them and the situation in which they were.
Section 484 requires that the person insulting should intend to provoke a
person to commit a breach of the peace or other offence or know it to be
likely that such provocation will cause that person to break the Public peace
or commit any other offence. The offence depends on the provocation oven and
not upon the provocation felt. It is not necessary that the person insulted
should in fact be provoked. The mere forbearance of the person insulted is
insufficient to protect the offender.



(5)        To constitute an unlawful assembly there must be an assembly of
five or more persons having a common object which is one of the six specified
in section 138 of the Penal Code. The mere presence of a person in an assembly
does not make him a member of an unlawful assembly unless it is shown that he
had done something or omitted to do something which would make him such a
member or unless being aware of facts which render any assembly an unlawful
assembly he intentionally joins that assembly or continues in it.



In a case where there are several accused the case against each accused must
be considered separately. Omnibus evidence of a general character must be
closely scrutinised in order to eliminate all chances of false or mistaken
implication of innocent persons. It is possible that only some members of the
assembly sang and that some of those in the assembly did not entertain the
common object.



(6)        When versions of two witnesses do not agree the trial judge has to
consider whether, the discrepancy is due to dishonesty or to defective memory
or whether the witness' powers of observation were limited. The demeanour of
the witness in the witness box must be taken into account.



(7)        The Magistrate had correctly evaluated the evidence of Mrs.
Bandaranaike and Kamala Ranatunga and the conflict in the evidence on the
number of pens used in recording the words of the songs does not make the
record of the song a fabrication. There is no doubt that the incident as
deposed to by Mrs. Bandaranalke did take place and her evidence is truthful
and that whoever sang the songs intentionally insulted her and gave
provocation to her. But the prosecution has not been able to establish beyond
reasonable doubt the identity of the persons who sang the songs or who
entertained the common object of intentionally insulting Mrs. Bandaranaike.



(8)        1st respondent having died when this appeal was pending the appeal
against his acquittal by the Court of Appeal abates.



**Cases referred to :**



(1)        _King v. Gunaratne et al 14 Ceylon Law Recorder 174._

_ _

(2) _        Martin Fernando v. The Inspector of Police Minuwangoda (1945) 46
NLR 210. _

_ _

(3) _        Haniffa v. Packeer (1949) 51 NLR 330._

_ _

(4) _        Fraser v. Sinnaiya (1910) 14 NLR 3._

_ _

(5) _        Jayasuriya v. Ratnayake (1949) 40 CLW 47. _

##  400



**APPEAL** from the Court of Appeal.



_H. L. de Silva, P.C._ with _Faiz Musthapha, S. Dassanayake, H. H. Ashroff_
and _K. Balapatabendi_ for petitioner.



_S. J. Kadirgamar, Q. C._ with _S. L. Gunasekera, Raja Dep and Daya Pelpola
for _1s _t_ _and_ 2nd __ respondents.



_K. Kanag ‑Iswaran with Rajah Dep_ for 3rd and 4th respondents.



_Mark Fernando_ with _Daya Pepola_  for 5th respondents.



_A. H. C. de Silva ,Q. C_. with _M. S. M. Naseem_ for 6th respondent.



_S. W. B. Wadugodapitiya, Addl_. _S.G._ with _D. P. Kumarasinghe, S.S.C._ for
7th and 8th respondents.



_Cur. adv. vult._

December 12, 1984.



**COLIN ‑THOME, J**



The 1st to the 6th respondents were charged in the Magistrate's Court of
Hatton in case No. 18725 on the following charges :‑



1.That on or about the 13th day of May, 1979, at Dikoya, within the
jurisdiction of this Court, you along with others were members of an unlawful
assembly with the common object of intentionally insulting and thereby giving
provocation to Sirima R. D. Bandaranaike, intending or knowing it to be likely
that such provocation would cause her to break the public peace or to commit
any other offence, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section
140 of the Penal Code ;



2. That at the same time and place and in the course of the same transaction one or more members of the said unlawful assembly did intentionally insult Sirima R. D. Bandaranaike by uttering (inter alia) the following words".... I very much like to get into a river along with Sirima and swim with her and also to suck both her lips....." and thereby gave provocation to her intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation would cause her to break the public peace or to commit any other offence, and thereby committed an offence in prosecution of the said common object of the said unlawful assembly, or such as the members of the said unlawful assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of the said common object, an offence punishable under section 484 read with section 146 of the Penal Code :



**  401**

  
3. That you did also in prosecution of the common object of the said unlawful assembly commit mischief by causing damage to the amount of Rs. 1,989 to the jeep bearing distinctive No. 31 Sri 1294 belonging to Sirima R. D. Bandaranaike an offence punishable under section 410 of the Penal Code read with Section 146 ;



4\. That in respect of the said act of mischief, you are also guilty of an
offence punishable under section 410 of the Penal Code read with section 32.



The case for the prosecution was that on the 13th of May 1979, at about 9 p.m.
a party of about 10 to 12 persons, which included the 1st to the 6th
respondents, came to Glencaim Bungalow in Dikoya occupied by the petitioner
and her party, shouting out "Where is Mrs. Bandaranaike the prostitute ?" and
thereafter indulged in singing obscene songs referring to Mrs. Bandaranaike.
Some of the words uttered were spoken to by A. R. Don Gunaratne Jayasinghe,
Mrs. Bandaranaike's bodyguard, and a substantial part of the words uttered
were taken down by Kamala Ranatunga at the request of the petitioner on
notepaper provided by her. The petitioner stated that she read what was taken
down that very night and the document P2 shown to her in Court contained what
was written down. The 1st to the 6th respondents did not give evidence but
called the Examiner of Questioned Documents and a licensed Surveyor who had
made a plan of Glencairn Bungalow. The Examiner of Questioned Documents
testified that the document P2 had been written with three ballpoint pens
while Kamala Ranatunga insisted that she had used only one ballpoint pen. The
Surveyor was called to show that Jayasinghe could not have seen what was
happening inside the bungalow through a window while standing at a point
outside the bungalow.



The learned Magistrate at the conclusion of the trial made order convicting
the 1st to the 6th respondents on the first two charges. The first, second and
fifth respondents were fined Rs. 250 each in respect of each charge ; the 3rd
respondent was warned and discharged ‑ the 4th and 6th respondents were also
warned and discharged and ordered to pay Rs. 200 each as State costs. All the
respondents were acquitted on the 3rd and 4th charges. The six respondents
appealed against their convictions to the Court of Appeal and the Court of
Appeal by its judgment delivered on the 31st August 1982, acquitted the
respondents upon the ground that if the learned

##  402



Magistrate had viewed the evidence adduced by the prosecution "in their proper
perspective," he would not have convicted the respondents.



The petitioner in her petition to us has canvassed the findings of the Court
of Appeal. The main grounds of the petition are :‑



( _a_ ) that the evidence of Jayasinghe, Kamala Ranatunga and the petitioner
when viewed "in their proper perspective" would have compelled a prudent man
'in the particular circumstances of this case to find the respondents guilty
of the charges ;



_(b)_  that it is inconceivable that these revolting obscene words were
falsely put into the mouths of these respondents by Kamala Ranatunga and the
petitioner when "milder" words would readily have occurred to them if they had
been inclined to fabricate evidence ;



_(c)_   that the testimony of the petitioner, a former Prime Minister of the
Island whose credibility the learned Magistrate did not doubt, established
that the impugned document P2 was in existence on the very night of the
alleged incident ;



_(d)_   that it was immaterial whether one ballpoint pen or three ballpoint
pens were used by Kamala Ranatunga. What was all important is whether what was
written down was what was uttered and that is amply corroborated by the
unimpeachable testimony of the petitioner which the learned Magistrate readily
accepted ;



_(e)_   that the utterances of the respondents on entering Glencaim Bungalow,
viz : "Where is Mrs. Bandaranaike the prostitute ?" and their subsequent
behaviour would have compelled any prudent man to infer that the unlawful
assembly was in existence prior to their "invasion" of the bungalow and the
common object of such assembly was to insult the petitioner ;



_(f)_  that the credibility of the witnesses is essentially a question of fact
and therefore eminently a question for the trial Judge. It is only in rare
cases that such a finding should be interfered with and this it is submitted
is not such a case ;



_(g)_  that the judgment of the Court of Appeal is erroneous and tends to
divert the due and orderly administration of justice in this country into a
new course which might be drawn into an evil precedent in the future ;

## 403



_(h)_  that the judgment of the Court of Appeal is, in the particular
circumstances of this case, manifestly unreasonable and if unreversed, would
occasion a grave miscarriage of justice.



The petitioner submitted that this case constituted a matter fit for review by
the  Supreme Court and prayed for such other and further relief as shall seem
fit and meet to this Court.



At this stage it is pertinent to observe that, the plaint was first filed in
this case on the 25th of May 1979, against 11 accused, charging them under two
counts as follows : ‑



(1)  that on or about the 13th May 1979, at Dikoya they insulted Sirima R. D.
Bandaranaike using words such as "... I like vermuch to get into a river with
Sirima and swim with her and to kiss both her lips while swimming and to suck
both her breasts....." and thereby gave provocation to her, intending or
knowing it to be likely that such provocation would cause her to break the
peace or to commit any other offence and thereby committed an offence
punishable under section 484 of the Penal Code read with section 32.



(2)  that at the same time and place aforesaid and in the course of  the same
transaction the accused did with intent to cause or knowing that they were
likely to cause wrongful loss or damage to Sirima R. D. Bandaranaike caused
damage to jeep bearing No. 31 Sri 1294 which was in the custody of the said
Sirima R. D. Bandaranaike by tearing the cover and by removing and destroying
the reflecting side mirror fixed on the right hand front mudguard so as to
reduce the value of the said jeep in a sum amounting to Rs. 1,987, and
committed mischief, an offence punishable under Section 410 of the Penal Code
read with section 32.



On the 5th of November 1977 the Police filed an amended plaint. The charges
against five of the accused were dropped and they were discharged. The two
counts in the plaint dated 25th May 1979 were altered to four counts against
the six respondents as stated at the outset of this judgment.



Learned Counsel for the respondents took the preliminary objection that the
petitioner had no locus standi. It was submitted that she was neither an
appellant nor a respondent in the Court of Appeal. The

##  404



Court of Appeal erred in allowing her application to be heard as she was not a
party in the proceedings. This concession by the Court of Appeal did not
convert her into a party and did not confer on her a right to appeal to the
Supreme Court. Under Article 128 of the Constitution the right of appeal was
restricted only to a party in any proceedings.



In the Court of Appeal learned Counsel for the petitioner made an application
to represent the petitioner, who he submitted was an  "aggrieved party" in the
case. He also asked to be allowed to address Court on her behalf. He relied on
the provisions of section 260 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of
1979 which reads :



"Subject to the provisions of this Code and any written law every person
accused before any criminal Court _may of right be defended by an attorney
‑at‑law, and every aggrieved party _shall have the right to be represented in
court by an attorney‑at‑law."



The corresponding Section in the repealed Criminal Procedure Code (Cap. 20)
was section 287 which stated :



"Every person accused before any criminal Court may of right be defended by a
pleader."



It is clear that the legislature intended that the right of representation
shall be extended to an "aggrieved party". The right to address Court and to
make submissions is implicit in the right of representation. This right is not
confined to a Court of first instance, a trial Court and a court holding an
inquiry. The expression "before any criminal Court" in section 260 is wide
enough to cover all Courts including Appellate Courts having the necessary
jurisdiction.



Section 41 (1) of the Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978, lends support to this
interpretation. It states :



"Every attorney‑at‑law shall be entitled to assist and advice _clients_ and to
appear, plead or act _in every Court_ or other institution established by law
for the administration of justice and every person who is a party to or _has
or claims to have the right to be heard_ in any proceeding in any such court
or other such institution shall be entitled to be represented by an
attorney‑at‑law."

**  405**



Every person who is either a party to or has or claims to have the right to be
heard in any proceedings in any Court is invariably a client of an
attorney‑at‑law. It follows, therefore, that an attorney‑at‑law shall be
entitled not only to assist and advice his clients but also to appear, plead
or act on behalf of them in every court or other institution established by
law for the administration of justice.



Applying these provisions to the circumstances of this case the Court of
Appeal has rightly held that Mrs. Bandaranaike was an  "aggrieved party" and
that this status did not cease with the conviction of the respondents in the
Magistrate's Court. It was a status which continues until the final disposal
of the appeal. She was therefore, entitled to be represented in the Court of
Appeal and her attorney‑at‑law was entitled to be heard in that Court.



It now becomes necessary to examine the relevant provisions of Article 128 of
the Constitution in relation to the petitioner's application for a review of
the judgment of the Court of Appeal :‑



" 128\.   (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any final order,
judgment, decree or sentence of the Court of Appeal in any matter or
proceedings, whether civil or criminal, which involves a substantial question
of law, if the Court of Appeal grants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court _ex
mero metu_ or at the instance of _any aggrieved party_ to such matter or
proceedings ;



(2) The Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal to
the Supreme Court from any final or interlocutory order, judgment, decree, or
sentence made by the Court of Appeal in any matter or proceedings, whether
civil or criminal, where the Court of Appeal has refused to grant leave to
appeal to the Supreme Court, or where in the opinion of the Supreme Court, the
case or matter is _fit for review_ by the Supreme Court :



Provided that the Supreme Court shall grant leave to appeal in every matter or
proceedings in which it is satisfied that the question to be decided is of
public or general importance."

##  406

           

Under Article 128 (2) the Supreme Court has a wide discretion to grant special
leave to appeal to the Supreme Court from a judgment of the Court of Appeal
where in the opinion of the Supreme Court, the case or matter _is fit for
review_ by the Supreme Court. Under Article 128 (2) you do not have to be a
party in the original case.



This view is strengthened on an examination of Article 134 (2) and (3) of the
Constitution :



"134 (2). Any _party_ to any proceedings in the Supreme Court in the exercise
of the exercise of its jurisdiction shall have the right to be heard in such
proceedings either in person or by representation by an attorney‑at‑law.



(3) The Supreme Court may _in its discretion grant to any other person or his
legal representative_ such hearing as may appear to the Court to be necessary
in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this Chapter."



In the instant case as there are questions of law and fact to be decided which
are of public and general importance I hold that this case is fit for review
by the Supreme Court and the preliminary objections are overruled.



Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that it is only in rare cases
that a finding on fact by a Magistrate should be interfered with. He submitted
that this was not such a case.



Under Article 127 of the Constitution ‑



"The Supreme Court shall, subject to the Constitution, be the final Court of
civil and criminal appellate jurisdiction in Sri Lanka for the correction of
all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by the Court of Appeal
or any Court of First Instance . . . . . . and it may affirm, reverse or vary
any order, judgment, decree or sentence of the Court of Appeal. ....."

##  407



This wide power must be used with circumspection. It is not necessary to
review the many decisions of this court which have hold that a court of appeal
should "attach the greatest weight to the opinion of the judge who saw the
witnesses and heard their evidence," and, consequently, should not disturb a
judgment of fact unless it is unsound. The principle embodied is a simple one,
and has been stated succinctly in two cases.



In the _King v. Gunaratne et al_ (1) Macdonell, C.J. stated :



"This is an appeal mainly on the facts from a Court which saw and heard the
witnesses to a Court which has not seen or heard, them, and in dealing with
this judgment I have to apply _the three tests, as they seem to be, which a
Court of Appeal must apply_ to an appeal coming to it on questions of fact :



(1) Was the verdict of the Judge unreasonably against the weight of evidence,



(2) Was there a misdirection either on the law or on the  evidence,

             

(3) Has the Court of trial drawn the wrong inferences from matters in
evidence."



In _Martin Fernando v. The Inspector of Police, Minuwangoda,_ (2)
Wijeyewardene, J. held that .



"An Appellate Court is not absolved from the duty of testing the evidence
extrinsically as well as intrinsically" although "the decision of a Magistrate
on questions of fact based on the demeanour and credibility of witnesses
carries great weight." Where "a close examination of the evidence raises a
strong doubt as to the guilt of the accused, he should be given the benefit of
the doubt."



It is common ground that the three most important witnesses in the case are
the petitioner, Kamala Ranatunga and Jayasinghe. Mrs. Bandaranaike stated that
she came to Hatton on the 12th May 1979 in connection with Urban Council
elections. She put up at the Glencairn Bungalow for the night. On the 13th
after the election campaign she returned to the bungalow at about 6 or 6.30
p.m. She was accompanied by Kamala Ranatunga, Jayasinghe, Chandrasena, Tilak
Liyanage, Taldena and a driver Simon. She had dinner at about 8

##  408



or 8.30 p.m. and thereafter retired to her room accompanied by Kamala
Ranatunga. This room adjoined the hall. The hall consisted of a lounge and
sitting room separated by an arch. Jayasinghe occupied the room next to her.
At about 9.15 p.m. she heard the tooting of a car horn and some persons
talking in a loud tone come inside the bungalow. A person was talking loud as
if he was addressing a meeting. She heard a group of persons Singing at
intervals. The singing came from the direction of the hall.



Mrs. Bandaranaike stated that she was unable to state the words of the song in
Court as they were so filthy. She had asked Kamala Ranatunga to note down the
words on note paper which she took from her bag. Kamala Ranatunga took them
down in her presence. Later as Kamala's handwriting was not easy to read she
got Kamala to read over the words to her. She identified P 2 and P 2 A as the
papers taken out of her bag on which Kamala wrote the words of the song. The
song caused her severe pain of mind and annoyance. She did not see the persons
who were singing the song. They continued to sing even after 11 p.m. She had
to get down the Manager of the hotel and she asked him to tell those persons
to allow them to be in peace as it was after 11 p.m.



Police Officers arrived at the bungalow after midnight. She did not make a
statement to them. They took Jayasinghe and Tilak to the Police Station.



Under cross‑examination she was shown P2 and repeated that it was written by
Kamala on her instructions. On the following morning (14th) she telephoned the
Inspector‑General of Police about the incident and told him that as she had to
proceed to Ratnapura that day for a meeting she had no time to make a
statement. The I.G.P. told her to get the others to make statements and to
speak to him when she returned to Colombo. She was not called upon by the
Hatton or Norwood Police to make a statement and she did not mention the
existence of P2 to them. She intended to produce it in Colombo.



On the 15th she spoke again to the I.G.P. about the alleged incident and
thereafter a police officer from the Cinnamon Gardens Police Station recorded
her statement that day. She told the police that in. sulting words were
uttered during the incident. At that time P2 was not with her, it was with
Kamala Ranatunga.

##  409



A group of persons were singing for about 1 1/2 hours. All that was sung was
not written down. She was questioned again by the police on the 18th and in
that statement she referred to P2. When she was questioned by the police on
the 15th she was not questioned in detail about the words used in the song.
They were not words that could be stated to the police, particularly to a male
police officer. On the 1st occasion she made only a short statement. On the
18th she gave a detailed statement to the police.



Kamala Ranatunga stated that Mrs. Bandaranaike asked her to take down the
words of the songs as much as possible. She wrote the words on paper and with
the pens which were in Mrs. Bandaranaike's bag. The songs, which were sung
very fast, were recorded by her on two sheets of paper P2 and P2A. These
papers were in her custody until she handed them over to the police on the
18th. The singing went on for about two hours. She took down the words while
standing. She said she used a black colour ballpoint pen. She was unable to
give the number of papers taken by her from the bag where files were kept. She
was concentrating on not missing any of the words sung. She stood close to the
door and took them down. There were occasions when she went to speak to the
security officers in the next room. Later she showed P2 to Mrs. Bandaranaike.
Mrs. Bandaranaike found it difficult to read her handwriting and so she read
it over to her. At that time the black ballpoint pen was on the table.



Kamala Ranatunga's attention was drawn to line 4 on the reverse of P2. She
stated that it appeared to her that the page was written with only one pen. It
was not clear to her that there was a difference in the colour between line 4
and the other lines. On the 15th she returned to her home in Veyangoda. She
was asked to come to Rosmead Place on the 18th. On that day she made a
statement to the police and handed over P2 and P2A to them.



Jayasinghe stated that at about 9.15 p.m. four or five vehicles approached the
hotel with their horns tooting. At that time he was near the telephone
counter. About 10 persons in a group entered the bungalow after knocking at
the door. The first respondent came in first. There were about three women in
this, group. After they came in Jayasinghe withdrew towards his room. They
asked whether there was a stud bull present. Jayasinghe stated, "They asked
'where is Sirima the prostitute ?' I am not sure as to who had asked so. One

##  410



among them asked this." Jayasinghe added, "The group of persons who had come
asked for a bottle of whisky." Then he corrected himself and said the 1st
respondent asked for whisky and the manager said there was no whisky and then
the 2nd respondent caught him by his shirt. Then some of the persons went into
the sitting room while others went to the kitchen through the corridor.



Jayasinghe stated he saw an employee taking tumblers and ice to the group. "I
think they took liquor thereafter. I saw them taking liquor." While consuming
liquor they started to sing in an insulting manner ; he could recollect some
of the words, they were :



"I like very much to get into a river with Sirima and swim and to suck both
her lips while swimming, and also to squeeze both her breasts. I like very
much to get together with Sirima and get into a river and swim and to get on
to her stomach : There comes the foolish son ; Mother take the girl inside the
house ; Please take the girl inside. Sirima my life, please listen, your
period is over now. This is our period ; The elephants have come in 1977."



A male was singing the song in lead while others joined in the refrain. Mostly
it was the men who sang.



In answer to Court Jayasinghe said :



"I _saw them_ singing in the sitting room and swinging golf clubs I can
compare the voice of the leading singer to that of the 5th accused."



He stated that the 1st, 2nd and 5th respondents were among those who sang. He
had heard the 1 st respondent speak briefly the previous evening but he was
not familiar with the voices of the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th respondents
before the 13th.



He identified the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th respondents in the corridor. In
addition to the six respondents there were others who were singing. The group
sang till about 11.10 p.m. After the Manager spoke to them they prepared to
leave. He heard one of those persons shout that if the vehicles were not
removed within five minutes they would push them down the hill. He was not
sure who said this. He saw the 1st, 2nd and 5th respondents pushing the
petitioner's jeep. When

##  411



the jeep was being shaken hard the 3rd respondent made an appeal to his
father, the 1st respondent, "Father, there is no necessity to do this, enough
of this singing, let us go". Then the 1st respondent pushed the 3rd respondent
who fell and the 1st respondent pulled out a pistol and threatened to shoot
his son. Then the 4th respondent and some other women pulled these respondents
away, pushed them into the cars and left.



Later Jayasinghe accompanied police officers to the Hatton Police Station
where he made a statement. Sub‑Inspector Sanders of the Norwood Police Station
arrived after that and he made a statement to him as well. On the 1 8th he
made a 3rd statement to the C. I. D.



Under cross‑examination it became evident that when jayasinghe stood by the
door of his room during the incident nobody inside the lounge or the sitting
room was visible from this position. Having conceded this vital fact he then
stated for the first time that he went outside the bungalow and peeped through
a window near the lounge for two or three minutes. He did not however say what
he saw or whether he identified any of the respondents singing insulting songs
at the time he peeped through the window. He admitted that if he had not gone
out and peeped through the window nothing happening in the sitting room or
lounge would have been visible to him from near the door of his room.



It was established by the defence that Jayasinghe did not mention in his first
statement to the Hatton Police in the early hours of the 14th that he had
peeped through a window near the lounge. He stated falsely under
cross‑examination that he had mentioned this fact in his statement to the C.
I. D. on the 18th. This was disproved by Inspector C. K. Gajanayake who
recorded his statement on the 18th. Jayasinghe stated that he got close to the
window, one or two feet away from it, and peeped through it into the hall. He
pointed out the window from which he peeped in the plan 1 D 2 produced by the
defence. Having first said that he peeped through the window only once, later
he stated that he had done so twice or thrice and that he spent more than 10
or 15 minutes peeping through the window.



The only other witnesses who claimed to have identified the respondents are
Chandrasena and Tilak Liyanage. They were security officers. Chandrasena
stated that 12 or 13 persons arrived that night. During the singing, on the
instructions of Jayasinghe, he took up a

##  412



position at a place like a balcony. This was at the rear of the building
between Jayasinghe's room and the kitchen. Chandrasena stated that at a
certain stage the first respondent came into the corridor and attempted to
kick the door of the room occupied by Mrs. Bandaranaike but the 6th respondent
rushed up and pulled him away. He also stated that he saw the 2nd and 5th
respondents with, golf clubs walking about in the hall shouting "Who is in
come out"



Apart from the impossibility of observing anybody in the lounge or sitting
room from the balcony it was also established that Chandrasena was not
familiar with the voices of any one of the respondents. He had seen the 1st,
3rd and 4th respondents briefly on the previous day and he saw the 2nd, 5th
and 6th respondents for the first time on the day of the incident. Chandrasena
stated that he mentioned to the Police that the 2nd and 5th respondents were
walking up and down with golf clubs. He was forced to admit that he did not
know the 2nd and 5th respondents at the time of the incident and that he did
not mention to the police that some persons were walking about with golf
clubs. He did not know the names of the respondents. Later he learnt their
names from outsiders.



Tilak Liyanage's evidence was rejected by the learned Magistrate. He was not
at the bungalow for most of the time as he went to make a telephone call to
the police from a nearby hospital. He stated that at the time the respondents
arrived he was in an upstair room in the bungalow. He could not explain how he
could have seen the respondents from the room upstairs. Liyanage claimed that
prior to the incident he had known the 1st, 3rd and 4th respondents. However,
it was proved by the defence that in his statement to the Hatton Police he had
stated "Jagathsena was there. I did not know the others"



Simon Singho, driver of Mrs. Bandaranaike, stated that the singing started at
about 9 p.m. He was unable to recollect the words and he did not identify the
persons who sang. After about half an hour he went on foot to the Hatton
Police Station about 4 or 5 miles away and made a complaint as he feared that
Mrs. Bandaranaike would be harassed by the group of persons who arrived at the
bungalow.



None of the respondents gave evidence at the trial. The defence called P. H.
Gunatunga, B.Sc. Hons., Examiner of Questioned Documents. He had 15 years'
experience in examing questioned

##  413



documents. He was also trained at the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Crime
Detective Laboratory for 1 1/2 years and at Ottawa and Toronto. He also had
experience in examining inks and pens including ballpoint pens and other
writing implements. He had examined the document P 2 under a microscope under
ultra violet and infra red rays. The examination revealed that‑



"1 .the colour of the ink in the entire handwriting in the body of page 1 of P
2 and the   colour of the ink in the handwriting from line 9 to the last line
of page 2 of P 2 is violet  blue.



2.  the colour of the ink in the handwriting from line 1 to line 3 and from line 5 to 8 in page of  P 2 is blue black.



3\.  the colour of the ink in the handwriting in line 4 of page 2 of P 2 is
bright blue



He also examined document P 2A. The entirety of this document was written with
a ballpoint pen using an ink which was violet blue in colour. P 2 had been
written with three different ballpoint pens.



Under cross‑examination Mr. Gunatunga stated that the method adopted by him
for his report on P 2 was only a physical analysis. He conceded that sometimes
colours of ink change due to effluxion of time and also due to chemical
action. The common factor in P 2 and P 2A was that ballpoint pens with blue
colour ink were used. He stated that he had done chemical tests on ballpoint
pen ink in other cases but he had not done so in this case. Permission of
Court is obtained for chemical tests as the documents may get damaged. The
learned Magistrate accepted his opinion that P 2 had been written with three
different ballpoint pens.



D. L. Y. A. Wijewardhana, a licensed Surveyor, was called by the defence to
produce plans of the Glencairn Bungalow marked 1 D1 and 1 D2. He had prepared
these plans on the 1Oth February 1980. He stated that the window through which
Jayasinghe claimed that he had peeped was 6 feet 7 1/2 inches above the
ground. The cross‑section was 51 1/2 inches He stated that a person cannot see
what is happening inside the lounge if he stood very close to the window. It
is so even if he stood two feet from the window. There was a flower bed
outside this window which was 9 feet in width. The flower bed was between the
window and the path.

##  414



The main submissions of any substance by learned Counsel for the respondents
about Mrs. Bandaranaike's evidence were that‑



(1) She was a belated witness. She did not inform the Police of the details of
the insulting words until the 18th.



(2) P 2 and P 2 A were belatedly handed over to the Police.



(3) She did not mention the obscene and insulting words in Court



In the Magistrate's Court Mrs. Bandaranaike stated that she was unable to
state the words of the song as they were so filthy. She was shown P 2 and P 2
A both by State Counsel and by Defence Counsel and she stated that they
contained the words of the song. She therefore adopted the contents of P 2 and
P 2 A.



With regard to the submission of belatedness she was aware on the 13th night
that the Hatton and Norwood Police were informed of the incident. She herself
informed the I.G.P. about the incident on the 14th morning and on the 15th as
well. She made a brief statement to the Police on the 15th and made a detailed
statement to the C, 1. D. on the 18th when she for the first time referred to
P 2 and P 2 A and the contents of these documents.



She explained that she was reluctant to mention the words to a police officer.
They were not words that could be stated to a male police officer by a woman.
She had promptly informed the police and the I.G.P. in a general way about the
incident. Considering the nature of the songs sung the learned Magistrate
accepted her explanation as reasonable and truthful. We have no hesitation in
accepting the learned Magistrate's evaluation of the testimony of this
witness.



The main submissions against Kamala Ranatunga's evidence were that :



(1) According to the Examiner of Questioned Documents three ballpoint pens of
different shades of blue ink were used to write the words in P 2. But
according to Kamala Ranatunga she used only a black coloured (ink) ballpoint
pen.



(2) The interpolations on the reverse of P 2 in different shades of blue ink
indicate that these documents were not made contemporaneously but long after
the event.



(3) The tendering of P 2 and P 2 A to the police only on the 18th supports the
theory of subsequent fabrication.

**  415**



The discrepancy between the evidence of the Examiner of Questioned Documents
and Kamala Ranatunga's evidence regarding the number of ballpoint pens used in
writing P 2 has to be critically examined in the light of all the
circumstances connected with the writing on P 2 and P 2A. Kamala stated,
"Madam said that there were paper and pens in her bag and asked me to write
down as much of the songs as possible." She wrote most of the words in a
standing position. Sometimes she went to the next room to speak to the
security officers. The singing went on for almost two hours. She was
concentrating on the words sung.



When versions of two witnesses do not agree the trial judge has to consider
whether the discrepancy is due to dishonesty or to defective memory or whether
the witness' powers of observation were limited. In weighing the evidence the
trial judge must take into consideration the demeanour of the witness in the
witness box. Was she trying to the best of her ability to speak the truth ?
The learned Magistrate had to bear in mind that Kamala was giving evidence
eight and a half months after the incident. Could she be expected to remember
every detail of the incident ? She was unable to remember how many papers were
taken from the bag. She made these entries at night. Can she be expected to
remember precisely several months later what shade of blue ink she used ?
According to her recollection she used a black coloured (ink) ballpoint pen
which was clearly an error. The learned Magistrate considered all these
circumstances and held that Kamala made a mistake about the number of pens she
used as all her attention was focussed on recording the words of the song and
not on the implements used for recording it. This mistake was trivial and did
not detract from the fact that Kamala Ranatunga had recorded the words on P2
and P2A contemporaneously with the singing.



Mrs. Bandaranaike and Kamala Ranatunga have explained the delay in handing P 2
and P 2 A to the Police. The Police were aware of the incident on the 13th
night. Mrs. Bandaranaike informed the Inspector‑General about the incident on
the 14th morning and again on the 15th. Being a woman she was too ashamed to
give details of the obscene words to a male police officer. The learned
Magistrate has accepted this explanation and rejected ' the suggestion of a
subsequent fabrication of these documents. It was never suggested to Mrs.
Bandaranaike and Kamala Ranatunga under cross‑examination that they had a
motive for implicating the respondents. There was not even a suggestion that
they knew the respondents earlier. In their

##  416



evidence they did not state that any of the respondents sang the obscene
songs. They did not set eyes on them at any stage during the incident. The
Magistrate has considered all the circumstances in which Kamala Ranatunga
wrote the words in P 2 and P 2 A and has accepted her evidence. We see no
reason for rejecting the learned Magistrate's assessment of the evidence of
Kamala Ranatunga.



Learned Counsel for the respondents submitted that the words used in the song
did not amount to an "insult" as contemplated in section 484 of the Penal Code
which states :



"484\.    Whoever intentionally insults and thereby gives provocation to any
person, intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation will cause
him to break the public peace, or to commit any other offence, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to two years, or with fine, or with both."



The verb "insult" according to the Oxford Dictionary means "to assail with
scornful abuse or offensive disrespect ; to offer indignity to : to affront,
outrage." Whether words are insulting depend on a variety of circumstances,
such as the context in which they were uttered, the intention, the tone and
the attitude of the person uttering them, and the situation in which they were
uttered. Whether words or acts are insulting is to be determined on the facts
of each case. Similarly, whether the insult was intentional is also a question
of fact to be inferred from the tone, the manner in which the words are spoken
and other circumstances.



Section 484 requires that the person insulting should intend to provoke a
person to commit a breach of the peace or other offence or know it to be
likely that such provocation will cause that person to break the public peace
or commit any other offence.



The mere forbearance of the person insulted and provoked from committing a
breach of the peace is insufficient to protect the offender. The offence
depends on the provocation given and not upon the provocation felt. In
_Haniffa v. Packeer_ (3) per Basnayake, J. it

##  417



was held that an offence under section 484 is committed where the insult is
provocative of a breach of the peace even where the person insulted is not
actually provoked or where he shows restraint :



It is not necessary "that the person insulted should in fact be provoked or
yield to his resentment, because if it were so it would not be an offence to
insult a person who by virtue of his position in life exercises restraint or
is too weak to retaliate. The law is not designed to enable those who do not
respect law and order to oppress those who do. The section punishes insults
which are provocative of the breach of the peace, and their character is
judged by the standard of the ordinary reasonable man, holding them criminal
if they are ordinarily sufficient to arouse passions and provoke retaliation."



See Gours' _Penal Law of India_ , 8th Edn. pp. 3662 ‑ 3667 : _Fraser v.
Sinnaiya_ (4) and _Jayasuriya v. Ratnayake_ (5).



Applying these principles to the present case there is no doubt that whoever
sang the songs intentionally insulted and gave provocation to Mrs.
Bandaranaike, knowing it to be likely that such provocation will cause her to
break the public peace, or to commit any other offence, an offence punishable
under section 484 of the Penal Code.



The crucial question in this case is whether the respondents have been
identified beyond reasonable doubt as members of an unlawful assembly with the
common object of intentionally insulting and thereby giving provocation to
Mrs. Bandaranaike as stated in the first two charges. It must be remembered
that the six respondents were only some of the 10 to 12 persons who came to
the Glencaim Bungalow on the 13th night.



The only witnesses who claimed to have identified the respondents as being
members of an unlawful assembly were Jayasinghe, Chandrasena and Tilak
Liyanage. Jayasinghe stated that a male was singing the song in lead while
others joined in the refrain. Mostly it was the men who sang. He said he saw
them singing in the sitting room. Under cross‑examination it was established
that he stood by the door of his room during the singing and he conceded that
from this position he could not see what was happening in the lounge and
sitting room where the singing was taking place. He then stated for the first
time that at a certain stage he went outside the bungalow and peeped

##  418  


through a window into the lounge. He did not mention this important fact in
examination in chief, nor had lie mentioned it in his statement to the Hatton
Police on the 13th night or in his detailed statement to the C. I. D. on the
18th. In any event he did not state that he saw anyone sing when he peeped
through the window. The learned Magistrate did not consider these
unsatisfactory features in Jayasinghe's evidence when evaluating his evidence.
These defects taken together with the Surveyor's evidence that the window was
6 feet 71/2 inches from the ground and that no one close to it could have seen
anyone inside the lounge prove that Jayasinghe's evidence of peeping through a
window was pure invention.



If Jayasinghe could not see what was happening inside the lounge and sitting
room from near his door then it was also impossible for Chandrasena to have
seen any occurrence in the lounge and sitting room fron the balcony which was
further away. It is probable that the learned Magistrate did not analyse
Chandrasena's evidence because of this glaring defect. Tilak Liyanage claimed
that he heard the respondents sing. He admitted that he was in an upstairs
room at the time. The Magistrate correctly rejected his evidence,



To constitute an unlawful assembly there must be an assembly of five or more
persons having a common object. The common object must be one of the six
specified in section 138 of the Penal Code. It is settled law that mere
presence of a person in an assembly does not make him a member of an unlawful
assembly unless it is shown that he had done something or omitted to do
something which would make him a member of an unlawful assembly or unless
being aware of facts which render any assembly an unlawful assembly he
intentionally joins that assembly, or continues in it.



What has to be proved against a person who is charged with the offence of
being a member of an unlawful assembly is that he was one of the persons
constituting the unlawful assembly and entertained the common unlawful object
of the assembly. In a case where there are several accused the case against
each accused must be considered separately. Omnibus evidence of a general
character must be closely scrutinised in order to eliminate all chances of
false or mistaken implication of innocent persons.



In the instant case there is no reliable evidence that Jayasinghe, Chandrasena
and Liyanage saw the respondents sing. They were not in a position to see what
was happening in the lounge and sitting

##  419



room. There was no evidence, therefore, of the behaviour of each member of the
assembly during the singing In order to infer that each respondent was
actuated by a common unlawful object. It has not been established beyond
reasonable doubt that all ten or twelve persons in the lounge and sitting room
were singing the insulting songs. It is possible that only some members of the
assembly sang. The witnesses did not have that degree of familiarity with the
voices of the respondents and others in the assembly to identify them by their
singing. The possibility that some of those in the assembly did not entertain
the common object cannot be ruled out.



The learned Magistrate had not marshalled the evidence against each respondent
separately so as to consider each case individually. He has also omitted to
consider items of evidence favourable to some of the respondents on the vital
question whether they entertained a common object of intentionally insulting
Mrs. Bandaranaike ‑ notably the cases of the 4th and 3rd respondents ‑ the
wife and 18 year old son of the 1st respondent. It would not have been unusual
for them to have accompanied the 1st respondent with an innocent intention.
there is also evidence that when the 1st respondent was leaving the bungalow
he pushed a jeep belonging to Mrs. Bandaranaike and that his son, the 3rd
respondent, tried to pull him away saying, "Father, we need not do this,
enough of this singing, let us go." When the 1st respondent set upon his son
and threatened him with a pistol the 4th respondent and the other ladies
pulled them apart and bundled everyone into their vehicles and saw them off
the premises. It is also in evidence that when the 1st respondent attempted to
kick the door of Mrs. Bandaranaike's room the 6th respondent rushed up to him
and dragged him away. If these respondents are excluded the charges on the
basis of an unlawful assembly fails. For reasons best known to the prosecution
a charge of intentionally insulting Mrs. Bandaranaike under section 484 of the
Penal Code based on was not included in the amended plaint.



It has been brought to our notice that the 1st respondent died pending the
conclusion of the hearing of this petition. The petition against his acquittal
by the Court of Appeal therefore abates.



While we have no doubt that the incident as deposed to by Mrs. Bandaranaike
took place and her evidence is truthful we however find that the prosecution
had not been able to establish beyond resonable doubt the identity of the
persons who  sang the songs or who

##  420



entertained the common object of intentionally insulting Mrs. Bandaranaike. It
is also a requirement of the law that an unlawful assembly should consist of a
minimum number of five persons. It has not been established beyond reasonable
doubt that five or more persons in the assembly entertained a common unlawful
object.



The petition is refused. There will be no costs.



**WANASUNDERA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**CADER, J.** ‑ I agree,

_  
Petition refused._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/4.html_  

