##  Gangulwitigama Pannaloka Thero v. Colombo Saranankara Thero and Others -
SLR - 332, Vol 1 of 1983 [1983] LKSC 4; (1983) 1 Sri LR 332 (24 March 1983)

# 332

**GANGULWITIGAMA PANNALOKA  
THERO**

**v.**

**COLOMBO SARANANKARA THERO AND  
OTHERS**

  
SUPREME COURT,

SHARVANANDA, J., RATWATTE, J.,

AND COLIN‑THOME, J,,

S.C.NO 17/81, C.A. NO. 353/72(F)

D.C. COLOMBO NO. 11150/26

SEPTEMBER 9TH 1982,

OCTOBER 14TH & 15TH, 1982.



Succession to the Viharadhipathiship of a Temple-Section 4(1) and (2) of the
Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance ‑plea of "resjudicata" from both parties ‑
Section 24,33,34,207, 406(2), of the Civil Procedure Code.  


The plaintiff‑Appellant claimed on two grounds to the Viharadhipathiship of
the temple Called "Wijewardana Aramaya" situated at Skinne's Road, Kotahena
after the death of its former Viharadhipathi (Gangulwitigama Saranatissa
Thero). He claimed that according to a deed No. 1125 of 27.9.1958 (P6) which
created a line of succession to the Viharadhipathiship and that he being the
senior pupil of the said Saranatissa Thero, he was the lawful Viharadhipathi
of the said temple.



The defendant-respondent denied the plaintiff's claims and in turn claimed
that he is entitled to the incumbency of the said temple on a different
writing dated 14.9.1959 (D2) and that he

#  333

**  **

is a senior pupil of the said Saranatissa Thero.



The trial judge held against the plaintiff's claim, on deed (P6) , which was
affirmed by the court of Appeal. On the issue of seniority the trial judge
concluded that the plaintiff was the senior pupil of the said Saranatissa
Thero. Though the Court of Appeal affirmed this, it however, held against the
trial Judge's decision that the writing D2 is not the act and deed of
saranatissa Thero and that it conveyed no right to the incumbency of the
temple to the defendant. The claim in reconvention of the defendant was upheld
and the defendant was declared the Viharadhipathi of the said temple.



The main issue was res judicata. Both parties contended that the other party
was precluded by the earlier judgment and decree in case D.C. Colombo 9357/L
from maintaining his claim to the incumbency of the temple. The trial judge
upheld the argument of res judicata set up by both parties. Both parties
appealed on this and the Court of Appeal set aside the trial judges decisions.



# Held -



(1) That though the plaintiff's claim to the Viharadhipathiship of the temple
based on deed P6 cannot be sustained, on the basis of the dates and names of
the robbing and ordaining tutors, he is the senior pupil of Rev. Saranatissa
Maha Thero.



(2)  That the trial judges' observation that "all the circumstances confirm
the suspicious and questionable character of the writing D 2" in, in the
perspective of the case, apt and well‑founded. The Court of Appeal, was not
justified‑in reversing the finding respecting the validity and genui­ness of
the document D 2 by the trial judge.

#  334



(3) That the District Judge misdirected himself in law in holding that the
judgment and decree in case No. 9357/L operated as res Judicata against the
plaintiff and precluded him from maintaining this action. The facts probanda
to establish the ingredients of the cause of action in each case are different
and the rights claimed in the two actions are not the same. The Court of
Appeal is in error in holding that what the defendant had pleaded in his
answer in case No, 9357/L was by way of defence and not by way of counter
claim. Since there had been no adjudication no rule of res judicata estops the
defendant from setting up the plea as a defence. The defendant is barred from
maintaining his present claim in reconvention to have himself declared
Viharadhipathi of the temple, but he is not precluded or estopped from
resisting or defending plaintiff's claim on the grounds which support his
claim to Viharadhipathiship.



(4) That the plaintiff-appellant is the lawful viharadhipathi of the said
"Wijayawardena Aramaya" entitled as controlling viharadhipathi of the said
temple and its temporalities, to control, administer and manage the same.



**Cases referred to:**



_1\. Somaratna vs. Jinaratne (1941) 42 N.L.R. 361  
 _

_2\. Chand Koer vs. Pratab Singh, 16 Cal. 98 (P.C)  
 _

_3\. Samichi vs. Pieris (1913) 16 N.L.R. 257 at 261  
 _

_4\. Ranhoti vs. Singho (1935) 14 C.L Rec. 91.  
 _

_5\. Krishna vs. Thevarajah (1959) 62 N.L.R. 511  
 _

_6\. Punnirulapillai vs. Western India Oil Distribution Co. Ltd., A.I.R. 1948
Madras 270.  
 _

_7\. Jayawardena vs. Aranolishamy, 69 N.L.R. 49.  
 _

_8\. Fernando vs. Perera (1923) 25 N.L.R. 197.  
 _

_9\. Radheyshiam vs. Nazir Khan A.I.R. 1937 Oudh 394.  
 _

_10 Dhammajoti vs. Sobita (1913) 16 N.L.R. 408._  

# 335

**  **

_11\. Piyatissa Terunnanse vs. Saranapala Terunnanse (1938) 40 N.L.R. 262_



**APPEAL** from an order of the Court of Appeal .  


_E. Amerasinghe, S.A.,_ with _L.C. Seneviratne Lakshman Peiris_ and _Miss D.
Guniyangoda_ for plaintiff-appellant.  


_H.L.de Silva, S.A._ with _S.Mahenthiran_ for defendant respondent.

_Cur.adv.vult._

  
March 24, 1983.



**SHARVANANDA, J.,**



The Plaintiff‑Appellant instituted this action on 23rd August 1963 against the
Defendant-­Respondent praying inter alia for a declaration that the
Plaintiff‑Appellant is the lawful Viharahipathi of the temple called
'Wijayawardana Aramaya' situated at Skinner's Road North, Kotahena and that as
the controlling Viharadhipathi of the said temple and its temporalities he is
entitled to control and administer the same.



It is admitted that the founder and the first Viharadhipathi of this temple
was Gangulwitigama Saranatissa Thero and that the temple is exempted from the
operation of section 4(l) of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance, but is
governed by section 4(2). The said Gangulwitigama Saranatissa Maha Thero died
on the 27th August 1960. This dispute that has arisen in this case is in
respect of the succession to the Viharadhipathiship of the said temple with
the death of the said Saranatissa Thero.



The Plaintiff‑Appellant based his claim to the Viharadhipathiship on two
grounds. He stated that according to deed No. 1125 dated 27.9.1958 (P6) the
said Saranatissa. Naha Thero created a line of succession to the
Viharadhipathiship of the said temple, according to the rule known as
'Gnathisisya Paramparawa' and appointed the Plaintiff‑Appellant,

#  
336

who is a blood relative of the said Saranatissa Maha Thero to succeed him as
Viharadhipathi The Plaintiff claimed that the said deed P6 constitutes a valid
nomination and appointment of the Plaintiff to the office of Viharadhipathi of
the said temp in succession to the said Saranatissa Maha Thero and that he was
therefore a lawful Viharadhipathi of the said Wijewardena Aramaya. The
Plaintiff further claimed that, in any event, he being the senior pupil of
Saranatissa Maha Thero he had succeeded the latter priest as Viharadhipathi of
the said temple.



The Defendant‑Respondent denied the plaintiff's claim to the
Viharadhipathiship of the said temple and in turn claimed a declaration he is
entitled to the incumbency of the said temple on the following grounds :-



a) That he is a senior pupil of Saranatissa Maha Thero and is thus the lawful
Vihara dhipathi of this temple.



b) That the said Saranatissa Maha Thero had by writing dated 14.9.1959 (D2)
nominated and appointed him to succeed to the incumbency of this temple on his
death; the defendant had by virtue of the said document D2 , succeeded as the
lawful Viharadhipathi of this temple.



c) That, on the day following the nomination of Saranatissa Maha Thero, the
Sanga Sabha together with the Plaintiff‑Appellant and other pupils of the
deceased priest elected and nominated the Defendant as the Viharadhipathi of
this temple.



d) The Plaintiff‑Appellant has by his conduct and consent to the said election
and/or nomination renounced and/or abandoned any right of the plaintiff to the
incumbency and that the.

#  337



plaintiff was thereby estopped from making the present claim and cannot have
and maintain this action.



The Plaintiff‑Appellant by his replication denied that the defendant was a
senior pupil of Saranatissa Maha Therc or that the writing dated 14.9.1959 ‑
D2 was the act and deed of the deceased Saranatissa Maha Thero. He also denied
(a) that the Sanga Sabha nominated or elected the Defendant‑Resopndent as the
Viharadhipathi or (b) that the Plaintiff or other pupils of the said
Saranatissa Maha Thero at any time acquiesced in or consented to the
appointment of the Defendant as an incumbent or (c) that he renounced or
abandoned any of his rights to the incumbency of this temple as alleged by the
Defendant.



The trial Judge has held against Plaintiff's claim based on deed No. 1125
dated 27.9.1958 to the Viharadhipathiship of the temple. This finding has been
affirmed by the Court of Appeal. I am in agreement with the conclusion of the
Courts below that the Plaintiff's claim to Viharadhipathiship of the temple
based on deed P6 cannot be sustained.



On the issue of seniority, the trial Judge has accepted the evidence of the
Plaintiff which was supported by the 'Upasampada" Register (P2) and documents
P6 and P21, that he is the senior pupil of Rev. Saranatissa Maha Thero by
robing and ordination. The Defendant was a pupil of Saranatissa Maha Thero
only by ordination,, Under the Buddhist Ecclesiastical law pupilage is
conferred by robing or by ordination and a robed Pupil is entitled to succeed
to the incumbency of the tutor, whether he has been ordained or not Robing
precedes ordination and the pupil who is the first to be robed is the senior
pupil, who is entitled to succeed his predecessor. ( _Senaratne vs. Jinaratne_
)(1) . On the basis of the dates and

# 338

  
the name of the robing and ordaining tutors given in the declarations P1, P2
and P3, the District Judge concluded that the Plaintiff was the senior pupil
of  Saranatissa Maha Thero. The Court of Appeal has affirmed this finding . No
valid reason to differ from this conclusion has been advanced and I hold that
the Plaintiff is the senior pupil of Rev. Saranatissa Maha Thero.



The evidence and contention of the Defendant that he was appointed as
Viharadhipathi of  the  temple by the Sanga Saba at a meeting held on the day
after the cremation of  Saranatissa Maha Thero and that the Plaintiff had
consented to and acquiesced in his election has been rejected by the trial
Judge. On the  evidence on record the findings  of the trial Judge on this
issue cannot be faulted.The main argument in this appeal related to the issue
of res judicata.. Both Plaintiff and Defendant contended that the other party
was precluded by the earlier Judgment and Decree in case D.C.  Colombo  9357/L
from maintaining his claim to incumbency of the temple. In the earlier action
9357/Linstituted on 14th  of December 1960, the plaintiff‑Appellant, along
with seven other P1aintiffs had sued this Defendant for a declaration of title
to the said land on which the temple was built, the buildings, the furniture
and other articles within the buildings on the land for ejectment of the
Defendant priest and for damages, on the basis that the subject matter was
pudgalika property' of Rev. Saranatissa Maha Thero and that he had gifted the
property to the Plaintiffs by Deed No. 1125 dated 27th September 1958 (P1)
subject to the terms thereof. In that action the Defendant had field answer
stating that  the said land and premises constituted sangika' property and
that the deed P6 was invalid and no effect in law. The Defendant has further
stated that he was the senior pupil of Rev. Saranatissa Maha  Thero and had as
such succeeded to the  


   **339  
 **

Viharadhipathiship of the temple on the death of Saranatissa Maha Thero and
further prayed for a declaration that he was the lawful Viharadhipathi of the
said temple and entitled to the premises. The said case No.9357/L went to
trial on eleven issues all touching on Plaintiff's claim. The
Defendant‑Respondent raised the decisive issue whether the said temple
property was Sangika property and if so whether the plaintiff could maintain
his action. The defendant respondent, though in his answer, had by way of a
claim in reconvention prayed for a declaration that he was the lawful
Viharadhipathi of the temple, did not raise or put in issue his claim whether
he was the senior pupil and if so he had succeeded the said Saranatissa Maha
Thero as Viharadhipathi of the temple. By its judgment dated 3rd June 1963 the
trial Court held that the property was Sangika property and dismissed the
plaintiffs' action in case No.9357/L. This judgment was affirmed in ap­peal on
20th July 1966 by the Supreme Court.



On the basis of the judgment and decree in case No. 9357/L the
Defendant‑Respondent contends that due to the failure of the Plaintiff to
claim in case No. 9357/L that he was the senior pupil of Saranatissa Thero and
was the lawful Viharadhipathi of the temple, the judgment and decree in the
said case operated as res judicata against the plaintiff and that sections 33,
24 and 207 of the Civil Procedure Code taken together barred him from making
the present claim. On the other hand the Plaintiff‑Appellant contends, on the
basis of the pleadings judgments and decree in case No. 9357/L, that though
the defendant had pleaded in case No. 9357/L that he was the, senior pupil of
Rev. Saranatissa, Maha Thero and had become the lawful Viharadhipathi of the
temple on the death of Saranatissa. Maha Thero and had prayed for a
declaration that he was the lawful Viharadhipathi of this temple, he had
failed to put these matters



#  340

in issue in case No. 9357/L and had thereby abandoned his claim, and was
barred by the  provisions of section 406 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code from
agitating the said issues in  this case and make a claim that he was the
senior pupil of Saranatissa Maha Thero and is the lawful Viharadhipathi of the
said temple.



The trial Judge upheld the argument of res Judicata set up by both parties and
dismissed the claim in reconvention of the defendant. Both parties appealed
from the judgment of the District Judge dismissing their claims to the Court
of Appeal The Court of Appeal  by its judgment dated 22.11.1979 set aside the
District Judge's determination on the pleas of res  judicata raised by both
parties to the case and held that the judgment and decree in case No. 9357/L
did not operate as res judicata or as an estoppel against the claims of the
Plaintiff and Defendant in this case.

  
Though the Court of Appeal affirmed t findings of the District Judge that the
Plaintiff was a senior pupil of Rev. Saranatissa Maha Thero and that he had
not abandoned the claim for incumbency, it however held that Rev. Saranatissa,
Maha Thero had by writing dated 14.9.1959(D2) nominated and appointed the
Defendant Respondent to the incumbency of the temple and temporalities and  it
set aside the findings of the trial judge that  the said writing D2 was not
the act and deed of Saranatissa Maha Thero. In the result the plaintiff's
action has been dismissed with costs and the claim in reconvention of the
defendant has been upheld and the defendant respondent declared the
Viharadhipathi of the temple and its temporalities by the Court of Appeal. The
Plaintiff has preferred this appeal against the judgment the Court of Appeal.



#  341





In my view the District Judge misdirected himself in law in holding that the
judgment and decree in case No. 9357/L operated as res judicata against the
Plaintiff and precluded him from maintaining this action. The
Plaintiff‑Appellant had along with seven others claimed in action No. 9357A
title to the land on which the temple is built and the buildings thereon on
the footing that they constituted 'pudgalika property' of Saranatissa Maha
Thero which were actually disposed of by him by Deed No. 1125 ‑ P6 in their
favour and that the entirety of the said property had devolved oft them
according to P6. On the other hand the claim of the Plaintiff ‑ Appellant in
this action is founded on the premise that the temple and its temporalities
constitute 'sangika property' and that as senior pupil of the last incumbent
he has succeeded as the Viharadhipathi. In this action the Plaintiff prays for
a declaration that he is the lawful Viharadhipathi of the temple and entitled
as controlling Viharadhipathi of the said temple and temporalities, to control
and administer the same. The District Judge has fallen into the error of
assuming that the cause of action in the present case is identical with the
cause of action in case No. 9357/L .The cause of action pleaded in the earlier
case No. 9357/L was defendant's denial of the plaintiff's title to the land
and premises described in the schedule to the plaint in the case, namely the
land on which the temple is built with the buildings standing thereon together
with the furniture and other articles on the said building. The cause of
action pleaded by plaintiff in the present action is defendant's denial of
plaintiff's status and office of Viharadhipathi of the temple. The facta
probanda to establish the ingredients of the cause of action in each case are
different and the rights claimed in the two actions are not the same. The
earlier action is based on Ownership of the property on which the temple is
built, while the present action seeks to establish

#  342



 entitlement to the office of the Viharadhipat which carries with it the right
to the possession and control of the temple and its temporalities. The rights
claimed are different in nature and context, the grounds of title to the
respective rights are different and the causes of action are distinct. True
that the defendant had in the earlier action resisted the plaintiff's claim
the ground that the land and temple are 'sangika property' and that he was the
lawful Viharadhipathi of the temple and entitled, as such to be in possession
of the said premises and temple. But, as observed by Lord Watson in _Chand
Koer vs. Pratab Singh,_ (2) "the cause of action has no relation whatever to
the defence which may be set up by defendant, nor does it depend upon the
character of the relief prayed for by the plaintiff. It ref entirely to the
grounds set forth in the plaint the cause of action or in other words, to the
me upon which the plaintiff asks the Court to arrive at a conclusion in his
favour." This principle been accepted and adopted by our Courts (Vide _Samichi
vs. Peiris_ (3) _, Ranhoti vs. Singho_ (4), _Krishna vs. Thevarajah_ (5) _._
The plaintiff, though he could have set up, was not bound to have set in the
earlier action No. 9357/L, his rights to incumbency of the temple on the
ground that he the senior pupil of Rev. Saranatissa Maha Thero; a person is
not bound to sue on an alternative ca of action; his failure to do so in the
former action does not bar the present action declaration that as the senior
pupil of Saranati Maha Thero, he is the lawful Vihahradhipathi of temple in
suit. The bar does not operate when cause of action in the subsequent suit is
not same as in the previous action. The defenda­nt's plea of res judicata
based on sections 34 and of the Civil Procedure Code is misconceived f what
would be res judicata in terms of t sections are rights and reliefs which
could have been claimed or put in issue between the parties



#  343  


upon the cause of action for which action No 9357/L was brought. Further'‑the
Plaintiff in the present case could not have joined in action No. 9357/L his
personal claim to the Viharadhipathiship of the temple with the claims of
other plaintiffs in that action, to the land on which the temple was built
which was the subject matter of that action ‑there would have been misjoinder
of parties and causes of action



I shall now deal with the plaintiff's contention that since the defendant had
failed to put in issue in case No. 9357/L his claim to be declared the senior
pupil of Rev. Saranatissa, the present Viharadhipathi of the temple, the
judgment and decree in the said case No. 9357/L operate as res judicata in
respect of the said claim ( issues 7 and 8 raised by the plaintiff ).



In my view no question of res judicata is involved in respect of the
defendant's claims; for there has been no adjudication on the said claims in
the earlier action; the claims were not put in issue. Counsel for the
plaintiff however, contended that what precludes the defendant from
maintaining his claim in this action is not any rule of res, judicata but the
statutory bar created by section 406(2) of the Civil Procedure Code. He urged
that the defendant had in his answer in case No. 9357/L not only denied and
resisted the plaintiff's claim but in fact had made a claim in reconvention
that he be declared the lawful Viharadhipathi of the temple in suit and
entitled to the premises. He submitted that since the defendant had however
refrained from framing any issue with respect to his claim in case No. 9357/L,
the defendant is con­sequently precluded by the said provisions of section
406(2) from reagitating that claim in the present action.

#  344

  
Counsel submitted that where a defendant makes a claim in reconvention, he is
presumed to be  in the position of plaintiff in so far as the said claim for
reconvention is concerned. He based submission on section 75(E) of the Civil
Procedure Code. The Defendant having put forward his claim reconvention was
bound to put in issue and have decided all matters on which he founded his
claim in reconvention. The section provides that a claim in reconvention duly
set up in the answer has same effect as a plaint in a cross action. Counsel
cited in support of his submission the case of _Punnirulapilliai vs. western
India Oil Distrlbution Co. Ltd_.(6) where it was held that since a defendant
who prefers a counter claim is in the posit of a plaintiff in respect of his
claim in reconvention, Order 23 Rule J(3) of the Indian Civil Procedure Code
which corresponds to section 406(2) of our Civil Procedure Code would operate
preclude him from bringing a fresh action for­ the same matter, the subject of
his claim in reconvention if he withdraws or abandons his claim recoavention
without the permission of Court      .



The Court of Appeal has said that the defendant had in case No. 9357/L only
pleaded a defence and not set up a claim in reconvention and has reasoned that
sections 34, 207 and 406 of the Civil Procedure Code apply in the case of a
defendant only when a claim in reconvention is made by the defendant and not
where the defendant has only pleaded to the Plaint. In my view the Court of
Appeal is in error in holding that what the defendant had pleaded in his
answer in case No. 9357/L was by way of defence and not by way counter claim.
In his answer in that case the defendant had in paragraph 8 not only pleaded
byway of defence that he was the senior pupil of Rev. Saranatissa Maha Thero
and the Lawful Viharadhipathi of the said temple and entitled to the premises
and place of worship, but had in his



#  345  


prayer asked not only that  the plaintiff's action be dismissed but that he (
the defendant) be declared the lawful Viharadhipathi of the temple and
entitled to the said premises. The defendant had thus sought not only to
justify his possession of the temple and the premises on the ground that he is
the lawful Viharadhipathi of the temple, but had proceeded to pray for a
declaration that he is the lawful Viharadhipathi and entitled to the premises
in suit, on the grounds set out in the body of the answer. The plaintiff, in,
fact had filed his replication dated 4th May 1961, denying defendant's claim
in reconvention and prayed for its dismissal.



In my view the failure of the defendant in case No. 9357/L to put in issue his
claim to the incumbency amounts to an abandonment of his claim by the
defendant. The Court had not granted him permission for such abandonment.
Section 406(2) provides that if the plaintiff withdraws from the action or
abandons part of his claim without the permission of Court, he shall be
precluded from bringing a fresh action for the same matter or in Respect of
the same part. The 'matter' referred to in section 406(2) does not mean the
property in respect of which an action is brought. It means the cause of
action in respect of which the action is brought. It includes the facts and
circumstances upon which the right to relief claimed by the party who
withdraws or abandons his ‑claim depends. _( Jayawardena vs. Aranolishamy_ ),
(7). As stated earlier, this bar to a fresh suit in respect of the subject
matter of the former action which had been withdrawn without the permission of
Court is not based on the principle of res judicata but is attributable to the
provision enacted in section 406(2). The stringency of this section is such,
that the fact that an action was withdrawn before the service of summons does
not take the case out of the provisions of section 406; an action is

#  346

  
instituted when a plaint is presented. _Fernando vs. Perera_ (8).



On the above view of the matter I agree with, the contention of Counsel for
the plaintiff that  the defendant in the present action is precluded by the
statutory bar created by section 406(2) of the Civil Procedure Code from
resurrecting his claim in reconvention viz. that he be declared entitled to
the incumbency of the temple on the grounds which could have been put in issue
in the earlier action 9357/L by way of fresh action or fresh claim in
reconvention against the plaintiff.  


But the defendant's claim is not irrelevant or purposeless in plaintiff's
present action. Since there had been no adjudication, no rule of res judicata
estops the defendant from setting up plea as the defence. Section 406(2) does
not extinguish a party's right; it only bars his remedy; it does not operate
to preclude the party from resisting the plaintiff's claim on the bas of the
right in which he founded his claim reconvention. The prohibition enacted by
section 406(2) of the Civil Procedure Code applies actions and not to
defences. Where a defendant raises a plea of set off but withdraws it with the
permission of the Court, he will not precluded from raising the same plea by
way of defence in a subsequent suit against him. _Radheyshiam vs. Nazir Khan_
(9).



On the above analysis of the question of res judicata or estoppel by statutory
bar, raised the parties, I am of the view that the defendant barred from
maintaining his present claim reconvention to have himself declared
Viharadhipathi of the temple, but he is not precluded estopped from resisting
or defending plaintiff's claim on the grounds which support his claim
Vibaradhipathiship. For the purpose of his defence

#  
 347

  
the defendant can reagitate the issue of Viharadhi­pathiship which he
abandoned in action No. 9357/L. Hence if the defendant establishes in this
case either that he is the senior pupil of Saranatissa Maha Thero or that he
had been appointed and nominated by writing dated 14.9.1953 ‑ D2 by
Saranatissa Maha Thero to succeed him as incumbent of the temple, though the
defendant will not be entitled to any declaration that he is the lawful
incumbent of the temple he can negate the plaintiff's claim and have the
plaintiff's action dismissed,



Finally there is the defence of the defendant that Saranatissa Maha Thero
appointed the defendant by writing dated 14th September 1959 marked D2, to
succeed him as Viharadhipathi of the temple. The defendant is admittedly a
pupil of Saranatissa Maha Thero, though not the senior pupil. A
Vihara­dhipathi has the right to nominate his successor from amongst his
pupils, even a junior pupil over the head of the senior pupil. _Dhammajothi
vs. Sobitha_ ,(10) _, Piyatissa Terunnanse vs. Saranapala Terunnanse_ (11).
The Plaintiff has challenged the genuineness of the said writing and has
averred that it is not the act and deed of the deceased Saranatissa Thero. The
burden of establishing that the writing D2 was the act and deed of the
deceased lay on the defendant. The trial Judge has, on the analysis of the
evidence and the probabilities of the case, held that the writing D2‑is not
the act and deed of Saranatissa Thero and that it conveyed no right to the
incumbency of the temple to the defendant. The Court of Appeal had disagreed
with the finding of the trial Judge and has held that the writing D2 is a
valid and authentic document and that it constitutes, a nomination of the
defendant to succeed the writer to the incumbency of the temple and its
temporalities. Counsel for the plaintiff‑appellant has relevantly urged that
the Court of Appeal was not justified in reversing

#  348

  
the trial judge's finding. of Primary fact. The question whether D2 is the act
and deed of deceased is essentially a question of fact and a Court sitting in
appeal over the judgment of trial Judge should be slow to interfere with the
findings of fact reached boy a trial Judge, unless it is satisfied that such
finding is against weight of evidence or that no person acting judicially and
properly instructed as to relevant law could have come to such conclusion.



Apart from the signature appearing In D2 which, according to the evidence and
report of t, handwriting expert was that of Rev. Saranatissa,  the body of the
document is riot in his handwriting;  it is typed. The Court of Appeal has
observed that " there is complete absence of any suspicious features on the
face of the document. itself." I regret that I cannot skare this perception of
document. I note an unexplained space between body of the document and the
signature. The circumstances in which the document D2 was all to have been
executed and the probabilities of case further caution against accepting it at
face value.



According to the defendant, the deceased priest had, on his return from the
funeral of his brother from Ratnapura on 12.9.1959, that very night come to
his room at about 12.30 a.m. indicated to him that he was going‑to devise
Viharadhipathiship of the temple to the defendant  and on the following night
at about 12.30 a.m. had brought the typed document D2 and read it to and Rev.
Walane Ananda and handed over the document to Rev. Walane Ananda for safe
keeping, a little after midnight on that day. Defendant at one stage said that
he identified Rev. Saranatissa's signature on D2, but later, in cross
examination tried to make out that the priest signed the document in his
presence. The trial Judge has quite



**  349**  


Justifiably pointed out that there are several circumstances relating to the
execution of the document D2, which are suspicious and which mill take against
its acceptance. I agree with the aboservation of the trial Judge that " it
seems met unlikely that the Nayake priest could have come to the defendant's
room at about 12.30 a.m. on the very night that he returned from Ratnapura in
order ­to tell the defendant that he had decided to change his mind in regard
to the deed of gift of the Ketahena temple to the plaintiff. Moreover one
would ordinarily ham expected the Nayake priest to have summoned the junior
priest to his room if he wished to speak to him. The defendant's evidence that
he came again the following night  at about the same time and read D2 to him
and Rev.Walane Apanda, who had been got down by the defendant on the
instructions of the Nayake priest sound too artificial to be believed ‑ D2 is
a typed document; there is no typewriter in the temple, it would have been
typed elsewhere. It must necessarily Nave been done on the 13th, since the
document was handed over to Rev. Ananda for safe keeping a little after
midnight on that day, but the document strangely bears the date of 14th
September." I agree with the District Judge that the circumstances surrounding
the execution of the document D2 as deposed ‑to by the defendant are highly
suspicious and question­able. It is a telling circumstance that though the
defendant was well aware of the execution and existence of the document D2,
‑by which the incumbency was devised to him, he had not, in the earlier case
Mo. 9357/L based  his claim to the incumbency on the writing D2 dated 14.9.59,
nor was the said writing referred to in the defendant's pleadings in that
case. This document surfaced only in the defendant's list of documents dated
5th July 1961\. As the trial Judge has quite rightly observed It there is no
reason why the defendant should have concealed the existence of D2, if it was
a genuine and untainted document until after the trial in the

#  350

  
earlier case commenced." Further the defendant had not produced this document
before the Sanga Saba which he said was convened immediately after the funeral
at Ratanapura in order to decide the succession to the Viharadhipathiship of
the two temples at Pelmadulla and Kotahena. The defendant did not produce D2
even when the plaintiff came to the Kotahena temple to assert his rights to
the Viharadhipathiship, shortly after the funeral of Rev. Saranatissa Maha
Thero. He has also not mentioned the existence of the writing in his complaint
to the Police dated 18.9.60 - D27. The trail Judge's observation" all these
circumstances confirm the suspicious and question able character of the
writing D2" is, in the perspective of the case, apt and well-founded.



A writing such as D2 by which an incumbent of a Buddhist temple nominates a
person to succeed him on his death is in the nature of a testamentary
disposition. Where such writing is relied on to support nomination to
incumbency the burden lies on the party who relies on such document to
establish to the satisfaction of Court that the document is the act and deed
of the deceased and if circumstances exist which arouse the suspicion of the
Court, as to the genuineness of the document or a circumstances in which the
document is alleged to have been executed, the Court should be vigilant and
jealous in examining the evidence in support of the writing which it should
not accept and act upon unless the suspicion is removed and it is judicially
satisfied, as in the case of a Last will, that the writing represents the true
disposition of the deceased.



In my view the very legitimate suspicions respecting the document D2, and  its
belated disclosure by defendant, taken together, conduce to a high degree of
improbability

#  351

  
that the writing is authentic. The acceptance of the authenticity of the
writing depends on defen­dant's evidence. It is to be noted that the defendant
is evidence on a number of matters had rightly been rejected by the District
Judge. In the circumstances one cannot, with confidence act on the defendant's
evidence and accept the document as the act and deed of the deceased priest
which it purports to be.



The Court of Appeal was not justified in reversing the finding respecting the
validity and genuineness of the document D2 by the trial Judge.



I therefore set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal dismissing the
plaintiffs action and allowing the defendant's claim in reconvention. I also
set aside the judgment of the District Judge dismissing the plaintiff's action
with costs. I allow the appeal of the plaintiff‑appellant with costs and enter
judgment for the plaintiff­-appellant declaring him the lawful Viharadhipathi
of the Wijewardana Aramaya, Skinner's Road North, Kotahena, entitled as
controlling Viharadhipathi of the said temple and its temporalities, to
control, administer and manage the same. I dismiss the defendant's claim in
reconvention. The Plaintiff as Viharadhipathi is entitled to be in possession
of the temple and the temporalities. The defendant respondent had wrongfully
denied the plaintiff's vigilant and jealous in examining the rights of the
Viharadhipathiship of the temple and its temporalities and has been wrongfully
in possession of the temple and its temporalities and collecting the rents
therefrom. The Plaintiff in his evidence has assessed the damage that he has
suffered by the defendant's wrongful possession at Rs. 450/- a month. The
defendant has not suggested that this amount is excessive. I direct the
defendant to pay the plaintiff-appellant a sum of Rs. 400/‑ per month,  from
the date of the plaint

#  352

  
i.e. 23rd August 1963 until the plaintiff is restored to and quieted in
possession of the said temple and the temporalities. Since the defendant is
admittedly a pupil of Saranatissa Thero he is as such entitled to reside at
the Vihare.



I do not order the ejectment of the defendant and I direct the defendant to
put the Plaintiff in quiet possession of the temple and its temporalities. The
defendant-respondent will pay the plaintiff-appellant the latter's costs in
this Court, in the Court of Appeal and the District Court.



**RATWATTE, J.,** I . agree.



**COLIN THOME, J**.I agree.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/4.html_  

