##  Sithamparanathan v. People'S Bank - SLR - 124, Vol 1 of 1989 [1982] LKSC
4; (1989) 1 Sri LR 124 (5 November 1982)

**

124

SITHAMPARANATHAN  
v.  
PEOPLE'S BANK

**

SUPREME COURT  
RANASINGHE. C J. TAMBIAH, J. AND AMERASINGHE. J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 47/86  
C.A. NO. 34/80  
LT. NO. 1/11038/74  
OCTOBER 31 AND NOVEMBER 1, 1988.

_

Industrial Dispute - Evaluation of evidence - Question of law - Review of
evidence by Appellate Court - Wrongful termination a Bank's Service - Loss of
confidence-_ _Selective punishment-_ _Nature of awardable relief._

At the relevant time the appellant was the Officer-in-Charge of the Corporate
Department of the respondent People's Bank while one P.M.P. Peiris was the
Officer-in-Charge and Ledger Officer of the Savings Department, During the
lunch hour (1 2 noon to 1.00 p.m.) the appellant covered Peiris duties as
Ledger Officer. After interdiction on 11.7.1 971 the appellant was on
24.5.-1-972 served with- a charge sheet accusing him. on seven counts mostly
of fraud and fraudulent withdrawals from the Savings Bank when functioning as
the Ledger Officer at Duke Street. A domestic inquiry was held arid the
appellant was exonerated. An inquiry -by the Criminal Investigation Department
failed-to pinpoint any criminal involvement on the part of the appellant Yet
on 5.6.1 974

**125**

the appellant's services were terminated with effect from VI.7.1971. The
appellant sought relief from the Labour Tribunal- Reinstatement with back
wages or compensation for loss of career and pension. At the Labour Tribunal
the Bank made seven allegations against the appellant but this time accused
him mainly of dishonest participation. In its written submissions the Bank
confined itself to four allegations Three of dishonest participation' in
fraudulent withdrawals and one of unauthorised possession of a Savings Bank
Pass Book. The L. T. President was satisfied with the proof on two of these
charges of dishonest participation and in addition he held as proved a charge
of negligently authorising a payment which even the Bank had jettisoned at the
stage of written submissions. In addition he made no definite finding on the
charge of unauthorised possession of a Savings Bank Pass Book,

After a delay of nearly one year he held that the appellant was not directly
guilty of fraud or fraudulent transactions but his conduct was not absolutely
above board and he was not a fit and proper person to be employed in a Bank
and therefore termination of his services was for a good cause. The ultimate
ground of termination was loss of confidence.

In appeal the Court of Appeal accepted the findings of the Labour Tribunal and
dismissed the appeal. The appellant appealed to the Supreme Court.

**

Held;

**

  1. Failure to properly evaluate evidence or to take into account relevant considerations, in such evaluation is a question of law and is reviewable by an Appellate Court. -  


  2. The President of the Labour Tribunal had failed to take into account relevant items of evidence favourable to the appellant and his finding of guilty is erroneous and untenable. The finding that though the appellant-was not directly guilty of fraud or fraudulent transactions, his conduct had not been above board is inconsistent with and contradictory to his earlier findings of dishonest participation.   


  3. Loss of confidence has two aspects in Labour Law:

  1. Loss of confidence- may justify termination by the employer.  


  2. Loss of confidence may be a circumstance from which a Court may conclude that reinstatement is not the appropriate relief, despite a finding that the termination is not justified.

Though theoretically there is no restriction as to the class of employee in
respect of whom termination of employment may be effected on the loss of
confidence. it usually applies in respect of employee's, who hold positions of
trust and confidence such as accountants, cashiers and watchers or who perform
a certain degree of responsible work.

**126**

On the first aspect, though a regular charge sheet cannot be prepared and an
opportunity to meet it given yet it is perfectly open to the employer to
terminate the services of an employee whose every loyalty to the employer was
suspect and there were more than reasonable grounds to entertain the
suspicion.

On the second aspect though in a case of wrongful dismissal the normal remedy
is reinstatement there are circumstances in which a Tribunal will be entitled
in its discretion to order compensation in lieu of reinstatement like loss of
confidence in the employee who occupied a position of confidence or reasonable
suspicion falling short of being a sufficient ground for termination but a
relevant circumstance on the question of reinstatement

(4) It was not the Bank's case that the termination was for reasonable
suspicion and loss of. confidence. The President of the Labour Tribunal has
clearly misdirected himself in law when he finally concluded that the
termination was for good cause as the appellant's conduct was not above board
and he (the appellant) was not a fit person to be continued in employment as
he holds a  
position of confidence.

(5) Peiris too was interdicted along with the appellant. Although Peiris
admitted fraud in respect of Pass Books and two fraudulent cheque transactions
he was reinstated and demoted. On the other hand the appellant though
exonerated in the domestic inquiry was dismissed. The action of the' Bank was
clearly discriminatory. Per Tambiah J: "A Public Institution like the People's
Bank cannot afford to be selective in-its punishment of two officers holding
the same rank in the same Institution". #9; '

(6) The appellant was dismissed-on 5. 6. _1A\_ He applied for relief to the
Labour Tribunal on 23. 7. 74 and the President delivered, his order on 7. 1.
80.- 51/2 years later taking nearly one year for his order after conclusion of
the evidence.

Per Tambiah J: "The tragic feature in this case is the inordinate delay in the
hearing of this case in the Labour Tribunal and in the delivery of its order."

  7. The just and equitable order should be immediate reinstatement with all arrears of salary from 1.7.71 (less receipts) and other benefits including retrial benefits as if there was no break in service.  


  8. The strange features in regard to this charge are that the relevant voucher for a payment of Rs. 45OO/-is missing, the Bank did not call Peiris. the Savings Ledger Clerk and the Cashier:

Per Tambiah J: "Was the Respondent Bank staging Hamlet not only without the
Prince, of Denmark, but without the other members of the Royal Household as
well?"

**

127

Cases referred to:  
**1\. Collettes v. Bank of Ceylon- S.C. Reference No. 6/82- S.C. Minutes of
5.11.82  
  
2.Ceylon Transport Board v. Gunasinghe- 72 NLR 76. 80.  
  
3\. Ceylon Transport Board v. Thungadasa- 73 NLR 21 1, 215.  
  
4\. Gratiaen Perera v. The Queen- 61 NLR 522  
  
5.Jubilee Mills Ltd. v. Baburae Chintamen- 1 954 (1) LL. J. 807.  
  
6\. Estrella Batteries v. Workmen- 96 (1 950) 1 CR 206  
  
7.Assam Oil Co. Ltd. v. Its Workmen (1960) 2LL. J. 745 (Mad, Prad.)  
  
8.Madhukar v. Bhilai Steel Project- (1966) 2LL.J. 745 (Mad. Prad).  


**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

M. A. Mansoor_ with _A. P. Niles_ and _K. S. Ratnavel for_ the Applicant-
Appellant.

_

H L. de Silva P.C._ with S.C. _Crossette-Thambiah_ for the Employer-
Respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

December-05. 1988

**

TAMBIAH. J

**

The applicant-appellant joined the Bank of Ceylon, in the year 1954 as a Grade
IV officer. He joined the People's Bank, i.e., the employer-respondent, on 1st
January, 1963, as a Grade IV officer, and at the time of his dismissal from
service, he was ledger officer in charge of Government Corporations and
Cooperatives Accounts, where in 1971, a turnover of Rs. 1 3.000,000/- was
averaged a day at the Duke Street Branch of the People's Bank. During the
entire period as officer-in-charge of the Corporate Department, there was not
even a suggestion made that his work was found to be remiss on a single
occasion. At the relevant time, the officer-in-charge and ledger officer

**128**

of the Savings Department was one P. M. P. Peiris. The then Manager of the
Duke Street Branch, one D. G. Perera, testified to the procedure for
withdrawals of funds from Savings Accounts as follows: The customer filled a
form called the 'Withdrawal Voucher', and handed same with his Pass Book to
one of the two cashiers at the counter. One of the cashiers was one
Nanayakkara and the other, one Appuhamy. After verifying the entries on the
withdrawal voucher against the entries on the Pass Book, the cashier endorsed
a token number on the withdrawal voucher and handed the token to the account
holder and got his signature on the reverse of the voucher, and entered the
date and time of receipt of the withdrawal voucher, the amount, the account
number and the name of the account holder in his Scroll Book. He then placed
the withdrawal voucher and the Pass Book in a tray and one of the peons was
expected to hand over these documents to the Savings Department Clerk. At this
time there were two clerks, one Cyril Fernando and one Muzamil. If found to be
in order, the clerk made the necessary entries in the Pass Book and in the
Customer's Ledger Sheet and put them up to the Ledger Officer of the Savings
Department. The Ledger Officer checked to see whether the customer's signature
tallied with his specimen' signature: The specimen signature card was kept in
a cabinet and the key to this cabinet was retained by Peiris, the Ledger
Officer. If the signatures tallied, the Ledger Officer placed the 'pay cash'
stamp on the withdrawal voucher and signed on the voucher and for the balance
in the Pass Book and also initialled the" Ledger Sheet. The peon, then, took
the voucher and Pass book back to the Cashier who checked to see whether it
has been authorised for, payment and if so. called out the token number and
after he got the customer to sign on the reverse of the voucher and having
checked whether the signature tallies with the signature at the time of
presenting the voucher, handed over the cash to the customer along with the
Pass Book.

It was the Manager's evidence that withdrawals over Rs. 5,000/ had to be
approved and signed by the Branch Manager and the Ledger Officer; below Rs.
5,00.0/, the payment had to be authorised by the Ledger Officer and whilst

**129**

the cashier is not required to check the identity of the account holder for
payment of sums under Rs. 1,000/ he was bound to do so where the voucher, is
for a sum of Rs. 1,000/ and above.

At the end of the day, the cashier was required to enter all the day's
withdrawals into his adding machine and balance the payments with the
withdrawal vouchers; and duplicate of the adding machine print out, called a
tape, and all the vouchers were forwarded to the Proof Department, which in
turn checked the tape and the- vouchers and again balanced the day's
transactions and made a tape of its own; and forwarded all the vouchers and
the duplicate of the tape to the Ledger Officer. He in turn again checked each
voucher against the respective ledger sheets and again balanced the payments
with the vouchers, entered all the day's transactions in a Summary Sheet and
took all the vouchers and Summary Sheet to the Manager. The Manager examined
the Vouchers to see whether correct authorisation had been made and thereafter
the bundle of vouchers was kept in the vault which was operated by a dual
control system.  .

If was the Manager's evidence that if there was a voucher or vouchers missing
from the bundle, it would have been detected by the Proof Department and also
by the Ledger Officer at the stage he balanced the accounts of .the day and
prepared the Summary Sheet,

It is in evidence' that when the Ledger Officer Peiris of the Savings
Department went out for lunch between 12 noon and 1.00 p.m. the applicant-
appellant covered his work and attended to the withdrawal vouchers that were
presented during that time in addition to his own work.

On 11th July, 1971, the applicant-appellant was interdicted and later served
With a. Charge Sheet dated 24.5.1972, containing the following charges:..

"While working as a Ledger Officer at Duke Street Branch of the Bank you did:

**130**

1. Authorise payment of the fraudulent withdrawal voucher of Rs. 4,500/- on 27.5.71 from Savings Deposit A/c. No.'9702.

2. Acting jointly or severally commit fraud in a sum of Rs. - 4,500/- on 27.5.71 on savings deposit account No 9702. 

3. Have unauthorised possession on-or about 1.6.71 of savings account .pass book No. 10237 belonging to Sydney Amarasinghe of 343A, Salawa Road, Embuldeniya, Nugegoda.

4. Authorise payment of Rs. 995/- on savings account No. 102-37 on 4.5.71 in the absence of necessary entries in the relevant pass- book.

5. Acting jointly or severally, attempt to commit the fraudulent withdrawal of Rs. 4;000/- on 6.6.71 from savings account No. 1 0043 by using an unissued pass book originally bearing the machine stamped number 10237 earlier reported lost from the bank, and altered to read as 10043.

6. Induce Mr. M. H. L. Gilbert, a Grade VI employee of the Bank to keep away from work on the pretext of being sick on 25.5.71,'which-was the day of the fraudulent withdrawal of Rs. .4.500/-- on Mrs. Wong's savings deposit account No. 10043.

7. Acting jointly or severally commit fraud in a sum of Rs. 4,500/- on 25.5.71 on savings account No. 10043. 

Except for charges 3 and 4, the gravamen of the complaint against the
applicant-appellant would appear to be that he alone or jointly with others
committed certain frauds and attempted' frauds in the Savings Department.. The
applicant-appellant was exonerated at the domestic inquiry. It is also in
evidence that the CID which investigated into the alleged frauds were unable
to find the culprit. But he was not reinstated. He was interdicted on

**131**

11.7.71 and was on no-pay and was placed on half-pay from 1.1.73 after he was
exonerated and later his services were terminated by the Respondent Bank on
5th June 1974 with effect from 11th July, 1971.

It would appear from the evidence of the Manager Perera, that Peiris, the
Ledger Officer in charge of the Savings Department, about the time that the
acts of misconduct alleged in the Charge Sheet were taking place, had himself
issued two cheques Nos A63025 for Rs-. 500/ and A63026 for Rs 280/ from a
cheque book belonging to some other .account holder, affixed the 'Staff
Account' frank, and signed the two cheques. This was at a time when his own
account was closed, and he had no cheque book. Both cheques were returned by
the Bank, one bearing the endorsement "drawer's signature differs", and the
other "cheque not issued to drawer" In the opinion of the Manager this "is a
very grave offence" The Manager stated further that Peiris was* interdicted
and served with a charge sheet and that whilst under interdiction he admitted
to a fraud concerning a Savings Pass Book; that after inquiry he was
reinstated and later demoted from his' grade to one grade below, for 3 years
denied his promotion and later retired:

The applicant-appellant complained to the Labour Tribunal that his services
were unreasonably, unjustly and illegally terminated and sought the reliefs,
inter alia, reinstatement with back wages or compensation for loss of career
and pension.

The Respondent Bank, in its answer, sought to justify the termination of
services in the following terms:

**

Para 2:

**

"The applicant was dismissed from service upon being found guilty of the
following acts:

(a) dishonest participation in the fraudulent withdrawal of Rs.4,500/- on 27th
May, 1971, in respect of Savings Deposit' Account No. 9702.

(b) in the alternative with gross negligence in authorizing payment of the
said sum of Rs. 4,500/- from the said  
account.

**132**

  3. dishonest participation in the fraudulent withdrawal of Rs. 4,5007- on the '25th May 1971 in respect of Savings Accounts No. 10043.  


  4. dishonestly inducing N. H. L. Gilbert, a Grade VI employee of the Bank to keep away the day of the fraudulent withdrawal of Rs. 4,500/-from Savings Account No. 10043.  


  5. dishonest participation on the attempted fraudulent withdrawal of Rs. 4,500/- on 6.6.71 in respect of Savings Account No. 10043 by using an unissued Pass Book originally bearing the machine stamped number 10237, earlier reported lost from the Bank, and altered to read as 10043.   


  6. unauthorised possession on or about 1.6.71 of Savings Account Pass Book No. 1 0237,  


  7. negligently authorising payment of Rs. 995/- on Savings Account-No. 10237 on 4.5.71 in the absence of the necessary entries in the relevant pass book."

The statement in the Answer that the applicant-appellant was dismissed from
service is factually incorrect.

Whilst the original position of the Respondent Bank at the domestic inquiry
was that the applicant-appellant, singly and or jointly was the perpetrator of
the alleged frauds and attempted frauds, there was change in its position
before the Labour Tribunal- that the applicant-appellant was only a dishonest
participant in the alleged frauds and attempted frauds.

The third position of the Respondent Bank was set out in the written
submission on his behalf where it sought to justify the termination of the
applicant-appellant's employment on four grounds'

1\. dishonest participation in the fraudulent withdrawal of Rs. 4,500/- from
the Savings Deposit Account No. 9702, belonging to one Gunaratne, on the 27th
May, 1971.

**133**

  2. dishonest participation in the fraudulent withdrawal - of Rs. 4,500/- in respect of Savings Deposit Account  
No. 10043, belonging to one Mrs. Wong on the 25th of May, 1971.

  3. dishonest participation in the attempted fraudulent withdrawal of Rs. 4,500/- on 6th June, 1971, in respect of  
Savings Account No. 1 0043 by using an unissued pass book originally bearing
the machine stamped number 10237  
which had been altered to read as 10043.

  4. unauthorised possession on or about 1.6.71 of Savings Account Pass Book No. 10237. without the written  
permission of the account holder (Edinsinghe).

Thus the Respondent Bank jettisoned 3 charges, para (2), (b), (d) and (g),
latd out in its answer and amended charge (f) by the addition of the words
"without the written permission of the account holder (Edinsinghe)" and this
was done after the conclusion of the evidence. Though the charges in para
2(b), (d) and (g) were abandoned, the President of the Labour Tribunal with
regard to 2 (b) states that "it is not possible to state that the applicant
was negligent in authorising this ' payment in the absence of the voucher"'
and. in respect of charges 2 (c) and (d) he states that the Respondent Bank
has not led sufficient evidence to establish the guilt, of the applicant-
appellant.

In regard to ground (1} above, the Respondent Bank relied on two items of
evidence. The Pass Book bearing No. 9702 (Rl) is the Pass Book of Account
Holder Edirisinghe Arachchige Gunaratne: According to R1, there is .no
withdrawal by the customer Gunaratne on 27.5.71. The relevant Scroll ' Book
'(R5) maintained by the Cashier on 27.5.71 and a bundle of vouchers containing
the relevant vouchers signed by the applicant-appellant on the same date (R4
(a) .to R4 (c)) were produced in evidence. The applicant-appellant admitted in
his evidence that Peiris when he initialled the Ledger Sheets used the letter
"P" and that he used the -figure _._ The Scroll Book shows that from

**134**

12.15 p.m. to 12.45 p.m. on 27.5.71, the withdrawals on savings vouchers R4
(a), R4(b), R4(c), R4(d), and-R4(e) in respect of other accounts which, have
been presented to the Cashier at the times 12.15 p.m., 12.25 p.m., 12.39 p.m.
12.40 p.m. and 12.45 p.m. have been initialled with the figure _"1":_ The
applicant-appellant admitted that he authorised these payments. The Scroll
Book shows that at 12.40 p.m. Savings Voucher in respect of Account No. 9702
had been presented for the withdrawal of Rs.- 4,500/-, but, the relevant
voucher is missing. ' The applicant-appellant denied that he authorised the
withdrawal of Rs. 4,500/-. The Respondent Bank wanted the. Labour Tribunal to
draw the inference that the missing voucher tendered at 1 2.40 p.m. too was
authorised by .the applicant-appellant.

The applicant-appellant's evidence is that on this day there were four other
officers who worked" including one Wickremsekera Banda, and it is his evidence
that savings voucher R4(f) had been received at 12.49 p.m., i.e., between 12
noon and 1.00 p.m. and was authorised by Wickremasekera Banda.

It was his further evidence that at 1 2.40 p.m. that day he was performing his
duties on the Co-operative Ledger seated in his seat and the Savings Ledger
Accounts were brought to him; that savings withdrawals are not authorised
according to the time they are presented at the counter and that vouchers
presented at a particular time may be authorised for payment much later due to
incomplete filling up, alterations, requirement of further specimen signatures
etc.

The "Bank Manager, Perera, in evidence also stated that a voucher presented at
a particular time may be paid even later than a voucher presented after it,
and that it depends on what time the ledger clerk pulls out the relevant
ledger and checks.

The applicant-appellant also- stated that as the withdrawal of Rs. 4,500/- was
not a withdrawal for Rs. 1,000/- or below, he would never have authorised
payment on this voucher without reference to the specimen

**135**

signature card that was in the locked cabinet. It is the Manager's evidence
too that the specimen signature card is in the cabinet, the key of which was
in Peiris' charge,-The payments on Vouchers R4(a). R4(b). R4(c). R4(d) and R4
(e). which admittedly have been authorised by the applicant-appellant, were
all for payments of Rs. 120/-. Rs. 50/-, Rs. 750/-, Rs. 150/-and Rs. 15/-.

The second item of evidence relied on by the Respondent Bank is this:

On the Ledger Sheet (R2.2) which related to the Co-operative Society, the
applicant-appellant conceded that his initial "7" appears 10 times. The Ledger
Sheet (R2); in respect of Savings Deposit Account No: 9702 on the face of it
shows that on 27.5.71, Rs. 4,500/- had been debited and the balance Rs.
4600/25 has been initialled with the letter "P". It was the case of the
Respondent Bank that the applicant-appellant had converted what was originally
the figure "7" into a "P" in R2. To establish, this, the Respondent Bank
relied on the evidence and report of the Assistant Examiner of Questioned
Documents of the Government Analyst's Department who stated in evidence that
he was asked to examine the Ledger Sheets (R2)and (R22) and to report whether
there was any evidence of alterations in the initial against the entry, Rs.
4600/25. His examination revealed that an original initial consistent with "7"
has been written over and altered to read "P"; that the original initial _"1"_
in the Ledger Sheet (R2) is consistent with the initials of the person who
initialled against the entries in the Ledger Sheet (R22).

In the Ledger Sheet (R2) there is an earlier entry where the balance of Rs.
7,350/- has been initialled with the initial "P" Under cross-examination he
was asked whether this "P" looked similar to the 'P' against the balance Rs.
4,600/25. His answer was that he would require more specimens similar to "P"
in order to come to a conclusion He further stated that he is unable to say as
to who is the person who altered _"7"_ into "P"

A L. M Muzamil, a clerk in the Savings Department, who gave evidence for the
Respondent Bank, under cross-examination, stated that there was a voucher n
respect of the entry u- the Ledger Sheet (R2) with regard to the withdrawal of
Rs 4,500,'-on 25 5 71, that normally the voucher is placed on the Ledger Sheet
and sent to Peiris, that Peiris gave him 3 voucher and

**136**

asked him to keep it with him to be put in the bundle of vouchers; that the
initial against the entry in regard to the balance of Rs. 4,600/25 after
withdrawal of Rs. 4,500/- is Peiris that there appeared to be an alteration in
respect of that initial; that before the voucher was given to him, Peiris
initialled the Ledger Sheet and gave it to him.

The applicant-appellant's Counsel, then, referred the witness to his evidence
at the domestic inquiry and asked:

regard to what he said at the domestic inquiry:

"Q. The initials in the Ledger Sheet is Mr. Peiris? A. It has been altered. It
was not there earlier. Q. Generally, withdrawal vouchers are signed when
payments are made? A. Yes. Q. At the stage that payments are made, the balance
is initialled? A. Yes. '

Q. Is he the person who made this entry?  
A. Yes."

It was Manager Perera's evidence that about two weeks after the withdrawal of
Rs. 4,500/-, Gunaratne, the holder of the  
relevant Pass Book turned up at the Bank on a letter written by Peiris to call
over with his Pass Book. Gunaratne had complained  
that Rs. 4,500/- had not been withdrawn by him and it was at this stage it
transpired that the relevant Voucher was missing.  
The writing of this letter is a contravention of the Rules of the Bank as only
the Manager or the. second officer of the Bank, one  
Anton Fernando, could write such a letter, and this was one matter, among
others, on which Peiris was charge sheeted. In  
response to this letter, Gunaratne had turned up and his Pass Book contained
.no 'entry in regard to the withdrawal of  
Rs.. 4.500/-.

**137**

The Manager Perera further stated that when the bundle of vouchers (R4) comes
back to the Savings Department from the Proof Department, Peiris has to cheek
and take over the vouchers. If a voucher .was missing, Peiris would have
discovered it at that stage; Peiris had signed on the cover of R4 and at the
time he signed, all the vouchers were there; the last person who would have
handled the vouchers after they were bundled and before preparation of the
summary was Peiris; that at the time of the preparation of the summary if the
voucher was not there, Peiris would have queried and when the summary was
prepared the vouchers were there and he would not have prepared the summary
without the vouchers being there; that at no time did Peiris complain to him
that any voucher was missing; that he come to know that the voucher was
missing after the customer Gunaratne called at the Bank; that the fact that
the summary was prepared by Peiris and the bundle of vouchers was sent to him
indicate that at that time, the voucher was there.

It was also Muzamil's evidence that Peiris checks the summary with the
vouchers and that in the summary prepared on 27/5, the entry with regard to
Rs. 4,5000/ was there and Peiris signed the summary sheet, that the voucher
would have been there when he checked, and it was thereafter that the voucher
was missing; that Cyril 'Fernando the other clerk told him that the voucher
was in the drawer of Peiris; that Peiris took the voucher and gave it to him
and .that he kept it on his table and on 28/5 the following day, he found the
voucher in the Ledger Book; that once it was entered in the summary, the
voucher had to go into the bundle and ought not to be in the Ledger Book; that
the voucher bundle of 27/5 was found on 28/5 on the table of Peiris and
thereafter it was missing; that the voucher was with him as Peiris had asked
him to keep it safely.

As regards this charge, the President of the Labour Tribunal only considered
the two items of evidence relied upo.n by the Respondent Bank, viz, the-time
of receipt of this voucher by the cashier and the evidence of the Assistant
Examiner of Questioned Documents and said;



"This voucher had 'been presented at 1 2.40 p.m. when the applicant was acting
for the permanent officer. The several

**138**

vouchers which had been authorised before and after lead to the inference that
this voucher too would have been presented to him during this period. Since'
the evidence of the EQD is quite clear that the applicant made the original
initial on R2, I have no hesitation in accepting the version of the Respondent
that there has been dishonest participation by the applicant in respect of
this withdrawal,"

As regards the second ground of termination, viz, dishonest participation in
the fraudulent withdrawal of Rs. 4,500/- in respect of Savings Deposit Account
No. 10043 belonging to one Mrs. Wong on 25.5.71, the President of the Labour
Tribunal stated that "not enough evidence has been brought before the Tribunal
for me to state that the applicant had participated in any way in respect of
this charge."

The Ledger Sheet in respect of Account No. 10043 (R9) shows that on 25/5/71,
there, had been a withdrawal of Rs. 4,500/-, leaving a balance of Rs, 4,350/-.
It is the clear evidence of the Respondent Bank's witnesses, the Manager
Perera, and Muzamil, that the initial "P" appearing against this entry is that
of Peiris.

The third charge relates to the attempted withdrawal of Rs. 4,000/'- from the
account of Mrs. Wong on 6.6.71.

The witness Muzamil stated that on 6.6.71, it was the applicant-appellant who
brought the withdrawal voucher (R13) dated 6.6.7V bearing Account No. 10043
and the Pass Book bearing No, 10043 to him; it was not part of applicant-
appellant's duty to bring these documents to him; he found the Bank officer's
signature in the right column just scrawled and he could not identify the
signature; he asked Peiris to check the signature and Peiris told him "you
just post it and give it to me"; he was not satisfied and he reported the
matter to the Assistant Manager and along with the Manager checked the
signature. They found that Rs. 4,500*/- had been withdrawn on 25/5 and found
the relevant voucher missing. The token number was called out and no one came
up. The Pass Book (R8) had the machine No. 10237 which was scored off and the
No. 10043 was handwritten in red.

**139**

Under cross-examination, he stated that according to the Scroll Book (R5) the
Pass Book ,(R8) was presented-at the counter at 10.12 a.m. and Peiris was
present; that most Pass Books are machine numbered and Pass Books that have no
machine number are written by them and given; the signature against the
withdrawal of Rs. 4,500/- is not the applicant-appellant's; in the relevant
Ledger sheet (R9), the withdrawal of Rs. 4,500/- has been initialled by Peiris
when Pass Books are handed over by customers at the counter, the cashier at
the counter puts them into a tray and thereafter the peon takes them and hands
them to the ledger section; he cannot remember whether at the time the
applicant-appellant removed the Pass Book from the tray, a peon was there or
not; unless the applicant-appellant had particular interest in that Pass Book,
he need not have brought it; normally when a friend of an officer of the Bank
comes to remove a Pass Book, they will go up to the officer in order to get
their job quickly done.

The genuine Pass Book (R7) issued to Mrs. Wong was produced by the Manager,
Perera. He stated that Pass Book (R8) is a fake document and the signatures
appearing as "Signatures of Bank officials" are all forged signatures.
According to the Pass Book (R7), there does not appear to be any withdrawals
made by the customer; on 21.5.71, the customer had deposited Rs. 7,000/- and
on 13.3.71 a sum of Rs. 500/- and the applicant-appellant has signed against
both deposits; on 21.5.71, the credit balance was Rs. 8,850/-. He also
produced the relevant Ledger Sheet (R9) according to which, on 21.5.71, the
credit balance is Rs. 8,850/- and the applicant-appellant has initialled the
entry, and the Pass Book bearing No,-10237 (R10) was issued to one Sydney
Amarasinghe and this number in (R10) is the same as the machine number
appearing in the fake Pass Book (R8). After investigations began into the
fraudulent withdrawals in respect of the Savings Accounts of Gunaratne and
Mrs. Wong, the applicant-appellant's desk drawers were searched and the Pass
Book (RIO) was found in one of his drawers.



The Manager, Perera, under cross-examination, stated that when a peon is not
available at the counter to take the Pass

**140**

Books and Cheques, the officer or clerk in charge of that subject will take
them; there were two counters and both counters accepted cheques and pass
books; the applicant-appellant was* dealing with current accounts and cheques
and pass books; and if a peon was not available, he would go upto the counter
and collect the cheques and if there was a pass book, he would take the pass
book and hand same to the officer concerned and there was nothing unusual
about it.

The Assistant Manager, H. A. Fernando, also gave evidence for the Respondent
Bank. He stated that Muzamil brought the Pass Book (R8) to him and he too
could not identify the signatures on (R8), and with the Manager's permission
he examined the voucher bundle of 25/5/71 and found the relevant voucher
missing. He asked Muzamil to call out the token number and no one turned up.

When questioned by the applicant-appellant's Counsel, he stated that on that
morning Nanayakkara came and told him "I know Mrs. Wong. Pay." He said that he
knew the party.

The applicant-appellant was questioned as regards this charge. He conceded
that in the pass book (R7), he had initialled the balance against the dates 1
3.3.71 and 21.5.71. He had not seen pass book (R8) before and came to know
that it was a forged document in the course of the inquiry; his signatures are
not in R8, nor that of Peiris'. He was working on 25.5.71, when Rs. 4,500/-
was withdrawn. In the Ledger Sheet (R9), his initial appears against the dates
21.5.71, and 13.3.71; Peiris' initial appears against the withdrawal of Rs,
4,500/- on 25.5.71.

As to how the Pass Book (R10) came to be found in his drawer, the applicant-
appellant stated that Sydney Amarasinghe resided next to his house and he
wanted to obtain a loan of Rs. 1.000/-. He introduced his friend to the Bank
as a customer. One could get a loan on their income. The relevant ledger sheet
shows that Amarasinghe opened his account on 29.3.71 with a cash deposit of
Rs. 5/-. His initial appears against the deposit of Rs. 5/-. He signed for the
Pass Book and handed it to Amarasinghe.

**141**

His account was credited with a loan of Rs. 1,000/-. On 4-5.71 Amarasinghe
withdrew a sum of Rs. 995/-. He approved the payment of it on R12. the
withdrawal voucher, and initialled it and retained the Pass Book for the
entries to be brought up to date. When he came to obtain the loan, Amarasinghe
left the Pass Book with him to enable the entries to be made. As he was
residing close to his house, he could have brought the entries up to date and
taken it to his house. Before he could bring the Pass Book up to date
"something happened, and he handed the book to the Inspector". To the question
"Why did you not bring the entries up to date?", his answer was "It may be
that he was in a hurry or that I was very busy", h his evidence he stated that
"there were thousands of current accounts and savings I worked on". Although
he retained the book, the particulars are in the ledger (R11); in every case
any withdrawal from the savings account is done with reference to the
outstanding balance in the ledger. He had come across Pass Books with
handwritten numbers. He had no control and it was Peiris who dealt with Pass
Books.

It was Muzamil's evidence that the account of Amarasinghe was introduced by
the applicant-appellant; that he wrote the particulars on Pass Book (R10) and
made the necessary entries in the Pass Book Issue Register IR20); the
applicant-appellant signed the Register and was given the Pass Book; that Pass
Book (R10) is a genuine Pass Book; that the customer Amarasinghe was not in
the Bank on that day, and this practice of handing over a Pass Book to a Bank
Officer on behalf of the customer is done and there is no Bank Circular
prohibiting it; there was no complaint from Amarasinghe or anybody else that
the applicant-appellant was in unlawful possession or unauthorised possession
of this Pass Book.

The Bank Manager, Perera, stated that the withdrawal voucher for Rs. 995/- is
not missing and it is a genuine withdrawal that P§58 Book (R10) is a genuine
.book and all entries in it are genuine, and that there is nothing unusual for
a customer to send the Pass Book through an officer to bring the Book up to
date; that the Ledger Clerk has to check the Ledger Sheet to see whether there
is money in the account and that the Ledger is the

**142**

real account; that the Ledger entries' may differ from the entries in the Pass
Book; that Amarasinghe has made no complaint in regard to his Pass Book; and
that the Pass Book was found in the applicant-appellant's, drawer on 29.10.71,
and he cannot keep the Pass Book with him unless he has the customer's
permission.

The President, Labour Tribunal, found the applicant-appellant guilty of this
charge. In his order, he states that "this was a fraudulent transaction and
the applicant-appellant's participation, in it is easy to see". The factors
that weighed with him were: (1) the Pass Book (R8) with a machine No. 10237
struck off and the No. 10043 handwritten is not a genuine one, (2) Pass Book
(R10) obtained by the applicant-appellant for his friend Amarasinghe has no
machine number but a handwritten number 10237, (3) the bogus book (R8) and the
voucher (R13) were brought to Muzarnil by the applicant-appellant. Muzamil
stated that "unless he had a particular interest in the Pass Book, he need not
have brought it." The applicant-appellant has given no explanation as to the
reason why he handed this document to the Ledger Clerk, (4) when the token
number was called, no customer turned up.

The charges set out in para 2 (f) and (g) of the Respondent Bank's answer
related to the Savings account Pass Book No. 10237 of Sydney Amarasinghe.
Though in its written submissions, the Bank abandoned the charge set out in
para 2 (g), the President of the Labour. Tribunal, except for a bare statement
that the Pass Book (R10) was found in the drawer of the applicant-appellant,
has not arrived at a finding on the charge relating to unauthorised possession
of R10, which the Bank asserted as the 4th charge in its written submissions.
In any event, the applicant-appellant has given a sufficient explanation as to
why it was in his drawer- that Sydney Amarasinghe left the book with him to
post the entries and bring the pass book up to date. There is the further
evidence of the Bank Manager Perera and the Savings Ledger Clerk Muzamil that
there was nothing unusual for a bank officer collecting a Pass Book on behalf
of a customer or for a customer to send a pass book through a bank officer in
order to bring the Pass Book up to date. On the evidence, the .applicant-
appellant has to be exonerated on the charge of unauthorised possession of
Pass Book (R10).

**143**

As regards the charge of negligently authorising payment of Rs.995/- on
4.5.71., in the absence of-necessary entries in the Pass Book (R10),
admittedly the applicant-appellant authorised the payment of Rs.995/- by
initialling the withdrawal voucher (R12). It is common ground that this
withdrawal was not reflected in the Pass Book. The President, Labour Tribunal,
in his order states "the applicant has tendered no explanation as to why he
failed to bring the Pass Book up to date. According to the evidence of the
Manager, it was not in order to approve a withdrawal without the accompanying
Pass Book. The applicant's conduct is contrary to the practice prevailing in
the Bank and therefore he is guilty of the charge of negligence in this
respect."

The charge as framed in the answer of the Respondent Bank was jettisoned by it
in its written submissions, but not withstanding this, the President, Labour
Tribunal, proceeded to consider the jetsam thrown out by the Respondent Bank
and found the applicant-appellant guilty of this charge. In any event, the
charge was that the applicant-appellant negligently authorised the withdrawal
of Rs. 995/-, in the absence of entries in the Pass Book. It is the-evidence
of both the Bank Manager and Muzamil that Pass Book (R10) is a genuine Pass
Book; that the relevant withdrawal voucher for Rs. 995/- is not missing and
the withdrawal is reflected in the Ledger Sheet (R1 1) and all entries therein
are genuine. The President of the Labour Tribunal, however, has found the
applicant-appellant guilty of not following a banking practice, viz, approving
a withdrawal without the' accompanying Pass Book, a charge not alleged either
in the Charge Sheet, the answer or in the written submissions of the Bank.
There is the definite evidence of the Manager Peiris that the Ledger Sheet is
the real account with reference to which withdrawals are made and that the
entries .in the Ledger may differ from the entries in a Pass Book. The
withdrawals are authorised for payment by reference to Ledger entries and not
to entries in the Pass Book. It seems to me that the Respondent Bank dropped
this charge in view of this evidence. The finding of the. Labour Tribunal
cannot stand having regard to this evidence of the Bank Manager.

**144**

The President, Labour Tribunal, concluded his order in these words:

"Summing up therefore the evidence led before the Tribunal, I find that the
conduct of the applicant was such that though he "has not been directly guilty
of fraud or fraudulent transaction his conduct has certainly been not
absolutely above board. It is my view that the conduct of the applicant has
been such that he is not a fit and proper person to be employed in an
establishment of the nature of a Bank where large sums of public money are
transacted in its, day to day activities. In the circumstances I hold that the
termination of the applicant's services was for good cause."

The applicant-appellant preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal and the
Court of Appeal by its judgment dated 7.3.86, without evaluating and analysing
the evidence in the case, accepted the findings arrived at by the Labour
Tribunal. The judgment merely states:

"I am of the view that the evidence on record substantiates the findings and
conclusions of the Labour Tribunal and this Court will accordingly not
interfere with his findings on the facts  Thus in the instant case once the
learned.

President has found on the evidence that 'his conduct has certainly been not
absolutely above board' in respect of the fraudulent transaction referred to,
the continued employment of the applicant is inimical to the interest of the
customers of the Bank and to any confidence that can be reposed in him; nor
can the Bank with any sense of responsibility continue to employ him and
jeopardise its own reputation and the interest of its customers to whom it is
responsible. The learned President was therefore right in holding 'that he was
not a fit and proper person to be employed in an establishment of the nature
of a Bank 'and in holding that the termination of the applicant's services was
for good cause.' This appeal is accordingly dismissed.

The ultimate finding of both the Labour Tribunal and the Court of Appeal is
that the Respondent Bank had lost confidence in the

**145**

applicant-appellant and he is unfit for continued employment at the Bank.
Therefore, the termination was for good cause.

As regards the remaining two charges, there are several relevant items of
evidence in the applicant-appellant's favour which the President. Labour
Tribunal, has failed to consider. There has been a lapse of about twelve
months between the conclusion of evidence on 22.2.79 and the delivery of the
Order by him on 7.1.1 980. This may account for the non-consideration of the
totality of evidence.

In _Collettes v. Bank of Ceylon_ (1) five Judges of this Court ruled thus-
"The question whether the Tribunal has failed to take into account relevant
considerations is a question of law."

Weeramantry, J. said in _Ceylon Transport Board v. Gunasinghe,_ (2).

"Where a statute makes an appeal available only in respect of questions of
law, the Appellate Court is not without jurisdiction to interfere where the
conclusion reached on the evidence is so clearly erroneous that no person
properly instructed in the law and acting judicially could have reached that
particular determination."

In _Ceylon Transport Board v. Thungadasa_ (3), Alles, J. observed:

"Some of the findings are inconsistent with the evidence and contradictory and
there has been a failure to consider relevant and admissible evidence. This
Court is therefore entitled, as a question of law, to examine and interfere
with such an order. ... . Recently, this Court has had occasion to draw the
attention of Presidents of Labour Tribunals to the duty of acting judicially
in evaluating evidence before making just and equitable orders."

The strange features in regard to this charge are that the relevant voucher
for the payment of Rs. 4,500/- is missing, and the failure of the Respondent
Bank to call Peiris, the Ledger Officer, the savings ledger clerk who handled
the missing voucher and the relevant ledger sheet, and the cashier who

**146**

received the voucher and ultimately paid out the money. I cannot resist asking
the question- Was the Respondent Bank staging Hamlet not only without the
Prince of Denmark, but, without the other members of the Royal Household as
well? This last observation also goes for the charge relating to the attempted
fraudulent withdrawal of Rs. 4000/- on 6/6/71.

The withdrawal voucher for Rs. 4,500/- has been presented at the counter at
12.40 p.m. on 27.5.71 according to the Scroll Book. From the mere fact that
the two preceding and succeeding vouchers have been authorised for payment by
the applicant-appellant, the President of the Labour Tribunal has inferred
that the withdrawal voucher for Rs. 4,500/- would have necessarily come to the
applicant-appellant and that he would have authorised the payment.

The applicant-appellant's evidence was that on this day there were four
officers working including one Wickremasekera Banda and this has not been
contradicted. The Voucher (R4 (f) was received at the counter at 12.49 p.m.
and was authorised for payment by one Wickremasekera Banda. This evidence was
not considered by the President of the Labour Tribunal.

The applicant-appellant stated that Vouchers were not authorised for payment
according to the time they were presented at the counter, receives support
from the evidence of Manager Peiris. This evidence was not considered by the
President of the Labour Tribunal.

The applicant-appellant's evidence that he would never have sanctioned the
payment of Rs. 4,500/- without reference to the specimen signature card which
was locked up in Peiris' cabinet, receives support from the fact that the five
vouchers he admittedly authorised for payment are all for sums under Rs.
1,000/- and below Rs. 200/-. This too was not considered by tie Present of the
Labour Tribunal

Most importantly, Muzamil stated in evidence that the initial against the
withdrawal of Rs. 4,500/- is that of Peiris' and that before Peiris gave the
missing voucher to him, he initialled the

**147**

Ledger Sheet and that the alteration was not there earlier. This important
evidence too was not considered by the President of the Labour Tribunal.

Equally important is the evidence of the Manager Perera that at the time
Peiris prepared the summary sheet, the relevant voucher would have been with
him and that at no time did Peiris complain that the voucher was missing.
There is the further evidence of Muzamil that the summary sheet was prepared
by Peiris on 27.5.71 and that the summary sheet was checked with the vouchers
and the voucher was there; that Peiris gave the voucher to him which he kept
on his table and that on 28.5.71, he found the voucher in the ledger, that the
bundle of vouchers was on Peiris' table and the voucher was missing
thereafter. All this evidence has not been considered by the President of the
Labour Tribunal.

In addition, there is the admission by the Manager Perera that during this
period Peiris was involved in fraudulent cheque transactions at a time when
his Bank account was closed and that Peiris admitted to a fraud concerning a
Savings Pass Book when he was under interdiction.

It is also relevant to note that though the Respondent Bank abandoned the 2nd
alternative charge in its Answer that the applicant-appellant negligently
authorised the payment of Rs. 4,500/-, the President of the Labour Tribunal
considered this charge and concluded "that it is not possible to state that
the applicant was negligent in authorising this payment in the absence of the
voucher. It is only from the voucher that one could conclude as to who has
authorised this payment." Surely, the same reasoning must equally apply in the
consideration of the first charge as well?

In the light of all these items of evidence favourable to the applicant-
appellant, which have not been considered at all by the. President of the
Labour Tribunal, could it be said that from the mere fact that the missing
voucher was received at the counter at 12.40 p.m. and as the applicant-
appellant had authorised the payments of the vouchers received just before and
after, at

**148**

12.39 p.m. and 1 2.45 p.m. the missing voucher too would have necessarily come
to the applicant-appellant and it is he who authorised the payment of this
withdrawal. It is an erroneous inference.

The other item of evidence relied upon by the President of the Labour Tribunal
is the evidence of the Handwriting Expert who stated that in his opinion the
original initial "7" which has been altered to "P" is consistent with the
initials "7" found in the Ledger Sheet (R22), which admittedly are the
initials of the applicant-appellant. In the Ledger Sheet (R2). the admitted
initial "P" of Peiris is also there, and the witness stated that in the
absence of more specimens similar to "P", he cannot express an opinion.

In dealing with the evidence of the Handwriting Expert, the President of the
Labour Tribunal stated that from his evidence it "is quite clear that the
applicant made the original initial '7' on R2". This is an erroneous
misconception of his evidence, as it is his clear evidence that he was unable
to say as to who is the person who altered the- original '7' into 'P'.

As to the value of expert testimony on the question of handwriting, _Monir_ in
his _"Principles and Digest of the Law of Evidence (4th Edn., Vol. 1, at p,
355)_ states:

"Conclusions based on mere comparison of handwriting must, at best, be
indecisive, and yield to the positive evidence, in the case. The opinion of an
expert cannot be more reliable than the statement of a witness of fact such as
a petition-writer who had seen the party signing the document."

There is no direct evidence of any kind against the applicant-appellant. No
one has seen the applicant-appellant initial the Ledger Sheet (R2). But on the
other hand, we have the direct evidence of the Savings Clerk Muzamil that
Peiris initialled the Ledger Sheet before he gave the voucher to him. This is
direct evidence of an eye-witness and the opinion of the Assistant Examiner of
Questioned Documents must yield to the positive evidence of Muzamil that
Peiris initialled the Ledger Sheet.

**149**

The Judges of our Courts have made it clear that a Court should not merely
adopt the opinion of an Expert, but, with the Expert's assistance, it should
independently form its own opinion, and that the Expert's opinion should be
accepted if there is other evidence which tends to show that the conclusion
reached by the Expert is correct. (See _Gratien Perera v. The Queen_ (4)

The finding of guilt by the President of the Labour Tribunal is erroneous and
untenable.

I now come to the charge relating to the dishonest participation of the
applicant-appellant in the attempted withdrawal of Rs. 4,000/- from the
Savings Account of Mrs. Wong on 6.6.71. The President of the Labour Tribunal
appears to have been influenced by the following factors: (1) that it was the
applicant-appellant who brought the withdrawal voucher and the fake Pass Book
(R8) from the cashier's tray to the Sayings Clerk Muzamil, (2) that the Pass
Book had its machine No. 10237 scored off and had a handwritten No. 10043
which corresponded with the handwritten No. 10237 on the Pass Book (R10),
which the applicant-appellant had obtained for his friend Sydney Amarasinghe,
(3) it was an attempted fraud because when the token number was called, no
customer came forward

Here again, there are items of evidence in the applicant-appellant's favour
which were never considered. The Bank Manager Perera saw nothing unusual in
the applicant-appellant walking up to the cashier's counter in order to
collect cheques which have to be dealt by him, and in the process collect
savings pass books and hand same to the savings clerks which have to be dealt
with by them. Muzamil admitted that the Pass Book (R10) was a genuine Pass
Book and he wrote the particulars on the Pass Book and all entries therein are
genuine. He further stated that as his suspicions were aroused, he took the
fake Pass Book (R8) and the Voucher (R13) to Peiris who said "just post it and
give it to We". There is the further evidence of the Assistant Manager
Fernando that the cashier Nanayakkara working at the counter came upto him and
said "' know Mrs. Wong. Pay." And it is this same Nanayakkara. according to
the Manager Perera, who was dismissed from service after a domestic inquiry
and he had

**150**

applied for relief to the Labour Tribunal. The statement in the applicant-
appellant's written submissions to this Court that Nanayakkara has since been
reinstated in service has not been denied in the Respondent Bank's written
submissions. Everyone of the factors that prompted the President of the Labour
Tribunal to find him guilty of this charge could be explained by the
Respondent Bank's own witnesses. This finding too is erroneous and cannot
stand.

Having found the applicant-appellant guilty of dishonest participation in the
fraudulent withdrawal of Rs. 4,500/ and in the attempted fraudulent withdrawal
of Rs. 4,000/, the President of the Labour Tribunal finally concluded: "though
he has not been directly guilty of fraud, or fraudulent transaction, his
conduct has not been above board", a finding to my mind which is inconsistent
with and contradictory to his earlier findings of dishonest participation.

Before this Court, learned President's Counsel for the Respondent Bank sought
to justify the conclusion of the Labour Tribunal that the applicant-
appellant's conduct being not above board, he is not a fit and proper person
to be continued in employment and, therefore, the termination was for good
cause. He submitted that the material placed before the Labour Tribunal raised
a reasonable suspicion of the guilt of the applicant-appellant; the employer
may place his case high, but it is open to the Labour Tribunal to say: "the
evidence may not add up to establish the charges, but, in its view, the
workman is not a fit and proper person to be continued in service." This is
the final position of the Respondent Bank to which it has been reduced to

**151**

two coolies were entrusted with the responsible duty of handling stores.
Employees in this department must naturally continue to enjoy the confidence
of the management and it would not be in the interests of the industry if
persons not enjoying the confidence of the management are thrust upon it in
such a department". In _Estrella Batteries v. Workmen_ (6) the Court held: "It
is vital to remember that this is a case of suspected loyalty to the Company
and in the state of affairs as they shaped it was not possible to get any
definite evidence to prove that it was an act of deliberate spoiling of the
batteries. It was therefore, not possible to prepare and give a regular charge
sheet and an opportunity to meet it that was not necessary because it was
perfectly open to the employer to terminate the services of an employee whose
every loyalty to the employer was suspect; and there was more than reasonable
grounds to entertain the suspicion."

In regard to the second aspect, S. R. de Silva (ibid at. pp. 376-380) states
that though in a case of wrongful dismissal, the normal remedy is
reinstatement, there are circumstances in which a Tribunal will be entitled in
its discretion to order compensation in lieu of reinstatement, inter alia (1)
in view of the employer's plea of loss of confidence in the employee who
occupied a position of confidence. _Assam Oil Co. Ltd. v. Its Workmen,_ (7)
_Madhukarv. Bhilai Steel Project,_ (8) (Reports not available)

**152**

where though reasonable suspicion may not of itself be a sufficient ground for
termination, yet it would be a circumstance to be taken into account on the
question of reinstatement. He cites several Indian decisions for his
proposition (Reports not available).

It is not the Respondent Bank's case that it reasonably suspected the
applicant-appellant of dishonest participation in the fraudulent withdrawals
or attempted withdrawals of monies in respect of Savings Deposit Accounts, and
the applicant-appellant no longer enjoys the confidence of the employer. Nor
is it the Labour Tribunal's position that there is reasonable suspicion of the
applicant-appellant's involvement, and though it would not be a ground for
termination, but, as the applicant-appellant occupies a position of
confidence, an award of compensation in lieu of reinstatement is the just and
equitable order. The President of the Labour Tribunal has clearly misdirected
himself in law when he finally concluded that the termination was for good
cause because in his view, the applicant-appellant's conduct rot being above
board, he was not a fit person to be continued in employment, as he holds a
position of confidence.

In my view the termination of employment of the applicant-appellant by the
Respondent Bank was unjustified, wrongful and unreasonable.

The appeal is allowed and I set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal
dated 7.3.1 986 and the Order of the Labour Tribunal dated 7 1.1 980

The question arises, what is the relief that should be granted to the
applicant-appellant?

In the application for grant of Special Leave to Appeal to this Court, the
applicant-appellant has stated that he, an officer-in-charge of the Corporate
Department, was interdicted along with the officer-in-charge of the Savings
Department P. M. P. Peiris; that both were served with Charge Sheets and
Peiris was charged with regard to two fraudulent cheque transactions and
Savings

**153**

Pass Book frauds; that he was exonerated after a domestic inquiry but not
reinstated, placed on half-pay from 1.1.73 and later his services were
terminated on 5.6.74 with effect from 11.7.71. But, on the other hand, Peiris
who admitted-fraud in respect of Pass Books, and the. two fraudulent cheque
transactions/after domestic inquiry, was reinstated on 18.3.74, demoted from
his Grade to one Grade below, and retired on 1.5.75. This position was
reiterated in the applicant-appellant's written submissions and has not been
contradicted by the Respondent Bank in its own written submissions. Perera,
the Manager of the Respondent Bank, also confirms what the applicant-appellant
says.

This punishment meted out to the applicant-appellant by the Respondent Bank is
clearly discriminatory. The two courses of action vis-a-vis Peiris on the one
hand and vis-a-vis the applicant-appellant on the other hand adopted by the
Respondent Bank appear to me to be illogical and incongruous. A Public
Institution like the People's Bank cannot afford to be selective in its
punishment of two officers holding the same rank in the same Institution.- It
dismissed the applicant-appellant who was exonerated at the domestic inquiry
and whom the Criminal Investigation Department had cleared/but, showed
leniency and reinstated Peiris, who on his own admission, accepted his
involvement in fraudulent transactions.

The tragic feature in this case is the inordinate delay in the hearing of this
case in the Labour Tribunal and in the delivery of its order. The applicant-
appellant, when he commenced his evidence on 22. 1. 79. gave his age as 47
years. On the date of his dismissal from service,, i.e. 5. 6. 74, he would
have been about 42 years and 4 months old. His application to the Labour
Tribunal was on 23. 7\. 74 and the President delivered his order on 7. 1. 80,
about 5.V2 years later. It took him about a year to deliver his order. The
Court of Appeal delivered its judgment on 7. 3. 86 and in November this year,
the applicant-appellant, would reach the age of 56 years and 10 months. There
is no evidence as to the age of retirement of an officer holding the rank of
the applicant-appellant in the Respondent Bank. There is also no evidence as
regards the terminal salary he was earning and the retrial benefits such an
officer would be entitled to.

**154**

In my view, the just and equitable order that I should make in this case is
that the applicant-appellant be reinstated with immediate effect with all
arrears of salary from 1.7.71 (less the half-pay he received for a certain
period of time) and other benefits, as if there had been no break in service.
The applicant-appellant was a member of the Bank's Pension and Provident Fund
Schemes. In Case the applicantappellant has by now reached the age of
retirement, I make order that in addition to all arrears of salary and such
other benefits as aforesaid, the applicant-appellant be placed on retirement
with all retiring benefits as provident fund payments and pension, on the
basis that there was no interruption in service.

I also make order that the Respondent Bank pay the applicant-appellant costs
of all proceedings fixed at Rs. 7,500/.

**

ranasinghe, C. J.-** I agree.

**

amerasinghe, J.-** I agree.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/4.html_  

