##  Reddiar v. Van Houten and Others - SLR - 265, Vol 1 of 1988 [1980] LKSC 4;
(1988) 1 Sri LR 265 (9 June 1980)

**

265

REDDIAR  
v.  
VAN HOUTEN AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
ATUKORALE, J., TAMBIAH, J.  
AND H. A. G. DE SILVA, J. .  
S.C. APPLICATION No. 70/87.  
MARCH 4 AND 29, 1988.

_

Fundamental Rights-Articles 12 and 14 of the Constitution-Decision to retire
English typist - Age of retirement.

_

Where the alleged infringement of Article 12(1) was based on the allegation
that the respondents have, acted in breach of. circulars B of 29.05.1984 and C
of, 6.2.1985 firstly by not recommending an extension of service after
reaching the age of 55 years and secondly by not obtaining the approval of`
His. Excellency the President for retiring him from service at the age of 55
years, the petitioner, being an English` Typist employed in an office outside
estates cannot claim the benefit of these circulars. These circulars apply to
non-executive staff employed on estates and not in outside offices.

Yet circular R 1 of 17.3.1978-as amended by Circular R 2 of 12.6.1981 is
applicable to the petitioner and accordingly the 1st respondent' should have
forwarded the petitioner's application for an extension of service to the
General Manger (Administration) to enable him to refer it to the Secretary,
Ministry of State Plantations for necessary action. Hence the Board's refusal
to extend the period of service of the petitioner is in breach of circulars R
1, and R 2. But-to succeed in establishing an, infringement of Article 12(1)
it is obligatory on the petitioner to prove that he has been treated
differently from' others similarly circumstanced as himself. But the
petitioner cited no such instance nor even averred such treatment:

The allegation that the" petitioner has been discriminated on the ground of
his political opinion in violation of Article 12(2) is. not substantiated in
the light of the letter to the President alleging that the petitioner has,
been forced to retire at the age of 55 without the prior approval of the
Presidential Secretariat.

**266**

The allegation, based on Article-14(1) (c) and (h) (freedom of association and
the freedom of movement and of choosing his residence within Sri Lanka
respectively) rests on letter marked L 'of 8.5.1987. The present petition
being filed on 17.6.1987 the claim for redress` is time barred: The allegation
that the 1st respondent was motivated by reason of petitioner's trade union
activities is not borne out by the petitioner's own letter in response to the
letter barring the petitioner from, entering the office... The Board office is
not a public place like a public park: The freedom of association spelt out in
Article 14(1) (c) is the freeborn to form or join associations and not the
freedom to enter any place at arty time for any purpose. The, freedom of
movement guaranteed by Article 14(1) (h) is the freedom to move about in Sri
Lanka and to choose a place of residence any where in Sri Lanka and has no
relevance to petitioner's case

**

Cases referred to :

**_

1\. Elmore Perera v. Jayawickrema (1985] 1 Sri LR-340.

2\. Roberts v. Ratnayake (1986) 2 Sri LR 36_.

**

APPLICATION** for infringements of fundamental rights.

_

D. W. Abeykoon with Nimal Punchihewa and M. A. Piyatilleke for the petitioner.

S. L Gunasekera with Mrs. M. Aluwihare for the 1st and 2nd respondents.

_ _

Cur. adv. vult.

_

June 9, 1980. **  
  
ATUKORALE, J.

**

This is an application under Article 126 of the Constitution seeking redress
in respect of alleged infringements of the fundamental rights enshrined in
Articles 12 and 14 of the Constitution. The petitioner is an English copy
typist attached to the office at Norwood of the Sri Lanka State Plantations
Corporation No. 1 which is a corporation established under the State
Agricultural Corporations "Act, No. 11 of 1972 and of which the 1st respondent
is the Chairman. The 2nd respondent is the Chairman of the Sri Lanka State
Plantations Corporation established under the Ceylon State Plantations
Corporation Act, No. 4 of 1958. The aforesaid Corporation: No. 1 (commonly
called and hereinafter referred to as the Board) manages all estates belonging
to the latter Corporation (hereinafter referred to as the Corporation) in the
Hatton Region for and on behalf of the Corporation. The Board having been duly
authorised by the. Corporation to, inter alia, appoint, retire, dismiss and to
exercise disciplinary control over certain categories of

**267**

its employees employed in the office of the Board and on its estates in the
Hatton Region appointed the petitioner as an English typist in the service of
the Corporation by letter dated 5:11.1980-vide â€˜p'.

On 3.1.1987 the 1st respondent by his' letter 'A' informed the 'petitioner
that he would be reaching the age of retirement on 15.7:1987 (his 55th year)
and that his services will not be required' as from 16.7.1987. The petitioner
by his reply 'E' of 6.1.1987 addressed to the 1st respondent alleged that his
decision to retire him on completion of his 55th year was arbitrary and mala
fide and was in violation of Circular instructions in respect of retirement.
He also enclosed therein an application for an extention of service in
duplicate and claimed that his services should be extended as done in the case
of other employees of the Corporation. On 2.3.1987 the 1st respondent wrote
letter 'H' to the petitioner requesting him to on leave with immediate effect
in view of the 14 days unavailed vacation leave: lying to his credit. He was
further informed that, as his services were not required he would continue to
be on leave with pay until 15:.7. 1987, when his retirement would take effect.
The 1st respondent set out no reasons in the letter for' this course of
action. On 8.5.1987 the -1st respondent- addressed letter` 'L to the
petitioner in which: he stated that there was reliable information in regard
to his career- record in the Sri Lanka Railways to show that he was a
dismissed employee of that department but that subsequently do an appeal made
by him to the Public Service Commission the order of dismissal had been
converted to one of compulsory retirement as a merciful alternative to
dismissal. The letter then proceeds to state thus:

We therefore confirm our decision conveyed to you earlier retiring you on 15th
July 1987 and in view of the past career record in the Sri Lanka Railways, you
should not visit this Office premises in future as it could have an adverse
effect on the rest of the staff.

Therefore, it has been decided to pay the full salary to cover your emoluments
up to the '15th July, 1987. In addition to this, it has also been decided not
to permit you to enter` this office premises unless with the specific approval
of the undersigned."

In reply the petitioner by his letter 'N' of 15.5.1987 sent to the 1st
respondent, whilst expressing surprise that the 1st respondent should have
chosen fit to bring up this 'superfluous' and 'irrelevant' matter of

**268**

his past record in the Railway Department for the purpose of retiring him from
service, states J hat he sought an extension of service in terms of the
Presidential directive, the provisions of which should not be violated in
granting him an extension as done in the case of other colleagues of his in
the Corporation. He points out that he has still not been informed of the
position in regard to his application for an extention of service. By his
reply 'O' dated 21.5.1887 the 1st respondent affirms that his letter 'L' did
not in any way affect the decision to retire the petitioner from service in
the Corporation which was communicated by letter 'A' stating further that the
petitioner's application for, an extension of service has been rejected, he
forwards to the petitioner a cheque for a sum of Rs. 4851.52 cts. in full and
final settlement of all dues owing to the petitioner. The above is the
entirety of the direct correspondence exchanged between the petitioner and the
1st respondent which has been produced for our consideration.

Quite apart from this certain other correspondence has also been placed before
us. On 25.2. 1987 the General Secretary of the Ceylon Mercantile, Industrial
and General Workers' Union, on behalf of the petitioner, wrote letter 'G' to
the 2nd respondent drawing his attention to Circular B of 29.5.1984 sent by
the General Manager of the Corporation to the Chairman of Regional Boards
I/II/III/IV according to which the Presidential Secretariat had directed that
"no members of the staff on plantations; who wish to continue in employment,
should be retired before reaching the retiring age of 60 years without the
prior approval of the Presidential Secretariat." Pointing out that this
Circular made it clear that the retiring age was 60 years and that an employee
could be retired before that age only upon intimation of reasons and according
to the procedure set out therein, the General Secretary requested that letter`
'A' issued to the petitioner be cancelled and that he be retained in
employment up to the retiring age of 60 years. On 10:3:1987 the petitioner
himself by his letter 'I' addressed to the 2nd respondent complained about his
arbitrary retirement without having regard to "various binding circulars",
according to which he could not be retired in such a fashion. He 'referred to
Circular C; of: 6.2.1985 according to the contents of Which, he contended, no
member of, the staff, should be retired before his 60th year without the
approval of the Presidential Secretariat and that in the event of an extention
to staff not being recommended reasons therefore should be communicated to the
staff member. On 27.3.1987 the President of the United Plantation Services
Employees": Union, on behalf of-the petitioner

**269**

wrote letter 'J' to His Excellency the President protesting against the forced
retirement of the petitioner at the age of 55 without the prior approval of
the Presidential Secretariat and requested His Excellency to inquire into the
matter: On 19.51.19 87 the Presidential Secretariat, by` its letter, replied
to this as well as to an earlier letter of 14.5.1987 (also' sent by the Union
on behalf of the petitioner) stating that the matter' is receiving attention
the-Presidential Secretariat:

On 17.6. 1987 the petitioner filed the present application seeking redress
from this court. He avers that letter 'A' sent to h m by the `1st - respondent
retiring him from 16.7.1987 is not in conformity with the procedure laid down
in regard to retirement of employees in the Corporation: Apart from relying
"on Circular B aforementioned, he has, in his application, placed reliance on'
Circular- C of 6. 2. 1985 sent by the 2nd respondent; the Chairman of the
Corporation to all Superintendents regarding the age of retirement. The
Circular states that it has been decided to give 6 months' notice to any
member of the; estate:, sub-staff who will be retired on completion of 55
years of age or thereafter if his services are not to be extended annually.
It" further stipulates that if the extension of service is not recommended by
the Superintendent reasons therefore should be intimated in writing to the
employee simultaneously with the notice of retirement and the application for
extension should be submitted for consideration to the Central Board (the
Corporation Board) through the Regional Chairman (the Chairman of the Regional
Board). This period of 6 months' notice was to enable the employee to make
arrangements for his retirement well in advance and to hand over the estate
quarters/bungalow on the date of his retirement to the Superintendent. The
Circular further states that it is not to affect the requirement of the
approval of His Excellency for retiring members of the sub-staff before the
completion of 6"0. years nor the necessity of obtaining the approval. of-the
Secretary, Ministry of State Plantations, for granting an extension of service
to any member of the sub staff beyond 55-years: All ;applications for
extensions have to be submitted well in "advance through the, Regional
Chairman to the Assistant Personnel Manager (Estate), Central Board, who would
communicate the decision direct to the Superintendent with a copy to the
Regional Chairman. The petitioner has also invoked in his favour document D
dated 13.1 1.1987. This document, however; is only a reproduction of an
extract of Circular C relevant to the retirement of non-executive estate staff
- same estate sub-staff and as such;. not being a separate

**270**

circular by itself, needs no further reconsideration. The petitioner further
avers that owing -to his trade union activities formerly as Assistant
Secretary of the Branch Union of the Ceylon Mercantile Union and latterly in
the United Plantation Service Employees' Union the 1st respondent was based
against him and was endeavouring not only to retire him but also to prevent
him from entering the Office premises: He states that the decision to retire
him and the rejection of his application for an extension of service are
arbitrary and in non-compliance with Circulars B, C and D and constitute an
infringement of Article 12(1) of the. Constitution and is also violative of
Article 12(2) as being discriminatory on grounds of political opinion for
being an active trade unionist. He states that -the decision not to permit him
to' enter the Office premises of the Board except with the specific approval
of the 1st respondent affects his freedom of movement and the freedom of
association and thus-infringes Articles 14(1) (c) and 14(1) (h).-Upon this
footing he seeks certain relief from this Court.

As pointed out by learned counsel for the 1 stand 2nd respondents (hereinafter
referred to as the respondents) at the hearing and in his written submissions
filed in the Registry of this Court on 14.04.1988,the foundation of the
petitioner's application, in' so far as the alleged infringement of Article 12
(1) is concerned, rests upon the allegation that the respondents have acted in
breach of Circulars B `and C in that, firstly, the reasons for not
recommending an extension of service to him were not communicated to him and;
secondly, the approval of His Excellency the President was not obtained for
retiring him from service at the age of 55 years. This position becomes
manifest upon a perusal of the relevant paragraphs of the- petitioner's
application and of the written submissions tendered therewith as well as upon
a consideration of the opening submissions of his counsel at the hearing.
Under normal circumstances; therefore, the petitioner, in so far as the
alleged violation of Article 12(1) is concerned, has to stand or fall upon the
allegation that the respondents have acted in breach of Circulars D and C. The
contention advanced on behalf of the respondents 'is' that the two Circulars
have no application 'whatsoever to the post held by the petitioner it was
submitted by their counsel that `the Circulars: applied only to `non-
executive' (or sub-staff) employed on' estates and not to non-executive staff
employed in offices outside estates. It was urged that the petitioner, being a
non-executive staff member employed in the office of the Board,

**271**

belonged to the class or category of employees constituting the non-executive
staff employed in offices outside estates-a category of employees separate and
distinct from the non-executive staff employed on estates. I am inclined to
agree with this submission of learned counsel for the respondents. The
language in which the two Circulars counsel makes it abundantly clear that
they apply only to non-executive staff employed on estates. The title of
Circular B is "Retirement of Non-Executive Estate Staff." It states that the
Presidential Secretariat has enjoined that no member of the staff on
Plantations" should be retired before reaching the retiring age of 60 without
the prior approval of the presidential secretariat. It then prescribes the
procedure to be adopted in the case of estate staff where the superintendents
are not in favour of granting an extension of service at any stage between the
age of 55-60 years. This Circular which addressed to Chairman of Boards
I/II/III/IV/V contains a request that its contents be brought to the notice of
all superintendents of plantations in their respective Regions for compliance.
It has reference to a Circular dated 15.03.1983 which has been produced as R3
which confirms the issue of a presidential directive on 21.09.1982 to the
effect that the staff on the plantations be allowed to continue in service
till they complete the age 60 years. Similarly Circular C which is titled "
Age of Retirement" and addressed to all Superintendents embodies a decision to
give 6 months notice to any member of the estate sub staff who will be retired
on completion of 55 years of age or thereafter if his services are not to be
extended annually. It requires Superintendents to adduce reasons to be
communicated to the employee along with the not being recommended by him. The
existence of these two categories of employees in the Corporation cannot be
seriously controverter by the petitioner in view of the correspondence Q, T
and U produced by him with his counter affidavit. The last letter U dated
18.09.1986 sent on his behalf by his trade union to the 2nd respondent states,
inter alia, as follows:

" We have also to point out that estate staff of the Corporation are
transferable between Estate Offices and may be transferred to Regional Offices
or Head Office only if there are vacancies in those offices with their consent
as their terms conditions of employment are different from those of the Head
Office and Regional Offices."

**272**

In fact on the Circulars placed before us for our consideration, such a
distinction between the two categories of employees, in relation to the age of
retirement, appears to have originated with the issue of Circular R 1 of
17.3.1978 which supercedes all previous circular instructions issued on the
subject Schedule 1 of this Circular specifies the appropriate authority for
granting of extensions of service to the various' categories of employees of
the Corporation and the officer through whom such applications for extensions
should be submitted. It enumerates, amongst others, the following 3 categories
of employees, namely, Regional Office Non-'Executives, Head Office Non-
Executives 'and Estate Sub-Staff. On a careful scrutiny of all the above facts
and circumstances it appears tome` that the Circulars relied upon by the
petitioner have no application, in so far as retirement is concerned; to non-
executive staff employees working in the offices outside the estates: Their
application must be confined to . non-executive staff (or sub-staff) employed
op the estates and estate offices only. It would therefore follow that the
petitioner's claim for . relief on the basis- of the averments set out in' his
application to this Court must fail.'

In the special circumstances of this case, however, the matter cannot, in my
view, be permitted to rest there. The respondents have maintained that
Circular R 1 is the only Circular pertaining to retirement that is applicable
to the petitioner and that Circulars Band C as well as Circulars; R2 (which
amended R 1) and R3 were inapplicable to him. I it is essential that we should
-examine, this contention of the respondents for a proper and effectual
determination of the issue before us. The contention is one that has been
raised directly by the respondents themselves both in their respective
affidavits-and at the hearing in answer to the petitioner's claim. All the
material relevant to a consideration of this contention has been: placed
before us and we have been invited by the parties to adjudicate on their
respective claims. Moreover this is an important application invoking the
special jurisdiction of this court alleging a violation of fundamental rights.
For these reasons I am unable to agree with learned counsel for the
respondents that the: question whether there has or, has not been compliance
with Circulars R 1 and/or R2 is not a matter that arises for our decision in
this case. Being so trivial and technical in nature, it is not an objection
which, in my view, can be sustained.

Circular R 1 prescribes that the age of retirement of all grades of employees
of the Corporation is 55 years. The Corporation has

**273**

reserved wit self this right to extend the services of an employee on a yearly
basis up to the age of 58 years. Schedule -1, sets out the appropriate:
authority for granting of such extensions and the officer through whom such
applications have to be submitted. For this purpose all employees of the
Corporation have been- classified into 7 categories. Group D: deals with the
non executives of the; Regional - Office, the appropriate,- authority for
granting their, extensions of service being the General -Manager
(Administration) and the officer through whom their applications have to be
submitted being the Regional Manager. - Group F deals with Estate Sub-staff,
the appropriate authority, for granting, extensions being the Regional Manager
and the officer through whom the applications should be made being the
Superintendent. The Circular further states that employees of, the Corporation
who wish to apply for such extensions should apply to the appropriate
authority through the officer -concerned at least 3 months before they reach
the, age, of 55 years. Circular R2 of 12.6.1.98.1 deals with the age, of
retirement and is amendment to Circular R 1. After setting, out several
amendments in regard to the age of retirement of non-executive estate staff,
on State Plantations, the notices of retirement which should be given to them
and their applications for extension of services, the Circular in paragraph 11
states:

"11. The extension of the service of those in labour grade which has been
referred to as minor grades in our Circular No. 55 of 17.3.78 will be
authorised by the Superintendent as done hitherto and in the case of members
of the non-executive and minor-staff attached to the Regional Boards,
applications for extensions should be forwarded in the same manner to the
General .Manager , (Administration) who would refer such applications for
necessary action to the Secretary, Ministry of State Plantations."

There is reference in this paragraph to members, of the on-executive staff
attached to Regional Boards: The petitioner being admittedly one of such
members, this provision would have application to him. The respondents,
concede that Circular R1 applies to the petitioner. If so, Circular R2 which
is an amendment to Circular R 1 making specific provision in paragraph 11 to
Board office non-executive staff must necessarily apply to him. Circular R.1
read with Circular R2 thus made it incumbent on the 1st respondent to forward
the petitioner's application- for, an extension of service to the General
Manager

**274**

(Administration) to enable him to refer the same to the Secretary, Ministry of
State Plantations for necessary action. I therefore hold that the Board's
refusal to extend the period of service of the petitioner has been in breach
of Circulars R 1 and R2.

"Learned Counsel for-the respondents submitted that even. if there had been
non-compliance of Circular R2, the petitioner cannot succeed. in his claim for
relief under Article. 12 (1) for the reason that he has failed to aver and/or
establish that other persons similarly circumstanced as the petitioner have
been differentially treated. The proposition that without such proof a
petitioner cannot succeed; in making' out a case of discrimination under
Article' 12 (1) has-been finally settled by the judgment of this Court in
Elmore Perera v. Jayawickrema (1)": The dissenting judgments delivered in that
case cannot be of any assistance to the petitioner. The majority decision
which laid down the above proposition must be deemed to be the decision in the
case: It is binding on this Court. Hence to succeed; in establishing an
infringement of Article 12(1) it is obligatory the petitioner to prove that he
has been treated differentially from others similarly circumstanced as
himself: Far from citing in his application, or any of his counter-affidavits
a." single instance of such differentia treatment, the petitioner has not even
averred that he has so treated. At the hearing his counsel in, an endeavor to
show such differential treatment referred us to letter 'T' dated 27.2.1986
addressed, by the petitioner's trade union to the 1st respondent and invited
us to infer that one Thiyagarajah a Store-Keeper/'Clerk in the and Office, had
been given an extension even beyond his 60th year. This letter has been
produced together with several other letters along with 'the first counter-
affidavit of the petitioner.- The petitioner has specified therein the purpose
of producing these letters as being to show his trade union activities and
also the attitude of the Board towards trade unionists. Thus the petitioner
himself did not intend to establish discrimination by producing' letter 'T':
It contains a statement alleged to have been made by the Manager of `the
.Board to the Secretary of the Union admitting over the telephone that
Thiyagarajah, who vvas over 60 years of age, should not' have been retained in
employment, according to the order given by the 1st respondent. This alleged
statement is not supported by an affidavit and constitutes hearsay evidence.
Even assuming that its contents are true, there is no material placed before
us to show the circumstances under which Thiyagarajah's extension of service
beyond even the 60th year came

**275**

to be effected. In the absence of such proof the fact that Thiyagarajah is
still in service even after his 60th year cannot be of any assistance to the
petitioner for the purpose of establishing discrimination. Hence I uphold the
submission of learned counsel for the respondents that the petitioner has
failed to establish that he has been subjected to unequal treatment in terms
of Article. 12(1)

Learned Counsel for the respondents went further and urgent that to succeed in
obtaining redress for a violation of the fundamental right guaranteed by
Article 12(1), a petitioner must establish that he has been subjected to
unequal treatment before the law. Contrasting the two sub-Articles of Article
12, he contended that the difference between them is that whilst
discrimination envisaged under sub-Article one or more of the grounds set out
therein, whether in reference to the application of a law or not. He drew our
attention to Article 170 which defines, inter alia, the Word 'law' in the
Constitution to mean any Act of Parliament, and any law enacted by any
legislature at any time prior to the commencement of the Constitution 'and
includes an Order-, in-Council. In the light of this definition, he argued
that the relevant circulars did not constitute 'law' and that therefore even
if there had been unequal treatment in the application of the Circulars,
before the law, In support of this submission learned counsel relied on the
judgment of Ranasinghe, J. (as he then was) in, Roberts v: Ratnayake (2).
However attractive this submission may appear to be, I do not think it
necessary for me to consider its validity here in view of my finding that the
'petitioner has failed to aver and/or establish unequal treatment.

Learned Counsel for the petitioner next submitted that toe petitioner has been
discriminated on the'-ground of his political opinion in violation of Article
12(2) To substantiate this allegation , he placed reliance solely on document
'J'. it is a letter addressed to His Excellency the President by Dr.
Wickramabahu Karunaratne, the President of the United Plantation Services
Union on behalf of the petitioner. It states that the petitioner has been
forced to retire at the age of 55 without the prior approval of the
Presidential Secretariat and requests His Excellency to look into the grave
injustice done to the petitioner which, it is said has aroused the entire
membership of the Union. There is absolutely nothing in this document to
warrant the

**276**

inference that the petitioner's retirement was in consequence of the political
opinion held by him. The petitioners allegation of discrimination on this
ground is without any foundation and must be rejected.

The only other matter that remains for consideration is he complaint of the
petitioner of alleged violations of Article 14(1)(c) and (c(), namely, the
freedom of association and the freedom of movement and of choosing his
residence within Sri Lanka respectively. The petitioner's case in respect of
these infringements rest on letter L" dated 8.6.1987 by which the 1st
respondent directed him not to visit or enter the office premises of the Board
except with his specific approval. The petitioner's reply to this letter is
dated 15.5.1987 by which date, no doubt, he became aware of the prohibition
that was imposed on him by letter 'L'. The present application has been filed
in this Court by the petitioner on 17.6.1987. Prima facie, therefore, the
claim for: redress for the alleged infringements of Article 14(1) (c) and (h),
is time-barred, a period of- more than one moth having lapsed between the date
of communicating the order of the 1st respondent and the date of filing the
present application. Confronted with this situation, learned counsel for the
petitioner submitted that the order contained in letter 'L' is so tied up with
the ultimate refusal to grant an extension of service embodied in letter 'O'
dated 21.5.1987 that they could of be separated and that, therefore, the
period of one month must be reckoned as: from, 21,51987. There is, in my view,
hardly, any merit in this submission of learned counsel for the petitioner.
The order forbidding the petitioner to enter the office premises without the
permission of the 1st respondent is quite distinct and separate from the order
of refusal to grant an extension of service. They are two orders made at
different times affecting the rights of the petitioner in separate ways. They
were separable and distinct orders effective on different dates. Each order,
according to' the petitioner's own showing, resulted in violations of
different fundamental rights of his. Thus each order may well have been the
subject matter of a separate application under Article 126."I am therefore
inclined to uphold the objection of learned counsel for the respondents' that
the petitioner's claim for relief in respect of the alleged violations of
Articles `14(1) (c) and (h) is prescribed. Be that as it may; l will proceed
to consider the 'substance of the petitioner's complaint in regard to the
above infringements alleged by him. His position is that he was placed on
compulsory leave and was asked not to enter or visit the office

**277**

premises of the Board with a view to obstructing and preventing him in. the
pursuit of his legitimate, trade union activities which the ' 1st respondent
disapproved of. There is, however, nothing to substantiate this allegation.
Neither in letter 'I' which the petitioner sent to the 2nd respondent when he
was placed on compulsory leave nor in letter `N' which he sent to the 1st
respondent when he was forbidden to enter the office premises has the
petitioner urged that the 1st respondent was motivated by reason of his trade
union activities. In fact in- letter 'I* the petitioner states that he has
been placed on compulsory, leave because, he wrote to the 2nd respondent with
regard to a; falls complaint made again him by the Manager of the, board to
the Norwood Police I, therefore, reject the allegation levelled against the
1st respondent as baseless. It was submitted on behalf, of the petitioner that
the Board office is a public place and that as such the 1st respondent had no
authority to prevent the petitioner, a member of the public, from entering the
premises. I find it difficult to agree with this submission. The Board office
is certainly not a public office or place as, for instance, a public park
where any member of the public has access. Although the Board is a public
institution in the sense that it is a public corporation -established under
the State Agricultural. Corporation Act, No. 11 of 1972, for the primary
purpose of the management and development "of agricultural and estate lands
vested-' in or transferred to it by the Government and is funded by public
funds, yet no member of the public has free and unrestricted right of access
to its premises. The petitioner, rightly or wrongly, placed on compulsory
leave until. retirement. He had thus no-duties or -functions to perform in the
office. The 1st respondent as' the chief executive officer of the Board was
entrusted with the duty of ensuring proper and due supervision, control and
administration of the affairs and business of the office, He appears to have,
in good faith, formed the opinion that the petitioner's, presence in the
office with no duties to attend to may have impeded the efficient and proper
administration of the office. He may have done so in the light of the past
record of the petitioner in the Sri Lanka Railways as stated by, him in his,'
letter 'L' honestly believing that the petitioner may disrupt the due and
proper administration of the office by creating disaffection against the
Management among the employees of the office which; according to his
affidavit; the petitioner attempted to do: it is not the' petitioner's case
that he sought the `1st respondent's permission to enter the office on any
occasion for any purpose and that he was refused permission. On the contrary
the petitioner placed his case on the very

**278**

high and broad basis that the office; being a public place, the 1st respondent
cannot prevent him the right of access. The petitioner can have no such
absolute right. The freedom of association spelt out in Article 14(1) (c) is
the freedom to form or join associations and not the freedom to enter any
place at any time for any purpose. The freedom of movement guaranteed by
Article 14(1) (h) is the freedom to move about in Sri Lanka and- to choose a
place of residence anywhere in Sri Lanka and can have no relevance to the
facts and circumstances of this case. The petitioner's complaint of violations
of Articles 14(1) (c) and (h) As o thus fails. Accordingly the application is
dismissed with costs fixed at Rs. 525 payable to the 1st and 2nd respondents
for and on behalf of the Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation.

**

THAMBIAH, J.** \- I agree.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J**. - I agree. _  
  
Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1980/4.html_  

