##  Senadeera, Inspector of Police, Pulmuddai Police Station Vs Lt. Siyasinghe
and Others - SLR - 335, Vol 1 of 2005 [2005] LKSC 4; (2005) 1 Sri LR 335 (1
April 2005)

**335**

**SENADEERA, INSPECTOR OF POLICE,  
PULMUDDAI POLICE STATION  
vs  
LT. SIYASINGHE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
WEERASURIYA, J.  
UDALAGAMA, J. AND  
FERNANDO, J.  
SC APPLICATION No. 263/2001 (FR)  
20th JANUARY, 2005  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Articles 11, 12(1) and 12(2) of the Constitution - Weak
and contradictary evidence - Weight of evidence to satisfy court - Balance of
evidence._

**336**

The petitioner police officer complained that when he and his wife (President,
Police Seva Vanitha Movement) were having lunch, the first and second
respondents (army officers of the Kokilai Camp) together with soldiers of the
Kokilai Camp arrived, kicked their plates and took the petitioner away in a
truck, assaulted him and later chased him away. In his counter affidavit the
petitioner said that there were other uniformed police officers accompanying
him but there was no affidavit from any officer to support this, except his
wife's affidavit. The 3rd to the 5th respondents were soliders and the 6th
respondent was the Army Commander.  
  
The evidence was contradictory except that there appears to have been a clash
between the police and the army when the police were stopped from entering
Kokilai village. The petitioner was produced before a medical officer
according to whose report there were no major injuries. The petitioner decided
not to enter the hospital for further treatment.  
  
The 1st and 5th respondents and 10 others were prosecuted before a Magistrate,
but the case was withdrawn on the advice of the Attorney-General. In the
course of the Supreme Court proceedings, the 3rd, 4th and 5th respondents were
discharged.  
  
The petitioner complained of infringement for his rights under Articles 11,
12(1) and 12(2) of the Constitution.  
  
**HELD:  
  
**_Per_ Udalagama, J.  
  
(1) " This court in order to consider granting relief to the petitioner needs
to be satisfied on a balance of probabilities as to whether the petitioner had
discharged his burden of establishing the allegation made out in the
petitioner's petition and affidavit"  
  
(2) The case for the petitioner is exaggerated and unsupported by independent
evidence.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Upul Jayasuriya_ for petitioner.  
  
_K. S. Tilakaratne_ for 1st, 2nd, 4th and 5th respondents.  
  
_S. L. Gunasekera_ for 3rd respondent.  
  
_Hashika de Silva, State Counsel_ for 6th and 7th respondents.

_Cur.adv.vult_

**337**

April 01st, 2005  
  
**UDALAGAMA.J.  
**  
The petitioner, an Inspector of Police, who was the officer in charge of
Pulmuddai Police Station alleges in his petition dated 01.05.2001 vide
paragraph 4 of same that on the 16th April, 2001 which obviously appears to
have been erroneously referred to as "the day prior to the Sinhala New Year"
that inter alia the 1 and 2 respondents together with soldiers in the Kokilai
Army Camp subsequent to abusing the petitioner and his wife, the latter of
whom was referred to as the President of the Police Seva Vanitha Association
kicked their plates whilst having lunch and smashed same on  the ground,
pulled the petitioner by his collar using obscene language and was ordered to
be dragged and put in a truck and further assaulted by at least 15 soldiers
whilst in the said truck and later dropped off and ordered to run. This
appears to be the second incident after a Corporal attached to the said Army
Detachment is said to have abused the petitioner in obscene language and
refused entry to the Kokilai village.  
  
The latter also complains that notwithstanding his introducing himself as the
officer-in-charge of Pulmuddai Police Station that the 1 st respondent
assaulted him in the presence of his wife.  
  
It is also alleged that he and his wife and two Reserve Sub-Inspectors of
Police were produced before the Government Medical  Officer of Padaviya but
they chose not to be admitted to the hospital for further treatment. The
petitioner also refers to documents P3a, P3b, P3c and P3d, the medical
reports dated 16.04.2001 (Medical Legal Examination reports).  
  
The petitioner is said to have thereafter informed the Assistant
Superintendent of Police of Kebitigollewa, the Superintendent of Police
(Operations) Padaviya and the Divisional Superintendent of Police,
Anuradhapura, subsequent to which the 1, 2 and 5 respondents and 10  others
were produced before the Magistrate of Kebitigollewa on a B report filed of
record bearing No. 3134/2001 dated 23.04.2001 (P4). It is observed from the
averments of paragraph 42 of the affidavit of the petitioner dated 04.11.2001
that the Magistrate discharged the accused from the proceedings on the advice
of the Attorney General. The petitioner also by his averment in paragraph 48
of the same affidavit alleges inter alia mala fides on the part of the then
Additional Solicitor General but significantly unsupported.  
  
The petitioner in paragraph 35 of the petition alleges that his fundamental
rights to liberty, the freedom to engage in a profession and equal protection

**338**

of the law guaranteed under Articles 12(1), 13(1), 13(2), and 14(1 )(g) had
thus been infringed and in the above circumstances prays for relief against
the 1 to 6 respondents.  
  
By a second petition which is undated the petitioner had also claimed an
infringement of his fundamental rights  recognized by the provisions of
Article 11 of the Constitution.  
  
On 31.08.2001 this court has granted leave to proceed only for the violation
of Articles 11,12(1) and 12(2) of the Constitution.  
  
It must be also mentioned here that the petitioner having not claimed relief
against the 3rd respondent had no objection to the discharge of the latter and
this court had on 20.05.2004 discharged the 3rd respondent accordingly.  
  
The affidavit of the petitioner filed with the original petition dated
01.05.2001 does not refer to any allegations of arrest, detention, torture or
abuse against the 4th respondent and as no violation of the petitioner's
fundamental rights by the 4th respondent appears to have been established this
court has no alternative but to discharge the 4th respondent.  
  
The 4th respondent is accordingly discharged.  
  
The only evidence against the 5th respondent, vide paragraph 23 of the
aforesaid affidavit of the petitioner appears to be the former's mere presence
with the 1 st and 2nd respondents and no allegation of a violation by the 5th
respondent of any of the petitioner's fundamental rights as alleged. In the
circumstances the 5th respondent is also discharged from these proceedings.  
  
The 6th respondent who is the Commander of the Sri Lanka Army had been made a
party as the 1 to 5 respondents are under the latter's  administrative control
and general supervision and the 7th respondent, the Attorney General, is made
a party to comply with the rules of court.  
  
Considering the averments in the objections filed by the 1 st respondent and
also as admitted to by the petitioner the latter at the time of the alleged
incident was not in uniform. The 1 st respondent appears to have refused a
request for a boat made by the petitioner and considering the

**339**

submissions of the learned Counsel for the petitioner at the hearing and also
the contents of the affidavits of the petitioner and his wife together with
the averment in the affidavits of the 1 and 2 respondents it is reasonable to
assume that a confrontation between the Police party and the Army personnel
had occurred on the date of the incident and that in all probability a violent
confrontation had also occurred. Considering also the averments as contained
in the affidavit of the petitioner supported by those of his wife together
with those of the 1 and 2 respondents it is apparent that the version of the
incident as submitted to court by both parties  are at variance except for the
fact that an incident had occurred. This court, in order to consider granting
of relief to the petitioner needs to be satisfied on a balance of probability
as to whether the petitioner had successfully discharged his burden of
establishing the allegation made out in the petitioner's petition and
affidavit.  
  
I am however, inclined to the view that the petitioner has in fact failed to
do so for the following principal reasons :  
  
1\. The uncertainty as to the date of the incident in view of the averments in
paragraph 4 of the petitioner's affidavit wherein the date is referred to as
the 16th of April, 2001 and also referred to as the day prior to the Sinhala
New Year which undoubtedly are two separate and different dates.  
  
2\. Admittedly the petitioner embarked on a journey accompanied by a number of
Police officers from the Pulmuddai Police station, and none of the junior
Police officers had affirmed or sworn to of such incident. The only averments
in support of the purported incident as related to by the petitioner was those
as contained in the affidavit of his wife.  
  
3\. The petitioner's averments vide paragraph 5 of his counter affidavit that
the other Police officers accompanying him were in uniform  is significantly
unsupported by affidavit from any of those officers. Undoubtedly affidavits
from those Police officers who accompanied the petitioner or importantly by
those who received injuries, would have certainly added value in comparison to
the solitary averments in the affidavit of his wife.  
  
4\. The injuries described by the Medical Officer, vide Medico Legal reports
filed marked P5A and P5(C) appear to be mild and incompatible with

**340**

the alleged severity as complained of by the petitioner and his wife which
included assault with weapon butts.  
  
The petitioner also complained of being dragged along the ground to a truck
and assaulted by 15 soldiers whilst inside the truck. The assault as described
by the petitioner in my view appears exaggerated when considering the injuries
in reference to the aforesaid Medico Legal Reports.  
  
5\. P5d, a Medico Legal Report with reference to a Sub-Inspector of Police who
is said to have accompanied the petitioner and who was also stated to have
been assaulted is not supported by an affidavit from that officer, which if
done undoubtedly would have added credence to the petitioner's version of the
incident as described by him.  
  
6\. The position of the petitioner that his wife was the President of the Seva
Vanitha Association is also unsupported by independent evidence.  
  
7\. The criminal proceedings instituted in the Magistrate's Court of
Kebithigollewa, vide B report bearing No. 3134/2001 and suspects including the
1 and 2 respondents who had been charged with offences under the provisions of
sections 128, 129, 141, 145, 183, 186, 324, 332, 344, 345, 348, 356, 410 and
438 of the Penal Code had been concluded by the learned Magistrate by his
order dated 15.10.2001 discharging all suspects on the orders of the Attorney
General.  
  
The allegation made by the petitioner against the Additional Solicitor General
of mala fides as stated above is without supportive evidence and needs to be
rejected.  
  
It must be noted and understood that such discharge of the suspects including
the 1 and 2 respondents from the serious allegations made out on the complaint
of the petitioner points to the fact of an obvious lack of material to proceed
on the complaint of the petitioner apparently rendering the version of the
petitioner supported by the averments in the affidavit of his wife to be
unworthy of consideration.  
  
Accordingly on a careful consideration of the aforesaid circumstances I am
inclined to the view that the petitioner has not succeeded in establishing on
a balance of probability that the petitioner was subjected to cruel,

**341**

inhuman and degrading treatment thereby infringing the provisions of Article
11 of the Constitution or that the respondents infringed the petitioner's
rights to equal protection as contemplated in the provisions of Article 129(1)
of the Constitution or that the petitioner was subjected to any discrimination
as provided for in Article 12(2) of the Constitution. This application is
accordingly dismissed without costs.  
  
**WEERASURIYA, J**. - I agree.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2005/4.html_  

