##  Ajith Fernando Alias Konda Ajith and Others v. The Attorney-General - SLR
- 288, Vol 1 of 2004 [2004] LKSC 4; (2004) 1 Sri LR 288 (27 January 2004)

**288**

**AJITH FERNANDO ALIAS KONDA AJITH  
AND OTHERS  
v  
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL**

SUPREME COURT  
ISMAIL, J.  
EDUSSURIYA, J.  
YAPA, J.  
WIGNESWARAN, J. AND  
JAYASINGHE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO 1/2002  
H.C. COLOMBO (TRIAL AT BAR)  
NO 9760/89  
OCTOBER 21ST AND 31ST 2003  
  
_Criminal Law - Abduction, Gang rape and murder - Penal Code, sections 296,
364(2) and 357 - Offences committed in the course of the same trans­action
-Abduction and murder in furtherance of the common intention.  
_  
Newly married Rita Joan and Mr.Manoharan were staying with her father-in-law
in Crow Island. The island was about 60 acres and situated in proximity of the
estuary of the Kelani river. On the eastern side was a mangrove jungle. With
creepers forming a canopy which prevented light reaching the land underneath.
A waterway extending from the river ran through the forest in which weeds and
water hyacinth grew.

**289**

On 11.10.1998 at about 6.15 p.m. Rita Joan the deceased and Manoharan had
walked towards the estuary of the Kelani river and were returning when they
were accosted by the three accused whom Manoharan identified at an
identification parade. Despite resistance in the course of which the 2nd
accused bit Manoharan causing an injury which was medically confirmed, the
three accused took Rita Joan by force. Having failed to save his wife
Manoharan ran home. The police arrived and with other people meticulously
searched for Rita until 11.00 p.m. but unsuccessfully. The search continued on
the 12th and 13th but in vain.  
  
On 13.10.98 the 2nd and 3rd accused were arrested. The 1st accused was
arrested on 14.10.98 away from his residence. Jewellery worn by the deceased
were recovered from the 2nd and 3rd accused. All the accused had injuries
which according to medical evidence could have resulted from having had
intercourse on the ground.  
  
The statements of the 2nd and 3rd accused were recorded in consequence of
which they were taken to the scene separately. Each showed the place where the
deceased's body lay in a stream in the jungle area. According to medical
evidence injuries on the deceased were consistent with gang rape and anal
intercourse and strangulation of the neck with a creeper. The clothes worn by
the deceased were found in consequence of a statement of the 1st accused.  
  
**HELD:**

> **(1)   **The failure of the court to call Lakshman Perera who was on the
> list of State witnesses did not prejudice the case. He had been given a
> conditional pardon. But the failure to call him does not raise any issue of
> non compliance with section 256 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act
> because the Attorney-General could not legally give him a pardon as he was
> not an accomplice. In any event the court examined his statement and decided
> that to call him as a witness of court would have been prejudicial to the
> accused; and left it open to the defence to call him if necessary.  
>  
>  **(2)   **The trial court did not attach a probative value to the statement
> of the 2nd and 3rd accused which resulted in the discovery of the deceased's
> body. In all the circumstances there was no misdirection in the matter. Only
> the accused knew where the deceased's body lay.  
>  
>  **(3)   **The objection that common intention had not been proved in regard
> to the abduction and murder is without justification in view of the strong
> prima facie case established which required an explanation from the accused.  
>  
>  
>  **(4)   **The conviction of the accused is justified.

**290**

1\. _Walimunige John v The State_ \- 76 NLR 488 at 496  
  
2\. _Chuin Pong Shiek v The Attorney-General_ \- (1999) 2 SRI LR 277 at Z85  
  
3\. _Pulukuri Kottaya v Emperor_ \- Al R 1947 PC 67 at 70  
  
4\. _Richard v The State_ \- 76 NLR 534  
  
5\. _Rishideo v The State of Uttar Pradesh_ \- 1955 AIR 331 at 335  
  
6\. _Commonwealth v Webster_ \- 5 Cush 295  
  
7\. _Seetin v The Queen_ \- 68 NLR 316 at 322  
  
8\. _R v Lord Cochrane and others_ \- (1814) Guruey's Reports 479  
  
**APPEAL** from the order of the High Court Colombo  
  
_Dr. Ranjith Fernando_ for 1st, 2nd and 3rd accused-appellants.  
  
_CR.de Silva, P.C. Solicitor-General_ with _Wasantha Bandara, Senior State
Counsel_ and _Harippriya Jayasundera,_ State Counsel for Attorney- General.

_Cur.adv.vult_

January 27, 2004  
**  
ISMAIL, J.  
**  
The accused above named were tried before the High Court at Bar by three
Judges without a jury on an order made by the Chief Justice in terms of
section 450(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No.15 of 1979, as
amended by Act, No.21 of 1998.  
  
The following charges were included in the information exhibit­ed by the
Attorney General to the High Court.  
  
1\. That on or about the 11th of October 1998, the said accused did, at
Modera, within the jurisdiction of this High Court, abduct Rita Joan Manoharan
in order that she may be forced into illicit intercourse and that they did
thereby commit an offence punishable under section 357 read with section 32 of
the Penal Code.  
  
2\. At the time and place aforesaid and in the course of the same transaction
that the 1 st accused together with the 2nd and the 3rd accused constituted a
gang and whilst being a

**291**

member of such gang, the 1st accused did commit rape on the said Rita Joan
Manoharan or that he did aid and abet the 2nd and/or 3rd accused to commit
rape on the said Rita Joan Manoharan and that he did thereby commit gang rape,
an offence punishable under section 364(2) of the Penal Code, as amended by
Act, No.22 of 1995.  
  
3\. At the time and place aforesaid and in the course of the same transaction
the 2nd accused together with the 1 st and 3rd accused constituted a gang and
whilst being a member of such gang, the 2nd accused did commit rape on the
said Rita Joan Manoharan or that he did aid and abet the 1st and/or 3rd
accused to commit rape on the said Rita Joan Manoharan and that he did thereby
commit gang rape, an offence punishable under section 364(2) of the Penal
Code, as amended by Act, No. 22 of 1995.  
  
4\. At the time and place aforesaid and in the course of the same transaction
that the 3rd accused together with the 1st and 2nd accused constituted a gang
and whilst being a member of such gang, the 3rd accused did commit rape on the
said Rita Joan Manoharan or that he did aid and abet the 1st and/or 2nd
accused to commit rape on the said Rita Joan Manoharan and that he did thereby
commit gang rape, an offence punishable under section 364(2) of the Penal
Code, as amended by Act, No. 22 of 1995.  
  
5\. At the time and place aforesaid and in the course of the same transaction
set out in count I above, the said accused did cause the death of Rita Joan
Manoharan and did there­by commit an offence punishable under 296 read with
sec­tion 32 of the Penal Code.  
  
6\. At the time and place aforesaid and in the course of the said same
transaction the said accused did commit robbery of a Chain worth Rs.25,000/, a
pair of gold bangles worth Rs.15,000/- and a ring worth Rs.10.000/-, the
property in the possession of the said Rita Joan Manoharan and that they did
thereby commit an offence punishable under section 380 read with section 32 of
the Penal Code.

**292**

The deceased Rita Joan, an indian citizen who was living in Bombay married
Jude Mohan Sunanthiran Manoharan, a Marine Engineer from Sri Lanka, on
12.9.1998 at St.Michael's Church, Maniff, India. The couple came to Sri Lanka
soon thereafter on 20.9.1998. She lived with her husband at the residence of
her father-in-law, a retired Senior Superintendent of Police, at Crow Island,
Modera.  
  
Crow Island was approximately 60 acres in extent extending on the north to the
estuary of the Kelani river. On the eastern side was a mangrove jungle about
16 acres in extent. This area had large bushes with an extensive growth of
creepers. The creepers provid­ed a canopy covering the surface preventing the
fall of sunlight and thus the area was in total darkness. A waterway extending
from the river ran through the parts of the jungle on the eastern side which
were marshy and covered with an intense growth of weeds and water hyacinth. A
sketch of the area (P12a) was plotted by Mr.S.M.W.Fernando, Deputy Surveyor
General, based on aerial photographs previously taken and on data compiled by
the Surveyor General's Department and the sketch 'P12' made by  Chief
Inspector Dehideniya in the course of his investigation.  
  
On the evening of 11.10.1998, at about 6.15 p.m. Rita Joan went with her
husband for a walk towards the estuary of the Kelani river. Having spent about
10 to 15 minutes there, they were returning home along a winding road by the
river. They ate some gram bought from a gram vendor whom they had met on the
way back. When they had come about 200 to 300 meters from the estuary, they
observed three persons coming towards them from the oppo­site direction. The
tallest of them was on one side. The shortest of them was in the centre and
the other person who was also tall was a few steps behind them.  
  
The evidence of the husband of the deceased Jude Manoharan was that the
tallest person had long hair which was tied as a 'pony tail'. He was dressed
in a blue T-shirt with two white stripes on it and was wearing a pair of blue
denim trousers. He had not seen that person prior to that day. he was the 1st
accused. The other per­son who was walking with the 1st accused was dressed in
a black T-shirt and a pair of black shorts. He was the 2nd accused. The third
person who was behind the 1st and 2nd accused was dressed

**293**

in a light mauve 'V neck T-shirt and was wearing a pair of light blue denim
trousers. He was the 3rd accused. Manoharan identified these three persons as
the accused above named at an identifica­tion parade held on 27.10.1998.  
  
  
As the three accused were passing them, the 3rd accused held his wife's hand
and tried to pull her. He managed to drag his wife towards him and asked the
3rd accused as to what he was doing. The 3rd accused abused him in obscene
language and all three accused proceeded a distance of about 21/2 yards. All
of a sudden the 3rd accused started running towards them followed by the 1st
and 2nd accused. As they came towards them he asked his wife to run away.
Before she could run away, the 3rd accused held him by his T-shirt while the
2nd accused held him by his neck. The 1st accused went behind his wife and
grabbed her saying that he was armed with a pistol. The 3rd accused kicked him
on his abdomen and when he was trying to extricate himself from the clutches
of the 2nd accused, the white T-shirt that he was wearing came off and his
pair of spectacles fell on the ground. While the 2nd accused held the witness
by his neck, the 3rd accused came towards him to assault him. He kicked the
3rd accused and dealt a blow towards the genitals of the 2nd accused. Both he
and the 2nd accused fell down. At that time he had heard his wife shouting out
his name and calling for his assistance. When he and the 2nd accused were
fall­en down, the 2nd accused bit him just below the left nipple. This
resulted in an injury which was later identified by the Medical Officer as a
bite mark. He dealt a blow on the face of the 2nd accused. Then the 3rd
accused came towards him and attempted to trample him. At that time too he
heard his wife calling out his name. He did not hear the cries of his wife
thereafter. The 2nd accused had also attempted to strangle him with a silver
coloured chain. He shouted out to his wife and there was no response from her.
As he was unable to continue to fight with these persons, he decided to escape
and to run away to seek assistance.  
  
While he was running towards his house he met a neighbour of his father named
Balakrishnan. He informed him of the incident. Balakrishnan advised him to run
to his house and inform his father and seek assistance. He then ran home and
having informed his father as to what had taken place, he returned in the
direction of the

**294**

place where the incident had taken place followed by 10 to 15 per­sons from
the neighbourhood. A short while later, a team of police officers together
with some army personnel came towards the place where the incident had taken
place on motor cycles and in jeeps. They began a search for his wife and the
three accused. It was dark at the time and the area was covered by shrub
jungle, creepers and huge trees. That evening all attempts to find his wife
were unsuccessful. The police informed him that they had found his T-shirt and
a pair of slippers that belonged to his wife. The search for his wife was
given up at about 11p.m. that night.  
  
The following morning too police officers, army personnel and the neighbours
made a search in the jungle and the marshy land for his wife and the accused
but were unsuccessful in locating them. He saw the naked body of his wife at
about 2 p.m. on 13.10.1998, immersed in the waterway filled with water
hyacinth plants, behind the Nara Institure building at Crow Island. The police
took the body out of the water and at that time, he observed that the items of
jewellary that she was wearing at the time she was abducted were missing,
except for the pair of 'gypsy' ear-rings on her ears.  
  
The evidence of Jude Manoharan was that at the time he went for a stroll with
his wife towards the estuary of the Kelani river on the evening of 11.10.1998,
he was dressed in a white T-shirt and a mauve coloured pair of shorts. He wore
a pair of slippers. His wife was dressed in a bluish pair of denim trousers
and a light green shirt which could be unbuttoned from the front. She was
wearing a pair of 'gypsy' ear-rings and 'thali', also known as a 'mangala
suthra', which was tied by him on the day of their wedding, a pair of gold
bangles, a wedding ring, a diamond ring and a pair of ear-studs which had the
shape of a Bo leaf, and a pendant attached to the 'thali', which had the
initials K.D.M. and the number 916 engraved on it. The pair of bangles had a
design depicting the num­ber 8 with a design of flowers at the centre. She was
also wearing a white coloured Indian brassiere and grey coloured under-wear,
purchased in Singapore, with the trade name 'Marks & Spencer' on it. At the
time the body was recovered, none of the above items of jewellery and clothing
were found on her body, except for the pair of 'gypsy' ear-rings.

**295**

Dr. Vidanapathirana, Assistant Judicial Medical Officer, visited the Crow
Island on 13.10.1998, accompanied by officers of the Modera Police and had
observed the body of the deceased Rita Joan Manoharan lying in the waterway
covered with water hyacinth plants. The body was naked and lay face downwards.
The body was taken out of the water and taken to the JMO's Office in Colombo,
where on the following day, on 14.10.1998, the post­mortem examination was
held. The body was identified as being that of Rita Joan by her husband Jude
Manoharan and his brother. At the time of the post-mortem examination, the
body was found to be putrefied and the nails along with the skin had peeled
off as the condition known as "glove and stockings" had set in. The following
injuries on the body of the deceased have been set out in the post­mortem
examination report:  
  
1\. Multiple parallel lacerations on the face.  
  
2\. Multiple parallel lacerations over the left nipple.  
  
3\. Multiple abrasions over the left scapular area, 2" x 2", involving the
dermis with criss-cross patterns.  
  
4\. Multiple parallel abrasions over right scapular area 2" x 1", involving
the dermis.  
  
5\. Multiple criss-cross abrasions over the left buttock area 2" x 1"
involving the dermis.  
  
6\. Multiple post mortem chlorophyll stains, on the back of the chest, abdomen
and buttocks in criss-cross patterns involving only the epidermis. These marks
were lost when removing the epidermis at autopsy.  
  
7\. Multiple abrasions over the back of the left ankle 2" x 1" involving the
dermis  
  
8\. Ligature (creeper) around the neck 39 cm long below the thyroid cartilage
running over the hair on the back side. The knot was on the back of the right
side of the neck, one end was 25 cm and the other end 111cm. The ligature was
removed by cutting it a few cm. to the right of the knot.  
  
Out of the injuries set out above, the 1st and 2nd injuries were post-mortem
injuries caused by animal bites. The other injuries

**296**

were all ante-mortem.  
  
The mark of the ligature was 2 cm in depth, and 1 cm thick and of a length of
25 cm, running horizontal around the neck pairing at the back of the neck, due
to the hair. There was no underlying hemorrhage of the skin or muscles. There
were no laryngeal cartilage fractures. The thyroid gland was putrefied. The
carotid arteries were normal. There were no fractures of the cervical
vertebrae.  
  
On an examination of the urinary and sexual area of the body, the Assistant
Judicial Medical Officer found that the area was moderately putrefied. He
found fibrosis of the hymen at the 5 and 7o'clock positions. There was a
contusion on the right labia majora on the inner aspect 1c.m.x1c.m. There was
a vaginal contusion of the right side of the posterior wall 1 cm.xi cm, 2 cm
above the hymen. The cervix and the uterus were normal. There was contu­sion
of the posterior wall of the anus 1 cm x 1 cm and 2 cm above the anal verge.
Upon a consideration of these injuries, the evidence of Dr.Vidanapathirana was
that in his opinion the deceased had been subjected to intra vaginal and anal
intercourse by more per­sons than one.  
  
The cause of death was due to strangulation of the neck by a ligature. His
considered view was that death had taken place 36 to 40 hours prior to the
post-mortem examination, between 6 pm and 11 pm on 11.10.1998. In fixing the
probable time of death he had taken into account the presence of partly
digested food in the stom­ach identified as gram and had formed the view that
death had taken place within one hour of its consumption. The post-mortem
examination report was produced at the trial marked 'P18'.  
  
Dr.Vidanapathirana also examined the three accused. He examined the 1st
accused on 14.10.1998 at 1.30 p.m. He has listed 5  
injuries found on him in the medico-legal report 'P21'.  
  
(i) 4"x2" multiple linear criss-cross abrasions over the left shin.  
  
(ii) 4"x2" multiple linear criss-cross abrasions over the right shin.  
  
(iii) 1/2"x1/2" contusion on the upper lip.  
  
(iv) 1"x1" contusion on the right wrist.

**297**

(v) 1/2"x1/2" contusion on the left wrist.  
  
He examined the 2nd accused at 12.55 pm on 13.10.1998. He had the following
injuries as set out in the medico-legal report 'P20'.  
(i) 4"x1" multiple linear criss-cross abrasion over the left knee.  
  
(ii) 2" linear abrasion on the left shin.  
  
(iii) 4" linear abrasion on the left shin.  
  
(iv) 2" linear abrasion on the dorsum of the left foot.  
  
(v) 2"x2" multiple linear abrasions on the right knee.  
  
(vi) 1/2" linear abrasion over the back of the left hand.  
  
(vii) 1" linear abrasion on the back of the right hand.  
  
He examined the 3rd accused on 13.10.1998 at 2.30p.m. at the JMO's office on
being produced by the Modera Police. He had four injuries as set out in the
medico-legal report 'P19'.  
  
(i) 1" linear abrasion over the left knee  
  
(ii) 2" linear abrasion over the right knee  
  
(iii) 1/2"x1/2" contusion over the right shin  
  
(iv) 1/2"x1/2" contusion over the left wrist.  
  
Dr.Vidanapathirana expressed the opinion that the injuries found on the legs
of all three accused could have been sustained while lying face downward on a
rough surface probably in the act of having sexual intercourse and that such
injuries could have been sustained between 6.30p.m. and midnight on
11.10.1998.  
  
In the course of his evidence, Dr.Vidanapathirana produced several photographs
taken by him at the scene and also some pho­tographs taken by an official
photographer which were taken during the post-mortem examination. 'P17A' is a
photograph taken by him at the scence before the body was taken out of the
stream covered with water hyacinth. 'P17B' is one which shows the chlorophyll
stains on the body of the deceased. Photograph 'P17C shows the peeling of the
skin and the nails described by him as the 'glove and stocking' effect.
Photograph 'P17D' shows the injury in front of the neck caused by the ligature
'P3' ,P17E shows the injury on the

**298**

back of the neck as a result of the ligature. 'P17F' shows the injury caused
to the labia majora of the deceased. 'P17G' is a photograph showing the
injuries on the knee of the 3rd accused. 'P17G' is a photograph showing the
injuries on the knee of the 3rd accused. 'P17H' shows the injuries with black
scabs on the skin of the 1st accused.  
  
Jude Manoharan was examined by Dr. H.P.Wijewardena, Assistant Judicial Medical
Officer at about 11.20 am on 13.10.1998. He had an injury 20 mm x 3mm on the
left side of the chest about 12cm below the left nipple with redness around
the injury. It was identified as a bite mark. There were abrasions below the
ankle on both his legs which could have been caused while running through the
scrub jungle. A photograph showing the bite mark was produced 'P2C at the
trial.  
  
Chief Inspector Ranjith Dehideniya received the first information regarding
the abduction of the deceased Rita Joan Manoharan by way of a telephone call
at 6.50p.m. on 11.10.1998. He proceeded to Crow Island which was about 11/2
miles from the police station with a police party and met Jude Manoharan at
about 7.05 pm. He questioned him at the scene and made inquiries with regard
to the place where his wife was abducted and the direction in which she was
taken away. He searched the area with the assis­tance of the other police
officers and some villagers who had gathered there. He found a pair of
slippers 'P10' at the scene which was that of the deceased. Although the
police dog was given the scent from the slippers and from the clothing of the
deceased obtained from her residence nearby, the search with the police dog
was unsuccessful. The police, villagers and army personnel continued to search
the area till about 11 p.m. but it was of no avail. The search continued the
next day. Although he and others went into jungle in Crow Island they were
unable to trace Rita Joan who was abducted.  
  
Upon the receipt of some information in the early hours of the morning on
13.10.1998, he proceeded to St.Andrew's Lower Road, Modera and took into
custody Mahamalage Lakshman Perera on suspicion. Having questioned him, he
along with the police party proceeded to the railway quarters in Slave Island
and arrested K.Balapuwaduge Basil Mendis, the 2nd accused, at about

**299**

6.00 a.m. at the house of one Sunil. Thereafter he proceeded with the party to
Kohalwila in Dalugama and arrested the 3rd accused, P.Chaminda Kumara
Fernando, at about 6.35 a.m. He returned to the Police Station with the police
party and the suspects at about 7 a.m. Although they were on the look out for
the 1st accused on the 13th, they were unable to arrest him.  
  
Having recorded the statements of the 2nd and 3rd accused they were separately
taken to the spot marked 'X' in the sketch and from there each of them pointed
out an area marked 'Y'. Lakshman Perera who was also taken there did not point
to any place. Upon a search of the area pointed to by the 2nd and 3rd accused,
IP Dehideniya discovered the body of the deceased in the water which was fully
covered with water hyacinth plants at point 'C on the sketch 'P12A'. The body
was recovered at about 12 noon on 13.10.1998. The extracts of the statements
made by the 2nd and 3rd accused which led to the discovery of the body were
produced at the trial marked 'P24' and 'P25' respectively under the
provi­sions of section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance. The body was naked and
was dumped face downward in the stream covered with water hyacinth plants.
After the discovery of the body he notified the Magistrate who arrived at the
scene at about 4.15 p.m. and after he made his observations, the body was
taken out of the water and was taken to the JMO's office. The pair of 'gypsy'
earrings on her ears was produced marked 'P16' at the trial and was identified
by the husband of the deceased. Inspector Dehideniya also produced a set of 9
photographs marked 'P1' which was taken by him of the body with a ligature
round her neck at the scene.  
  
SI Udayakumara took the 1st accused-appellant into custody at Hasalaka and
produced him at the Modera Police Station at 10.30 a.m. on 14.10.1998. He
questioned the 1st accused and after his statement was recorded, he was taken
at about 11 a.m. on 14.10.98 in a covered police vehicle to Crow Island. At a
place which was 10 to 15 yards from where the body was discovered,-he
recovered a pair of blue denim trousers, a yellowish blouse and a lady's
underwear with the trade name Marks & Spencer underneath some leaves near a
'Kottan' tree. These items of clothing were identified by Jude Manoharan as
the items of clothing that were worn by his wife at the time of the abduction
and were produced marked 'P7', 'P8' & 'P9'. An extract of the statement
leading to the discovery of these items was produced

**300**

marked 'P27' by IP Udayakumara. The 1st accused was examined by the Judicial
Medical Officer at 1.30 p.m. and produced thereafter at the Colombo
Magistrate's Court and was remanded till 27.10.1998. The wife of the 1st
accused handed over a pair of bangles to IP Dehideniya at the Police Station
on 15.10.1998. It was produced marked 'P15'.  
  
Inspector Chandrathilake, the Officer-in-Charge at the Modera Police Station
testified at the trial that after the identification parade was held, having
obtained an order from Court, he questioned the 2nd accused in the presence of
prison officers. On the following day on 28.10.1998, he searched the house of
the 2nd accused sit­uated at 173/46, Modera Street and recovered a gold chain
with a pendant with the mark K.D.M. and the number 916 engraved on it. It had
been concealed under a plank on the roof of the said house. He produced the
chain marked 'P15'. It was identified by Jude Manoharan as the 'thali' which
was worn by the deceased at the time of her abduction.  
  
After the case for the prosecution was closed, an application was made by
counsel who appeared for the 1st and 2nd accused-appellants in terms of
section 199(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act for the Court to call a
witness named in the list of wit­ness in the indictment but not called by the
prosecution. The Court having examined the statement made by the said witness
Lakshman Perera refused the application on the basis that the evi­dence of the
witness, if called by Court, would be prejudicial to the accused. However, an
order was made permitting the accused to call the said witness as a witness
for the defence if they so desired. Lakshman Perera was not called as a
witness for the defence. Thereafter, the three accused-appellants made
statements from the dock denying the charges against them and stated that they
have been falsely implicated.  
  
At the conclusion of the trial, the 1st accused was found guilty and was
convicted on counts 1,2,5 and 6. The 2nd accused was found guilty and
convicted on counts 1,3,5 and 6. The 3rd accused was found guilty and was
convicted on counts 1,4 and 5.

**301**

The 1st accused was sentenced on count 1, to 12 yrs R.I; on count 2, to 20 yrs
R.I; and on count 6, to 10 yrs R.I. The sentences were ordered to run
consecutively. The death sentence was passed on Court 5.  
  
The 2nd accused was sentenced on count 1, to 12 Yrs R.I; on count 3, to 20 Yrs
R.I.and on count 6, to 10 Yrs R.I. The sentences were ordered to run
consecutively. The death sentence was passed on Count 5.  
  
The 3rd accused was sentenced on count 1, to 12 Yrs R.I; and on count 4, to 20
Yrs R.I; The sentences were ordered to run con- secutively. The death sentence
was passed on Count 5.  
  
This appeal is by all three accused-appellants against the said convictions
and sentences.  
  
Learned Counsel for the appellants submitted, firstly, that the learned Judges
of the High Court at Bar erred in law by failing to deal with the non-
compliance at the trial of the mandatory provisions of section 256(2) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure Act. It was submitted that compliance with this
provision is necessary in the interests of justice and that this section is
not meant to serve the interests of a suspect accepting a pardon. The words of
the section are that every person accepting a pardon shall be examined as a
witness and the failure to do so would vitiate the trial and conviction.
Mahamalage  Lakshman Perera who accepted a conditional pardon granted to him
by the Attorney-General under section 256(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure
Act was not examined as a witness at the trial.  
  
The provisions of section 256 of the Code are as follows:  
  
(1) In the case of any offence triable exclusively by the High Court the
Magistrate inquiring into the offence may, after having obtained the Attorney-
General's authority so to do, or the Attorney-General himself may, with the
view of Obtaining the evidence of any person supposed to have been directly or
indirectly concerned in or privy to the offence under inquiry, tender a pardon
to such person on condition of his making a full and true disclosure of the
whole of the circumstances within his knowledge relative to such offence and
to every other person concerned whether

**302**

as principal or abettor in the commission thereof.  
  
(2) Every person accepting a tender under this section shall be examined as a
witness in the case.  
  
(3) Such person if not on bail shall be detained in custody until the
termination of the trial.  
  
The object of tendering a pardon is to obtain the evidence of an accomplice, a
person supposed to have been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to
an offence. "Granting a pardon and exam­ining the evidence of an approver is
at best a necessary evil, in view of both the approver's escape from
punishment, and of the natural suspicion with which any court would look upon
the evidence in the best circumstances. The secrecy of the crime and the
scarcity of clues, sometimes necessitates this course, solely for the
apprehension of other offenders, the recovery of incriminating objects, and
production of evidence otherwise unobtainable. These can be safely considered
to be the only grounds on which a pardon may be granted. The object of
tendering a pardon is to obtain the evidence of any person supposed to have
been directly or indirect­ly concerned in or privy to an offence to which the
section applies" \- Sohoni on The Code of Criminal Procedure 1973, 18th
Edition, Volume IV at page 3192.  
  
The Attorney-General can tender a pardon only to a person sup­posed to have
been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to the offence under inquiry
with the view of obtaining his evidence to prevent the escape of other
offenders from punishment in grave cases for lack of evidence. The
considerations which should guide the Attorney-General in granting or
withholding of the pardon has been stated as follows by R.F.Dias in "A
Commentary on the Ceylon Criminal Procedure Code", vol. II, pg.727, paragraph
5.  
  
"Before tendering the pardon the Attorney-General shall be satisfied that the
accused has in fact committed the crime charged in conjunction with others, or
that he has some active part towards its commission; in other words he should
be satisfied that the accused is really an accomplice. A mere suspicion that
he may have committed the offence is insufficient. The police inquiry notes,
the recorded evidence and state­ments of the accused should all be placed
before him to

**303**

decide whether or not there is sufficient evidence, apart from the testimony
which the accused can give, to bring about the conviction of the other
accused. If such evidence exists, he will, as a rule, refuse to tender a
pardon ... He should consid­er the degree of complicity of the accomplice."  
  
It would therefore be appropriate to consider whether Mahamalage Lakshman
Perera could have in the first instance been granted a pardon. He was the
first person to have been arrested on suspicion and was produced before a
medical officer. He did not have any injuries. His statement which was
recorded did not show any complicity on his part in any of the offences. He
was not identified at the identification parade by the eye witness Jude
Manoharan. No productions relevant to the case were recovered consequent to
his statement being recorded. He was taken to the alleged scene of the offence
but he, unlike the 2nd and 3rd accused was unable to point to any spot that
could have helped the police in its investigation. A close scrutiny of his
statement clearly reveals that he cannot be regarded as a person who could
have been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to the offence under
inquiry.  
  
A pardon may not be granted in instances where there is no evi­dence available
to connect an accused with the crime. An exami­nation of the statement of
Lakshman Perera shows that at best he was a witness to the abduction of the
deceased by the three appel­lants and was certainly not an accomplice. Dias in
his Commentary on the Ceylon Criminal Procedure Code, Vol.11 at Pg.728
observes that, "A pardon would be illegally tendered if it is made to a person
who is not an accomplice and who is no way responsible for the crime alleged."
In such a case the evidence of a suspect to whom a pardon has been illegally
tendered would neither be admissible nor could he be dealt with for any breach
of the conditions of the pardon.  
  
The unambiguous words in section 256 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act and
the authorities cited above make it abundantly clear that a pardon may be
granted to a person supposed to have been directly or indirectly concerned in
or privy to the offence; in other words, to a guilty associate of a crime,
meaning an accom­plice. It may be so granted only in instances where there is
no other

**304**

evidence available to connect the accused with the crime. In the instant case
the direct evidence of the husband of the deceased was available in regard to
the abduction of his wife by the three accused. Having regard to the factors
which should guide the Attorney-General in granting or withholding a pardon,
Lakshman Perera could not, in my view, have been tendered a pardon in terms of
the provisions of section 256(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. The
pardon so granted has, in the circumstances,  been wrongly granted by the
Attorney-General.  
  
Counsel for the .appellants submitted, however, that even if the pardon has
been wrongly granted, section 256(2) mandates that the person accepting the
pardon should be examined as a witness. He submitted that the Judges erred in
law in refusing the applica­tion made by the defence for Lakshman Perera, who
was a witness listed in the indictment, to be called as a witness of Court in
terms of provisions of section 199(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.  
  
The Court having considered the said application made by the defence at the
trial and having perused the statement of Lakshman Perera took the view that
it would have been prejudicial to the accused if he was called as a witness of
Court and left it open to the defence to call him as their witness. The
refusal of the applica­tion by the defence to call Lakshman Perera as a
witness of Court in terms of section 199(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure
Act had not occasioned a miscarriage of justice. He was not a witness whose
evidence was necessary to unfold the narrative and no pre­sumption adverse to
the prosecution case could be drawn by its failure to call Lakshman Perera. As
G.P.A.Silva, S.P.J. observed in Walimunige John v The State (1).  
  
"The question of a presumption arises only where a witness whose evidence is
necessary to unfold the narrative is with­held by the prosecution, and the
failure to call such witness constitutes a vital missing link in the
prosecution case, and where the reasonable inference to be drawn from the
omission to call the witness is that he would, if called, not have sup­ported
the prosecution. But where one witness' evidence is cumulative of the other
and would be a mere repetition of the

**305**

narrative, it would be wrong to direct a jury that the failure to call such
witness gives rise to a presumption under section 114(f) of the Evidence
Ordinance."  
  
The next submission of Counsel was that the Judges erred in law by attaching a
probative value to the discovery of the body con­sequent to statements made by
the 2nd and 3rd accused as they were inadmissible under section 27 of the
Evidence Ordinance and that such information was not the cause of the
discovery. In any event, it was submitted, that even if such statements were
admis­sible, the Judges have erred in attributing to the accused more than
"the knowledge of the whereabouts" of the body. Counsel submitted that in
terms of section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance, the infor­mation must be such
as has caused the discovery of a fact. This follows from the words "thereby
discovered"; the fact must there­fore be the consequence and the information
the cause for the dis­covery. The connection must be that of cause and effect.  
  
The evidence of IP Dehideniya was that the 2nd and 3rd accused separately
pointed towards an area which was marked "Y" on the sketch and that the body
of the deceased was recovered from the point "C" in the canal and that this
point was near this area. Learned Counsel submitted that as the spot from
which the body was recovered was not within the area "Y", that the relevant
statements could not have been the cause for the discovery.  
  
The extensive search for the body by the police, army person­nel and the
villagers on the night of the 11th and the 12th was not successful. However,
after their statements were recorded, the 2nd and 3rd accused were taken to
the vicinity of the mangrove swamp and both accused separately pointed to the
area marked "Y". The body was recovered form a point in front of the area "Y"
in the sketch. Shortly thereafter and in consequence of such information the
body which was initially not visible as it lay in the water covered with a
thick growth of water hyacinth was recovered. The medical evidence that there
were chlorophyll stains on the body confirms this fact. In the circumstances,
the submission that the body could have been discovered consequent to
information from other sources including Lakshman Perera cannot be accepted.
Considering that the area pointed to by the accused was marshy

**306**

and in their words 'muddy' and a 'muddy hole', the exact location where the
body lay could not have been pointed to, even by them, with pin-point
accuracy. I am of the view that the prosecution has established that the
recovery of the body was the consequence and that the information from the 2nd
and 3rd accused was the cause for such recovery. The requirement of the nexus
has been fulfilled and thus the prosecution has established that the two
accused who pointed to the area marked 'Y' had knowledge of the place where
the body could be found.  
  
In this connection, the learned Solicitor General has appropri­ately referred
to the observations made by Fernando, J. when he considered this principle in
Chuin Pong Shiek v The Attorney General(2) In this case it was sought to be
argued that the discov­ery of six screws in the pocket of the jacket was
improperly admitted contrary to section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance because
that part of the petitioner's statement did not refer to the contents of the
bag. Fernando, J. observed as follows:  
  
"The Court of Appeal rejected that submission, and I would venture to
summarize its reasoning as follows. The bag was the 'fact' discovered; it was
deposed to as having been dis­covered in consequence of the petitioner's
statement; so much of that statement as related distinctly to the bag - the
'fact' discovered - could therefore be proved. The 'fact' discovered was the
bag including its contents. Accordingly as held in R v Krishnapillai and Etin
Singho v The Queen, the petitioner's statement established that he had
knowledge of the place at which was found the bag containing the jacket and
the screws. The petitioner failed to explain how he had acquired that
knowledge. In my view, no question of law aris­es in relation to the
interpretation or application of section 27(1)."  
  
Learned Counsel for the appellant submitted while dealing with the evidence
regarding the discovery of the body, that the judges of the High Court at Bar
erred in law in attributing more than the knowledge of its whereabouts. He
referred in particular to the find­ing that the accused were present during
the disposal of the body and that they were aware of her death. In this
connection the observations

**307**

of the Privy Council in Pulukuri Kottaya v Emperor, (3) has an important
bearing. It was held that "it is fallacious to treat the 'fact discovered'
within the section as equivalent to the object pro­duced. The 'fact
discovered' embraces the place from which the object is produced and the
knowledge of the accused as to this, and the information given must relate
distinctly to this fact". The finding of the High Court at Bar was not
unreasonable considering the other items of evidence led in this regard. The
information pro­vided by the 2nd and 3rd accused which led to the discovery of
the body confirmed their knowledge of the whereabouts of the body which was
not clearly visible and was found submerged in water covered with a thick
growth of water hyacinth. The three accused were identified by the husband as
the only persons who forcibly took the deceased away shortly prior to her
death. The finding of the Judges arrived at on the basis of the cumulative
effect of the entirety of the evidence besides the evidence relating to the
dis­covery of the body is not unreasonable and is justified. The submissions
of counsel in regard to the discovery of the body cannot therefore be
accepted.  
  
The next ground of appeal, in regard to the conviction for mur­der, was that
the available evidence did not support an irresistible inference that all
three accused entertained a common murderous intention at the time of
committing the offence. Counsel for the appellants submitted that the original
plan of the accused was abduction apparently for the purpose only of illicit
sexual inter­course; that there was no evidence of sharing of a common
intention; that there was no prior preparation as the creeper used as a
ligature was readily available at the scene and that the medical evidence did
not point to the use of force in its application or the involvement of more
than one individual to effect the strangulation. Counsel also drew attention
to the evidence that all the items of jewellery worn by the deceased at the
time of the abduction were recovered only from the 2nd and 3rd accused. They
did not abscond, although it was only the 1st accused who was absent from his
usual place of residence and was arrested the day after the other two accused
were taken into custody.  
  
On the other hand, it was submitted by the Solicitor General that the
following items of evidence have to be taken into account in this

**308**

regard. The deceased was forcibly abducted with the active partic­ipation of
all three accused after assaulting her husband. She was raising cries at that
time. Shortly thereafter police and army officers together with the villagers
were making a search of the area with the aid of lights. If the deceased had
raised cries or was permitted to escape there was a strong likelihood of her
abductors being identified and arrested. In the circumstances, realising the
predica­ment they were in, silencing her effectively and killing her would
presumably have been the only means for all the accused to escape detection.
There was reliable evidence of the abduction which has not been challenged and
of the identity of the three accused had been established. The failure of the
accused to offer an explanation was a factor that the judges could reasonably
have taken into consideration in arriving at their finding in regard to a
common murderous intention. It was held in Richard v The State,(4) that the
cumulative effect of all the items of circumstantial evidence against one of
the appellants was sufficient, in the absence of evi­dence to explain his
presence at the scene, to establish that he acted in furtherance of a common
murderous intention with the other accused to kill the deceased.  
  
The question whether a particular set of circumstances establish that the
accused acted in furtherance of a common intention is a question of fact and
if the view of the trial Court cannot be said to be unreasonable, it is not
the function of an appellate court to inter­fere. In Rishideo v State of Uttar
Pradesh,(5) the Supreme Court of India has expressed this principle as
follows:  
  
"After all the existence of a common intention said to have been shared by the
accused person is, on an ultimate analysis, a  question of fact. We are not of
opinion that the inference of fact drawn by the Sessions Judge appearing from
the facts and circumstances appearing on the record of this case and which was
accepted by the High Court was improper or that these facts and circumstances
were capable of an innocent explanation."  
  
In this instance it was essential that the accused should have either given or
offered evidence to explain their conduct subse­quent to the abduction of the
deceased. Their failure to do so did

**309**

attract a presumption adverse to them. I am therefore of the view that the
finding of the judges that the accused were actuated by a common murderous
intention is justified and cannot be said to be unreasonable.  
  
While urging further that the judges of the High Court at Bar erred in law by
attributing guilt on the basis that the accused failed to offer any
explanation in regard to the prima facie evidence led against them, it was
contended that the burden did lie on the prosecution to prove its case beyond
reasonable doubt, independent of any explanation required to be offered by the
accused. The rule regarding circumstantial evidence and its effect, if not
explained by the accused, has been stated by Chief Justice Shaw in the
American Case of Commonwealth v Webster(6) in the following words which have
been referred to in Seetin v The Queen(7).  
  
"Where probable proof is brought of a statement of facts tend­ing to criminate
the accused, the absence of evidence tending to a contrary conclusion is to be
considered though not alone entitled to much weight, because the burden of
proof lies on the accuser to make out the whole case by substantive evi­dence.
But when pretty stringent proof of circumstances is produced tending to
support the charge, and it is apparent that the accused is so situated that he
could offer evidence of all the facts and circumstances as they exist, and
show, if such was the truth, that the suspicious circumstances can be
accounted for consistently with his innocence and he fails to offer such
proof, the natural conclusion is that the proof, if pro­duced, instead of
rebutting, would tend to sustain the charge."  
  
E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy on the Law of Evidence, Vol.1 at page 21 has observed in
this regard as follows:  
  
"The recent tendency of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka also appears to be to
expect an explanation of telling circum­stances, though the failure that is
commented on is the failure of the accused to offer evidence and not to give
evidence him­self. A party's failure to explain damning facts cannot convert
insufficient into prima facie evidence, but it may cause prima facie evidence
to become presumptive. Whether prima facie evidence will be converted into
presumptive evidence by the

**310**

absence of an explanation depends on the strength of the evi­dence and the
operation of such rules as that requiring a spe­cially high standard of proof
on a criminal charge."  
  
The items of evidence relied upon by the prosecution were as follows:  
  
a) The three accused were identified as the only persons who abducted the
deceased at about 6.30 pm on 11th October '98. This aspect of the prosecution
case has not been disputed.  
  
b) The death had occurred within one hour, close to the place of the
abduction.  
  
c) The medical evidence is that the deceased had been subjected to vaginal and
anal intercourse by more persons than one after the abduction.  
  
d) The injuries found on the knees and shin of each of the accused and the
opinion of the medical evidence suggestive of the circumstances in which they
could have been sustained.  
  
e) The body of the deceased was found submerged in water covered with an
extensive growth of water hyacinth and was discovered only upon the
information provided separately by the 2nd and 3rd accused. This attributed
knowledge to them of the place where the body of the deceased whom they had
abducted could be found.  
  
f) The clothes worn by the deceased were found hidden in the mangrove swamp
and were discovered upon information provided by the 1st accused.  
  
(g) The 1st and 2nd accused had access to the jewellery worn by the deceased
at the time of her abduction.  
  
The cumulative effect of the aforesaid items of evidence was that a strong
prima facie case had been made out in regard to the culpability of the
accused, in relation to the offences of abduction, rape and murder having been
committed in the course of the same transaction. The place from where the body
was recovered and the place at which the items of clothing worn by the
deceased lay

**311**

hidden were within the knowledge of the accused. The accused had been in
possession of the jewellery worn by the deceased at the time of her abduction.
The failure of the accused to give or offer evidence in respect of these
matters justify the application of the following dictum of Lord Ellenborough
in R v Lord Cochrane and others,(8)  
  
"No person accused of crime is bound to offer any explanation of his conduct
or of circumstances of suspicion which attach to him; but, nevertheless, if he
refuses to do so, where a strong prima facie case has been made out, and when
it is in his own power to offer evidence, if such exist, in explanation of
such suspicious circumstances which would show them to be falla­cious and
explicable consistently with his innocence, it is a reasonable and justifiable
conclusion that he refrains from doing so only from he conviction that the
evidence so suppressed or not adduced would operate adversely to his
interest."  
  
However, learned counsel for the appellants contended that the dictum of Lord
Ellenborough has been misapplied in this case which involved more than one
offence. Learned Solicitor General submitted in reply that the several
offences in the indictment were  committed in the course of the same
transaction and that the dic­tum which is not a principle of evidence but a
rule of logic applies only when the prosecution has established a strong prima
facie case against the accused. I am of the view that there is no rational
basis for a selective application of the dictum and it is to be noted that it
has been applied previously in cases where the accused have been convicted of
more offences than one.  
  
For the reasons set out above, the appellants cannot succeed on the grounds of
appeal relied upon by them. The conviction of each of the accused-appellants
is therefore affirmed.  
  
At the outset counsel for the appellants submitted correctly that the sentence
of imprisonment imposed on all the accused on count 1 of the indictment
exceeded the maximum term of imprisonment specified in section 357 of the
Penal Code.  
  
The sentence of imprisonment imposed on all three accused appellants in
respect of Count 1 of the indictment is therefore set aside. In lieu thereof,
I impose a sentence of 10 years R.I. on each

**312**

of the accused-appellants on count 1 of the indictment.  
  
Subject to the variation in regard to the sentence only on count 1 as above,
the sentences imposed on each of the accused-appellants are affirmed.
Considering the heinous nature of the offences committed by the accused-
appellants, the order that the sentences of imprisonment should run
consecutively is affirmed.  
  
Subject to the above, the appeals of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd accused-appellant
are dismissed.

**EDUSSURIYA, J. - I agree.  
  
YAPA, J. -  I agree.**

**WIGNESWARAN, J. - I agree.  
  
JAYASINGHE, J. - I agree.**

> _Appeal dismissed;  
>  sentences on count one varied._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/4.html_  

