##  Sanjeewa, Attorney At Law (On Behalf of Gerald Mervin Perera) v.
Suraweera,Officer In Charge, Police Station, Wattala and Others - SLR - 317,
Vol 1 of 2003 [2003] LKSC 4; (2003) 1 Sri LR 317 (27 February 2003)

**317**

**SANJEEWA, ATTORNEY-AT-LAW (ON BEHALF OF** ****

**GERALD MERVIN PERERA)** ****

**v** ****

**SURAWEERA,** ****

OFFICER - IN - CHARGE, POLICE STATION,

WATTALA AND OTHERS



SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

EDUSSURIYA, J., AND

WIGNESWARAN, J.

SC No. 328/2002 (FR)

27 FEBRUARY, 2003



_Fundamental Rights - Wrongful arrest on vague information - Torture and
detention at the police station - Mistaken identity of the suspect - Articles
11, 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution - Liability of superior officers of
the police for acts of subordinates \- Right of the victim to recover incurred
medical expenses in addition to normal compensation._



The petitioner was arrested at about 12.45 p.m. on 3.6.2002 on the order of
the 1st respondent Officer-in-Charge, Police Station Wattala, by subordinate
police officers. The arrest was effected admittedly on information that one
"GERRAD" had committed a murder. The petitioner was taken to the Wattala
Police Station. The evidence, including medical evidence showed that he had
been hung up (whilst in police custody) with a rope and beaten with an iron
rod and wooden poles. His hands were burnt with lighted matches. The medical
evidence supported the alleged burning.



On the advice of the Gampaha Ayurvedic Hospital for emergency treatment, the
petitioner was admitted to Nawaloka Hospital where he received treatment under
intensive care. After his discharge from the Nawaloka Hospital, the petitioner
was admitted to the General Hospital, Colombo and discharged from thereon
17.7.2002.



The petitioner had acute renal failure, loss of sensation over the 8th
cervical and 1st thoracic vertebrae, damage to the median and ulnar nerves,
complete loss of power of both shoulder joint muscles and inability to grasp
objects with fingers consistent with suspension from a beam and assault.



No statement of the petitioner was recorded. The 1st respondent told him that
they had made a mistake. Thereafter, the petitioner was released at about
11.30 a.m. on 4.6.2002.

**318**

**Held :** ****

(1)                  The arrest of the petitioner was not made on credible
information, and the reference to "GERRAD" was not sufficient to identify the
petition­er. Police officers did not even subjectively believe that the
petitioner had committed an offence but were merely hoping that something
would turn up. His arrest was violative of Article 13(1) and the deten­tion
was violative of Article 13(2) of the Constitution.  


(2)                  The petitioner was subjected to torture and to cruel and
inhuman treatment by the 3rd, 6th and 7th respondents, with the knowledge and
acquiescence of the 1st respondent in violation of Article 11. The 1st
respondent became so liable as the Officer-in-Charge of the Police Station and
having control and supervision over his subordi­nates.

_Per_ Fernando, J.



The duty imposed by Article 4(d) to respect, secure and advance fundamen­tal
rights extend-. to all organs of Government and the Head of the Police (The
Inspector General of Police) can claim no exemption A prolonged failure to
give effective directions designed to prevent violations of Article 11, and to
ensure Mia proper investigation of those which nevertheless take place
followed by disciplinary or criminal proceedings, may well justify the
inference of acquiescence and condonation if not also of approval and
autho­rization."

(3) The petitioner is entitled to compensation for infringement of his rights
and further, to reimbursement of medical expenses attributable to tor­ture.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_D,S. Wijesinghe,_ P.C. for petitioner

_Prince Perera_ with _D.D.P. Dassanayake_ for 1st to 7th respondents

_P.A.K. Ranasinghe,_ State Counsel for Attorney-General

# Cur. adv. vult

**319**

April 4, 2003.

**FERNANDO, J.**



The Petitioner is a cook employed by Colombo Dockyard Ltd. He complains that
the 1st to 8th Respondents have infringed his fundamental rights under Article
13(1) by reason of his unlawful arrest on 3.6.2002, under Article 11 by
torture thereafter whilst in Police custody, and under Article 13(2) by
unlawful detention till 4.6.2002. The 1st to 7th Respondents are Police
Officers of the Wattala Police. The 1st Respondent is the Officer-in-Charge,
the 2nd Respondent is the Officer-in-Charge, Crimes, the 3rd to 5th
Respondents are Sub-Inspectors, and the 6th and 7th Respondents are
Constables. The 8th Respondent is the Inspector-General of Police.

**The Petitioner's Version**



According to the affidavit of the Petitioner's wife, at about 11.45 a.m. on
3.6.2002, as she left home with her three-year old son in order to fetch her
daughter from pre-school, she saw a Police jeep parked nearby. One Police
Officer asked for her hus­band, and she replied that he had not returned from
work. She then heard one officer tell someone on his mobile telephone that
they had not found the Petitioner but only his wife, and she also heard him
ask what he should do.



The Petitioner's wife attempted to proceed to fetch her little daughter but
the officers restrained her, and forced her and her son into the jeep. They
then asked her to telephone the Petitioner at his workplace and to tell him to
come home quickly as a child was ill, but she was unable to do so. She begged
the officers to let her go to bring her daughter, but they refused and took
her to the bus-stand to await the Petitioner's arrival.



At about 12.45 p.m. the Petitioner got off the bus, and the officers dragged
him into the jeep saying "you are the man we are looking for", but gave no
reason his arrest. On the way they dropped the wife and son by the roadside.

320

The Petitioner's wife and brother have sworn detailed affi­davits dated
19.6.2002. They stated that on 4.6.2002 at about 10.00 a.m. the Petitioner's
wife, his brother and other friends and relations went to the Wattala Police
Station. The wife stated that she saw several of the officers who had come to
arrest the Petitioner. She further stated that she saw the Petitioner in great
pain, with his body swollen, and unable to walk and to move his arms, and that
Police Officers told her that the Petitioner had been arrested on wrong
information - all this was corroborated by the Petitioner's brother.



The Petitioner's wife and brother also stated that the Petitioner had told
them what had happened after arrest; that he had been blindfolded, his hands
had been tied, and he had been hung from a beam; that he had been assaulted by
the 1st to 7th Respondents and another officer, with iron rods and wooden
poles for about an hour, despite crying out in pain; that while being beat­en
he was questioned regarding a murder, of which he knew noth­ing; that he had
then been laid on the floor and his hands burnt with lighted matches; that no
statement had been recorded from him; and that later that day he was taken to
the 1st Respondent who had told him that they had made a mistake and that he
would be released the next morning.



The Petitioner was admittedly released from Police custody at about 11.30 a.m.
on 4.6.2002.



In view of the Petitioner's condition, his wife and bother took him to the
Gampaha Wickremaarachchi Ayurvedic Hospital where the physician advised
immediate emergency treatment at a leading hospital. Accordingly, they
admitted him to Nawaloka Hospital, Colombo, where he was in an intensive care
unit for some time. On 14.6.2002 the doctors informed the wife that his
condition was crit­ical and that his life was in danger.

The Petitioner produced the Nawaloka Hospital bill up to 25.6.2002, which
showed a sum of Rs. 704,788/- (including a "deposit against professional
charges" of Rs. 182,723/-) then due. He was discharged on 13.7.2002, and
admitted immediately to

321

the General Hospital Colombo, and discharged from there on 17.7.02.



A petition dated 17.6.2002 was filed on 19.6.2002 by an attorney-at-law on
behalf of the Petitioner, together with the affi­davits of that attorney-at-
law and the Petitioner's wife, both dated 19.6.2002. Affidavits of the brother
and some others were filed soon after. The petition was supported, and leave
to proceed was granted on 26.6.2002.



The Petitioner did not file an affidavit as soon as he was able to, but did
so, rather belatedly, only on 5.12.2002 after the Respondents' affidavits had
been filed on 11.10.2002. However, as the Respondents did not have an
opportunity of replying to that affi­davit, I will not act upon it, except
insofar as it was in reply to new material in the Respondents' affidavits.

**The Medical Evidence**



The Judicial Medical Officer ("JMO") of Colombo examined the Petitioner on
16.7.2002. In his report he set out the history of torture, substantially as
stated in the petition. From the investiga­tions done at the Nawaloka
Hospital, he concluded that the Petitioner had "developed acute renal failure
probably due to rhab-domyolysis which necessitated haemodialysis", "changes
due to axonal loss in the median and ulnar nerves", and "loss of sensation
over 8th cervical and 1st thoracic vertebrae". The relevant medical records
had been called for from the Nawaloka Hospital. According to the JMO, systemic
examination of the Petitioner revealed com­plete loss of power of the muscles
around both shoulder joints, and inability to move both arms at the shoulder
joints; while he could move his fingers he could not grasp any object at the
time of exam­ination; and there was sensory loss around both elbow areas.



He noted certain injuries, consistent with the history given by the
Petitioner; two blackish scars on the back of the right hand, consistent with
burns with lighted matchsticks; two scars, near the right and left wrists
consistent with being hung with a coir rope; a discolouration of the skin on
the left shin, consistent with a blow with an iron bar; and weakness of both
upper limbs, consistent with being suspended. In his opinion, such suspension
could have

322



caused neuromuscular and tendon damage and weakness of the upper limbs; and
muscular contusions could cause rhabdomyoly-sis, which could cause acute renal
failure, but there was no evi­dence of a considerable amount of contusions at
the time of his examination. The Petitioner had completely recovered from
renal failure.

**The 2nd, 4th,** & **5th Respondents' version**

These Respondents have denied any involvement in the arrest and torture of the
Petitioner. They produced extracts from the Information Books ("IB's)
according to which they were away from the Wattala Police Station at all
relevant times: when the Petitioner was arrested when he was brought to the
Station, and during the next two or three hours when he was allegedly
tortured. While those IB extracts are not conclusive, yet the Petitioner's
identifica­tion of the 1st to 7th Respondents at the officers who tortured him
is subject to the infirmity that he was blindfolded for much of the time that
he was tortured. Besides, in the condition in which he was, he may well have
mistakenly included persons whom he had merely seen at the Station only after
the torture. In the circum­stances the Petitioner has not established their
involvement on a balance of probability, although there certainly was grave
suspi­cion, which warrants an internal probe. They are discharged from these
proceedings.

**The 1st, 3rd, 6th and 7th Respondent's version**



The 1st Respondent admitted that the Petitioner was arrest­ed on his
directions. He did not claim that he was away from the Station when the
Petitioner was brought in, or during the next few hours when the Petitioner
was allegedly tortured. As Officer-in-Charge he had overall responsibility to
supervise and control the conduct of his subordinates, and it was he who had
the power to release the Petitioner. He is therefore liable if the
Petitioner's arrest and/or detention were unlawful, and for any torture that
occurred at the Station.



According to the IB extracts produced by the other three Respondents, a Police
party consisting of Sub-Inspector Suresh

323



(3rd Respondent), Sub-Inspector Herath, Constable Nalin (6th Respondent),
Constable Perera (7th Respondent), Constable Amila, and Home Guard Vineetha,
left the station in a private vehi­cle at 12.30 a.m. on 3.6.2002 on the 1st
Respondent's directions on _crime prevention duties - not to investigate the
murder_ which had taken place the previous day. They were armed with a
revolver and two T-56 automatic weapons.



The affidavits filed by these Respondents were far from sat­isfactory. They
denied or pleaded unawareness of every averment in the petition - even the
averments that the Petitioner had been kept overnight at the Police Station
and released on the 4th morn­ing, and that he had been arrested on wrong
information. Each of them affirmed, in language absolutely identical even in
regard to obvious errors and omissions, that -

"(1) I was reported for duty at about on 3.6.2002. A tribal murder has taken
place at Wattala area on 02.6.2002. The police team consisted of myself,
Naleen Perera, Amila and Vineetha were investigating this crime. While we were
inves­tigating into this crime, we came to know from our informant that the
person named Gerrad was committed this tribal murder. According to this
information I have taken steps to arrest this person named Gerrad with my
subordinates. Accordingly, I and other police officers went to Gerrad's
resi­dence with the informant and questioned about Gerrad from his wife. At
the time of questioning she informed us that Gerrad was not at home. At about
12.00 p.m. on 3.6.2002 I with my other officers arrested Mudalige Gerrad
Perera, with informing the reason for arrest (i.e. charge of committing a
tri­able murder).



(ii) Thereafter I ordered M. Gerrad Perera to get into the jeep. As ordered he
got into the jeep. While we were return­ing to the Wattala Police Station we
stopped our jeep at the Mabola Hotel in order to have a cup of tea. While the
6th respondent going to the Hotel by opening the back door of the jeep."



(iii) I had to exercise minimum force in terms of section 23(2) of the
Criminal Procedure Code of No.15 of 1979. Thereafter

324



he was put into the police jeep, by me and other police offi­cers and taken to
the Wattala Police Station.



(iv) The after I questioned him about the commission of this triable murder by
Gerrad Perera. After questioning I ordered Herath the Sub Inspector to take a
statement. Thereafter the person named Gerrad made a statement to Wattala
Police Station at about 2.15 a.m. on 4.6.2002.



(v) I state that during the course of investigation and the statement of
Gerrad I found that there is no evidence against Gerred to charge him for this
triable murder.



(vi) I state that thereafter I reported this to the Officer-in-Charge of the
Wattala Police Station, at about 11.30 a.m. on 4.6.2002. the 1st respondent
released as Gerrad Perera on 4.6.2002.



(vii) I state that at all times material to this application I acted in utmost
good faith in discharging my duties. After releasing Gerred Perera, I filed a
A report in the Magistrate's Court of Wattala and reported this incident to
the learned Magistrate in terms of the provisions of the Criminal Procedure
Code of No. 15 of 1979. (The relevant documents are marked as 3Rb and annexed
hereto)."

No "A" Report was in fact annexed.



The position of these three Respondents is that they arrest­ed the Petitioner;
that all three did use "minimum force" on him, the nature and extent of which
they failed to describe; and that they were continuously present from the time
the Petitioner was brought to the Wattala Police Station until 2.15 a.m. the
next day, when his statement was allegedly recorded. If, therefore, during
that period he was tortured, these Respondents were present. Their identity
and involvement are thus proved by their own admissions, inde­pendent of any
assertion by the Petitioner or any one on his behalf.



The 1st, 3rd, 6th , and 7th Respondents also pleaded that the petitioner had
not given an adequate description in the petition of the mode of assault and
the nature of the injuries sustained, but added

325



very relevantly, as it turns out - that "the manner in which the Petitioner
described this alleged assault if such a thing has taken place the Petitioner
could not have survived."



Although an attempt had been made in the IB extracts to explain away the
injuries sustained by the Petitioner, by claiming that he had attempted to
escape (from a heavily armed Police party of six!) none of the affidavits
mention any such attempt. I cannot accept the IB extracts as evidence of any
attempt to escape.



Finally, there were other unexplained infirmities in their affi­davits.
Although they claimed that the Petitioner's statement was recorded at 2.15
a.m. on 4.6.2002, the relevant IB extract produced purports to be a statement
recorded at 10.30 pm on 3.6.2002 -while the Petitioner denied making any
statement at all. Their affi­davits all referred to the _Police jeep_ in which
they travelled while the IB extracts referred to an unidentified _private_
vehicle.

**Preliminary Objections**



Learned Counsel for the 1st - 7th Respondents took a series of preliminary
objections.



He submitted, first, that the petition was not duly supported by an affidavit
because the attorney-at-law who filed an affidavit had no personal knowledge
of any of the facts, and urged that the application should therefore be
dismissed for non-compliance with Supreme Court Rule 44(3) and section 4(1
)(a) of the Oaths Ordinance.



It was pointed out to him that the wife's affidavit was quite sufficient as it
was of her personal knowledge in regard to the arrest and detention, as well
as the injuries resulting from the treatment meted out in custody. In any
event, an affidavit based - on its face - on credible information given by the
victim of an alleged funda­mental rights violation, in circumstances in which
he is unable to make an affidavit himself, may be accepted as sufficient for
the grant of leave to proceed.

Learned Counsel immediately moved on to a second objec­tion, that the petition
had been filed (according to him) on 17.6.2002 whereas the wife's affidavit
was dated 19.6.2002 - a discrepancy

326

which, in his submission, created doubts as to its genuineness. Reference to
the record confirmed that although the petition bore the typed date 17.6.2002
it had actually been filed only on 19.6.2002, together with the wife's
affidavit.



Learned Counsel then shifted to a third objection, that the application could
not be maintained because, previously, on 14.6.2002, an informal application,
under Supreme Court Rule 44(7), had been made by a third party on the wife's
instructions. The fact that an informal application had been made was not a
bar to the exercise of the Petitioner's constitutional right under Article
126, particularly where no action had been taken on it.  


Finally learned Counsel submitted that the 3rd Respondent named in the
petition was "Suresh Gunaratne", but that there was no such officer by that
name serving at the Wattala Police Station; that therefore a wrong person had
been made a party respondent; and that the application could not be
maintained. The record shows that in response to the notice issued on "Suresh
Gunaratne", Sub-Inspector Suraj Gunasena had filed an affidavit describing
himself as the 3rd Respondent. Indeed, the IB extracts produced by him refer
to "Sub-Inspector Suresh". It is clear, therefore, that those extracts and the
petition both referred to the same Suresh, and that no one was misled thereby.
However, to avoid any further controversy about the identity of the 3rd
Respondent, I amend the caption by describing the 3rd Respondent as "Suresh
Gunaratne, alias Suraj Gunasena, (Sub-Inspector), Police Station, Wattala". I
must add that, in any event, the mis-description of one Respondent will not,
generally, invalidate an application as against the other Respondents.

**Arrest and Detention**

The material on which the 1st, 3rd, 6th and 7th Respondents arrested the
Petitioner was a claim by an informant that a person named "Gerrad" had
committed a murder. None of the affidavits gave any particulars either about
the informant and his reputation for reliablity, or the nature of the
information.

Even where there is a claim that an informant was usually reliable, a bald
allegation that "

327



Gerrad" had committed a murder would not justify the arrest of any person
believed to be that Gerrad: indeed, I doubt that it would even justify
questioning each and every Gerrad in the area. Further, had the Respondents
been acting _bona fide_ when they arrested the Petitioner, they would have
promptly recorded his statement, and would then have either pro­duced him
before a Magistrate or released him. The fact that they failed to record a
statement (or if the IB extracts are accurate, wait­ed ten hours to do so)
strongly suggests that they did not, even subjectively, believe that he had
committed an offence, but were merely hoping that something would turn up. It
is also probable that the Petitioner was not given a reason for arrest.



I therefore hold that the Petitioner's arrest by the 3rd, 6th and 7th
Respondents, on the orders of the 1st Respondent, was in vio­lation of Article
13(1).



The Respondents were not entitled to keep the Petitioner in the Station and to
delay producing him before a Magistrate. He was entitled to be so produced
within a reasonable time, 24 hours being the upper limit for such production.
Assuming that there was truly a need to record his statement, that would not
have justified a delay of more than an hour or two. By 3.00 pm. at the latest
the Petitioner should have been either released or on his way to the nearest
Magistrate. There is ample reason to insist on speedy production. Continued
detention at Police Stations creates opportunities for ill-treatment as well
as for false allegations of ill-treatment. Prolonging detention until late
evening almost automatically results in deten­tion overnight.



Besides, in this case it was manifest that the Petitioner was in need of
medical treatment - whether or not he was going to be produced before a
Magistrate the next morning, he should immedi­ately have been taken to
hospital. If further detention was required, this at least was certainly one
case in which detention in hospital was justified.



While it was the 1st Respondent, as Officer-in-Charge, who was primarily
responsible for the failure to release the Petitioner, according to the
affidavits of the 3rd, 6th and 7th Respondents all of them unduly and
unnecessarily prolonged the "questioning" of the Petitioner from 1.00 p.m. on
the 3rd until 2.15 a.m. on the 4th; and it was only at 11.30 a.m. that they
informed the 1st Respondent

328



that there was no evidence against the Petitioner. I therefore hold that the
1st, 3rd, 6th and 7th Respondents unlawfully detained the Petitioner in
violation of Article 13(2).

**Torture**



The 3rd, 6th and 7th Respondents admitted that after they arrested the
Petitioner all three of them used force on him: so-called "minimum force". The
Petitioner's wife and brother described his condition at 10.00 a.m. the next
morning. The medical evidence confirmed how serious that condition was - acute
renal failure, loss of sensation over the 8th cervical and 1st thoracic
vertebrae, dam­age to the median and ulnar nerves, complete loss of power of
both shoulder joint muscles, and inability to grasp objects with the fin­gers,
consistent with suspension from a beam and assault. The irresistible inference
is that while in Police custody the Petitioner had been subjected to severe
torture endangering life. There is no doubt whatsoever that he had been
tortured and how exactly he had been tortured does not matter in the least.
The failure to release the Petitioner promptly, or at least to secure prompt
med­ical attention for him, was cruel and inhuman.



I therefore hold that the Petitioner was subjected to torture and to cruel and
inhuman treatment by the 3rd, 6th and 7th Respondents, with the knowledge and
acquiescence of the 1st Respondent, in violation of Article **11.**

**Liability of the 8th Respondent**



It was averred in the petition that a complaint had been made on or about
14.6.2002 to the Inspector-General of Police, the 8th Respondent. The 8th
Respondent did not file an affidavit either denying the receipt of such
complaint or explaining what action he took. The number of credible complaints
of torture and cruel, inhu­man and degrading treatment whilst in Police
custody shows no decline. The duty imposed by Article 4(d) to respect, secure
and advance fundamental rights, including freedom from torture, extends to all
organs of government, and the Head of the Police can claim no exemption. At
the least, he may make arrangement

329



 for surprise visits by specially appointed Police officers, and/or offi­cers
and representatives of the Human Rights Commission, and/or local community
leaders who would be authorised to interview and to report on the treatment
and conditions of detention of persons in custody, A prolonged failure to give
effective directions designed to prevent violations of Article 11, and to
ensure the proper investi­gation of those which nevertheless take place
followed by discipli­nary or criminal proceedings, may well justify the
inference of acquiescence and condonation (if not also of approval and
autho­rization).



However, learned President's Counsel appearing for the Petitioner did not
pursue the question of the 8th Respondent's lia­bility.

**Order**



I grant the Petitioner a declaration that his fundamental rights under
Articles 11, 13(1) and 13(2) have been infringed by the 1st, 3rd, 6th and 7th
Respondents, and award him a sum of Rs 800,000 as compensation and costs
(excluding medical expenses), payable on or before 30.6.2003. Of that sum, the
1st Respondent will per­sonally pay Rs. 70,000, the 3rd Respondent Rs. 40,000,
the 6th Respondent Rs. 20,000 and the 7th Respondent Rs. 20,000, and the State
will pay Rs. 650,000.



The Petitioner also claimed reimbursement of medical expenses incurred at
Nawaloka Hospital. Learned Counsel for the 1st, 3rd, 6th and 7th Respondents
contended that the Nawaloka charges were exorbitant and that the Petitioner
could have sought treatment at a State hospital. The evidence is that the
Petitioner's wife and brother did not rush to Nawaloka in the first instance,
but were content to go to the Wickramaarachchi Ayurvedic Hospital, and that it
was in consequence of medical advice then received that they brought him to
Nawaloka. However good the standard of treat­ment in State hospitals may be,
there is no doubt that many Sri Lankans do opt for treatment in private
hospitals - sometimes in the belief that treatment and care is better, and
sometimes because of fears in regard to delays, over-crowding, strikes,
shortages of

330



equipment and drugs, etc. Citizens have the right to choose between State and
private medical care, and in the circumstances the Petitioner's wife's choice
of the latter was not unreasonable -and was probably motivated by nothing
other than the desire to save his life. Article 12 of the International
Covenant on Economic Social and Cultural Rights recognizes the right of
everyone "to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and
men­tal health".



I therefore further direct the State to pay to the Petitioner the sum already
paid to Nawaloka Hospital by or on behalf of the Petitioner, as well as any
further sum remaining due for the period 26.6.2002 to 13.7.2002. The
Petitioner will file a statement together with bills and receipts within two
weeks from today. If the amount claimed by the Petitioner is disputed, the
Registrar will refer the matter to this bench for further directions.

**EDUSSURIYA, J.** - I agree.

**WIGNESWARAN, J.** _ I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/4.html_  

