##  Kristley (Pvt) Limited. v. The State Timber Corporation - SLR - 225, Vol 1
of 2002 [2002] LKSC 4; (2002) 1 Sri LR 225 (15 March 2002)

**225**

**KRISTLEY (PVT) LIMITED  
v.  
THE STATE TIMBER CORPORATION**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
GUNASEKERA, J. AND  
WIGNESWARAN, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 51/99  
HC NOS. ARB 50/97 AND 52/98  
20 MARCH, 10 APRIL, 20 JUNE AND 12 SEPTEMBER, 2001  
  
_Arbitration - Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995 - Applications to enforce I set
aside award - Failure to file a certified copy of the award - Lack of legal
competence of the claimant at the time of reference to arbitration -
"Incapacity" as a ground for setting aside the award - Objection to award on
the grounds of public policy - Consolidation of Applications - Sections 31 (2)
(a), 31 (2) (ii), 32 (1) (a) (i), 32 (1) (b) (ii) and 35 (1) of the Act -
Issues in arbitration - Natural justice._  
  
In October, 1993, the appellant an Australian Company (the claimant) and the
respondent State Timber Corporation (STC) signed a contract for the supply of
300 cubic metres of sawn pine radiata timber from Australia. When one
consignment of goods supplied by the claimant reached Colombo by ship on 09.
12. 1993, the STC terminated the contract for certain stated reasons.  
  
On 24. 10. 1994 the claimant gave notice of arbitration in terms of the
contract agreement and submitted its claim on 04. 06. 1996 on the ground that
the termination of the contract by the STC was unlawful. On 09. 07. 1996 the
terms of reference for arbitration were signed by the parties.  
  
The STC in its statement of defence dated 20. 06. 1996 objected to the
jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal and pleaded that the contract had been
lawfully terminated. The objection to jurisdiction was later withdrawn.  
  
On 16. 08. 1996 during the cross-examination of the claimant's Managing
Director, counsel for the STC stated that the claimant had been de-registered
and dissolved on 28. 08. 1995, hence the claimant was non-existent at the date
it made its claim; and consequently arbitration proceedings were a nullity.
Counsel contended that an issue was unnecessary but the Arbitrators compelled
him to raise issues which was followed by counter issues for the claimant.
Documents were tendered to prove that the claimant had been restored to the
roll with effect from

**226**

11\. 09. 1996. After inquiries arbitrators held that there was no proof that
the claimant had been dissolved and that upon re-registration it was in the
same position as if its registration had never been cancelled.  
  
In the course of the arbitration, an allegation was also made that a
certificate supplied by the claimant including on seasoning of timber was a
forgery and evidence of one Morrison was led but without raising an issue in
that regard. This was in the background of a unanimous ruling by the
Arbitrators that forgery should be established beyond reasonable doubt.  
  
On 10. 12. 1997 by a majority decision (the Chairman and another arbitrator)
it was held that the termination of the contract was wrongful. In two separate
awards they upheld the claimant's award. The third arbitrator disagreed.  
  
The Chairman held (with the other arbitrator agreeing) that the genuineness of
the impugned certificate was never put in issue, that in the absence of a
specific issue which would have enabled the claimant to know the case it had
to meet, the claimant was not obliged "to Gounter the conjecture suggested by
Bill Morrison". The third Arbitrator held that there was a "preponderance of
evidence" that the impugned certificate was a forgery; and that the claimant
had not established it genuineness. He opined that whilst the counsel for the
STC was remiss in failing to raise a specific issue, it was the duty of the
Tribunal to have raised the issues on the evidence of Morrison.  
  
On 29. 12. 1997 the STC applied to the High Court to set aside the award
annexing copies of the separate awards. On 21. 10. 1998 the claimant applied
for the enforcement of the award annexing copies of the separate awards
certified by an attorney-at-law. The applications were consolidated under
section 35 (1) of the Arbitration Act (the Act). The High Court Judge by his
order dated 09. 02\. 1999 refused the application and set aside the majority
award on the grounds :  
  
(a) that the application for enforcement was not accompanied by a duly
certified copy of the award.  
  
(b) that the award was based on a forged certificate, hence it was contrary to
public policy; and  
  
(c) that the claimant had been de-registered and lacked legal capacity at the
time of the reference to arbitration.  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1) On the facts and circumstances of the case, copies of the awards tendered
with the claimant's application were duly certified copies within the meaning
of section 31 (2) (ii) of the Act.

**227**

_**Obiter  
  
**_Even in a case where the copy of the award filed with the application is
not a duly certified copy the application may not be summarily rejected
without giving an opportunity to tender duly certified copies interpreting
"accompany" in section 32 (2) purposively and widely.  
  
(2) In the circumstances of the case, the majority was justified in refusing
to consider the question of forgery without a specific issue. Natural Justice
demands such issue to enable each party to know from the beginning what case
it has to meet and to afford the affected party an opportunity of meeting the
case against it. In any event, the third Arbitrator's finding was on a
"preponderance of evidence" contrary to the Tribunal's previous unanimous
ruling that forgery required proof beyond reasonable doubt which is a
proposition supported by a long line of decisions. Therefore, the High Court
was not entitled to review the decision on the ground of public policy, in
terms of section 32 (1) (a) (i) of the Act.  
  
(3) "Incapacity" which is a ground for setting aside an award in terms of
section 32 (1) (a) (i) is established where a party to the arbitration
agreement was under some incapacity, i.e. some incapacity to which a party was
subject to when the arbitration agreement was entered into. In the instant
case, the de-registration of the claimant which was relied upon occurred much
later on 28\. 08\. 1995, but the High Court considered the question of
incapacity as at 09. 07. 1996 {the time of reference to arbitration) and not
at the date of the arbitration agreement (October, 1993), which contained the
arbitration clause. In any event, it was established that the claimant was
restored to the roll the legal effect of which was to place it in the same
position as if its registration had never been cancelled. As such, the High
Court erred in holding that the claimant was under an incapacity within the
scope of section 32 (1) (a) (i) of the Act.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
  
**1\. _Lanka Genera! Workers' Union v. Samaranayake -_ (1996) 2 Sri LR.  
  
2\. _Nagappa Chettiar v. Commissioner of Income Tax -_ AIR 1995 Madras 162.  
  
3\. _Narayan Chettiyar v. Official Assignee -_ AIR 1941 PC 93.  
  
4\. _Coomaraswamy v. Vinayagamoorthy -_ (1945) 46 NLR 246, 249.  
  
5\. _Selliah v. Sinnammah -_ (1947) 48 NLR 261, 263.  
  
6\. _Muthumenika v. Appuhamy -_ (1948) 50 NLR 162, ,164.  
  
7\. _Lakshmanam Chettiar v. Muttiah Chettiar -_ (1948) 50 NLR 337, 340.

**228**

8\. _Yusoof v. Rajaratnam -_ (1970) 74 NLR 9, 13.  
  
9\. _Soleimany v. Soleimany -_ (1998) 3 WLR 811.  
  
10\. _Westacre Investments v. Jugimport -_ SPDR (1998) 3 WLR 770.  
  
11\. _International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers v. Iowa Electric Light
and Power Company_ \- 834, F. 2d, 1424.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court.  
  
_H. L. de Silva, PC_ with _S. Mahenthiran, PC_ and _A. Athurupana_ for
claimant-appellant.  
  
_S. Marsoof, PC, Additional Solicitor-General_ with _T. W. Karunaratne_ ,
_State Counsel   _and _Riyad Ameen, State Counsel_ for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 15, 2002  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
This is an appeal against a judgment and order of the High Court setting aside
an arbitration award. The High Court held that the application for enforcement
made by the claimant-appellant (the claimant) was not accompanied by a duly
certified copy of the award; that award was based on a forged document
produced by the claimant, and therefore that it was contrary to public policy
to enforce it; and that at the time the claimant referred the matter to
arbitration, it had been deregistered and lacked the legal capacity to do so.
Several questions of law arise in regard to the interpretation of sections 17,
26, 31 (2) (a), 31 (2) (ii), 32 (1) (a) (i) and 32 (1) (b) (ii), of the
Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995.  
  
The claimant is a company incorporated under the laws of Australia, while the
respondent-respondent is the State Timber Corporation (STC) a public
corporation established under the laws of Sri Lanka.

**229**

Pursuant to a tender floated by the STC, the parties entered into a contract
in October, 1993, under which the claimant agreed to supply 300 cubic metres
of sawn pine radiata timber of specified grades and dimensions suitable for
building construction. The following specifications are relevant to this
appeal :



_Grade_ | In accordance with Australian Standard. AS 2858 - 1986 the grades
required are as follows:  
  
(Stress Grade)  
  
(1) Structural Grade 2 F11  
(2) Structural Grade 3 F8  
  
---|---  
_Treatment Condition_ | Presure treated timber is not required. But,
antistained Sap stained treatement is necessary to prevent any decay or fungal
attack in transit . The timber should be antistained Sap treated .  
  
_Seasoning Condition_ | **.......  
 **  
_Seasoned Timber_ | (a) [ moisture content ] of timber should not be more than
15% m. a.  
  
  
Under the terms of the contract, the claimant was required to furnish a
performance bond to the value of 10% of the contract price, within 14 days of
the acceptance of its tender; within seven days of the receipt of the
performance bond, the STC was obliged to establish an irrevocable letter of
credit; and the claimant had to ship the total quantity in one shipment within
45 days of the date of the letter of credit. Other relevant terms were as
follows :  
  
**MODE OF PAYMENT :** Payments will be made by means of Irrevo­cable Letter of
Credit . . . [providing] for payment of 90% of the C&F

**230**

value ... to be made against the relative set of Shipping Documents which
shall consist of :  
  
(a) Full set of Clean, On Board, Freight pre-paid Marine Bill of Lading in a
set of 03 originals . . .  
  
(b) Manually signed invoices . . .  
  
(c) Certificate of origin ...  
  
(d) Certificate of Grading, Species, Quantity and Quality from Standards
Association of Australia or approved Timber Authority of the country of origin
[acceptable] to STC . . .  
  
(e) Manufacturer's certificate of inspection.  
  
(f) Packing list . . .  
  
(g) Certificate from the beneficiary that he has faxed direct to the Chairman,
STC . . . copies of documents listed in (a) to (f) . . . within 02 days from
the date of Bill of Lading . . .  
  
**ADVANCE NOTIFICATION : I** mmediately before the goods are shipped the
seller shall send to the buyer a Fax/Telex stating the name of the vessel, ETA
of the vessel, the quantity shipped . . .  
  
**TERMINATION OF CONTRACT :** If the seller violates any of the Terms or
Conditions ... the buyer shall be entitled to forthwith teminate this
Tender/Contract.  
  
Should seller anticipate at any time . . . that he will be unable to deliver
the goods within the time specified in this contract, he shall at once give
notice accordingly in writing to the buyer explaining the cause of the delay.
Upon the receipt of such

**231**

notification of the seller, the buyer will have the option of either granting
extension or termination of this contract ...  
  
There was no requirement of a certificate regarding "treatment" or
"seasoning".  
  
The claimant having duly furnished a performance bond on 05. 11. 93, sought
permission on 09. 11. 93 to effect a partial shipment of 182.5 cubic metres.
Having first refused, the STC later agreed, on 16. 11. 93. The claimant then
confirmed that it would notify on 19. 11. 93 the exact amount of the first
shipment, to be shipped on the vessel Fishguard Bay leaving Melbourne on 23.
11. 93, and that the balance would be shipped on another vessel on 14. 12. 93.
The claimant then sent the pro forma invoice on 19. 11. 93; the STC
acknowtedged receipt by fax dated 22. 11. 93, but pointed out an error,
whereupon the claimant sent a corrected invoice the same day. The STC
established a letter of credit on 03. 12. 93, which reached the claimant on
06. 12. 93. That called for a certificate different to the stipulation in
clause (d) above, namely :  
  
"certificate of grading, species, seasoning, treatment, quality and quantity
from Forestry and Forest Products Industry Council . . ." [emphasis added].  
  
The letter of credit also required that certain identification marks be placed
on each bundle of timber. The vessel had already left Melbourne by then, and
the claimant immediately notified STC that it was not possible to fulfil some
of these new and/or amended terms. Further, it was admitted that the Assistant
General Manager of STC knew that the Forestry (etc) Council had ceased to
exist in 1990. The letter of credit also required negotiation within fourteen
days of shipment, which period expired on 07. 12. 93.  
  
Naturally, by fax dated 06. 12. 93, the claimant requested several amendments.
Although there was evidence, in the arbitration proceed­ings, that the matter
had been discussed by telephone, and that the

**232**

Deputy General Manager of the STC had agreed, the letter of credit  was never
amended. Instead, by fax dated 08. 12. 93 the STC asked the claimant to
courier the shipping documents, which it did. These included a certificate
(which I will refer to as "the impugned certificate") from the "Timber
Promotion Council" (TPC of Victoria, Australia, one entry in which referred to
"seasoning" as "green".  
  
The vessel arrived in Colombo on 09. 12. 93. Without any exami­nation of the
goods, by letter dated 09. 12. 93 the STC immediately terminated the contract
for six stated reasons :  
  
(1) The goods had been shipped before the letter of credit was established.  
  
(2) Amendments to the letter of credit could not be made in violation of the
tender conditions.  
  
(3) The letter of credit required a certificate from the Forestry (etc)
Council, but what was submitted was from the TPC.  
  
(4) The specifications in that certificate did not conform to tender and
letter of credit specifications. (The nature of that non-conformity was not
then clarified).  
  
(5) There were two bills of lading, and not one; besides, they did not
indicate the quantity in cubic metres.  
  
(6) The bill of lading was dated prior to the establishment of the letter of
credit.  
  
There was no complaint that the moisture content of the timber exceeded 15%
m.a.  
  
The claimant duly gave notice of arbitration by letter dated 24. 01. 94 and
submitted its claim on 04. 06. 96. The basis of that

**233**

was claim that the STC "had wrongfully and/or illegally and/or maliciously
and/or fraudulently terminated the contract".  
  
The STC in its statement of defence dated 20. 06/96 objected to the
jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal, and pleaded that the STC had lawfully
terminated the contract.  
  
On 09. 07. 96, "the terms of reference for the arbitration" were signed by the
parties. Thereafter, fourteen admissions were recorded, and 39 issues were
framed by the parties : nine by the claimant, 26 by the STC, and a further
four consequential issues by the claimant. Counsel for the STC withdrew his
objection to jurisdiction. Evidence was led on 16. 07. 96, 18. 07. 96, 23\.
07. 96, 31. 07. 96, 08. 08. 96 and 16. 08. 96.  
  
On 16. 08. 96, in the course of his cross-examination of the claimant's
Managing Director, Counsel for the STC stated that the claimant-company had
been deregistered and dissolved on  28\. 08. 95; that, therefore, the claimant
was not in existence at the time the statement of claim was filed; and
consquently that the arbitration proceedings were a nullity. On 29. 08. 96,
although Counsel for the STC contended that "actually an issue is not really
necessary", all three Arbitrators insisted that an issue must be raised in
regard to that matter. Counsel then raised five issues, which were allowed. On
a subsequent day, 12. 11. 96, Counsel for the claimant raised four
consequential issues, and tendered certain documents in proof of the fact that
the company had been restored to the roll with effect from 11. 09. 96. On 18.
11. 96, both Counsel stated that they did not intend to lead any evidence as
to the Australian law. Having heard Counsel on 29. 08. 96, 12. 11. 96 and 18.
11. 96, the arbitral tribunal ruled against the STC on 28. 11. 96. One
Arbitrator held that -assuming, on the basis of the admissions, that the
claimant-company had been deregistered \- it had not been proved that it had
been dissolved. The other two Arbitrators held that the claimant-company had
been restored to the roll, and was thereupon in the same position as if its
registration had never been cancelled.

**234**

On 16. 08. 96, before that question of deregistration arose, the claimant's
Managing Director had testified that the impugned certificate had been
received from the supplier of the timber, "Thompson Saw Mills", who had
obtained it from TPC. Counsel for the STC then tendered an affidavit dated 06.
08. 96 from Bill Morrison (described as Quality Assurance Manager of TPC) to
the effect that the impugned certificate tendered by the claimant was a
forgery. Counsel for the claimant objected, submitting that the impugned
certificate had already been produced without objection, that forgery must be
established by the best evidence, and that the maker of the affidavit should
give evidence and be cross-examined. Counsel for the STC then said he would
get down Morrison only if the affidavit was rejected. The Chairman of the
arbitral tribunal then asked him to make up his mind whether he was calling
Morrison, to which Counsel's response was "provided the claimant deposits the
costs incurred in the tribunal". The Chairman then ruled that :  
  
"According to Morrison this document which is a vital document produced by the
claimant is a forgery. The issue of forgery has been raised, and in our view
forgery should be established beyond reasonable doubt by positive evidence. It
is not sufficient to base our conclusion that an important document such as
[this] is a forgery on the belated affidavit of one Mr. Morrison purported to
be from Australia. We know that Mr. Morrison has been listed as a witness for
the [STC], but [its Counsel] states that he is not calling Mr. Morrison. The
position of the tribunal is that we cannot accept a series of allegations on
forgery without the person testifying and subjecting himself to cross-
examination . . . Therefore, we reject the affidavit." [emphasis added].  
  
This ruling, and in particular the observation "the issue of forgery has been
raised" did not mean that the question of forgery had been duly put in issue.
In the context, it only meant that an allegation of forgery had been made, and
that the arbitral tribunal was not prepared to hold it proved on the basis of
an untested affidavit.

**235**

No issue was framed, the affidavit was rejected, and the matter was - for the
time being at least - closed. The fact that immediately thereafter, on the
same day, the tribunal insisted on formal issues (in regard to deregistration)
serves to emphasise that that was the procedure which the tribunal chose to
adopt.  
  
The question of forgery was reverted to on 12. 11. 96. After counsel for the
claimant had raised four more issues regarding deregistration, counsel for the
STC stated that he would be calling Morrison to testify in regard to forgery.
Although by then counsel had, between them, raised 48 issues on a very wide
range of matters, and despite the arbitral tribunal's previous insistence on
issues on 29. 08\. 96, counsel for the STC did not raise any issue regarding
forgery.  
  
One other matter merits mention. The claimant's Managing Director also
testified that in January, 1994, the Chairman of the STC had induced him to
hand over an undated letter, dictated by the latter, containing an admission
that the timber had been shipped contrary to the tender conditions and the
letter of credit, upon the latter's assurance that "if you give me a letter
like this with these words, we will cancel the L C. and take your timber".
Although listed as a witness, the Chairman of the STC did not give evidence to
contradict that accusation. An issue on that point was answered in favour of
the claimant by the majority of the tribunal.  
  
On 10. 12. 97 the Chairman and one Arbitrator held that the timber shipped was
in conformity with the contract specifications (including moisture content),
that partial shipment was with the consent of the STC, and that the
termination of the contract was wrongful. In two separate awards, they upheld
the claimant's claim. The third Arbitrator disagreed. Their findings in regard
to the allegation that the impugned certificate was a forgery are most
relevant to this appeal.  
  
The Chairman held that the genuineness of the impugned certificate was never
put in issue; that a specific issue would have enabled the

**236**

claimant to know what case it had to meet; and that, therefore, the claimant
was not obliged "to counter the conjecture suggested by Bill Morrison". The
Arbitrator who agreed with him did not add anything on that point. However, in
his previous ruling on the question of deregistration, he had cited with
approval the following passage from The Law and Practice of Commercial
Arbitration (Mustill & Boyd, 2nd edition, page 317) :  
  
"In many arbitrations, the issues lie within a narrow compass, and it is plain
from the outset what points the arbitrator must decide, and what case each
party will have to meet. In other instances, the dispute opens up a wide field
of issues, or potential issues; and in these cases it is desirable to carry
out, in one form or another, a process whereby the issues are defined in
writing."  
  
The third Arbitrator held that there was "a preponderance of evidence" that
the impugned certificate was a forgery, and that the claimant had not
established its genuineness. In considering such "preponderance" to be
sufficient, he overlooked the tribunal's previous unanimous ruling that
"forgery should be established beyond reason­able doubt by positive evidence".
As for the lack of an issue, he  observed :  
  
"The concept of framing of issues of matters in contest between he parties is
a concept in the Civil Procedure Code. There is no provision for the framing
of issues in the Arbitration Act. However, as a matter of convenience to
spotlight the case presented by each party, and where there is no agreement
issues are framed . . .[citing certain decisions]. The parties are entitled to
suggest issues but it is the ultimate responsibility of the Court to frame the
issues ...  
  
I have adverted [to] the question of framing of issues since it can be
contended that no issues had been raised regarding the [impugned] certificate
being a forgery. Undoubtedly, this is a serious lapse on the part of the
counsel for the [STC]. He should have

**237**

specifically raised this issue after the evidence of Bill Morrison was led.
However, in view of the expenses incurred and the time taken to have his
evidence recorded and the substance of what has transpired in evidence, both
in examination-in-chief and in cross-examination, I am of the view that the
placing of the evidence of Morrison in these proceedings was not meant to be
an exercise in futility. This evidence was specifically led because of [sic]
the impact of the facts deposed to by him was of vital importance. Though
counsel for [STC] had failed to do so, / think it was the duty of this
tribunal to have raised the issues on this evidence. The issue that would
arise therefore would read : Is the [impugned] certificate a forgery? The
answer of which would be in the affirmative. The consequential issue to this
would be : If so had the claimant failed to furnish a valid certificate as
required by . . . the tender documents? The next issue would then be : If so
can the claimant claim relief in these proceedings? The answer of which would
be no." [emphasis added].  
  
The STC made application dated 29. 12. 97 to the High Court to set aside the
majority award, annexing copies of the three awards. The claimant made an
application dated 21. 01. 98 for the enforcement of the award, annexing copies
of the three awards. Those copies were certified by an attorney-at-law, and
were described in paragraph 13 of the application as "duly certified" copies.
The STC, in its objections dated 27. 02. 98, admitted paragraph 13. The two
applications were consolidated in terms of section 35 (1) of the Arbitration
Act, and after inquiry the learned High Court Judge made one order dated 09.
02. 99, delaing with both applications together. He refused the application
for enforcement and set aside the majority award, on the ground that the
application for enforcement was not accompanied by a duly certified copy of
the award; that the award was based on a forged certificate, and therefore
that it was contrary to public policy to enforce it; and that the claimant-
company had been deregistered and lacked legal capacity at the time of the
reference to arbitration. The claimant appealed to this Court with leave on
those questions.

**238**

Both counsel made extensive oral and written submissions which have helped me
greatly in reaching a decision.  
  
**DULY CERTIFIED COPY OF THE AWARD :  
  
**Section 31 (2) (a) requires an application to enforce an award to be
accompanied by "a duly certified copy of such award", and that :  
  
"... a copy of an award . . . shall be deemed to have been duly certified if -  
  
(i) it purports to have been certified by the arbitral tribunal or by a member
of that tribunal; or  
  
(ii) it has been otherwise certified to the satisfaction of the Court."  
  
The learned High Court Judge held :  
  
" I am afraid that the certification by an attorney-at-law cannot be accepted
as duly certified under the second limb of that section. What is envisaged as
"duly certified" in that section is certification by the Arbitral Tribunal or
by a member of the Tribunal or by the Registrar of the Arbitration Tribunal
and certainly not an attorney-at-law representing a party. However, in this
case [subsequently claimant's counsel] had filed the certified copies of the
Arbitral Agreement and the Arbitration awards duly certified by the Registrar
of the National Arbitration Centre.  
  
Section 31 (2) ... is a mandatory provision. It provides that the application
to enforce the award shall be accompanied by the original of the Arbitration
Agreement and the original of the award or duly certified copies to the
satisfaction of the Court. . .[if not] the application will have to be
dismissed in limine. _The defect cannot be cured by submitting the said duly
certified documents at a subsequent stage._

**239**

 An award made by an arbitrator is equivalent to the judgment of a civil
court. The Arbitration Act provides that on application being made to enforce
the award, by the High Court, the award is made a decree of the High Court.
For the High Court to enter decree on  the same lines as the award either the
original of the award or a duly certified copy certified either by the
Arbitral Tribunal or a member of the Arbitral Tribunal or by the Registrar of
the Arbitration Centre has to be tendered with the application. This is to
ensure that the decree that will be entered by Court will be only on the lines
of the arbitral award. Otherwise there can be abuse of process. If, for
example, an unscrupulous person files a copy of a fictitious award in the High
Court falsely certified by a dishonest attorney-at-law, on such application
being made, the High Court is required to enter decree on the lines of the
fictitious award and enforce the same . . .To prevent such abuse of the
process of Court, the Legislature in its wisdom had made it mandatory for a
party seeking enforcement to produce the original or a duly certified copy
along with the application to enforce the award at the time the application is
filed to Court and not thereafter." [emphasis added].  
  
The learned High Court Judge failed to give full effect to clause (ii) of
section 31 (2). That clause unambiguously provides for a mode of certification
additional to that prescribed by clause (i). But, for that clause
certification by the Registrar of the Arbitration Centre would not have been
acceptable. Clause (ii) requires the High Court in each case, having regard to
the facts of the case, to decide whether the document is certified to its
satisfaction. The learned Judge erred in laying down a general rule - founded
on a virtual presumption of dishonesty - which totally excludes certification
by an attorney-at-law regardless of the circumstances. The position might have
been dif­ferent if the application for enforcement had been rejected promptly
on presentation, for then there might well have been insufficient reason to be
satisfied that the copy was indeed a true copy : and that would have caused no
injustice, as the claimant could have filed a fresh application. But, I
incline to the view that even at that stage the

**240**

application should not have been summarily rejected. The claimant should have
been given an opportunity to tender duly certified copies, interpreting
"accompany" in section 31 (2) purposively and widely (as in Sri Lanka General
Workers' Union v. Samaranayake and Nagappa Chettiar v. Commissioner of Income
Tax. ) Undoubtedly, section 31 (2) is mandatory, but not to the extent that
one opportunity, and one opportunity only, will be allowed for compliance. In
the present case, however, the order was not made immediately, but only after
the lapse of the period of one year and fourteen days allowed for an
application for enforcement. By that time, the learned Judge had consolidated
the proceedings : hence he could not have ignored the certified copies filed
in the STC' s application, which admittedly, were identical in all material
respects to the copies tendered with the claimant's application. He had also
to consider (even if he was not bound by it) the admission in the STC' s
statement of objections that those copies were "duly certified", as well as
the fact that, by then, the claimant had also tendered copies certified in
terms of clause (i). It was on all that material that the learned Judge had to
decide whether the copies had been certified to his satisfaction. In deciding
that issue, he was perfectly correct in noting that the Court had to ensure
that it "gave judgment according to the award" (cf section 31 (6)) : the
object of section 31 (2) was to ensure that the High Court did have true
copies of the award. It was not reasonable, on the facts of this case, to
conclude that the copies initially filed were anything but true copies of the
originals. There was not even the faintest suspicion or suggestion that they
were inaccurate.  
  
I hold that the learned High Court Judge erred in law in rejecting the copies
of the award filed by the claimant.  
  
**DEREGISTRATION OF CLAIMANT :  
  
**The learned High Court Judge held that the claimant :  
  
"was suffering from an incapacity at the time [it] filed the letter
[referring] the matter for arbitration ... on the 9th of July, 1996,

**241**

when [the claimant] was deregistered. Therefore, when [the Man­aging Director]
signed [that letter] the company was legally a non-existent entity. Hence,
there was no valid reference to arbitration."  
  
The question of incapacity depended upon Australian law relating to the effect
of deregistration and registration and restoration to the roll. Upon the
invitation of the parties, the arbitral tribunal decided that question, as a
preliminary issue, against the STC. Such a decision, made in the course of
arbitral proceedings, is binding by virtue of section 19 of the Act, which -
unlike section 26 - has not been made expressly subject to any other provision
of the Act.  
  
Let me assume, however, that section 19 is subject to Part VII of the Act, and
that section 32 (1) (a) (i) gives the High Court a discretionary power to set
aside the award. However, that provision is applicable only upon proof that "a
party to the arbitration agreement was under some incapacity", i.e. that there
was an incapacity to which the party was subject when that arbitration
agreement was entered into. Such incapacity would vitiate that agreement. That
provision, however, does not apply to a valid arbitration agreement, where a
party later became subject to some incapacity.  
  
Further, what is relevant is the arbitration agreement, and not other steps in
the arbitration proceedings. The arbitration agreement means the agreement to
refer to arbitration - and here that means the arbitration clause contained in
the contract entered into in October, 1993. At that time, there was no
question of deregistration.  
  
The learned High Court Judge has considered the question of incapacity as at
09. 07\. 96. Any incapacity on that date was not in respect of the arbitration
agreement, and was, therefore, irrelevant. In any event, he has given no
reason whatever for the view that the claimant was legally non-existent on 09.
07. 96. The legal effect of restoration to the roll has not even been
mentioned. No reference

**242**

has been made to the findings of the Arbitrators, let alone any discussion of
their reasons.  
  
I hold that the learned High Court Judge erred in holding that the claimant
was under an incapacity falling within the scope of section 32 (1) (a) (i).  
  
**PUBLIC POLICY :  
  
**Section 17 of the Act gives the parties the freedom to agree on  the
procedure to  be followed by the arbitral tribunal. Section 19 makes any
decision made in the course of arbitral proceedings binding. Section 26
provides :  
  
"Subject to the provisions of Part VII ... the award made by the arbitral
tribunal shall be final and binding on the parties to the arbitration
agreement."  
  
Part VII contains section 32 (1) (b) (ii), which empowers the High Court to
set aside an arbitral award where "the arbitral award is in conflict with the
public policy of Sri Lanka".  
  
The learned High Court Judge held (after referring very briefly to  Morrison's
evidence) that the impugned certificate had been proved to be a forgery. He
then added that there was a finding by one Arbitrator that the impugned
certificate was a forgery. He noted that "although the Chairman . . . had
faulted the STC for not framing an issue on ... forgery", in terms of section
17 "the parties have apparently followed the Civil Procedure Code and have
framed issues", that under section 146 of the Code "it is the duty of the
Court to frame issues and that duty is not cast on the parties"; and that at
least after Morrison had testified that the impugned certificate was a
forgery, it was the duty of the arbitral tribunal to have framed an issue on
the question of forgery. He observed that no such issue was framed, and that
the majority had accepted that certificate as a genuine

**243**

certificate "and proceeded to make awards based on this forged document". He
concluded that forgery is an offence under the laws of Sri Lanka and
Australia, and that it is against public policy to act on a forged document,
and to enforce an award based on a forged document.  
  
It would be an oversimplification to describe the question for determination
as being "Is it contrary to public policy to enforce the majority award on the
ground that it was based on a forged document?"  
  
Several questions arise. Did the majority err in refusing to consider the
question of forgery in the absence of a specific issue? Could the question of
forgery have been raised in the High Court? Was the High Court right in
concluding that the impugned certificate was forgery?  
  
It is very clear that the arbitral tribunal and the parties adopted the
procedure of framing issues. There were numerous disputes and potential
disputes, including several matters not raised in the letter of termination
dated 09. 12. 93. All these had to be identified with sufficient precision for
several reasons. The arbitral tribunal needed to know what exactly it had to
decide in its award - deciding all the matters, and only the matters, which it
was required to decide, and not deciding any others. Each party needed to know
from the beginning what case it had to meet, so as to ensure an orderly
presentation of evidence and submissions. Since parties sometimes change
positions, or adopt new positions, in the course of an arbitration, the
questions which then arise need to be recorded with clarity and certainty.
Issues were, therefore, necessary. Thus, when at one point counsel for the STC
submitted that an issue on deregistration was 470 not really necessary, the
arbitral tribunal insisted that it was. Indeed, the learned High Court Judge
rightly observed that "the parties have apparently followed the Civil
Procedure Code and have framed issues". While it is certainly not desirable
that Arbitrators should mechanically

**244**

copy court procedure and practice in every respect, this was a case in which
issues were essential, and that was accepted by all three Arbitrators.  
  
The learned High Court Judge erred in holding that it was the duty of the
arbitral tribunal to have framed an issue on the question of forgery. A party
and its legal advisers are presumed to know best what its case is, and what
matters it should urge - and what matters it should not. It is true that
section 146 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code expressly imposes a duty on a
trial Judge to frame issues, where the parties are not agreed as to the
issues. It is unnecessary to decide whether that same duty is cast upon an
arbitral tribunal because this was not a case where the parties were not
agreed as to an issue; it was, rather, a case where the STC failed to suggest
an issue. It was not even an issue which arose from the pleadings. The
tribunal was not obliged to frame an issue as to forgery.  
  
The third Arbitrator ventured to frame, and to answer, what he considered to
be the issues relevant to forgery. Even if I were to assume that, in the
circumstances, the arbitral tribunal did have a power to frame such issues,
natural justice required that the affected party should have been informed of
those issues, and given an opportunity to suggest consequential issues and to
lead further evidence - particularly, because the standard of proof of forgery
proposed to be applied was lower than that notified to the parties.  
  
I hold that, in the circumstances, the majority was justified in refusing to
consider the question of forgery without a specific issue, and the High Court
was not entitled to review that decision on the ground of public policy or
otherwise, under section 32 (1) of the Act.  
  
Even if the question of forgery could have been raised in the High Court, I
hold that the learned High Court Judge's conclusion that the impugned
certificate was a forgery is unsustainable. That conclusion was based partly
on his own evaluation of the evidence and partly

**245**

on the third Arbitrator's finding. Not only did he fail to consider the burden
of proof required, but he overlooked the fact that the third Arbitrator's
finding was on a mere "preponderance of evidence" contrary to the arbitral
tribunal's previous unanimous ruling that forgery required proof beyond
reasonable doubt - a proposition amply supported by  a long line of decisions
delaling with proof of fraud, forgery and other criminal conduct in civil
cases (Narayanan Chettyar v. Official Assignee, Coomaraswamy v.
Vinayagamoorthy," Selliah v. Sinnammah, Muthumenika v. Appuhamy, Lakshmanan
Chettiar v. Muttiah Chettiar,P) Yusoof v. Rajaratnam.m)) Finally, that
conclusion was reached without appreciating that it involved a denial of
natural justice to the claimant.  
  
I must now refer to some of the decisions cited by learned counsel for the
STC.  
  
In Soleimany v. Soleimany, it was apparent on the face of an arbitration award
that the arbitrator was dealing with an illicit enterprise under which it was
the joint intention of the parties that carpets would be smuggled out of Iran
illegally. The arbitrator considered that illegality to be of no relevance
since he was applying Jewish law under which it would have no effect on the
rights of parties. It was held that that illegality did not invalidate the
arbitration agreement; that the arbitrator had jurisdiction to consider the
question of illegality; that a claimant seeking to enforce the award in
England could do so only subject to English law; that the interposition of an
arbitration award did not isolate the successful party's claim from the
illegality which gave rise to that claim; and that, therefore, enforcement of
the award would be contrary to public policy.  
  
In Westacre Investments v. Jugoimport-SPDR, (10) it was held that a party
resisting enforcement of an arbitral award would not normally be permitted to
adduce evidence that the award had been obtained by perjury, unless that
evidence was so cogent and weighty as to be likely to have materially
influenced the arbitrators' conclusions had it been adduced before them but
was not available or reasonably

**246**

obtainable either at the time of the arbitration proceedings or in the
relevant court of supervisory jurisdiction.  
  
Another decision cited was International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers v.
Iowa Electric Light and Power Company!" An arbitrator ordered reinstatement of
a nuclear power plant employee who had been dismissed for deliberately
violating important federally mandated safety regulations for no better reason
than that he wanted to get an early start for lunch. That order was set aside,
the Court holding that "once the public policy question is raised, we must
answer it by taking the facts as found by the arbitrator, but reviewing his
conclusions de novo".  
  
In view of my conclusion that forgery was not duly put in issue and proved,
none of those decisions assist the STC. A finding of forgery was not among the
facts found by the majority of the arbitral tribunal, and such a finding was
not apparent on the face of the award. The STC despite having had evidence of
the alleged forgery at least midway through the proceedings, nevertheless
failed to raise the relevant issue.  
  
**ORDER :  
**  
For the above reasons, I allow the appeal, and set aside the order dated 09.
02. 99 of the High Court. The application made by the STC to set aside the
arbitral award is refused. The claimant's application for the enforcement of
that award is allowed, and the High Court is directed to file the award, give
judgment according to the award, and to enter decree accordingly. The claimant
will be entitled to costs of appeal in this Court, and to costs in respect of
both applications in the High Court, in a sum of Rs. 100,000.  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**WIGNESWARAN, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/4.html_  

