##  Asia Siyaka Commodities (Pvt) Ltd. v. Forbes & Walker Tea Brokers (Pvt)
Limited. and Others - SLR - 403, Vol 2 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 4; (1999) 2 Sri LR
403 (24 September 1999)

**403**

**ASIA SIYAKA COMMODITIES (PVT) LTD  
v.  
FORBES & WALKER TEA BROKERS (PVT) LIMITED AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
WEERASEKERA, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C. (SLA) NO. 226/98  
C.A. APPLICATION NO. 191/98  
JULY 21, 1999

_Writ of certiorari - Special leave to appeal to the Supreme Court - Article
128 (2) of the Constitution - Basis of granting leave._

The petitioner company (the petitioner) sought special leave to appeal to the
Supreme Court against a judgment of the Court of Appeal which quashed the
licence issued to the petitioner under the Licensing of Produce Brokers Act,
No. 9 of 1979. The 1st respondent Company applied for such quashing by way of
certiorari on the ground that upon the petitioner's application made in
February, 1998, a licence could legally have issued in terms of the relevant
regulation only for the year 1999 and not for 1998. The Court of Appeal upheld
the 1st respondent's interpretation and quashed the licence issued to the
petitioner 'for 1998 and 1999'.

**Held:**

Substantial questions of law are involved, and there is a live issue for
determination; hence, the matter is fit for review by the Supreme Court.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Commissioner of Taxation for NSW v. Baxter - (1908) 24 Times LR 249.  
2\. State of Mysore v. Alexander - AIR 1970 SC 1024.  
3\. Sun Life Assurance Co. of Canada v. Jervis - (1944) 1 ALL ER 469.  
4\. Ainsbury v. Millington - (1987) 1 ALL ER 929.  
5\. Sundarkaran v. Bharath - (1989) 1 Sri LR 46._

404

**APPLICATION** for Special Leave to Appeal from the judgment of the Court of
Appeal.

_H. L de Silva, PC with D. S Wijesinghe, PC, Gomin Dayasiri, Kushan de Alwis,
Dilan de Silva and P. Obeysekera for the petitioner._

_K N. Choksy, PC with Miss Kishan Wijetunga for the 1st respondent._

_S. Marsoof PC, ASG with M. Gopallawa, SC for the 2nd and 3rd respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 24, 1999.  
**FERNANDO, J.**

The 3rd respondent-petitioner-company (the petitioner) seeks special leave to
appeal against a judgment of the Court of Appeal which quashed the licence
issued to the petitioner under the Licensing of Produce Brokers Act, No. 9 of
1979.

Regulations in respect of the business of broking of tea were first made under
that Act on 27. 8. 79 ("the 1979 Regulations', and were amended on 2. 6. 81
("the 1981 amendments").

The petitioner-company was incorporated in February, 1998, and its main object
was to engage in the business of a produce broker in tea. It applied for and
obtained a licence in February, 1998. The 1st respondent-company (the 1st
respondent) applied to the Court of Appeal for a writ of certiorari to quash
that licence - on the ground that upon the petitioner's application made in
February, 1998, a licence could legally have been issued only for the year
1999, and not for 1998.

Regulation 8 of the 1979 regulations required an applicant for a licence to
furnish certain information which an existing produce broker could furnish,
but which, obviously, a person entering the business

**405**

 of broking of tea for the first time (a new entrant) could not : for example,
'details of staff employed in the business of broking of tea exclusively',
'evidence of the availability of adequate facilities to clients of the
applicant in regard to (i) market information, (ii) advice on the manufacture
of tea. . .'.

Regulation 11 provided that an application for a licence for a particular year
shall be made on or before the 30th of September of the preceding year, and
that the licensing authority shall determine such application on or before the
30th of October next. It made an exception only in the case of licences for
the very first year (1979), for which year applications had to be made on or
before the 30th of September of the same year, and determined before the 30th
of October next.

Prima facie, regulation 8 would have had the effect of stifling competition,
by preventing any new entrant entering the business. The 1981 amendments
changed the position. Not only was regulation 8 amended, by expressly
excluding new entrants from its purview, but a new regulation 8A was
introduced specifying the information which a new entrant should furnish:
'details of staff to be employed . . .", "facilities which are proposed to be
provided to clients . . .". etc. Another new regulation 11A required every
application by a new entrant to be determined by the licensing authority
within thirty days.

There is no dispute that the petitioner being a new entrant, its application
was subject to regulation 8A, and that regulation 8 was inapplicable. It is
also clear that regulation 11A applied, so that a determination had to be made
upon an application by a new entrant within thirty days. The crucial question
which the Court of Appeal had to decide was whether regulation 11 was also
applicable, in which event a licence issued on the approval of the
petitioner's application, although made as early as February, 1998, could not
become legally operative until January of the following year.

Let me state the issue in more specific terms. The petitioner contended that
its application made in February, 1998, had to be determined within thirty
days, and if approved a licence, valid for the

**406**

 rest of 1998, had to be issued. The 1st respondent's submission, however, was
that regulation 11A also applied; in order to obtain a licence for 1998, the
petitioner should have made an application before 30th September, 1997;
further, the scheme of the regulations was that a licence could be issued only
for a full year at a time, and not for part of an year (except for 1979); and
consequently, upon the February 1998 application a licence could only have
been issued to the petitioner for the year 1999. It is a corollary of the 1st
respondent's submissions that if an application had been made by a new entrant
on, say, 5th October, 1998, and even if that application had been approved
before 30th October (or within the prescribed thirty days), nevertheless a
licence could only have been issued for the year 2000 - not for 1999.

By its judgment dated 11. 11\. 98, the Court of Appeal upheld the 1st
respondent's interpretation, and quashed the licence issued to the petitioner.

Mr. H. L de Silva, PC on behalf of the petitioner contended that the Court of
Appeal was in error in its interpretation of the regulations, for several
reasons. He urged that the purpose of the 1981 amendments was to make special
provision for new entrants, and regulation 11 A had to be regarded as a
special enactment which would override the general provisions in regulation 11
- because generalibus specialia derogant The Court of Appeal should have
adopted a purposive interpretation. Properly interpreted, he submitted,
regulation 11 could not be treated as applicable to a new entrant. The
question also arises whether the right to carry on the business of a produce
broker falls within Article 14 (1) (g) of the Constitution; if so, whether
that right can be subject only to' restrictions prescribed by law, and not by
subordinate legislation; and, in any event, whether the regulations as amended
must be interpreted broadly - so as to enhance the fundamental right, rather
than to curtail it.

In my view substantial questions of law are involved, and the matter is fit
for review by this Court.

However, Mr. K. N. Choksy, PC, for the 1st respondent, submitted that Article
128 (2) confers a discretion on this Court whether or not to grant special
leave to appeal, and that this Court should not

**407**

exercise that discretion, because, he claimed, there was no longer a live
issue. This, he said, was the result of a new regulation 11 A, introduced on
23. 11. 98, after and in consequence of the Court of Appeal judgment. In a
motion filed on 23. 6. 99 in this Court, on behalf of the 1st respondent, it
,was urged that that amendment was made `in order to change the law as it
existed at the time of the institution and decision of these proceedings in
the Court of Appeal and to enable persons in the position of the [petitioner]
to qualify for licences'. The new regulation 11A provides:

"Every application for a licence for a particular year made by [a new entrant]
may, notwithstanding anything in regulation 11, be submitted to the
Appropriate Authority at any time during the year in respect of which the
licence is applied for and shall be determined by the Appropriate Authority
within thirty days of the date on which such application is made, and such
licence shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of the year in which
it was so issued; provided that, notwithstanding the provisions of regulation
10, any licence issued under this regulation upon an application made on or
after the first day of October in any year, [by a new entrant], shall expire
on the thirty-first day of December of the succeeding year.'

In terms of that regulation a licence was issued on 27. 11. 98 to the
petitioner, the relevant portion of which is as follows:

"Licence for 1998 & 1999

In terms of section 2 (1) of Licensing of Produce Brokers Act, No. 9 of 1979
[the petitioner is] hereby authorised to carry on the business of a Produce
Broker for tea.

This licence shall be valid up to the thirty-first day of December, 1999."

Mr. Choksy submitted that upon the introduction of the new regulation 11A,
regulation 11 ceased to apply to a new entrant; and that

**408**

upon an application made in mid-year a licence could be issued for the
remainder of that year. Thus, whether the Court of Appeal was right or wrong
in its interpretation of the Regulations, the law is now settled for the
future. Whether that Court erred in quashing the petitioner's February 1998
licence was no longer a live issue. He cited Halsbury, Laws of England, (4th
edition) volume 37, para 682.

"An appeal does not lie where the question or issue raised for the
determination of the appellate court . . . has ceased to be a live issue, or
where the parties have no longer any real interest in the result of the
appeal, because of an agreement that the decision of the appellate court is
not to affect their proprietary interests or for any other reasons. Nor does
an appeal lie where the question or issue raised is or where the facts are
hypothetical.

The Court of Appeal may refuse to entertain an appeal where the amount or
issue at stake is trifling."

By a motion dated 16. 7. 99, the petitioner submitted that the new regulation
11A was prospective only, and did not validate the licence granted on 26. 2.
98 for the year ending 31. 12\. 98, which had been quashed by the Court of
Appeal. Consequently, the petitioner who had carried on business from 26. 2.
98 to 11. 11. 98 became liable to criminal prosecution for having contravened
section 2 (1) of the Act; and also ran the risk of being sued in civil
proceedings for loss and damage caused to other produce brokers by having
conducted business without a licence during that period. Further, it was
asserted that the petitioner had throughout acted lawfully and bona fide, and
reserved the right to seek compensation in appropriate proceedings from the
1st respondent for all loss caused to its business by reason of the 1st
respondent's conduct. Accordingly, it was essential to have a determination of
the question of law on which special leave is sought.

Mr. Choksy cited five decisions to which I must now turn.

The first was Commissioners of Taxation for NSW v. Baxter(1). The High Court
of Australia held that income tax could not be levied upon the salary paid to
an officer of the Commonwealth under an Act of an Australian State. The taxing
authority sought special leave to appeal

**409**

to the Privy Council. Before the hearing, there was passed an Act, of the
Commonwealth expressly authorizing States to impose taxation of that kind. In
those circumstances, the Privy Council held "that the controversy cannot be
raised again"; that "the sums actually in dispute or indirectly affected are
inconsiderable in amount"; and refused to advise the grant of special leave.
That decision depended on two conditions being satisfied : that the
controversy 'cannot' be raised again; and that the amounts in dispute were
trifling. I must observe that the taxpayer was thus allowed to retain a sum of
money, which he might not legally have been entitled to, because that sum was
thought to be 'inconsiderable" presumably from the point of view of the taxing
authority. If the result of declining to entertain an appeal would have been
to deprive the taxpayer of a sum of money, a different view may very well have
been taken.

State of Mysore v. Alexander(2) was similar. The High Court held that a
statutory provision imposing a tax on "passenger transport operators" was
invalid, and declared them entitled to a refund. Pending appeal to the Supreme
Court, the impugned provision ceased to be in operation. The Supreme Court
held that "the claims involved in these appeals are by no means substantial .
. . Hence, we do not think that these are fit cases in which this Court should
exercise its special and discretionary jurisdiction . . ."

In Sun Life Assurance Co. of Canada v. Jervis,(3) the House of Lords declined
to hear an appeal because the Court of Appeal granted leave upon the
appellant's undertaking both to pay the costs incurred in the House of Lords
and not to ask for the return of any money ordered to be paid under the
judgment of the Court of Appeal. Thus, it became

"... a matter of complete indifference to the respondent whether the appellant
wins or loses; the respondent will be in exactly the same position in either
case. He has nothing to fight for, because he has already got everything that
he can possibly get, however the appeal turns out, and cannot be deprived of
it."

410

Ainsbury v. Millington,(4) was another illustration of the same principle. An
unmarried couple who were living together obtained a joint tenancy of a house
from the local authority. After they separated, and while they were litigating
about the right to possession of the house, the local authority legally
resumed possession of the house; the woman was given another house; and (in
other unconnected proceedings) the man was sentenced to imprisonment. The
House of Lords declined to hear an appeal because the joint tenancy had come
to an end; and there remained not even an issue about costs, because both
parties were receiving legal aid, and so there was only a remote possibility
of any order for costs.

The fifth was Sundarkaran v. Bharath,(5) where this Court quashed the decision
of a Government Agent not to issue a liquor licence to the petitioner for the
year 1987, although that year had passed: granting a licence for 1987 was no
longer possible. The principles laid down in the Court's decision obviously
had relevance to further applications for licences. Mr. Choksy argued that
whatever principles this Court may lay down in regard to the quashing of the
February 1998 licence would have no application to further applications for
licences.

Mr. Choksy submitted that the petitioners apprehensions of criminal
prosecution were groundless: because the licensing authority had supported the
petitioner right along, and it was hardly likely that the Attorney-General
would ever launch a prosecution. But, that does not satisfy the tests laid
down in the cases which he cited. Thus, it cannot be said that "the
controversy cannot be raised again"; or that whether the petitioner wins or
loses he "will be in exactly the same position [and] has nothing to fight for,
because he has already got everything that he can possibly get, however the
appeal turns out"; or that "the sums actually in dispute or indirectly
affected are inconsiderable in amount" \- because the claims for compensation
which can be made by or against the petitioner will be affected if the order
of the Court of Appeal is set aside.

The suggestion was also made during the hearing that the licence issued in
November, 1998, was valid for the whole of 1999. It is true

**411**

that that licence is described as a 'licence for 1998 & 1999", seemingly
implying that it is valid for the whole of 1998\. However, the new regulation
11A was introduced only on 23. 11. 98, and prima facie it would seem that
neither the regulation nor any act done thereunder is retrospective. It was
also suggested that if a prosecution is ever instituted against the
petitioner, he can then plead that the February, 1998, licence was valid. The
question will then arise as to whether the original Court (or the High Court
or the Court of Appeal) is bound (because of stare decisis, or res judicata,
or otherwise) by the judgment now impugned. If that judgment would be binding
at that stage, it seems to me inequitable that this Court should now decline
to consider the correctness of that judgment, but nevertheless allow it to be
binding even if it were wrong. On the other hand, if that judgment would not
be binding, then it means that the same controversy (ie whether the February,
1998, licence is valid or not) can be raised again.  
For the above reasons, I hold that the decisions cited by Mr. Choksy are
-inapplicable, and that there is a live issue for determination.

I grant special leave to appeal upon the questions referred to earlier in this
judgment (which are also referred to in paragraph 6 (a), (b), (c) and (g) of
the petition dated 19. 11. 98.

If the petitioner succeeds in appeal, it will be entitled to the costs of this
application, but the 1st respondent will not in any event be entitled to such
costs. The petitioner and the respondents will file their written submissions
on 15. 11. 99 and 31. 12. 99, respectively, and the date of hearing will be
fixed forthwith by the Registrar after consulting counsel.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

**WEERASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Special leave to appeal granted._  


* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/4.html_  

