##  Warapitiya Rahuia Thero v. Commissioner General of Examinations and Others
- SLR - 344, Vol 3 of 2000 [2000] LKSC 40; (2000) 3 Sri LR 344 (31 March 2000)

**344**

**WARAPITIYA RAHULA THERO  
v.  
COMMISSIONER GENERAL OF EXAMINATIONS AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
WIJETUNGA, J.,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
SC (FR) 683/99  
MARCH 31st 2000  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Constitution Article 12(1) - Member of the Clergy -
Application to sit S.L.A.S refused - Violation of rights guaranteed under
Article 12(1).  
_  
**Held :  
**  
(1) There is nothing in the gazette notification or in the Law disqualifying
the members of the clergy from serving in the Public Service.  
  
**APPLICATION** under Article 126 of the Constitution.  
  
_Ms. Mallika Prematilaka with Manori Pathirana and Leslie Suraweera_ for
Petitioner.  
  
_Harsha Fernando, S.C._ for Respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 31, 2000.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.  
**  
The Petitioner obtained his diploma in Social work in 1983 and was confirmed
in the post of Social Service Officer with effect from 01.11.89. He had served
in the Department of Social Service as Social Service Officer Grade 11 since
that time. On the 24th of March 99, in response to an advertisement in the
Government Gazette dated 2nd March, 99 the petitioner applied to sit the
limited competitive examination for entry in to the Sri Lanka Administrative
Service.  
  
By letter dated 09. 07. 99 marked P2 in these proceedings the Department of
Examinations informed the petitioner that

**345**

his application was rejected, since he was a member of the clergy.  
  
There is nothing in the gazette notification or in the law disqualifying the
members of the clergy from serving in the Public Service. They are in the
circumstances, entitled to the protection relating to equal treatment
guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution. Indeed Learned Counsel for
the respondents properly concedes that there has been a violation of
petitioner's fundamental rights guaranteed by Article, 12(1) of the
Constitution, although he did express concern about the appropriateness of a
member of the clergy functioning as an ordinary public officer.  
  
In the circumstances, we declare that the petitioner's rights under Article
12(1) of the Constitution have been violated. We made order that the State
shall pay a sum of Rs. 25,000/- as costs to the petitioner.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J**. - I agree.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J**. - I agree.  
  
_Relief Granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/40.html_  

