##  Ameen and Others v. Malship (Ceylon) Ltd. - SLR - 483, Vol 2 of 1982
[1982] LKSC 40; (1982) 2 Sri LR 483 (15 June 1982)

# 483

  **AMEEN AND OTHERS**

**v.**

**MALSHIP (CEYLON) LTD.**

SUPREME COURT

WIMALARATNE, J., RATWATTE, J., AND SOZA, J.

S.C. NO. 91/81.

CA/LA/NO. 92/81(SC) ‑ CA/LA/113/81

D.C. COLOMBO NO. 1893/SPL.

MAY 21, 1982.



_     Stamp duty ‑ Should an application for leave to appeal be stamped?_



# Held ‑



That as sub‑head A of Part II of 'the Schedule of the Stamp Ordinance does not
provide for stamping of applications for leave to appeal or notices of appeal
no stamp duty is necessary for leave to appeal or notices of appeal. The levy
of stamp duty is governed by the letter of the law and not by its spirit.



# 484



**Cases referred to:**



1\. _Partington v. Attorney ‑ General (1869) IV English and Irish Appeals (H.
L.) 100, 122 _

  
2\. _Tennant v. Smith (1892) A.C. 150, 154._



**APPEAL** from order of Court of Appeal



_P. Somatilakam_ for petitioners‑appellants.

_  
Douglas Premaratne, D.S.G._ (appears as Amicus Curiae).



Cur. adv. vult

June 15, 1982.



**SOZA, J.**



            The only point raised in this appeal is whether an application for leave to appeal should be stamped. The Court of Appeal has held that such applications should bear class stamps.



At the time the Stamp Ordinance was passed in 1909, the Civil Procedure Code
No.2 of 1889 was in force. Under the provisions of this Code a party aggrieved
by "any judgment, decree or order of any original court" could file a petition
of appeal to the Supreme Court ‑ see section 754(1). Whether the appeal was
from a final judgment, decree or order or from an interlocutory judgment,
decree or order, the provision was for filing a petition of appeal. In its
Schedule A Part II the Stamp Ordinance enumerated the stamp duties payable on
law proceedings. For the civil proceedings in District Courts itemised under
sub‑head A of this Part the stamp duties payable were set out. Item 19 refers
to petitions of appeal as being liable to stamp duty varying in value
according to the scale set out against this item. As notices of appeal and
applications for leave to appeal were not steps in procedure prescribed by the
statute as it stood then, there is no reference to them.



On 1.1.1974 the Administration of Justice Law, No.44 of 1973 came into force.
By section 3(1)(b) of this Law sections 753 to 778 of the Civil Procedure Code
were repealed. Henceforth appeals to the Supreme Court against any judgment of
an original court were to be lodged by giving a notice of appeal (sections
317(1) and 318) while appeals from an order made by an original court in the
course of any civil action, proceeding or matter were possible only with the
leave of the Supreme Court first had and obtained upon an application for
leave to appeal (sections 317(2) and 326(1)). Sections 323(1) and 326(1) of
the Administration of Justice Law stipulate that a notice



**  485**



of appeal and an application for leave to appeal respectively had to bear a
stamp of the prescribed denomination. Although there was this requirement of a
stamp of the prescribed denomination there was no legal stipulation
prescribing the denomination of stamps that should be affixed. The Stamp
Ordinance was not appropriately amended. Therefore no stamp duty was payable
on notices of appeal or applications for leave to appeal under the
Administration of Justice Law, No.44 of 1973.



When the Administration of Justice Law was taken off the Statute book and the
Civil Procedure Code was revived by Law No.19 of 1977 and amended by Law No.20
of 1977 the provisions in regard to appeals underwent a change. Under the
provisions of the Civil Procedure Code as amended appeals from any final
judgment pronounced by any original court in any civil action, proceeding or
matter had to be preferred by lodging a notice of appeal followed within sixty
days by a petition of appeal (sections 754(1), (5), 755(1) and (3)). The
notice of appeal had to be duly stamped but the petition of appeal was exempt
from stamp duty. Appeals from any order (not a final judgment) of any original
court made in the course of any civil action, proceeding or matter were
possible with the leave of the Supreme Court first had and obtained upon a
duly stamped application for leave to appeal (sections 754(2), (5) 756(2)).
Needless to say the reference to the Supreme Court in the provisions of the
Civil Procedure Code must be read. as a reference to the Court of Appeal
constituted under the Constitution of 1978 (Article 169). The Civil Procedure
Code now operative provides that notices of appeal and applications for leave
to appeal shall be duly stamped. The expression "duly stamped" means here
"stamped according to law". No consequential amendment to the Stamp Ordinance
was made and there is no statutory provision stipulating the denomination of
stamps that should be affixed. The Stamp Ordinance still carries provision for
stamping only petitions of appeal but these too are now exempt from stamp duty
by virtue of section 755(3) of the Civil Procedure Code.



So far as civil proceedings in the Supreme Court go there are only fourteen
items made subject to stamp duty in Part 11 of Schedule A of the Stamp
Ordinance. The Stamp duty is uniform for all the items according to the class.
But it is wrong to assume that as all these fourteen items are subject to
stamp duty at a uniform rate even papers not so itemised should be presumed to
be subject to stamp duty at the same rate. The fourteen items in question do
not



#  486



make an exhaustive list. I can find no justification for the view that all
papers filed in the Supreme Court have to be stamped. Only those expressly
enumerated have to be stamped. If the Legislature wanted all papers filed in
the Supreme Court to be stamped, it would have said so. This surely cannot be
presumed. Applications for leave to appeal are not referred to at all in the
enumeration of papers that have to be stamped. The levy of stamp duty to be
effective must be imposed in clear and express terms. In this connection the
oft‑quoted words of Lord Cairns in _Partington v. Attorney-­General_ (1) bear
repetition:



"...... as I understand the principle of all fiscal legislation, it is this:
If the person sought to be taxed comes within the letter of the law he must be
taxed, however great the hardship may appear to the judicial mind to be. On
the other hand, if the Crown, seeking to recover the tax, cannot bring the
subject within the letter of the law, the subject is free, however apparently
within the spirit of the law the case might otherwise appear to be. In other
words, if there be admissible, in any statute, what is called an equitable
construction, certainly such a construction is not admissible in a taxing
statute, where you can simply adhere to the words of the statute.



A similar approach was adopted by Lord Halsbury speaking from the Woolsack in
the case of _Tennant v Smith_ (2).



"In various cases the principle of construction of a taxing Act has been
referred to in various forms, but I believe they may be all reduced to this,
that inasmuch as you have no right to assume that there is any governing
object which a taxing Act is intended to attain other than that which it has
expressed by making such and such objects the intended subject for taxation,
you must see whether a tax is expressly imposed.



Cases, therefore, under the Taxing Acts always resolve themselves into a
question whether or not the words of the Act have reached the alleged subject
of taxation."



In the instant case the reference to petitions of appeal in sub‑head A of Part
11 of Schedule A of the Stamp Ordinance is not wide enough to reach notices of
appeal and applications for leave to appeal as subjects of taxation. The levy
of stamp duty is governed by the letter of the law and not by its spirit. In
construing a taxing statute one cannot bend its plain language to suit what
the Legislature may



**  487**

**  **

have contemplated or intended. To do so would be to cross the Rubicon which
divides the province of the Judge from that of the Legislator.



The appeal is therefore allowed. The Attorney‑General was represented before
us as amicus curiae on our direction. Therefore there will be no costs either
here or in the Court of Appeal.



**WIMALARATNE, J** ‑ I agree.



**RATWATTE, J.** ‑ I agree.



Appeal allowed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/40.html_  

