##  Wijeyeratne v. Wijeyeratne and Others - SLR - 325, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981]
LKSC 40; (1981) 1 Sri LR 325 (29 May 1981)

**325**

**WIJEYERATNE  
  v.  
WIJEYERATNE AND OTHERS**

**SUPREME COURT  
WEERARATNE J., SHARVANANDA J.,  
AND WANASUNDERA J.  
S. C. NO. 32/80  
C. A. (SC) 70/73 Inty.  
D. C. GAMPAHA 16263/P  
MARCH 26, 1981.  
**  
_Last Will - Fideicommissum - Power: to disinherit - Is deed necessary for
gift-over ?  
_  
**Held** (Sharvananda J. dissenting) The Last Will clearly created a valid
fidei commissum,  
  
as the property was not to vest in the fiduciary absolutely. The
fideicommissary was clearly indicated and the power to disinherit was otiose
and redundant.  
  
The fideicommissum being valid the gift-over to the named fideicommissaries
(sons of the testator) takes effect automatically although the fiduciary
(widow of the testator) had failed to comply with the testator's direction to
"devise and bequeath" the inheritance to them as directed: The properties vest
automatically on the fideicommissaries on the termination of the fiduciary
interest.  
  
Per Weeraratne J: The Last Will carried the direction that the fiduciary
should devise and bequeath the properties to the fideicommissaries "if in her
(fiduciary) opinion they (the fideicommissaries) had. merited it by the kind
of treatment they had accorded to her" but as the fiduciary had not declared
otherwise it would not be unreasonable to presume that she had. no objection
to the fideicommissaries succeeding to the properties as fideicommissaries.  
  
Per Wanasundera J: The condition that the fiduciary should make the bequest
"if in her opinion they had merited, it by the kind of treatment they had
accorded to her is in effect otiose and redundant" and does not confer "a
positive power of disinheritance.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
_(1) Edirisuriya v. Wijedoru (1965) 68 NLR 325, 328, 330.  
  
(2) Bibile v. Mahaduraya (1926).28 NLR 253.  
  
(3) Kiri Banda v. Punchiappuhamy (1951) 53 NLR 361, 363.  
  
(4) Seneviratne v. Seneviratne (1950) 51 NLR 553, 559, 560.  
  
(5) Van Niekerk v. Van Niekerk's Estate (1935) C.P.D. 359.  
  
(6) Jewish Colonial Trust Ltd. v. Estate Nathan (1940) AD 163.  
  
**APPEAL**_ from judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_C. Thiagalingam Q.C. with H. L. de Silva, N. K. Choksy, Mark Fernando and H.
Jayamaha_ for 6th defendant-respondent-appellant.  
  
_Nimal Senanayake with K. Gunaratne, P. A. D. Samarasekera, Miss S. M.
Senaratne and Mrs. A. S. Dissanayake_ for 2nd plaintiff-appellant-respondent.

**326**

May 29, 1981  
**WEERARATNE, J.  
**  
By his last Will No. 2314(15) dated 17th June 1958, T. A. de. S. Wijeyeratne
devised and bequeathed to his wife Rose Charlotte Helen de Silva Wijeyeratne
two lands named Pelahela Estate and Etheraliyagahawatte subject to the
following conditions and restrictions to. wit:  
  
"My wife shall not sell, mortgage, encumber or otherwise alienate the said
lands or any of them hereby bequeathed to her, but shall take and enjoy the
rents, profits and income thereof during her lifetime and shall devise and
bequeath the first-named called Pelahela Estate unto our son Lindon and the
second-named land called Etheraliyagahawatte unto our son Dalton if in her
opinion they had merited it by the kind treatment they had accorded to her."  
  
The sole question that arises for decision in this appeal in which all parties
are brothers and sisters, turns on the construction of the clause in the said
last Will set out above. Mr. C. Thiagalingarn Q.C. appearing on behalf of the
6th Defendant-Respondent-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant),
submitted that the Court of Appeal judgment is in error in holding that there
was no fideicommissum created in favour of the Appellant. Learned Counsel
contended that on the contrary the words in the clause referred to above,
constituted an indefeasible fideicommissum with power to the fiduciary to make
over the gifts of the said lands to the *Appellant, Lindon Marimus and also to
his brother Dalton respectively, inter vivos. The finding of the Court of
Appeal is that the phrase, 'if in her opinion they had merited it,' clearly
controls the whole' paragraph and that the bequest is made subject to her
discretion and that consequently it is in her absolute discretion whether or
not to bequeath the land to the Appellant.  
  
Mr. Nimal Senanayake, in submitting that there is no fideicommissum created,
supported the finding in the :Court of Appeal judgment and stated that if the
widow wanted to do what her husband had indicated in the relevant clause, then
even if the Appellant had not behaved in the way stipulated by the Testator,
he would nevertheless get a share as one of the intestate heirs. In regard to
the Appellant and his brother Dalton, Counsel submitted that if there was any
doubt, preference must be given to the larger class on the basis that there is
no fideicommissum.  
  
In construing this Will, a close examination of the relevant

**327**

clause reveals that the gift to the Appellant and his brother is subject to
restrictions.  
  
In the judgment of the Court of Appeal it is stated:  
  
"The phrase, 'if in her opinion they had merited it,' clearly controls the
whole paragraph. The bequest is made subject to her discretion. She is put
under no obligation to bequeath the land to him." The Court held that there
was no fideicommissum created as the widow was left with a discretion whether,
to give the property or not and that accordingly the property devolved on her
absolutely, and on her death on all her heirs equally. But there is a clear
prohibition against alienation imposed on his wife by the Testator, thus
ensuring that his wife cannot regard it as her absolute property, but could
only enjoy the rents and profits and income during her lifetime. The Testator
then goes on to state emphatically, ". . . and shall devise and bequeath the
first named estate unto our son Lindon. . ." There is here, a clear indication
that Lindon, and Lindon alone is to be the fideicommissary.  
  
A fiduciary cannot defeat the Testator's intention (which in this instance is
that this land must go to the fideicommissary, Lindon) except where the
fideicommissum is a Fideicommissum Simplex (vide 68 N.L.R. 325 at pp. 328 and
330 in Edirisuriya v. IN Wijedoru(1) ). But in this case there is no such
exceptional Fideicommissum Simplex because the fiduciary has not been
expressly given. a power of alienation.' Having regard to the language used in
this clause of the Will, it seems clear that the Testator had the intention of
creating an ordinary fideicommissum in favour of the Appellant.  
  
There is in law a presumption against a fideicommissum in a case of doubt as
to the Testator's intention, but in this case there is no reasonable doubt.  
  
In view of all that I have discussed above, the question arises as to what
significance should be attached to the omission on the part of the widow to
declare expressly that Lindon and his brother had merited the said lands by
the treatment accorded to her. When the fiduciary is empowered to disinherit
any of the fideicommissaries named by the Testator, the power of
disinheritance must be determined by rules which are akin to those governing a
power of appointment, which requires that the Will and intention of the
Testator must be gathered from the different terms employed. However in this
instance one does not need to go far to infer that an implied power of
disinheritance is given to the fiduciary in the said clause, since the words
used are quite clear and explicit.

**328**

". . if in her opinion-they had merited it by the kind of treatment they had
accorded to her."  
  
Since the fiduciary has not declared otherwise it would not be unreasonable to
presume that she had no objection to Lindon and his brother succeeding to the
properties as fideicommissaries. Consequently the fidei commissa created by
the Testator continues to be operative. In this case however, there has been
an omission on the part of the widow to exercise the discretion given to her
to make a declaration so required of her.  
  
It will be noticed that the relevant clause also requires the widow "to devise
and bequeath" the said lands to Lindon and Dalton. The fact that the lands
were not devised and bequeathed would not however invalidate the
fideicommissum. In the case of Bibile v. Mahaduraya reported in 28 N.L.R. page
253(2) Justice Garvin stated :-  
  
"As to the contention that the fideicommissum did not become effective by
reason of the absence of a deed of gift in favour of Bandu Menike and Muthu
Menike, I think the answer is that if a valid fideicommissum has in point of
fact been created, then the fideicommissary became vested with the property
immediately the fideicommissum matured by the happening of the contingency,
the death of the donor."  
  
In the case of Kiri Banda v. Punchiappuhamy 53 N.L.R. page 351(3) Gratiaen J.
stated at p. 361.  
  
"The law was finally settled by Garvin J and Lyall Grant J in Bibile v.
Mahaduraya which held that a valid fideicommissum was created, and that no
express deed from the donee was necessary to render it effective, where a
conveyance contained 'not a mere request but a direction and an imperative
order' requiring the first institute to pass the land to the next set of
institutes."  
  
Gratiaen J stated that the principles of law to which Garvin J and Lyall Grant
J had referred are now clearly set out in a passage at page 143 of Professor
Nadaraja's Treatise on the Roman-Dutch Law of Fidei commissa in the following
terms.  
  
"In the pre Justinian Roman Law, the fideicommissary did not acquire ownership
in the property until 'restitution', of it had been made by him to the
fiduciary at the time prescribed by the testator. But after Justinian had
enacted that there was to be no difference between the different kinds of
legacies and

**329**

between legacies and fideicommissum and that fideicommissaries and legatees
equally should have not merely a personal action but also the real action
which had formerly been open to legatees, per vindicationem, ownership (at any
rate in the case of singular fideicommissum) passed from fiduciary to
fideicommissary, even without any express restitution, as soon as the gift
over to the latter was expressed to take effect. In the modern law it would
seem that in all cases the transfer of ownership takes place automatically at
the time prescribed by the testator for the vesting of the fideicommissaries
interest, and the fideicommissary is entitled from that time to the use and
enjoyment of the property and to enforce his- claims to the property against
the fiduciary, his representatives, or other possessor. "  
  
 Having regard to what has been, cited above, Gratiaen J stated that the
failure of either daughter to obey the direction that she should "make over"
her share to the fideicommissaries did not have the effect of defeating the
donor's intention.  
  
For the reasons given I am of opinion that the appeal of the Appellant must be
allowed with costs in this Court.  
  
**SHARVANANDA, J.  
**  
I regret being unable to agree with the reasoning or with the conclusions of
Weeraratne J. or of Wanasundera J.  
  
The basic issue in this case is whether the 6th defendant-appellant had,
become entitled to the sole proprietorship of the land called "Pelahela
Estate,' the subject matter of this action, by virtue of the last Will No.
2314 dated 14.6.58(P5), or whether he was only entitled to a share as co-owner
of the said land along with his brothers and sisters on the basis of his being
an intestate heir of his mother.  
  
By his last Will No. 2314, the late T. A. de S. Wijeyeratne devised and
bequeathed to his wife Rose Charlotte Wijeyeratne this. land and another land
called 'Etheraliyagahawatte' subject to the following conditions and
restrictions:  
  
 "My wife shall not sell, mortgage, encumber or otherwise alienate the said
lands or any of them hereby bequeathed to her but shall take and enjoy the
rents, profits and income thereof during her life-time and shall devise and
bequeath- the first named land called 'Pelahela Estate' unto their son Lindon,
and the second-named land called 'Etheraliyagahawatte' unto their

**330**

son Dalton if in her opinion they had merited it by the kind of treatment they
had accorded to her."  
  
Wijeyeratne died on 15.12.58 and in terms of the. aforesaid last Will, title
to Pelahela Estate became vested in the widow, subject to the aforesaid
conditions and restrictions.  
  
The widow, Rose Charlotte Wijeyeratne, died intestate on 16.12:70. The
question in issue is whether, on the widow dying intestate, the land devolved
on all her children in equal shares, or whether, in terms of the aforesaid
last Will No. 2314, Lindon, the 6th defendant-appellant, became solely
entitled to it even though the deceased widow had not devised and bequeathed
the said land to him in terms of the said last Will.  
  
The position of Lindon, the 6th defendant-appellant, is that the said last
Will created a fideicommissum in his favour and that on the death of his
mother, the fiduciary, the property devolved in its entirety on him. The
District Judge who heard the case upheld the appellant's contention and
dismissed the plaintiff's action for partition of the land. On appeal by the
plaintiff, the Court of Appeal held that the last Will did not create a
Fideicommissum in favour of the 5th defendant-appellant and that the property,
therefore, devolved in equal shares on the intestate heirs of the widow and
could be partitioned. From the judgment of the Court of Appeal, the 6th
defendant-appellant has preferred this appeal.  
  
The contention advanced on behalf of the appellant was that there was a
prohibition on alienation by the legatee and that there was a clear,
indication of the persons for whose benefit it was imposed and that the last
Will thus created a fideicommissum in favour of the appellant and his brother
Dalton.. It was submitted that the last two lines, "if in her opinion they had
merited it by the kind of treatment they had accorded to her," conferred a
power of disinheritance on the widow by implication and that the appellant and
his brother Dalton remained the instituted 'fideicommissary heirs of the
testator because of the non-exercise of the implied power of disinheritance by
their mother.  
  
A 'fideicommissum' is a disposition of property in favour of .a person called
a 'fiduciary': with an obligation imposed upon him on his death, or in the
happening of a certain event, or on the fulfilment of a condition, to hand the
same over to or allow the pro property to devolve on a third person called a
'fideicommissary.' For the existence of a. valid fideicommissum, it is
essential that:-

**331**

(1) the testator should have shown that the subject. matter should not the
absolute property of the first taker of it but that it should go over on the
fulfilment of some condition from the fiduciary to the fideicommissary;  
  
(2) there should be certainty about the property; and  
  
(3) there should be certainty :about the persons who as fideicommissaries are
to benefit by it and about the time at which the rights vest in the
fideicommissaries.  
  
The obligation resting on the fiduciary to hand over and transmit the property
in question to the fideicommissary should be contained in a positive direction
or command in the will. No particular form of words is necessary to create a
fideicommissum. But the intention to substitute another (fideicommissary) for
the taker (fiduciary) should be express or is to be gathered by necessary
implication from the language of the Will for a fideicommissum to be
constituted. However, there should be clearness of language and certainty both
as regards the intention of the maker and the person to be benefited. The mere
prohibition against alienation does not constitute a fideicommissum,: unless
the persons are indicated in whose favour the prohibition is made. (Voet
36.1..27). For the. constitution of a valid fideicommissum, it is absolutely
essential that the person should be indicated to whom the burdened property
must go. Where the fideicommissary is not expressly designated, he must by
implication be clearly indicated. No fideicommissum is created unless someone
is indicated by the Will who should take the property after the death of the
person to whom the Fife interest had been bequeathed. I n the absence of such
an indication, the fiduciary heir or legatee takes the estate absolutely. Any
curtailment of the rights of ownership appearing in the Will, such as a
prohibition against alienation, is of no legal effect unless a third party is
indicated in whose favour such curtailment is to operate. The fideicommissary
is generally to be ascertained at the time specified for the gift-over or
restitution; so that if members of the class designated die before that date,
they -do not generally transmit to their heirs any right to the
fideicommissum. (Voet 36.1.26) It is however open to the testator to leave to
the fiduciary the task of deciding who are to be the fideicommissaries by
giving the fiduciary what in English Law would be called" "power of
appointment." As pointed out by Maasdorp (6th Edition, Vol. I; at page 201):  
  
"A testator may confer upon the fiduciary the power of selecting the person
upon whom such property shall devolve

**332**

at the expiration of the life interest, in which case the due exercise of such
power has the same effect as if the testator had himself made the selection in
his Will."  
  
But it is a necessary condition to the validity of such a disposition that it
must not be left to the fiduciary whether or not he will pass on that
property. The obligation to pass on should be present. The exercise of a power
of appointment has the same effect as if the testator had himself made the
selection in his Will and the person nominated under the appointment is
therefore the heir or the legatee of the testator and not of the person who
exercises that power. If the grantee is given the choice of certain persons
and fails 'to exercise that choice, all will be entitled to inheritance or
bequest, namely, those living when the time. for distribution arises. (Voet
36.1.29) The grantee must exercise his powers within the limits of those
powers conferred upon him. If he exceeds or executes them improperly, the
result is the same as if, he had not executed them at all. In Seneviratne v.
Seneviratne (51 N. L. R. at 559, 560) (4), Dias S P J. quotes with approval
the: following passage from- Nadarajah on: Fidei commissa, page 59:  
  
"But for the exercise of the power of appointment to be valid; the fiduciary
must act within the limits imposed `upon him. For example, if the mode of
exercise of the power is restricted to appointment by Will, an appointment by
deed will be invalid and vice versa; or where the fiduciary appoints from
outside the class designated by the testator, the appointment would be. .
invalid; as will also be the case where a condition is attached to the
exercise of the power and the power is exercised without the condition being
satisfied...... If there has been no exercise of the power at all, or it has
not been properly exercised, those persons whom the testator. designated as
beneficiaries in the event of non-exercise of the power will succeed. If no
such substitution has been made by the testator, all the persons from whose
number the selection was to be made by the fiduciary, becomes entitled to
succeed where the power is special and the .fiduciary's intestate heirs will
be entitled to succeed where the power is general."  
  
Professor Nadarajah in his book. on Fidei-Commissa states at pages 80-- 81.  
  
"Where there is a. disposition to A for life and on his death to such person
as he may appoint, A is not absolute owner because there is a clear indication
that he should take only a

**333**

 life interest - he is not a fiduciary to whose discretion it is left whether
or not to pass on the property and it is not a case where there. is no gift-
over, or where the gift-over has failed .... In such 'a disposition, the
fideicommissaries are ascertainable on A's death, according as A has or has
not exercised his power of appointment. If A has exercised his power, the
appointees are the fideicommissaries under the original testator's
disposition. Where he has not exercised his power of appointment, a gift over
on default of appointment to the intestate heirs is implied."  
  
If there is failure of the person entitled. to claim restitution, the
fideicommissum fails. On, the failure of the fideicommissary, the .
fiduciary's interest, gets enlarged into full ownership. Where property is
left to an heir or legatee who is restricted by the terms of the Will to take
in the income merely of the inheritance or bequest for life and there is no
gift of the corpus to anybody else and no indication of anybody in whose
favour the restriction on the heir or legatee was imposed, the restrictive
provision will be treated as merely nudum praeceptum without binding effect;
and the heir or legatee is entitled to claim the corpus of the property. "in
the constitution of a valid fideicommissum, it is absolutely essential that
the person or persons should be indicated to whom the burdened property must
go. There must be a gift-over. If no person or class of persons is mentioned
to whom the fiduciary is to hand the . property, no fideicommissum is created
even though the testator may have purported to burden the inheritance or
bequest with the entail of fideicommissum as the fideicommissum is nudum and
inoperative." (Steyn on Wills - 2nd Edition; at page 286). The burden of
fideicommissum is extinguished where there is a failure of the person on whom
the burdened property is to devolve. Upon such failure, the fiduciary becomes
the absolute owner of the burdened property, unless alternate
fideicommissaries are substituted in the Will.  
  
It is in the background of the above principles that one has to test the claim
of Lindon, the 6th defendant-appellant, to be the sole fideicommissary
entitled under the said last Will to succeed to the entirety of the property
on the death of his mother.  
  
By his last Will, the testator had directed the legatee to devise and bequeath
Pelahela Estate to Lindon "if in her opinion he had merited it by the kind of
treatment he had accorded to her." This condition, "if in her opinion he had
merited it," controls the legatee's obligation to bequeath the property to
Lindon and is condition precedent to Lindon's entitlement to be .devisee. If
in her opinion Lindon did not merit it, there was no obligation on

**334**

the legatee to devise and bequeath the property to him. The testator's object
is quite manifest. The testator appears to have had confidence in the judgment
of the legatee and had provided for a gift-over to the 6th defendant-appellant
only "if in her opinion he had merited it;" impliedly if in her opinion he had
not merited it, there was to be no obligation to make a gift-over to Lindon.
In my view it is not legitimate for this Court to depart from the terms of the
Will and to ignore this vital condition on which Lindon's entitlement rested
and to treat the gift-over to Lindon as absolute and automatic when, ex-facie,
it was conditional. This condition, however, had not the effect of giving
absolute discretion to the legatee to say whether she is willing to give as
held by the. Court of Appeal - nor did it import a power of disinheritance.
The power conferred by the testator on the legatee was not power of
disinheritance but power of appointment. If in her opinion he merited the
legacy by the kind of treatment he accorded to her, the legatee . was obliged
to appoint Lindon as fideicommissary to succeed her. It logically follows
that, if in her opinion he did not merit it by the kind of treatment he had
accorded to her, she was not obliged to bequeath the property to him; in that
event, the power of appointment need not be exercised. In view of the fact
that the legatee, Mrs. Rose Charlotte Wijeyeratne, did not devise and bequeath
to Lindon the property though she had survived the testator for twelve years,
it is to be presumed that in her opinion Lindon did not merit the legacy by
the kind of treatment he had accorded to her. The condition precedent for
Lindon's appointment had not been satisfied and Lindon did not become entitled
to be appointed fideicommissary. It was not a question of disinhesitance, .but
a case of Lindon failing to satisfy the condition of entitlement to be
appointed fideicommissary. Disinheriitance involves the idea of divesting a
beneficiary of a benefit which is already vested in him. Lindon. was never
vested with any right to the property. That right would stem only from an
appointment by his mother, Mrs. Wijeyeratne.  
  
The contention that "the clause that Mrs. Rose Charlotte Wiieyeratne shall
devise and bequeath Pelahela Estate unto Lindon if in her opinion he had
merited it by the kind of treatment he had accorded to her' can be considered
otiose and redundant and that the 6th defendant-appellant must be considered
under the law. to possess the right of having the property passed to him
automatically on the determination. of the mother's fiduciary. interest" is
against all canons of interpretation. A Will should, if possible, be construed
so as to give effect to every word or clause therein and the Court is not at
liberty to disregard any word or clause if some meaning Can be given to it. It
is not to be assumed that additional

**335**

words or conditions are used without a purpose. One cardinal rule of
construction is that effect must be given to the intention of the testator.
The Court cannot re-write the testator's Will. A clause which spells the
testator's intention cannot be rejected as close or redundant. In its context,
that clause discloses the testator's purpose, viz. to see that Lindon treated
his mother well to oblige. her to bequeath the property to him. If the mother
was of opinion that Lindon was not treating her well, he would not merit being
appointed fideicommissary. There is sense in the provision; it means what it
says. But in the submission of Lindon's Counsel, it serves no purpose and has
no function to perform in identifying the destination of the property. This
facile explanation carries no persuasion.  
  
Mr. Thiagalingam for-the appellant relied on the case of Kiribanda v.
Punchiappuhamy (53 N.L.R. 361) (3). I agree with the principle of the judgment
in that case. I n that case, the deed of gift by which one Ukkurala donated
certain lands to his daughters T. M. and D. M. provided as follows:  
  
"I hereby . . . . . grant and make as a gift unto. . . . . my daughters T.M.
and D.M.... the lands to be possessed by them during their life-time.......  
  
Further, the said TN. and D.M. shall only possess the said lands and premises
allotted to them during their lifetime and shall not transfer or mortgage the
same outside and the said. T. M. and D. M. shall at their death make over
their shares and lands allotted to them to no other person than to P or to P's
heirs and shall not- alienate the same to any-other person whomsoever."  
  
The Court rightly held that "the gift created a valid fideicommissum in favour
of P, or in the event of P's death of his heirs and that no express deed from
the fiduciary was necessary to render it effective." In that case, the
fideicommissaries, or the persons benefiting under the fideicommissum, were
specifically named or nominated. There was no condition precedent, such as we
have here in this case, of potential fideicommissary becoming entitled to the
property only if the. fiduciary, being of the opinion that he merited it by
the kind of treatment he accorded to her, devised or bequeathed the property
to him. The fundamental difference between that case and the present case is
the condition stipulated by the testator that the potential beneficiary should
become entitled to the property only if the legatee should determine that he
deserved it. The omission of the mother in the exer-

**336**

cise of the power bestowed on her by the testator to nominate Lindon as
fideicommissary has the significance and relevance which it did not have in
the deed of gift referred to in the case reported in 53 N.L.R. 361(:3) viz.
that Lindon acquired the status and rights of a fideicommissary only on
appointment by the party so charged by the testator. I n that case the
fideicommissary was already appointed by the testator and could have been
ascertained at the time of gift-over. In the instant case, Lindon had never
been appointed fideicommissary and hence could not claim to succeed as such.  
  
In my view the appellant's claim that he was the sole fideicommissary under
his father's last Will and was thus entitled to the sole ownership of the
subject matter of this action cannot be sustained. His appeal therefore fails
and t dismiss it with costs.  
  
**WANASUNDERA, J.  
**  
I' am in agreement with the judgment of my brother Weeraratne, J. and the
order he has proposed. Since my brother Sharvananda, J. has taken a different
view, I would like to set down my own reasons for allowing this appeal.  
  
The Last Will of Mr. T. A. de S. Wijeyeratne, P5 of 1958, devising the
bequeathing this land and another land called Etheraliyagahawatte to his wife
Rose Charlotte Helen de Silva Wijeyeratne, contained the following condition:  
  
"My wife shall not sell, mortgage, encumber or otherwise alienate the said
lands or any of them hereby bequeathed to her but shall, take and enjoy the
rents, profits and income thereof during her lifetime and shall devise and
bequeath the first named land called Pelahela Estate unto our son Lindon and
the second-named land called Etheraliyagahawatte unto our son Dalton, if in
her opinion they had merited it by the kind of treatment they had accorded to
her."  
  
It was plaintiff's case that the Last Will left the mother with a discretion
whether or not to devise and bequeath this property to her son Lindon the 6th
defendant-appellant and accordingly it has not created a fideicommissum in
favour of the 6th defendant appellant. Mrs. Wijeyeratne died, on 6th December
1970 intestate and without making. any bequest of this property to the 6th
defendant-appellant. Upon her death, the plaintiff's claim that all her
children succeeded to' the property in equal shares - each being entitled to a
1/9th 'share. On this basis' the two plaintiffs

**337**

came into court claiming a 1/9th share each and conceded to the other brothers
and sisters similar shares. The 1st to 6th defendants took up a common and,
united stand supporting the 6th defendant-appellant and averred that the Last
Will created a fideicommissum in favour of the 6th defendant-appellant and
that, upon thei   r mother's death, the entirety of the property passed solely
to the 6th defendant-appellant and not to the other brothers and sisters. The
7th defendant did not participate in the proceedings.  
  
Originally, the testator by Deed No. 202 dated 15th November 1951 had gifted
this property to the 6th defendant-appellant who was at that time a minor,
reserving a life interest to himself and his wife Rose Charlotte Helen de
Silva Wijeyeratne. This gift was a revocable one, the donor reserving "the
full right and liberty to revoke, cancel and annul this deed of gift or
donation at any time without notice to the said donee and without assigning
any reasons." The gift was revoked by the donor, as he lawfully may, by
instrument No. 2282 dated 7th March 1957. Thereafter, on 1st June 1958, Mr. T.
A. de S Wijeyeratne executed the Last Will P5. Mr. Wijeyeratne died on 15th
December 1958. The material before us does not show that any untoward act on
the part of the 6th defendant-appellant had led to these developments. On the
other hand, Mr. Thiagalingam relied on these circumstances and stated that it
showed a clear intention and a consistent desire on the part of the testator
to single out the 6th defendant-appellant for favoured treatment.  
  
In the District Court, the contention of the 1st to 6th defendants was upheld
and the learned District Judge dismissed the plaintiff's action. The Court of
Appeal, however, has reversed that decision holding that the Last Will has not
created a fideicommissum in favour of the 6th defendant-appellant. In coming
to this conclusion, the Court of Appeal said that "the phrase 'if in her
opinion they had merited it' clearly controls the whole paragraph. The bequest
is made subject to her discretion. She is put under no obligation to bequeath
the land to the 6th respondent. It is in her absolute discretion, whether or
not to bequeath the land to him." The Court of Appeal also added that in view
of this discretion vested in her by the testator, "it must be presumed that he
intended to vest the dominium in her."  
  
The Court of Appeal relied on a statement by Voet contained in Book 36 Tit, 1
Section 29 (Commentary on the Pandects translated by Gane), and a comment on
this passage made by Steyn on The Law of Wills in South Africa (1st Edn.) page
237\. Voet says:

**338**

". . . it cannot indeed be said to be a fideicommissum, when it is left in the
discretion of him whom the testator thinks to put under obligation to say
whether he is willing to give, that is to say hand it over. But nevertheless
it is a proper fideicommissum when it is not put into the discretion of him of
whom the request was made to say whether he is willing to hand over at all,
but-after the need to hand over has been laid upon him, a discretion is
vouchsafed merely to allot the property and to choose the person to whom it
shall be handed over."  
  
As I understand the law, I do not think that it is necessary for the testator
himself to indicate the fideicommissaries. It is open to a testator to leave
to the fiduciary the task of deciding on who should be the fideicommissaries.
This is tantamount to the giving of a power of appointment. Thus in a
disposition "to A for life and on his death to such persons as he may
appoint." A is not the absolute owner because he "is not a fiduciary to whose
discretion it is left whether or not he will pass on the property." Van
Niekerk v. Van Niekerk's Estate, 1935 C.P.D. 359(5). Vide also Nadaraja -
Roman-Dutch Law of Fidei commissa, page 80.  
  
A power of appointment conferred on a fiduciary may be general or special. It
is special where the power can be exercised in favour of certain persons or a
class. A general power is one in which the fiduciary is given an unlimited
choice. Steyn appears inclined to .the view that where the power is general,
there could be no fideicommissum and the fiduciary's interest is enlarged and
he becomes the absolute owner of the property. This view has not been accepted
by the courts and finds no support in the old texts (vide Nadaraja, p. 78).  
  
The Last Will in the present case contains in explicit terms a clear
prohibition against alienation by the widow. This condition is reinforced by
the words that she "shall take and enjoy the rents, profits and income thereof
during her life-time." We also find here an indication of the person in whose
interest this prohibition was imposed. The 6th defendant-appellant is
expressly indicated by name as a fideicommissary and he would be entitled to
his rights upon the fulfillment of the condition set out in the Will. A
general power of appointment is often confused with words which are predatory
in 'nature where "the testator's wishes are expressed merely in the form of a
desire or a direction; without giving a right to someone to insist on such
desire or direction being carried out, then the court will regard such desire
or direction as nudum praeceptum and not enforce it." Jewish Colonial Trust,
Ltd. v, Estate Nathan; 1940 A.D. 163(6j. The latter would be a clear case
where

**339**

a discretion is given to a person "whether he is willing to give or restore"
mentioned by Voet.  
  
Incidentally, though the discretion given to the widow appears at first sight
to 'be unlimited, it is in fact not so. It has certain characteristics of a
special power of appointment. In the present case the widow is. enjoined to
transfer the property to the 6th defendant-appellant on the fulfillment of the
condition that the 6th defendant-appellant had merited it by the kind of
treatment he had accorded her.  
  
This discretion is, no doubt, cast in subjective terms and made a matter of
personal judgment of the widow. Nevertheless this does not constitute it an
absolute discretion. Here we have a discretion _ which has-to operate in the
context of a stipulated condition. As regards the decision, however subjective
it may be, it is legitimate to expect, having regard to the ordinary course of
affairs, that the widow would exercise her discretion not perversely but upon
a proper self direction. Since the discretion reposed in her has to be
exercised in the context of the stipulated condition, it is in that sense a
controlled discretion and not an absolute one. That a court may be unwilling
to interfere with a decision made by her is not to the point. There is
undoubtedly a freedom of choice - a certain latitude given to the widow - but
the freedom of choice here is only in respect of the subjective assessment of
the condition prescribed by the .testator and operates only within that
context. In any event it is clear that it was the testator's intention to
provide for a gift over to the 6th defendant-appellant upon the happening of a
condition.  
  
This becomes evident when we understand the full import of the condition laid
down in the Last Will. It contains two interlocking obligations which
conjointly go to serve the wishes and intentions of the testator. The widow is
on the one hand given a life interest in the property and enjoined to transfer
it to Lindon, provided he had looked after her in the manner expected of a
son, and the son for his part is given the right of getting this property
provided he were to look after his mother as is expected of a dutiful son. It
has been the testator's intention to make provision for the welfare of both
the widow and his son, the 6th defendant appellant. These. mutually supporting
clauses appear to constitute the core of this testamentary disposition.  
  
I therefore incline to the view that the wording in the Last Will is
sufficient to create a fideicommissum. If so, there are a number of legal
principles that could be availed of by the 6th

**340**

defendant-appellant to enable him to succeed in this action. The following
examples given by Voet at page 377 are of some relevance in this context :  
  
"Nay again the discretion of choosing was at times restricted by the founder
to the deserts of the persons to be chosen, if for instance he said 'I ask
you, my daughter, to some day allot the goods to your children, as each one
shall have deserved of you'. In such a case the jurist lays down in the
passage cited below to what extent the discretion of choice was free or was
not free to the daughter. He says, that is to say, that the fideicommissum was
left to all the children, though they had not equally earned it by merit. But
if the mother failed to make a choice it would be enough for them that they
had not done anything to displease her. Those however whom the mother had
chosen would be in the stronger position if they alone had earned it by merit.
And if she should have chosen no one, only those who had given cause for
displeasure would not be let in. This can also be gathered from the passage
next cited below."  
  
Mr. Thiagalingam relied on the judgment in Kiribanda v. Punchiappuhamy (53
N.L.R. 361)(3) which -illustrates some of these principles. This judgment and
the decisions discussed in this judgment show that where the other indications
in an instrument or deed point to the intention to create a fideicommissum,
any specific direction that the first institute shall by another act of
transfer, pass the property to the next set of institutes cannot have the
effect of defeating the donor's intention, in the event that such a transfer
is not effected. The transfer of ownership to the second set of institutes
takes place automatically at the time prescribed for vesting of the
fideicommissary interest.  
  
In the present case, since there exists a clear indication of the testator's
intention to create a fideicommissum, the 6th defendant-appellant has a right
to succeed to the property as a fideicommissary. This can only be defeated by
a positive power of disinheritance. This Will gives the widow no such power.
The wording in the Last Will to bequeath the property to the 6th defendant-
appellant is not a power to disinherit. In so far as its effect is concerned,
it can be considered as otiose and redundant in view of the fact that the 6th
defendant-appellant must be considered under the law to possess the right of
having the property passed to him automatically on the determination of the
mother's fiduciary interest.  
  
For the above reasons, I would allow the appeal and restore the judgment of
the District Court. The 6th defendant-appellant would be entitled to costs in
this Court.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_  

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/40.html_  

