##  Karunathilaka and Another v. Dayananda Dissanayake, Commissioner of
Elections and Others (Enforce Ment Judgment) (Case No.2) - SLR - 183, Vol 1 of
1999 [1999] LKSC 40; (1999) 1 Sri LR 183 (16 March 1999)

**183**

**KARUNATHILAKA AND ANOTHER  
v.  
DAYANANDA DISSANAYAKE,  
COMMISSIONER OF ELECTIONS AND OTHERS  
(Enforcement Judgment)  
(Case No. 2)**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
FERNANDO, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 509/98 (ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT)  
MARCH 09, 1999

_Fundamental Rights - Enforcement of judgment - Directions by court to fix a
new date of poll for Provincial Council elections - Failure by the
Commissioner of Elections to duly exercise his direction in complying with the
judgment - Power of court to enforce its judgment._

By the judgment of the court delivered on 27.01.99, the court declared that
the failure of the Commissioner of Elections to hold the poll on 4.8.88 for
five Provincial Council Elections because of a purported Emergency Regulation
was unlawful and directed him to fix a new date or dates within three months
from 27.1.99. The Commissioner fixed 1.4.99 as the new date of poll.
Representations were made complaining that 1.4.99 was unsuitable for
Buddhists, Christians and Muslims as it would interfere with religious
observances by them having regard to the fact that 31-3.99 was a Full Moon
Poya day, 2.4.99 was Good Friday and that the said date fell within the period
during which Muslims participate in the Haj Pilgrimage to Mecca Many of these
representations were received by the Commissioner of Elections. Consequently,
the Commissioner by a motion and affidavit applied to the court for permission
to vary the said date.

**Held:**

1\. Although the Commissioner of Elections had complied with the time limit
fixed in the judgment, his decision to fix 1.4.99 was, ab initio, not
reasonable, and thus not in due compliance with the judgment. The
Commissioner's decision was not a proper exercise of his discretion - for the
reason that he completely failed to consider relevant matters.

184

2\. Had the Commissioner of Elections properly complied with the directions
given in the judgment, then the court would be functus officio; but as he had
not, the court has the power, and perhaps also a duty to enforce compliance by
giving further directions. Since the issue relates to the court's power to
enforce its judgment, the submission that the proper remedy is by legislation
is unfounded.

_Per_ Fernando, J.

"The fact that the court was functus officio in regard to the substance of the
judgment does not make it functus officio in regard to its enforcement."

**Case referred to:**

1. _Jeevakaran v. Wicremanayake (1997) 1 SRI LR 351._

**APPLICATION** for further directions to comply with the judgment of the
court.

_K. C. Kamalasabayson, PC SG_ with _U. Egalahewa, SC_ and _M. Gopallawa, SC_
for the 1st respondent. __

_R. K. W. Goonesekera_ with _J. C. Weliamuna_ for the petitioners.  
  
For the parties noticed __ :

_K. N. Choksy, PC_ with _Daya Pelpola_ for the General Secretary, United
National Party. __

_Anil Obeysekera, PC_ with _Champani Padmasekera_ for the General Secretary,
People's Alliance. __

_H. Wijetunga_ with _O. R. Samaranayake, Herbert Kumarasinghe_ and _R. S.
Sirisena_ for the General Secretary, _Sinhalaye Mahasammata Bumiputra_ Party.
_  
  
Piyasena Dissanayake _with _Kanishka Vitharana_ for the General Secretary _,
Mahajana Eksath Peramuna.  
  
Sunil Watugala _for the General Secretary _, Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna_ __

_Kamal Nissanka_ for the General Secretary _, Liberal Party.  
  
Raja Samarakoon, Leader, _Independent Group, Kandy District.

_Cur. adv. vult_.  
  
**185**

March 16, 1999.  
**  
FERNANDO, J.**

The date of the poll for five Provincial Council elections was duly fixed (in
terms of the Provincial Council Elections Act, No. 2 of 1988) for 28.8.98. The
Commissioner of Elections did not hold the poll on that day only because of a
purported Emergency Regulation issued on 4.8.98, which was held to be unlawful
for the reasons stated in the judgment delivered in this case on 27.1.99.

As noted in that judgment, the Commissioner of Elections wrongfully failed to
exercise his undoubted power (under section 22 (6) of the Act) to fix a new
date. Even thereafter, despite the determination of this Court dated 30.11.98
(in SC SD 9-14/98), and despite the observations of this Court on 7.12.98
(when reserving judgment in the principal application No. 509/98), he again
failed and neglected to fix a new date.

Consequently, this Court was obliged to ensure that a reasonably early date
would in fact be fixed. It was not appropriate for the Court itself to fix a
date, because the date involved administrative arrangements properly within
the purview of the Commissioner of Elections. But as section 22 (6) stipulates
no time limits, a simple direction to the Commissioner of Elections to act
under that provision might not have ensured the fixing of a reasonably early
date. Further, the date previously fixed (under Rule 10 (1) for the issue of
postal ballot papers had been cancelled. There was no express provision to fix
a new date for that purpose, and accordingly a simple direction to fix a new
date of poll under section 22 (6) may not have enabled the Commissioner of
Elections to fix a new date for issue of postal ballot papers. Accordingly, it
was essential for the Court to give directions to ensure that the Commissioner
of Elections would fix a reasonably early date of poll, and to enable him to
fix a new date for the issue of postal ballot papers.

It was in those circumstances that this Court directed the Commissioner of
Elections to fix a new date or dates within three

186

months from 27.1.99 (ie on or before 27.4.99); and, so that all concerned
would have adequate notice thereof, directed him to notify that date within
two weeks of 27.1.99 (ie on or before 10.2.99).

On or about 8.2.99 (within the stipulated period) the Commissioner of
Elections fixed 1.4.99 as the new date of poll (also within the stipulated
period). There was no reason for anyone to think that the order of this Court
in any way circumscribed his discretion as to the fixing of that date, or
compelled him to fix 1.4.99 - because the only restriction was that the date
could not be after 27.4.99.

Late in the afternoon of 3.3.99 the Commissioner of Elections filed a motion
supported by his affidavit, requesting this Court "to permit him to vary the
said date acceptable to all sections of the public". In his extremely brief
affidavit he offered no explanation as to how and why he happened to fix
1.4.99 as the new date of poll; nor did he mention any of the matters which he
had taken into consideration. He produced copies of several letters, from
religious personalities and others, complaining that 1.4.99 was unsuitable:
for Buddhists, because the previous day (31.3.99) was Bak Full Moon Poya day,
and preparations for the poll would interfere with religious observances on
that day, particularly because many polling booths would be in the vicinity of
temples; for Christians, because the next day (2.4.99) was Good Friday, and
past experience of the imposition of curfews on account of post-election
violence made it likely that religious observances on that day would be
impeded by such a curfew; and for Muslims, because that day fell within the
period when many Muslims participate in the Haj pilgrimage to Mecca. Many of
those representations had been made to the Commissioner of Elections within a
few days of 8.2.99. He has not told us what replies, if any, he gave to those
who had written to him, nor why he delayed for nearly three weeks to move this
Court.

The Commissioner's application was taken up the very next morning. We asked
Mr. Kamalasabayson, PC, SG, whether this Court had jurisdiction to vary - as
requested by the Commissioner of Elections the directions given in its
judgment; and if this Court did have such jurisdiction, what the circumstances
were which justified the exercise

187

of that jurisdiction. We also expressed the view that after the Commissioner
of Elections had fixed the new date of poll, candidates contesting the
elections had probably acquired a right to express their views in regard to
any proposed change in that date. Mr. Kamalasabayson agreed that they should
have notice of the application made by the Commissioner of Elections, and we
accordingly directed that the Commissioner of Elections should give notice of
his application, by 6.3.99 at the latest, to all Secretaries of recognised
political parties and leaders of independent groups contesting the five
elections, indicating that it had been refixed for support on 9.3.99.

On the question of jurisdiction, Mr. Kamalasabayson stated that there was no
error, omission, inconsistency or ambiguity in the judgment dated 27.1.99, and
that the application was not made on the basis of any need for correction,
amendment or clarification. It follows that if in fixing 1.4.99 as the new
date the Commissioner of Elections had duly exercised his discretion,
complying with the directions given in the judgment, then we were functus
officio; but if he had not, then this Court would have a power, and perhaps
also a duty, to enforce compliance by giving further directions to enforce due
compliance, even if that meant amending the directions contained in our
original order to the extent necessary to ensure such compliance (as, for
instance, where the lapse of time rendered such amendment necessary).

There can be no doubt that the Commissioner of Elections complied with the
time limits fixed in our judgment. The only question then is whether there was
a proper exercise of his discretion.

Mr. Kamalasabayson submitted that it was only after receiving a large number
of representations that the Commissioner of Elections had realised that he
ought not to have selected 1.4.99, because of the indirect impact on religious
observances. He conceded that the Commissioner of Elections had failed to take
into account some relevant matters, and that therefore his decision to fix
1.4.99 was, ab initio, not reasonable, and thus not in due compliance with the
judgment.

188

In fixing the date of poll, under the relevant enactments or in compliance
with the directions of this Court, the Commissioner of Elections must not act
arbitrarily; he must act with a degree of openness, taking into account all
relevant matters. These would include the convenience of voters, because the
purpose of an election is to enable voters - and as many voters as possible -
to exercise their franchise. Article 104 refers to the powers, duties and
functions of the Commissioner of Elections. But that is not exhaustive of his
powers and duties. Article 93 of the Constitution requires that voting be
free, equal and secret, and it follows that the Commissioner of Elections has
such implied powers and duties as are necessary to ensure that voting is free,
equal and secret. There are other Constitutional provisions as to religious
freedom, which too he must consider. Thus in _Jeevakaran v. Wickremanayake_
,(1) it was held that while the freedom of religious worship and observance
(Article 14 (1) (e)) imposed on the State no obligation to grant public
holidays and other special facilities for religious worship and observance,
nevertheless it must not prevent or impede religious worship and observance. A
glance at the calendar would have shown that week commenced on Monday 29th
March, which was Haj Festival Day; which was followed on Wednesday the 31st by
Bak Full Moon Poya Day; and ended with Good Friday, on 2nd April. The past
experience of the Department of Elections would have revealed the position
both as to the take over of premises in proximity to temples in order to set
up polling stations, as well as to the likelihood of a curfew following
election violence. The time limits fixed by this Court were flexible enough to
permit him to have avoided that period.

It would seem that the Commissioner of Elections did not pay attention to
these aspects until the representations became voluminous.

Mr. Kamalasabayson's submissions indicate very clearly that the Commissioner
himself now realises that fixing 1.4.99 was not a reasonable and proper
exercise of his discretion, and that his decision was flawed. He stated that
if the Commissioner of Elections was granted the relief prayed for, he
intended to fix as early a date after 1.4.99 as was reasonably possible,
during the following week.

189

Mr. Goonasekera on behalf of the original petitioners submitted that the
Commissioner of Elections had acted bona fide and had the discretion under
section 22 (6) to fix a new date; and that his discretion could not be
fettered by anyone. He was not required to consider representations made,
whether before or after fixing a date.

Several submissions were made by counsel appearing on behalf of some of the
parties and groups noticed.

It was pointed out - correctly - that on 8.2.99 the Commissioner of Elections
had fixed a new date by issuing a "Notice under section 22 (6)". It was
contended that the only power of postponement which the Commissioner of
Elections had was under section 22 (6); that enabled him to change the date
fixed under section 22 (1) (c), but not a date fixed under section 22 (6); and
that accordingly the Commissioner of Elections could not now again fix a new
date under section 22 (6).

It was also submitted that section 22 (6) enabled a new date to be fixed if
the poll could not be taken on the original date because of "emergency or
unforeseen circumstances", and that there were no such circumstances here.

It was urged that to permit the Commissioner of Elections to alter the date
already fixed would amount to this Court not only giving him a power of
postponement which the Legislature had not given, but even violating the law.

Another submission was that the judgment delivered on 27.1.99 was a final
order, and that this Court was now functus officio.

Flowing from that submission, it was further contended that if the
Commissioner of Elections had made a mistake, the proper, and indeed the only,
remedy was by legislation by Parliament.

There were also two technical objections, that the Commissioner was only a
respondent to the original application, and that he had applied only by way of
a motion (and not by petition).

190

Finally, there was one complaint that the election campaign was already well
under way, and that a postponement would cause prejudice \- details of which
were not disclosed.

The relief which this Court is asked to grant involves not any variation of
the substance of the judgment dated 27.1.99, but rather its due
implementation. If the Commissioner of Elections failed, within two weeks, to
fix a new date, or if within that period he fixed as the new date a Full Moon
Poya day or a public holiday (which section 22 (1) (c) by necessary
implication prohibits), the question of enforcement of the judgment would have
arisen. The Court could not in such a situation have refrained from giving
relief on the ground that the period of two weeks had lapsed; it would be
obliged to do whatever was reasonably possible to ensure that there would be a
proper election; and accordingly, the Court would again have directed the
Commissioner of Elections to fix a date, notwithstanding the lapse of that
period of two weeks. The fact that the Court was functus officio in regard to
the substance of the judgment, did not make it functus officio in regard to
its enforcement.

The situation that this Court now faces is somewhat different. Although the
Commissioner of Elections has purported to comply with the judgment, yet on
his own admission that compliance was by means of a decision that was not a
proper exercise of his discretion \- for the reason that he completely failed
to consider relevant matters which he could and should have taken into account
at that time. That decision was therefore flawed on procedural grounds. It is
now said on his behalf that if he had taken those matters into consideration
he would have fixed some date other than 1.4.99. Whether such a decision is
right or wrong is a question which involves the merits. Our duty is to decide,
not whether that would be a correct exercise of the Commissioner's discretion,
but only whether that would be an unlawful, arbitrary, capricious, or
unreasonable exercise of discretion. We are of the view that it would not.
That being the case, the effect of allowing the flawed decision fixing 1.4.99
to stand would be to affirm an improper implementation of the judgment of this
Court.

191

The fact that the question of due compliance comes up on a motion, and that by
a respondent, does not affect our jurisdiction.

No question therefore arises of a past or future exercise by the Commissioner
of Elections of his power under section 22 (6). The fact that the Gazette
notification issued by him purported to be under section 22 (6) makes no
difference: the issue now is whether he should be allowed to comply properly
with the judgment of this Court. The fact that there are no "emergency or
unforeseen circumstances" is irrelevant to that issue. Compelling the
Commissioner of Elections to comply with that judgment does not in any way
amount to giving him a power of postponement which the Legislature had not
given. Since the issue relates to the Court's power to enforce its judgment,
the submission that the proper remedy is by legislation is unfounded.

As for the complaint that a postponement would cause prejudice, Mr.
Kamalasabayson has already told us that the Commissioner of Elections would
fix a date during the following week. While it is true that prejudice would
have been minimized if the Commissioner of Elections had acted sooner,
nevertheless there is no reason to think that any prejudice would be
significant.

It is for these reasons that at the conclusion of the hearing on 9.3.99, we
made order permitting the Commissioner of Elections (notwithstanding the
directions given in our judgment dated 27.1.99) to fix a new date of poll, not
later than 27.4.99, after such consultation as he thought appropriate, and
requiring him to notify that date within two days.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.** \- I agree.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Commissioner of Elections permitted to vary the date of poll._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/40.html_  

