##  Prematilake v. Withanachchi, Secretary, Judicial Service Commission and
Others - SLR - 221, Vol 3 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 40; (1998) 3 Sri LR 221 (16
October 1998)

**221**

**PREMATILAKE  
v.  
WITHANACHCHI,**

**SECRETARY,  
JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT

WADUGODAPITIYA, J.,

GUNAWARDANA, J. AND

GUNASEKERA, J.

S.C. (FR) APPLICATION NO. 515/97

OCTOBER 16, 1998

Fundamental Rights - Minutes on Pensions - Date of retirement - Last working
day for computing the pension - Error in determining the relevant date -
Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.

The petitioner who was a District Judge 'Super Grade' attained the compulsory
age of retirement, viz, 60 years on 01.01.1997. The Director of Pensions
relying on a practice whereby an officer is exempted from reporting for work
on his last day, decided to pay the petitioner's pension calculated on the
basis of the salary scale which was applicable on 31.12.1996.

**Held:**

The petitioner completed the age of 60 years on 01.01.1997, at the end of that
day; and her pension should be computed on the salary drawn by her as at the
date of her retirement/ viz, 01.01.1997 according to section 17 of the Minutes
on Pensions.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_T. Marapana P.C. with Nalin Laduwahetty and Jayanatha Fernando for the
petitioner._

_K. Sripavan D.S.G. for 1st to 5th respondents._

Cur. adv. vult.

222

October 16, 1998

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.**

The petitioner states in her petition that she was born on 1.1.1937 and that,
having joined the Judicial Service as a Magistrate in 1979, upon promotion,
she functioned as District Judge, Super Grade, upto and including 1.1.97. She
specifically states that she completed her 60th year on 1.1.97, and that her
last working day was the self-same 1.1.97, since she, in fact, worked on that
day.

She complains that the Director-General of Establishments (2nd respondent) in
respect of her pension has maintained that her date of retirement is 31.12.96
and not 1.1.97, and that, by letter P2A, the 2nd respondent has informed the
1st respondent, the Secretary to the Judicial Service Commission, that since
the last day on which the petitioner should have worked was 31.12.96, she is
not entitled to any payments in respect of her services on 1.1.97. The 1st
respondent has thereupon directed the 4th respondent, the Director of Pensions
to pay the petitioner's pension on the basis that her last working day was
31.12.96, thus depriving her of the benefits of the new increased salary
scales which came into force on 1.1.97 by Public Administration Circular No.
2/97 dated 15.1.97 (P4). Her complaint is that her pension, as calculated on
the old salary scales under the old Public Administration Circular No. 16/95,
reduced her commuted pension by Rs. 166,800/- and reduced her pension by Rs.
6,255/-every month.

Thus, in computing her pension, the question that arises for decision is,
whether the effective date of retirement, was 1.1.97 as the petitioner avers,
or whether it was 31.12.96 as maintained by the Director-General of
Establishments, (2nd respondent). Mr. Marapana for the petitioner submits that
the correct date for the purpose of computation of the petitioner's pension
would be 1.1.97. He submits (and this is conceded by Mr. Sripavan for the
respondents) that there is a practice whereby an officer is exempted from
reporting for work on his/her last day, which in this case was 1.1.97. He
submits however that this must not be held to interfere with the computation
of the pension, on the question as to what should be the actual date of
retirement. The Director-General of Establishments has stated that the date of
the petitioner's retirement is 31.12.96, and not 1.1.97. This, he says

223

is on the basis that 31.12.96 was the last day on which the petitioner was
required to report for work (vide P2A). This is clearly in error as, what is
required is not the last working day, but the day on which, (according to
section 17 of the Minutes on Pensions), the petitioner attained the compulsory
age of retirement, viz 60 years, which in this case 1.1.97.

It is also clear that the petitioner's time of birth is totally irrelevant to
the issue, inasmuch as, the time of birth is nowhere mentioned in the rules
relating to retirement or the grant of pension. It appears from the
submissions of Mr. Sripavan that the 2nd respondent has erroneously calculated
the petitioner's date of retirement basing himself on the additional factor of
the time of her birth. It seems to us that the rules, pertaining to this
matter deliberately avoid mentioning the time of birth for the obvious reason
that this could lead to confusion and would end in untenable conclusions.

Mr. Marapana refers us to the document marked P1 whereby the Attorney-General
has given his advice on this matter, and stated quite clearly, that the
petitioner completed the age of 60 years on 1.1.97, at the end of that day.
The Attorney-General further states that for the purpose of computing the
petitioner's pension, the relevant date should be 1.1.97.

Mr. Sripavan agrees with, and supports the opinion given by the Attorney-
General in P1. He however states that there is an explanation relating to the
practice hitherto followed which in fact moved the Director-General of
Establishments to disagree with the Attorney-General and maintain that the
relevant date ought to be 31.12.96 and not 1.1.97. The practice appears to be,
to consider the last day on which the officer should have worked as the date
of retirement; the unwritten concession being that an officer is exempted from
working on what in fact is, his/her last day. Accordingly the 2nd respondent
says (para 7 of his affidavit), that ... in accordance with the consistent
practice adopted right throughout, I decided that the petitioner's last
working day should be 31st December, 1996\. The 2nd respondent's argument
therefore is that 31.12.96 was the last day on which the petitioner should
have worked (vide P2A). Continuing this line of argument, the 2nd respondent
concludes that therefore, 31.12.96 was in fact the petitioner's last working
day. He confirms this by stating, at paragraph 6 of his affidavit: I state
that the petitioner's last working day was

**224**

the 31st day of December, 1996, and she is not entitled to any allowance given
to persons in service on 1st January, 1997 (the emphasis is mine). This to us,
is not acceptable. No such practice can override the Provisions of the Minutes
on Pensions which govern the question in issue, and which indeed must prevail.

For the reasons set out above, it seems clear that the Attorney-General's
advice is correct in law, and that, the view taken by the Director-General of
Establishments (2nd respondent) is untenable and must therefore be rejected.

We therefore declare:

i) that the petitioner's fundamental right guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution has been violated;

ii) that the petitioner's pension should be computed on the salary drawn by
her as at the date of her retirement, viz. 1.1.97; and

iii) that the petitioner is therefore entitled to have her pension computed
according to the revised salary scale which came into effect on 1.1.97.

We therefore direct the 4th respondent who is the Director of Pensions to pay
the petitioner's pension and commuted pension according to the revised salary
scale which came into effect on 1.1.97 in terms of Public Administration
Circular 2/97 dated 15.1.97 (P4).

The application is allowed but without costs.

**GUNAWARDANA, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

Relief granted.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/40.html_  

