##  Wijesuriya v. National Savings Bank - SLR - 181, Vol 1 of 1997 [1997] LKSC
40; (1997) 1 Sri LR 181 (31 January 1997)

181

WIJESURIYA

**v.** ****

**NATIONAL SAVINGS BANK** ****

** **

SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J.,

WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND

WIJETUNGA, J.

S.C. 142/95

AUGUST 23, 1996.



Constitution - Article 12(i) - Promotions - Interview - Cancelled - Fresh
interview with a changed scheme - Not notified.



The petitioner states that he is entitled to be appointed to one of the four
posts of Regional Security Officers on the results of the first interview at
which interview he was placed first, but that interview was cancelled and at a
second interview for the purpose of which, the selection criteria/ scheme for
awarding marks was changed without prior notice, the petitioner was left out.
The petitioner complains of discrimination and that he had been denied the
equal protection of the law.



**Held:** Per Wadugodapitiya, J.



"it has been held more than once, that it is imperative that candidates at
interviews must be afforded equal opportunity of presenting their cases when
facing Boards of Interview and that one of the ways of achieving this end is
to make known in advance the criteria to be adopted and the scheme of marking
especially when a significant change is made.



What was done in this case was against all canons of fair play, where not only
was a Competent Board found fault with and the interview cancelled for no
objectively, valid reasons, but a New Board was appointed to conduct an
interview basing itself upon a changed scheme of marking which new scheme was
not notified and was not within the knowledge of the petitioner."



The second interview was fatally flawed. The 7th respondent had misused his
discretion and acted arbitrarily and unreasonably in cancelling it. While it
is true that a Board of Interview generally lacks the authority to make
appointments, yet its findings cannot be arbitrarily set aside.



_Manohara R. de Silva_ for the petitioner.

_ _

_Surath Piyasena, S.S.C._ for 1st, 2nd, 6th and 7th respondents.  


_J. C. Boange_ for 3rd and 4th respondents  


5th respondents absent and unrepresented

  
6th respondent present in person.



_Cur adv vult._  


**182**



January 31, 1997.  


**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.**

** **

The petitioner was given leave to proceed with this application in respect of
an alleged violation under Article 12(1) of the Constitution. His complaint is
directed against the 1st, 2nd and 7th respondents, and is, briefly, that he
was entitled to be appointed to one of the four posts of Regional Security
Officer on the results of the first interview held on 24.2.95, at which
interview he was placed first, having obtained 77 marks; but that this
interview was cancelled, and, at a second interview held on 10.4.95 for the
purpose of which, the said respondents had changed the selection criteria
and/or the scheme for awarding marks without prior notice to the petitioner,
the petitioner was left out and the 3rd respondent was appointed instead,
together with the 4th, 5th and 6th respondents.



The petitioner states that he first joined the 1st respondent bank together
with the 6th respondent on 1.8.80 in the capacity of Security Administrative
Officer (P1') when the Security Division was first established in the 1st
respondent Bank. The 3rd, 4th and 5th respondents who are also Security
Officers, also joined at that time but are junior in service to the petitioner
and the 6th respondent. He goes on to state that in January 1995, applications
were called for, for four posts of Regional Security Officer (P2) in the
Bank's service. Seventeen Security Officers of the 1st respondent bank
including the petitioner and 3rd to 6th respondents applied. By letter dated
16.2.95 (P3), the petitioner was summoned by the 2nd respondent for an
interview on 24.2.95. Similar letters were sent to others. The Board of
Interview consisted of 2nd respondent (Chairman), S. H. Piyasiri, Assistant
General Manager (Inspection), and R. C. Gunaratna, Security Manager, who was
the head of the Security Division of the 1st respondent bank.



The petitioner states, .that according to information he received, he was
placed first with 76 marks, the 5th respondent, second with 62 marks, and the
4th and 6th respondents, third with 54 marks each. The 3rd respondent was not
among the first four.



Replying to this particular averment, the respondent states in his affidavit,
that petitioner obtained 77marks, whilst the 5th respondent obtained 67 marks,
and the 4th and 6th respondents obtained 63

**183**



marks each. The 7th respondent admits that the 3rd respondent was not among
the first four.



The petitioner goes on to state that although the marks were generally known,
the results were not released officially, but what in fact happened was that
by letter dated 31.3.95 (P4), all the applicants were called for a "further
interview" fixed for 10.4.95. This letter P4, is also signed by 2nd
respondent. A new Board of Interview was appointed for this 2nd interview and
consisted of P. A. S. Prathiraja, Senior Assistant Secretary, Minister of
Finance (Chairman), R. Navaratnarajah Deputy General Manager (Internal Audit),
and Quintus Perera, Assistant General Manager (Inspection). This Board had
been appointed by the 7th respondent. The petitioner states that he was
surprised that the Head of the Security Division was not on the Board.



The petitioner complains that whereas at the 1st interview he was questioned
for 15 to 20 minutes, especially on his duties and on matters pertaining to
security management, problems and solutions regarding security at the Bank, at
the 2nd interview held on 10.4.95, he was questioned only for about 3 to 4
minutes on what his present duties were. He states that when he started
answering, he was interrupted by Mr. Navaratnarajah and not allowed to answer
further. No other questions were asked regarding his area of work but he was
asked whether he had played Cricket. The 7th respondent in his affidavit
replies as follows:- "I deny that the petitioner was interviewed for 3 minutes
(circa). Answering further, I state that the petitioner was interviewed for
more than 15 minutes in the same that was devoted for other candidates." Since
the 7th respondent was not on the Board of Interview, this is pure hearsay,
and not acceptable evidence. There is no affidavit from any member of the
Board of Interview.



The petitioner states that thereafter, on 19.4.95, on 7th respondent's
instructions, the 2nd respondent informed the Security Manager that the 3rd to
6th respondents had been appointed to the 4 posts of Regional Security Officer
(P5). He says that he got to know that the 1st interview had been cancelled on
the directions of the 7th respondent. He feels that the facts that he was a
member of the Jathika Sevaka Sangamaya and organizer of the said Trade Union
in the Security Division of the 1st respondent bank, which Trade Union was
affiliated to the United National Party, weighed against him. On

**184**



the other hand, he says that the 3rd to 6th respondents are members of the
Ceylon Bank Employee's Union which is affiliated to the political parties
which constitute the present Government. The petitioner's Union took up the
matter and wrote to the 7th respondent about it and the 7th respondent replied
by P6 that the 2nd interview was held not for the purpose of ousting members
of the JSS Trade Union but because he felt that the 1st interview had not been
held in a fair and impartial manner. He gave no reasons.



The petitioner complains that after the 2nd interview, the 4th, 5th and 6th
respondents who were also successful at the 1st interview, were selected once
again. He states that the only purpose for holding the 2nd interview was to
exclude him from selection, and to replace him with the 3rd respondent.



The petitioner states that he has been discriminated against and denied the
equal protection of the law.



The 7th respondent in his affidavit states by way of answer, that on a
scrutiny of the report on the 1st interview, he formed the opinion that that
interview had not been conducted in a just and impartial manner. He gives only
two reasons: firstly, that the Interview Board had awarded the petitioner 20
out of 25 marks for performance as a security officer although there were
three adverse reports against him for the year 1992, and, secondly that the
Board had awarded the petitioner 10 out of 10 marks for efficiency shown in
discharging his duties and a commendation therefore in June 1994, whilst for
an identical commendation, candidate N. D. N. Q. Perera had been awarded only
5 out of 10 marks.



Although the Board of Interview which conducted the first interview had
awarded 77 marks to the petitioner; 67 marks to the 5th respondent and 63
marks each to the 4th and 6th respondents, and had recommended their promotion
as Regional Security Officers with effect from 1.3.95 (7R1), the7th respondent
states that, "I get the impression that the Board has been very subjective in
marking Mr. Wijesuriya" (i.e. the petitioner), and called for the observations
of the Chairman of the Board (7R1).



The Chairman of the board (2nd respondent) replied by 7R2. The relevant
portions of his reply are quoted as follows:

**185**



INTERNAL LETTER

NATIONAL SAVINGS BANK



From: Acting Deputy General  Thro: General Manager

Manager (P & A)  To : Chairman



# Interview for the Post of Regional Security Officer

** **

I refer to the Chairman's minute dated 03.03.1995 on the above.



The Chairman has queried as to how interview panel gave 20 marks out of 25
marks to Mr. Wijesuriya for performance when he is having 3 advesre reports
against him.



Mr. Wijesuriya was given 20 marks out of 25 marks for performance as he is
doing very satisfactory work as a Security Officer, having being attached to
Head Office and he also acts for the Security Manager when he is on leave or
in the absence of the Security Manager.



Even responsible-wise, (re) whatever job is entrusted to him, he has done very
satisfactory work during the past years and the Security Manager informed us
that during the curfew days he was continuously' in office when some others
were not willing to take the responsibility, and he worked during night and
day.



Considering these, he was given 20 marks out of 25 marks.



As regards the adverse reports, he has been severely warned on 11.08.1992.
This is in relation to an incident that took place on 25.07.1992 when an
outsider has come to the main gate in his car and there had been some cross-
talk between the outsider and Security Guard \- Mr. W. L. Kottearachchi when
the Security Guard wanted to check his car.



Mr. Wijesuriya had been severely warned for trying to cover up the incident
that took place between the outsider and the Security Guard - Mr.
Kottearachchi.



Severe warning on 30.07.92 was on account of delaying a preliminary
investigation report.

**186**



The suspension of increment by three months was also on this account. This
increment has been subsequently paid.



For these adverse reports we have deducted 5 marks from the total marks.



He has been commended by the General Manager when two robbers tried to steal
parts from a motor cycle which was parked just in front of the Bank. Mr.
Wijesuriya had single handedly caught these 2 robbers and had taken them to
the Police Station and a case had been filed against these two robbers and the
case is pending.



In the case of Mr. N. D. N. Q. Perera, he has been commended by the Security
Manager, when he found one of the workers working for a contractor who has
undertaken some work in the premises of the Bank and when leaving the Bank
after work and when Mr. Neville Perera did a routine check he had found that
this workman trying to take away a bundle of wire about 100 metres in length
out of the premises of the Bank.



Therefore the commendation given to Mr. Wijesuriya had been given in our
opinion was for a more bravery act than for what Mr. Neville Perera had been
commended.



Therefore Mr. Neville Perera was given only 5 marks out of the 10 marks ...



I seek your approval ... to promote the four security officers as Regional
Security Officers accordingly.



Sgd.

Acting Deputy General Manager  
(Personnel and Administration)



9th March 1995.



However the 7th respondent made the following order thereon, dated 14/3/95:



"G. M.



I find it difficult to accept the explanation offered.

**187**



Therefore, I am reluctantly compelled to reject the recommendation of the
interview Board.



I am taking action to appoint a fresh Interview Board with 'a Senior Official
from the Ministry of Finance as Chairman."



The 7th respondent gave no reasons for rejecting the 2nd respondent's
explanation.



It must be noted that, even if the 7th respondent's criticism was completely
justified, yet the consequence was that, in regard to the petitioner., (a) the
Board should have deducted 10 marks (instead of 5) for "adverse reports", and
(b) the Board should have given him only 5 marks (instead of 10) for
"commendations". If so, the petitioner would have had a total of 67 marks
(instead of 77) and would still have been placed first (jointly) with the 5th
respondent.



Regarding the question of adverse reports and punishments, the petitioner
stated that the 3rd respondent had been given a warning on 27.12.94, for not
being present at his duty point, and also for making false entries, and that
he (3rd respondent) had also been found guilty for the offense of absenting
himself from work without informing his office, for which offence he was
placed on no-pay leave (p7. p7B, p7C).



With regard to the 4th respondent, the petitioner states that the 4th
respondent's increments had been deferred for 6 months (P8A), and that the 4th
respondent had also had a warning issued against him for failure to perform
his duties and for the negligent manner in handling the tasks allocated to him
(P8B).



With regard to the 5th respondent, the petitioner states that the 5th
respondent had been warned by letter dated 5.2.81 (P9B) for not acting with
responsibility and causing damage to motor bicycle 82 Sri 9069. The 5th
respondent had also been severely reprimanded on 7.7.81 on being found guilty
under Section 7(f) of the National Savings Bank Disciplinary Rules (P9). He
(5th respondent) had also been warned for neglect of duty on 29.8.81 under
Section 6(a) of the National Savings Bank Disciplinary Rules for failure to
supervise the mounting and dismounting of guards at 23.59 hours. The
petitioner makes no mention of any adverse reports or punishments against the
6th respondent.

**188**



The petitioner further states that he had authority to approve leave
applications submitted by Security Officers, Assistant Security Officers and
Security Guards; that he exercised the function of recommending the annual
increments of Security Guards attached to the Head Office and that he was
vested with the duty of preparing rosters in respect of the other security
officers attached to the Head office. The petitioner adds that the 3rd to the
6th respondents were vested with no such duties and had no experience in
performing such functions. He states that taking all these factors into
consideration, he was the most suitable candidate to be appointed to the post
of Regional Security Officer.



The other matter the petitioner complains of is that for the purpose of the
2nd interview the 1st, 2nd and 7th respondents had changed the selection
criteria and/or the scheme for awarding marks without prior notice to him.



The petitioner states that it was generally known in the 1st respondent Bank,
that the basis for the giving of marks at the interview would be as follows:



Years of service in the Bank                   \-               25 marks

Duties performed/work experience -                  25 marks

Work performance \-         10      marks

Educational Qualifications -         10       marks

Performance at the Interview -         15       marks

Personality -                 15       marks

                                                                             100  marks

Adverse remarks -     less       10       marks



In reply, the 7th respondent sets out, (in para. 7 of his affidavit), the
original scheme of marking used for the first interview as follows:



Service -           25   marks

Performance as a Security Officer - 25 marks

Personality -           15   marks

Higher Educational Qualifications - 10 marks

Commendations -  10   marks

Adverse Reports \- 10 marks (minus)

Interview                                                -           15
marks

                                                                       100   marks



**189**



This same scheme is set out in document 7R1 which is the report of the panel
which held the 1st Interview which was chaired by the 2nd respondent.



The scheme for awarding marks as set out by the petitioner is almost identical
with that set out by the 7th respondent, except for one category, viz: where
the petitioner mentions a possible maximum of 10 marks for "work performance";
whereas the 7th respondent mentions a possible maximum of 10 marks for
"commendations."



However, what is important is that, as regards the first interview, the
petitioner was certainly aware of the scheme and the basis of awarding marks.



This notwithstanding, when it came to the 2nd interview, the 7th respondent
states as follows in paragraph 10 of his affidavit:



"Answering further, I state that the 2nd interview was conducted on a pre-
determined criteria of a marking scheme. The basis on which marks were awarded
were as follows:



Service  -  20 marks

Educational Qualifications   \- 10 marks

Sports  \- 10 marks

Special Investigations carried out \- 10 marks

Annual grading for the past 3 years -  10 marks

Commendations \- 10 marks

Interview including-personality   -  30 marks

Adverse reports \- 10 marks (minus)



This scheme is set out in detail in the document 7R6 produced by the 7th
respondent. The 7th respondent does not deny the petitioner's averment that
this scheme was never published, and that he did not have any notice of it.



Thus, on his own showing, the 7th respondent has himself demonstrated the
significant differences between the scheme adopted for the 1st interview
(which the petitioner was aware of) and the new scheme adopted for the 2nd
interview (which the petitioner was unaware of).

**190**



On a comparison of the two schemes, it appears that several new criteria had
been introduced into the new scheme for the 2nd interview, viz:



(i) Sports,  


(ii) Special Investigations carried out, and

  
(iii) Annual grading for the past 3 years.



The petitioner states that he had no prior notice or knowledge of these new
criteria, and in this context, with reference to the second interview, states
in paragraph 17 of his affidavit:



"I was not questioned on matters pertaining to security management or problems
and solutions pertaining to the security of the Bank. I was asked many
irrelevant questions such as whether I have played Cricket etc.,"



Judging by the categories in the scheme of marking as he knew and understood
it, these questions on Cricket would indeed have seemed irrelevant to the
petitioner, for he was never told that the criterion of "Sports" was relevant.



How this affected the petitioner is shown when the 7th respondent further
stated in paragraph 10 of his affidavit: "Answering further, I state that the
petitioner had only the minimum educational qualification at the G.C.E. (Ord.
Level) Examination **and had no sports qualifications** " (Emphasis added).



In answer to this averment by the 7th respondent, the petitioner states in
paragraph 3(h) of his counter-affidavit, that it was quite incorrect for the
7th respondent to state that he had "no sports qualifications", because his
certificates marked P13A and P13B had been produced when he first joined the
1st respondent Bank and were filed in his personal file. P13A is the school
leaving certificate from the Principal of his school, Isipatana Maha
Vidyalaya, which inter alia, sets out his sports activities as follows:



Athletics - Captain, College Athletics Team, 1972

                               Captain Milton House Athletics Team, 1970

                               Participated from 1966 to 1972 with colours in 1970 

                               Adjudged under 16 champion, Colombo South Meet in 1970             



**191**



Hockey -     First X1,1972

Basketball        -     1972

Rugby Football -     Second XV, 1971

Cricket   -     Under 16, 1968

Soccer   -     Member, Milton House Soccer Team, 1969

Swimming        \- Member, Swimming Association.



Document P13B is a certificate from the Senior Cadet Master of his school,
which, besides his cadeting activities, where he started as a Junior Cadet in
1969 and ended up as Warrant Officer 11 (Regimental Quarter-Master Sergeant)
in the Senior Cadet Corps, sets out the fact that the Senior Cadet Platoon
with the petitioner as its Sergeant, had won first place in the "Five Star
Athletics Championship" in 1972\. This certificate also states that the
petitioner was the school's Athletics Captain, besides being a member of the
Hockey and Basketball Teams.



The petitioner states that this remark of the 7th respondent that he had "no
sports qualifications" only shows that the Interview Board for the second
interview had not even perused his personal file.



The petitioner further states that if he knew that 10 marks were to be awarded
for "sports", he would have submitted his other certificates in regard to
Athletics, which he now produces with his counter-affidavit marked P13(c) (i)
and (ii), P13D and P13E(1) and (ii). The petitioner says that he would also
have submitted a certificate from the 3rd Batallion of the Sri Lanka Cadet
Corps to the effect that he was placed first in the Marathon and also first in
Firing. He has produced this certificate with his counter-affidavit, marked
P14.



Further, the petitioner states that although the 2nd interview Board had
deducted 10 marks for "Adverse reports" from the petitioner (i.e. the
maximum), only 7 marks had been deducted from the 3rd respondent whose Adverse
Reports were of a more serious nature. The petitioner adds that despite the
warnings he received, he was paid bonus for the year 1992 (P17).



Another complaint the petitioner makes is that whereas the 2nd Interview Board
had given him only 3 marks out of a possible 10 for his two commendations
(P10A and P10B), the 3rd respondent was also given 3 marks for his single
commendation.

**192**



The petitioner further complains that the fact that during times when a curfew
was imposed he reported for work and attended to his duties (7R2) even going
to the extent of procuring the services of a cook from Panadura and providing
meals for the other security personnel, seems to have been ignored in the
process of awarding marks, whereas, on the contrary, the 3rd respondent who
was infact appointed, did not co-operate with the Management and did not even
report for duty during the period the curfew was imposed, for which he was
punished with a warning together with a day's salary cut and the non-payment
of his bonus.



The petitioner pleads that his performance as a Security Officer was
excellent; that he was the most senior Security Officer in the 1st respondent
Bank, and that he was in fact performing additional duties for which he was
paid an additional Rs. 100/- per month (P11). The petitioner even states that
when the Head of his Division, R. G. Gunaratne who was the Security Manager
was on leave, he (the petitioner) was assigned the task of performing the said
Security Manager's duties (P12(a) and (b)).



Thus we see a curious situation:- On 24.2.95 one interview was held for four
posts of Regional Security Officer bases on a known scheme of marking, and
conducted by a Board consisting of Acting Deputy General Manager (Personnel
and Administration) as Chairman, the Assistant General Manager (Inspection)
and the Security Manager; at which marks were awarded as follows, and
recommendations made accordingly:



The petitioner - 77 marks

5th respondent - 67 marks

4th respondent - 63 marks

6th respondent - 63 marks



This recommendation was not given effect to because the Chairman of the Bank
felt that the interview had not been held in a fair and impartial manner.



Thereafter on 10.4.95 a 2nd interview was held for the selfsame four posts,
but now based on a scheme of marking containing three new categories of which
the petitioner says he had no prior notice. This interview was conducted by an
entirely different Board

**193**



consisting of a Senior Assistant Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, the
Deputy General Manager (internal Audit) and a different Assistant General
Manager (inspection), at which interview marks were awarded as follows, and
recommendations made accordingly:



4th respondent - 49 marks

6th respondent - 48 marks

3rd respondent - 46 marks

5th respondent - 43 marks



The 7th respondent says that at this 2nd interview the petitioner was placed
8th in order of merit with a total of only 33 marks.



This recommendation of the 2nd Interview Board was not faulted in any way by
the 7th respondent, who directed that the 3rd to 6th respondents who were
selected by that Board be appointed with effect from 1.5.95.



The topsy-turvy nature of the second interview could be highlighted thus. The
4th and 6th respondents who were originally placed third (jointly), came first
and second; the 3rd respondent who was originally not placed at all, came
third; the 5th respondent who was originally placed second, came fourth; and
the petitioner who was originally placed first, came eighth: a drastic
inversion of the original result. What is more, while the 4th and 6th
respondents scored about 24% less at the second interview, the 5th respondent
scored 36% less. The petitioner, however, scored 57% less. Whilst differences
in assessment by two Boards are reasonably possible, in this instance, the
extent of the differences suggests a grave flaw.



It is noteworthy that although the 7th respondent found fault with the
original Board of Interview for not conducting the first interview in a fair
and impartial manner, no action whatsoever seems to have been taken against
any of the Members of that Board for their alleged transgression.



In any event, the petitioner states that the only result produced by the 2nd
interview was that he (the petitioner) was replaced by the 3rd respondent. The
other three candidates who were selected at the first interview were selected
once again at the second interview.

**194**



I have taken pains to enumerate the facts in some detail and also to analyse
them, placing them in their proper context, so that the situation becomes
self-evident. As stated earlier, the petitioner complains of a violation of
his fundamental right to equality and discriminatory application of the law,
and on a consideration of the totality of the material placed before us, I
cannot help but see that the picture that emerges is one where the petitioner
has been singled out for discriminatory and unequal treatment.



The pivotal factor is the unwarranted cancellation of the first interview at
which the petitioner was placed first in order of merit and recommended for
appointment by the Board of Interview which consisted of high ranking officers
of the 1st respondent Bank who were knowledgeable in the area of activity in
respect of which the appointments were to be made and had all the necessary
material before them to enable proper assessment to be made.



The 7th respondent however, overrules the recommendation made by the 1st
Interview Board on the hazy subjective ground that he felt that interview was
not conducted in a fair and impartial manner, and cancels it.



The 7th respondent thereafter appoints a fresh Board of Interview consisting
of at least two members (out of three) who are quite unfamiliar with the area
of work in question. One of them is a total outsider from the Ministry of
Finance. But, this aspect, the important fact here, which adversely affected
the petitioner, was that the scheme of marking which was to be applied by the
second Board of Interview was different to the scheme earlier adopted by the
first Board. Most significantly, although the applicants had notice of and
knew the contents of the original scheme of marking, the new scheme of marking
adopted by the second Board was not so notified, and the petitioner had no
knowledge or intimation of the categories contained therin. It appears that
the first time this new scheme came to be known was when the 7th respondent.
mentioned its contents in his affidavit in which affidavit the 7th respondent
highlighted the fact that the petitioner "had no sports qualifications". It
transpired that "sports" was a new criterion which, together with two other
criteria, had been added to the new scheme for the awarding of marks, and that
this fact was not made knows to the

**195**



petitioner. This provoked the petitioner to produce all the material relating
to his achievements in the field of sports in his counter-affidavit, and to
state that, had he known of it before hand, he would have produced all the
material before the 2nd Board of Interview. He says that by the non-disclosure
of the new scheme of marking he was deprived unjustly of the opportunity of
presenting his qualifications before the second Board, which, of course,
ensured to his detriment. The petitioner goes further and says that even the
material regarding his sports activities contained in his school leaving
certificate given by the Principal of his school and a second certificate
given by his Cadet Master, both of which were available in his personal file
were either seen and ignored or not looked at all.



**It has been held more than once, that it is imperative that candidates at
interviews must be afforded equal opportunity of presenting their cases when
facing Boards of Interview and that one of the ways of achieving this end, is
to make known in advance the criteria to be adopted and the schemes of
marking, especially when a significant change is made.**



What was done in this case was against all canons of airplay, where, not only
was a competent Board found fault with and the interview cancelled for no
objectively valid reasons, but a new Board was appointed to conduct an
interview basing itself upon a changed scheme of marking; which new scheme was
not notified and was not within the knowledge of the petitioner.



Upon the evidence in this case, the entire responsibility for this situation
especially on his own admission in his affidavit, lies on the 7th respondent,
and I have no hesitation in holding that the 7th respondent has been
responsible for the violation of the petitioner's fundamental right enshrined
in Article 12(1) of the Constitution, inasmuch as he has been singled out of
the treatment set out above.



The 3rd and 4th respondents have also filed affidavits which I have
considered; but, they do not alter the situation or mitigate the gravity of
the violation.



I would summarise my findings as follows: The first interview was duly held,
expect for two defects alleged by the 7th respondent; those allegations were
fully and satisfactorily explained by the 2nd respondent, and so, there was no
valid reason to cancel the results of

**196**



that interview. Second, even if it were assumed that there were these defects,
they were of no significance in the circumstances of this case, because they
would have resulted in reducing the petitioner's aggregate by not more than 10
marks, and he would still have been the first. Third, if the 7th respondent's
real concern was that that interview had not been conducted "in a just and
impartial manner", there was no justification for an unpublished alteration of
the criteria for the second interview, and that alteration suggests an
improper motive. Fourth, apart from the serious defect in introducing new
criteria, those criteria were not fairly and properly applied at the second
interview: not only was the petitioner denied the opportunity of producing
information regarding the criteria of "Sports" \- because he was not told of
its relevance - but even the information available in the petitioner's
personal file was ignored. Similarly, the criteria in regard to
"commendations" and "adverse reports" were not uniformly applied as between
the petitioner and the 3rd respondent, to the advantage of the latter.



Thus, the second interview was fatally flawed, and must be quashed. The first
interview was duly held, and the 7th respondent misused his discretion and
acted arbitrarily and unreasonably in cancelling it; that order cannot stand.



While it is true that a Board of Interview generally lacks the authority to
make appointments, yet its findings cannot be arbitrarily set aside.
Consequently, the assessment and recommendation of the first Board of
Interview must stand, and the 1st and 7th respondents must give effect to it.
I make order accordingly, and also declare the second interview to be invalid
and of no effect. The appointments of the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th respondents
made by the 7th respondent in consequence of such second interview are also
invalid and are hereby cancelled.



I make order that the petitioner be compensated in a sum of Rs. 10,000/- and
also be paid his costs in a sum of Rs. 2,500/- by the 1st respondent.



**FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree.



**WIJETUNGA J.** \- I agree.



_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/40.html_  

