##  Up Country Distributors (Pvt) Ltd. v. Subasinghe - SLR - 330, Vol 2 of
1996 [1996] LKSC 40; (1996) 2 Sri LR 330 (30 September 1996)

**330**

**UP COUNTRY DISTRIBUTORS (PVT) LTD.,  
v.  
SUBASINGHE**

SUPREME COURT.  
G.P.S. DE SILVA, C.J.,  
RAMANATHAN, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA. J.  
S. C. APPEAL NO. 111/95.  
S.C. APPEAL L.A. NO.296/95.  
H.C. LT APPEAL KANDY NO. 75/94.  
L.T. NO. 10/246/91.  
20TH AUGUST, 1996.

_Termination of services of workman ‑Compensation in lieu of
reinstatement­-Industrial Disputes Act‑Section 33(5) of the Act‑Assessment of
compensation ­Discretion of the Labour Tribunal._

The Respondent workman applied to the Labour Tribunal for relief in respect of
the termination of his services by the Appellant company and prayed for
reinstatement with back wages or compensation in lieu of reinstatement. The
workman was 42 years of age and was in receipt of benefits amounting to
Rs.5,000/‑, at the time of termination. He had 15 years of service. The
Tribunal decided that the termination was unjust and awarded Rs.300,000/‑
being 5 years' wages, as compensation having regard, in particular to the
workman's period of unemployment, his age at termination and the period of his
service.

**Held:**

The award made by the tribunal is just and equitable. The tribunal has a
discretion in determining the quantum of compensation, on the basis of the
facts and circumstances of each case. That discretion should not be unduly
fettered.

**_Per_ Wijetunga, J.**

"The legislature has in its wisdom left the matter in the hands of the
tribunal, presumably with the confidence that the discretion would be duly
exercised. To my mind some degree of flexibility in that regard is both
desirable and necessary if a tribunal is to make a just and equitable order".

**Cases referred to:**

1. _Silva v._ _Kuruppu_ __ S.C. __ 182/69 S.C. Minutes 14th October 1971.

**331**

2. _The_ _Ceylon_ _Transport Board v. Wijeratne_ (1975) 77 NLR 481, 496.

3\. _Nanayakkara v. Hettiarachchi,_ (1971) 74 NLR 185.

4. _The Caledonian (_ _Ceylon_ _) Tea & Rubber Ltd., v. Hillman, _(1977) 79(1) NLR 421.

5\. _The Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd., v. Jayasinghe_ (1982) 2 Sri L.
R. 595.

6\. _Jayasuriya v. Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation,_ (1995) 2 SLR 379

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court.

_R. K. S. Sureschandra _for Appellant.

_Nimal Malalasekara_ for __ Respondent.

_Cur .adv. vult._

30th September, 1996.

**WIJETUNGA, J.**

This is an appeal from the judgment of the Provincial High Court of Kandy
dismissing the appeal of the  Respondent ‑Appellant‑Appellant ('Appellant').

The Applicant‑Respondent‑Respondent ('Respondent') made an application to the
Labour Tribunal, Hatton alleging that his services had been wrongfully
terminated by the Appellant Company and prayed that he be reinstated with back
wages or be paid a sum of Rs.500,000/- as compensation in lieu of
reinstatement.

The Appellant filed answer stating that the Respondent was dismissed on
disciplinary grounds after due inquiry, as he had been found guilty of the
acts of misconduct alleged against him, which caused the Appellant to lose
confidence in him. It was averred that the termination was _bona fide_ and for
good and valid reasons, and was justified. The Respondent filed a replication
denying the position taken up by the Appellant in the answer.

The learned President of the Labour Tribunal held that the termination was
unjust and awarded the workman compensation in a sum of Rs.300,000/‑.

**332** __

The Company appealed against the said order to the Provincial High Court of
Kandy That Court, by its judgment dated 22.8.95, dismissed the appeal. Being
aggrieved by the said judgment of the High Court, the Appellant made an
application to this Court for special leave to appeal. Special leave was
granted only in respect of the matter set out in paragraph 9(f) of the
petition which reads as follows:‑

"The learned High Court Judge failed to consider the fact that the learned
President of the Labour Tribunal had failed to give the basis of the award of
compensation in favour of the Respondent".

It is relevant to state that the learned President in his order did take into
account the period of unemployment of the Respondent resulting from the
termination aforesaid and computed the compensation on the basis that the
Respondent's monthly salary was Rs.5,000/‑ and granted him five years' salary
as compensation.

The High Court subjected the basis of the learned President's computation of
compensation to careful scrutiny. It made pointed reference to the delay of
about 21 months between the conclusion of the hearing and the delivery of the
order (which the learned President himself had mentioned regretfully in his
order as being due to his ill-health) and observed that the order does not
indicate whether the President took into account only the period of about one
year between the commencement of proceedings and the conclusion of evidence,
for the purpose of such computation, or whether the 21 months that had elapsed
before the order was delivered was also taken into account. The High Court
said that it had no doubt that the learned President had given due
consideration to the authorities cited by counsel. It further adverted to the
relevance, in considering the question of quantum of compenstion, of the fact
that the Respondent was only 42 years of age and that he had admittedly served
the Appellant Company from 1975 for a period of about 15 years at the stage of
termination. These were the factors that led the High Court to the view that
the award of Rs.300,000/‑ was just and equitable and not excessive, in the
circumstances.

In _Silva v._ _Kuruppu_ (1) __ Samarawickrema, J. observed that the
"assessment of compensation is eminently a matter within the province of the
President of the Labour Tribunal."

**333**

As Vythialingam, J. stated in _The Ceylon Transport Board v. Wijeratne_ (2) __
"although our Industrial Disputes Act provides for the payment of compensation
in lieu of reinstatement, it does not lay down the basis on which it is to be
computed. In this connection it is important to remember that where this is so
much a matter for the exercise of the Tribunal's discretion and depends on the
peculiar facts and circumstances of each individual case, it is undesirable to
confine that discretion within too narrow and rigid limits."

However, a number of decisions of the Supreme Court have laid down what should
be taken into consideration in determining the quantum of compensation payable
under section 33(5) of the Industrial Disputes Act.

In _Nanayakkara v. Hettiarachchi_ (3) __ Wijayatilake, J. considered the
workman's age, the number of years of service, the benefits received from the
employer and the capital of the business in determining the quantum of
compensation.

In _Wijeratne's_ case _(supra)_ where the learned tribunal had awarded the
workman the full salary for the balance workspan till he reached the age of
superannuation as compensation, Vythialingam, J. having made a comprehensive
analysis of the case law relevant to this question, disagreed with that mode
of computation and stated at page 498 that "account should be taken of such
circumstances as the nature of the employer's business and his capacity to
pay, the employee's age, the nature of his employment, length of service,
seniority, present salary, future prospects, opportunities for obtaining
similar alternative employment, his past conduct, the circumstances and the
manner of the dismissal including the nature of the charge levelled against
the workman, the extent to which the employee's actions were blameworthy and
the effect of the dismissal on future pension rights and any other relevant
considerations. Account should also be taken of any sums paid or actually
earned or which should also have been earned since the dismissal took place."

In _Caledonian (Ceylon) Tea & Rubber Estates Ltd. v. Hillman_(4) __
Sharvananda, J. (as he then was) agreed with Vythialingam, J. that "the amount
however should not mechanically be calculated on the

**334**

basis of the salary he would have earned till he reached the age of
superannuation."

In _The Associated_ _Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. v. Jayasinghe_ (5) __ Soza, J.
observed at page 600 that "the object of the exercise should be to ascertain
as far as possible the money equivalent of the loss of employment from the
date of unjust dismissal. The calculation must depend on the particular
circumstances of each case. Wages can provide a useful unit for the
calculation but it is neither possible nor desirable to lay down a formula for
application in all cases."

More recently, in _Jayasuriya v. Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation_
(6)this Court dealt exhaustively with the matters relevant to the
determination of the quantum of compensation.

Amerasinghe, J. stated that "there ought to be at least an approximate
computation of immediate loss, i.e. loss of wages and benefits from the date
of dismissal upto the date of the final Order or Judgment, and another with
regard to prospective, future loss, and a third with regard to the loss of
retirement benefits, based as far as possible on a foundation of solid facts
given to the Tribunal by the parties.

While it is not possible to enumerate all the circumstances that may be
relevant in every case, it may be stated that the essential question, in the
determination of compensation for unfair dismissal is this: What is the actual
financial loss caused by the unfair dismissal?

With regard to financial loss, there is, first, the loss of earnings from the
date of dismissal to the determination of the matter before the Court, that
is, the date of the Order of the Tribunal, or if there is an appeal, to the
date of the final determination of the appellate court. The phrase 'loss of
earnings' for this purpose would be the dismissed employee's pay (net of tax),
allowances, bonuses, the value of the use of a car for private purposes, the
value of a residence and domestic servants and all other perquisites and
benefits having a monetary value to which he was entitled."

**335**

It is thus evident that the appellate courts have, over the years, laid down
guidelines in regard to assessment of compensation. Yet, in my view, the
tribunal's discretion should not be unduly fettered in that process. The
particular facts and circumstances of each case have an immeasurable bearing
on the question of quantum of compensation payable. The legislature in its
wisdom has left that matter in the hands of the tribunal, presumably with the
confidence that the discretion would be duly exercised. To my mind, some
degree of flexibility in that regard is both desirable and necessary if a
tribunal is to make a just and equitable order.

In the instant case, the learned President has specifically referred to the
Respondent's period of unemployment, the salary drawn by him at the stage of
termination and awarded him five years salary by way of compensation. The
proceedings had before the tribunal did focus attention on the fact that the
Respondent had admittedly been in service for about 15 years. Witness Kandiah,
the Executive Director of the Appellant Company has admitted in evidence that
the total benefits that the Respondent received for a month were about
Rs.5,000/‑. The attention of the tribunal had also been drawn to the fact that
the Respondent was 42 years of age at the time of termination. The relevant
case law on the question of computation of compensation too had been placed
before the tribunal.

Although the learned President has not itemized each and every one of these
matters in his order, the High Court observes that it has no doubt that the
President had given due consideration to the authorities cited, in arriving at
his decision as regards the quantum of compensation.

It would, therefore, be idle to contend that the tribunal had failed to give
the basis of the award of compensation; however, it must be emphasized that
the tribunal should have dealt with the criteria relevant to the computation
of compensation in more explicit terms, thus "taking the award beyond the
realm of mere assurance of fairness"‑per Amerasinghe, J. in _Jayasuriya's_
case _(supra)._

The learned High Court Judge has carefully considered the question of quantum
of compensation in the light of the relevant authorities and

**336**

has rightly come to the conclusion that the award was a just and equitable
one.

In these circumstances, I see no reason to interfere with the order. The
appeal is accordingly dismissed with costs.

**G.P.S. DE SILVA, C.J.** ‑ I agree.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/40.html_  

