##  Tennakoon v. Piyadigama and Others - SLR - 341, Vol 1 of 1996 [1995] LKSC
40; (1996) 1 Sri LR 341 (26 June 1995)

**341**

**TENNAKOON  
****v** **.  
PIYADIGAMA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
G. R. S. DE SILVA, C.J.  
KULATUNGA, J. AND  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 275/94.  
28 MARCH, 02 MAY AND 13 JUNE, 1995.

_Fundamental Rights ‑ Compulsory and premature retirement on suppression of
post._ __

When there is a change of government it may become necessary to man positions
with different persons. It may also become necessary to provide "personal
staff" to Ministers. But officials in the position of the 1st Respondent must
ensure that such action is lawfully taken, in accordance with government
decisions and without causing serious prejudice to particular public officers.
Here the Petitioner who was appointed Senior Assistant Secretary (Information)
coming over from a similar position in the Ministry of Public Administration,
Provincial Councils and Home Affairs was prematurely and compulsorily retired.
He was not informed of his option to revert to his earlier post; when he
applied for reversion, everything was done to close all avenues of reversion
or alternative employment. No effort whatsoever was made to find alternative
employment for him. Instead the 1st Respondent compulsorily and prematurely
ordered his retirement. He was subjected to selective discrimination.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights guaranteed
under Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

_R. K. W. Goonesekera_ __ with _J. C. Weliamuna_ __ and _Miss_ _Shiranthi_
_Jayatilleke_ for Petitioner.

_Surath_ _Piyasena S.S.C._ for Respondents.

_Cur._ _adv. vult._

June 26, 1995.

**KULATUNGA J.**

The Petitioner has been a public officer from 1961. He complains

**342**

that the 1st Respondent (Secretary to the Ministry of Labour and Vocational
Training) has purported to compulsorily retire him at the age of 52 years and
thereby infringed his rights under Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

The Petitioner was a government teacher from 1961 to 1971. From 1972 ‑1989 he
was a Press Officer in the Department of Information, and the Ministry of
Cultural Affairs and Labour. He rose to the position of Senior Assistant
Secretary (Information) in the Ministry of Labour. From 1989 ‑1992 he served
in the same capacity in the Ministry of Public Administration, Provincial
Councils and Home Affairs. In 1992, he reverted to the Ministry of Labour, as
Senior Assistant Secretary (Information).

On 09.09.94 the 1st Respondent addressed a letter to the Secretary/Ministry of
Public Administration, Local Government and Plantation Industries, requesting
for the release of G. H. S. Premasiri of the SLAS as the 2nd Respondent
(Minister of Labour & Vocational Training) intended to appoint him as the
Senior Assistant Secretary (Information) in the Ministry (Exhibit X2). Next,
the 1st Respondent by his letter dated 15.09.94 informed the Petitioner that
the Petitioner's services will be terminated with effect from 30.09.94 as the
2nd Respond­ent intended to appoint another officer as Senior Assistant
Secretary (Information) (Exhibit P2).

On 20.09.94 the petitioner inquired from the 1st Respondent what his new
duties will be in the event of the proposed new appointment (Exhibit P3). This
letter was not replied but on 07.10.94 the 1st Respondent issued a letter of
appointment to the 3rd Respondent ap­pointing him as Coordinating Officer
(Information) to the 2nd Respondent. The letter states that the appointment is
temporary and personal to the 2nd Respondent and that the 3rd Respondent will
hold office subject to termination, at the will of, the 2nd Respondent. He
would otherwise be subject to the Establishments Code and Financial
Regulations etc. and receive a salary of Rs.45,120 ‑ 57,120 and Provident Fund
benefits (Exhibit 1R11).

Thereafter, the 2nd Respondent obtained a Cabinet decision dated 12.10.94 for
the suppression of the posts of Senior Assistant Secre-

**343**

tary (Information) and Assistant Secretary (Trade Unions) in his Minis­try.
According to the decision, the person holding the said posts were permitted,
at their option, to revert to their earlier posts or to retire from service
(Exhibit 1R5). This decision was obtained presumbly for the reason that
according to a government decision made on 05.10.94 and published in PA
Circular No.36/94 dated 19.10.94 (Exhibit XI), a Minister was permitted
personal staff including a Coordinating Officer (Information). However, a
Minister will not be entitled to appoint a Coordinating Officer (Information)
in his personal staff where there is a post of Assistant Secretary
(Information) in the cadre of his Ministry; hence the appointment of the 3rd
Respondent made on 07.10.94 which was contrary to that decision had to be
regularised.

Next on 26.10.94 the 1st Respondent informed the Petitioner that he would be
retired with effect from 31.10.94 in view of the fact that the post of Senior
Assistant Secretary (Information) had been abol­ished by the aforesaid Cabinet
decision (Exhibit P4). In so addressing the Petitioner, the 1st Respondent
failed to disclose the option granted to an affected officer, to revert to his
previous post. However, in his letter of the same date addressed to W. A.
Somasiri, Assistant Secretary (Trade Unions) whose post was also abolished,
the 1st Respondent copied the Cabinet decision fully and requested him to
inform within 3 days whether he would revert to his previous post or retire
from service.

Somasiri did not retire; but he was reverted to a vacant post in the Special
Grade in the Sri Lanka Middle Level Technical Service, in the Department of
Labour.

On 27.10.94 the Petitioner informed the 1st Respondent that he (the
Petitioner) had learnt that the Cabinet decision gives an affected officer the
option to revert to his previous post; as such he cannot be compulsorily
retired and would opt to revert to his previous post (Exhibit P5). On
14.11.94, the 1st Respondent replied stating that the petitioner's previous
post namely, Senior Assistant Secretary (Information) in the Ministry of
Public Administration, had also been abolished and the substitute post,
Coordinating Officer (Information), in that Ministry had been filled; hence
the petitioner will be retired from service (Exhibit P6).

**344**

By his letters dated 14.11.94 and 15.11.94 addressed to the 1st and 2nd
Respondents respectively, the Petitioner reiterated that in terms of the
Cabinet decision, he cannot be compulsorily retired and requested that he be
given alternative employment until he reached his age of retirement (Exhibits
P7 and P8).

In his affidavit, the 1st Respondent admits that the post of Senior Assistant
Secretary (Information) still exists in the Ministry of Shipping, Ports,
Rehabilitation and Reconstruction and in the Ministry of Trade. In his
petition, the Petitioner states that the said post still exists in two other
Ministries namely, the Ministry of Forestry and the Ministry of Industries.
This has not been contradicted. In his counter affidavit he states that, even
after the Cabinet decision there have been appointments to the post of Senior
Assistant Secretary (Information) in the Ministry of Transport, Highways,
Environment and Women's Affairs and the Ministry of Irrigation, Power and
Energy. This has been admitted in the written submissions filed on behalf of
the Respondents.

On these facts, Mr. R.K.W. Goonesekera, learned Counsel for the Petitioner
submits that the decision to terminate the services of the Petitioner and to
place him on retirement is _mala_ _fide,_ arbitrary, unjust, discriminatory
and for a collateral purpose, all of which are violative of the Petitioner's
right to equal protection of the law.

The learned Senior State Counsel submits that the other officers who hold
posts of Senior Assistant Secretary (Information) and Somasiri who was found
alternative employment are not similarly circumstanced _vis ‑a‑vis_ __ the
Petitioner.

I am of the view that the Petitioner and other officers are in the like
situation being public officers who are normally entitled to serve until the
age of retirement. However, the Petitioner's post was suppressed and he was
purportedly retired, whilst some officers have been permitted to continue as
Senior Assistant Secretary (Information). Somasiri whose post was suppressed
was given alternative employment. There is no rational basis for such action.
Hence, the allegation of unlawful discrimination is established.

**345**

Consequently, I am in agreement with the submissions of Mr. Goonesekera. It
seems to me that the Petitioner has been subjected to selective
discrimination. When there is a change of government it may become necessary
to man certain positions with different persons. It may also become necessary
to provide "personal staff" to Ministers. But officials in the position of the
1st Respondent must ensure that such action is lawfully taken, in accordance
with government decisions and without causing serious prejudice to particular
public officers. Here the Petitioner was not informed of the option to revert
to his earlier post; when he applied for reversion, every thing was done to
close all avenues of reversion or alternative employment; no effort whatsoever
was made to find alternative employment for him; instead, the 1st Respondent
compulsorily and prematurely ordered his retirement.

For the foregoing reasons, I grant the Petitioner a declaration that the
impugned retirement of the Petitioner is violative of his fundamental rights
under Article 12(1) of the Constitution and hence null and void and of no
force or effect. As the post held by the Petitioner in the Ministry of Labour
has been abolished, I direct the 1st and 2nd Respondents and the State to
appoint him to another post of Senior Assistant Secretary (Information) in the
Public Service or to any other comparable post.

On the question of compensation Mr. Goonesekera submits that the Petitioner is
entitled to substantial compensation. I am in agreement with this submission.
Accordingly, I direct the State to pay him compensation in a sum of
Rs.60,000/‑ (Rupees Sixty Thousand) being the minimum loss of his earnings
since the impugned retirement on 31.10.94, based on the scale of salary
specified in 1R2 (Rs.72.000 ‑10 x 3600 ‑108,000/‑)Secretary (Information) in
the Ministry of Public Administration in 1989. I also direct the 1st
Respondent to pay the Petitioner costs in a sum of Rs.5000/‑ (Rupees Five
Thousand).

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.** ‑ I agree.

**RAMANATHAN,** **J**. ‑ I agree.

_**Relief granted.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/40.html_  

