##  Sithi Faiza Shum v. People'S Bank and Others - SLR - 369, Vol 3 of 1994
[1994] LKSC 40; (1994) 3 Sri LR 369 (9 December 1994)

369

  
SITHI FAIZA SHUM

v.  

PEOPLE'S BANK AND OTHERS



SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 91/94

C.A. NO. 1968/79

NOVEMBER 11, 1994.



_Writ of Certiorari - Finance Act, No. 11 of 1963 as amended by Law, No. 16 of
1973, Sections 71(1), (2), 2(a), (c) and (d), 72(2) \- Vesting order- Natural
justice._



**Held:**

** **

Part VIII of the Finance Act, No. 11 of 1963 as amended provides for the
redemption by acquisition of agricultural, residential or business premises
the ownership of which had been lost at any time before or after 10 January
1964 but not earlier than 01 January 1952 inter alia by being sold in
execution of a mortgage decree against the owner of such premises (referred to
as `original owner").

  
Section 71(1) of the Act authorises the People's Bank to acquire such
premises.  


Section 71(2) provides for the conditions precedent to acquisition.



(1) The application for acquisition must be made by the original owner of the
premises or if he is dead or of unsound mind or otherwise incapacitated, by
the spouse, or any other descendant of such person, or if there is no such
surviving spouse or descendant, by a parent, brother or sister of such person
(S. 71(2) (a)).



(2) The Bank has to be satisfied that the average statutory income of the
applicant and of the other members of the family of which he is the head
computed under income tax law, for the three years of assessment immediately
preceding the date of the application does not exceed Rs. 10,000/-, (S. 71(2)
(c)).



(3) The Bank must be satisfied that such premises are reasonably required for
occupation as a residence for the owner of such premises or any member of the
family of such owner. (S. 71(2) (d)).



Where the statutory income of the original owner (3rd respondent now deceased)
and his family was not investigated to see if it did not exceed the limit
fixed by law, and where the question of the appellant's claim that the
premises were

**370**



reasonably required for occupation as a residence for the appellant (present
owner) and the members of her family had not been duly decided by the Bank,
the impugned vesting order should not have been made.



The duty of making the correct decision is exclusively on the bank and there
is no burden on the owner of the premises. The failure of the appellant to
controvert the applicant's claim does not per se absolve the bank from
discharging its duty.



The applicant's absence at the inquiry was due to illness. It cannot be said
that the appellant was content to limit her case to making written objections
and in the circumstances it was wrong to have faulted the appellant for
failing to give evidence. Hence there was a failure to observe the rules of
natural justice.



The impugned acquisition was void.



**Case referred to:**

** **

1 _. Sai Nona v. Maggie Silva_ [1989] 2 Sri L.R. 11.

_ _

**APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.

_ _

_S. Rudramoorthy_ for petitioner.

_ _

_Kumar Paul, S. C._ for 1st respondent Bank.

_ _

_Faiz Musthapha, P.C._ with _Jayampathy Wickremaratne_ for 4th and 5th
respondent. _  
 _

_Cur adv vult._



December 09, 1994.  


**KULATUNGA, J.**



The appellant made an application to the Court of Appeal for a writ of
certiorari to quash an order made by the 2nd respondent (Minister of Finance)
under S. 72(2) of the Finance Act, No. 11 of 1963 as amended by Law, No. 16 of
1973 vesting in the 1st respondent (People's Bank) certain premises owned by
the appellant. The said order was gazetted pursuant to a determination by the
1st respondent under S. 71(3) of the Act to acquire the said premises in the
purported exercise of its power under S. 71(1). The Court of Appeal dismissed
the appellant's application. Hence this appeal.



Special leave to appeal was granted on the following questions:



Is the order for the vesting of the property in dispute bad -

**371**



(a) for the failure on the part of the 1st respondent to satisfy itself as to
the existence of the requisite conditions precedent under relevant provisions
of the Finance Act No. 11 of 1963 as amended by Law No. 16 of 1973;



(b) for failure on the part of the 1st respondent to observe the rules of
natural justice in holding an inquiry into the application for redemption made
by the 3rd, 4th and 5th respondents?



Part VIII of the Finance Act No. 11 of 1963 as amended provides for the
redemption by acquisition of agricultural, residential or business premises
the ownership of which had been lost at any time before or after the 10th of
January 1964 but not earlier than 1st January, 1952 inter alia by being sold
in execution of a mortgage decree entered by a Court against the owner of such
premises (referred to as "original owner"). S. 71(1) of the Act authorises the
People's Bank to acquire such premises. S. 71(2) provides for the conditions
precedent to such acquisition. The conditions relevant to the present case
are:



(1) The application for acquisition should be made by the original owner of
the premises or if he is dead or is of unsound mind or otherwise
incapacitated, by the spouse or any other descendant of such person, or if
there is no such surviving spouse or descendant, by a parent brother or sister
of such person (S. 71(2) (a)).



(2) The Bank has to be satisfied that the average statutory income of the
applicant and of the other members of the family of which he is the head
computed under income tax law, for the three years of assessment immediately
preceding the date of the application does not exceed ten thousand rupees. (S.
71(2) (c)).



Section 71(2) states that if these conditions are not satisfied no premises
shall be acquired under S. 71(1).



(3) The bank is also barred from acquiring any premises if the bank is
satisfied that such premises are reasonably

**372**



required for occupation as a residence for the owner of such premises or any
member of the family of such owner (S. 71(2) (d)).  


The impugned acquisition was effected on the application of the original owner
(3rd respondent) and his two sons (4th and 5th respondents). The 3rd
respondent died during the pendancy of the Court of Appeal application
whereupon the 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th respondents being his children were
substituted. The appellant is the present owner of the premises. She is a
married woman having children. She challenges the impugned acquisition on the
following grounds.



(a) That the 1st respondent decided to acquire the premises without being
satisfied at a proper inquiry that the statutory income of the 3rd respondent
and of the members of his family did not exceed the amount fixed by S. 71(2)
(c). The 1st respondent also failed to consider the appellant's claim that she
reasonably required the said premises for occupation as a residence for
herself and her family.



(b) That the 1st respondent made the said decision on the basis of evidence
recorded at an ex parte inquiry without affording the appellant any
opportunity of impeaching such evidence at a subsequent inquiry or informing
the appellant of the fact that such evidence had been recorded. There was thus
a breach of the rules of natural justice.

  
The relevant facts are as follows:



The 3rd respondent mortgaged premises No. 853, Galle Road, Katukurunda to one
Zaheed by deed No. 1357 dated 12.07.1951. The same were purchased by Zaheed at
a sale in D.C. Kalutara case No. 30585 (MB) and were transferred to him by
Fiscal's conveyance No. 13521 dated 25.06.57. Zaheed gifted the said premises
to his daughter, the appellant by deed No. 105 dated 21.05.68. Thereafter, on
17.05.69 the 3rd, 4th and 5th respondents made the aforesaid application for
the acquisition of the premises. Notice of the said application for the
acquisition was given to the appellant only on

**373**



03.03.75. After further delay, by a notice dated 22.10.75 parties were
summoned for an inquiry on 12.11.75. The inquiry commenced on 12.11.75 and was
continued on 27.02.76. On these dates parties were present and represented by
Counsel. As per notes of inquiry (Exhibits 'F' and 'B') no evidence was led on
these dates. The inquiry was confined to hearing of legal submissions on the
statutory preconditions for a valid acquisition. The inquiring officer was the
Manager, Land Redemption Department of the 1st respondent bank.



By a letter dated 04.06.76 the inquiring officer summoned the parties for
further inquiry on 07.07.76. By her letter dated 02.07.76 (Exhibit A)
dispatched by registered post on 06.07.76 and accompanied by a medical
certificate, the appellant applied for a postponement of the inquiry on the
ground of illness. However, the inquiry was held, ex parte. In his objections
filed before the Court of Appeal the inquiring officer states that the said
application was received only after the inquiry had been terminated and the
party had departed. But, according to the annexed report 1R1 the inquiring
officer states that the appellant had submitted a medical certificate that she
was ill and unable to attend the inquiry. However, as that was the third day
of inquiry, he allowed the applicant's lawyer to lead the evidence of the
applicant and the Grama Sevaka Kalutara district. That evidence was to the
effect that the income of the applicant (3rd respondent and his family) was
meagre; and the appellant was a very wealthy person owning several houses and
properties; hence the premises were not reasonably required for occupation as
a residence for the appellant or any member of her family.



The appellant was not informed of the fact that such inquiry was held on
07.07.76. Instead, the inquiring officer by his letter dated 14.10.76,
purporting to be a reply to the appellant's letter dated 02.07.76, informed
the appellant that if the appellant was objecting to the redemption of the
premises under the Finance Act, he may submit his reasons in writing on or
before 15.11.76 (Exhibit C). In reply, the appellant's Attorney-at-Law
addressed the inquiring officer a letter dated 12.11.76 stating inter alia,
that the appellant objected to the proposed acquisition as the premises were
reasonably required for occupation as a residence for the appellant and the

**374**



members of her family (Exhibit E). After the lapse of two years the inquiring
officer acting on behalf of the 1st respondent addressed the appellant a
notice in terms of S. 71(4) of the Act that the 1st respondent had determined
that the premises shall be acquired (Exhibit I).



The appellant states that upon the receipt of the said notice, her Attorney-
at-Law attempted to obtain information of the decision from the 1st respondent
but without success. In July 1979 her Attorney-at-Law was issued a copy of the
proceedings of inquiry. However, a copy of the inquiring officer's
recommendation was not given. The appellant next received a letter dated
02.08.79 from the 1st respondent informing her that the 2nd respondent had, by
order dated 03.07.79, published in Gazette Extraordinary No. 44/11 dated
11.07.79 under S. 72(2), vested in the 1st respondent the premises in suit
(Exhibits 'J' and 'K'). This was followed by a notice dated 22.10.79 addressed
to the appellant by an officer authorised to take possession of the premises
whereby she was informed that possession of the premises will be taken over on
22.11.79 (Exhibit 'L'). Whereupon, on 15.11.79 the appellant filed her writ
application before the Court of Appeal. On 19.11.79 the Court of Appeal stayed
further proceedings for the acquisition of the premises pending the final
determination of the application.



In dismissing the appellant's application the Court of Appeal has not
considered whether on the available material, it can be concluded that the
statutory income of the 3rd respondent and the members of his family did not
exceed the limit fixed by law; and whether the appellant's claim that the
premises were reasonably required for occupation as a residence for the
appellant and the members of her family had been duly decided before the
impugned vesting order was made.



The Court of Appeal held that the procedure adopted by the 1st respondent did
not result in a failure of natural justice. The following is a summary of the
reasons adduced by that Court for its conclusion.



1\. The appellant failed to make arrangements for Counsel to represent her on
07.07.76 and apply for a postponement.

**375**



2\. The appellant failed to request for an opportunity to cross examine the
deponents of the affidavit annexed to the 3rd respondent's application or the
witnesses to be called in support of the application.  


3\. The appellant made no request to give evidence on her behalf, but was
content to submit written objections through her Attorney-at-Law.

  
4\. The appellant was not prejudiced by the failure of the 1st respondent to
send her the proceedings of 07.07.76 because parties are presumably capable of
ascertaining what transpires at inquiries in proceedings to which they are
interested parties.



In Sai Nona v Maggie Silva(1) this Court has fully considered the nature of
the Bank's duty in making a decision to acquire premises under the Finance Act
and the principles applicable to the holding of a fair inquiry in that regard.
The Court held:



(a) The duty of making the correct decision is exclusively on the Bank and
there is no burden on the owner of the premises.



(b) The Bank is not compelled to adopt a particular procedure but what
procedure it adopts must be made known to the parties. If any party is
prejudiced for want of such knowledge it may result in a denial of natural
justice depending on the extent of prejudice caused.



(c) Whether or not the failure to permit oral hearings would constitute a
denial of natural justice will depend on the facts and circumstances and the
issue in each case.



With all due respect to the Court of Appeal, I cannot agree with the approach
it adopted in the case. Thus the Court appears to have assumed that if the
claims made in an application for an acquisition are not controverted by the
owner, the conditions precedent to a valid acquisition are satisfied. This is
against the principle that the duty of making the correct decision is
exclusively on the Bank. As such, the failure of the appellant to controvert
the applicant's claim would not

**376**



per se absolve the 1st respondent from discharging its duty. As regards the
preconditions as to income, there is no satisfactory evidence as to the
statutory income of the 3rd respondent and of the members of his family during
the relevant period. There is also no finding, reached after a proper inquiry
and sufficient evaluation of the evidence, that the premises are not
reasonably required for occupation as a residence for the appellant and her
family.



On the complaint of failure of natural justice, I am unable to agree with the
reasoning of the Court below. The appellant's absence at the inquiry on
07.07.76 was due to her illness. She was therefore not in default. The Court
was in error in taking the view that the appellant has been remiss in failing
to retain Counsel to appear at the inquiry for the purpose of obtaining a
postponement. Secondly as already said above the mere failure on the part of
the appellant to controvert the 3rd respondent's claim cannot justify a
decision to acquire the premises. Hence the Court erred in blaming the
appellant for failing to request for an opportunity to cross-examine the 3rd
respondent's witnesses. Thirdly, it cannot be said that the appellant was
content to limit her case to making written objections. Her Attorney-at-Law
sent written objections in response to a request by the inquiring officer to
do so in circumstances where she was totally unaware of the inquiry held on
07.07.76. By her letter dated 02.07.76 she applied for a postponement on the
ground of illness; and when in reply to that letter the inquiring officer
requested her to submit her objections in writing, in the absence of a
disclosure of the inquiry held on 07.07.76 she could not have believed that
any prejudice would be caused to her by limiting her case to making written
objections. In the circumstances, the Court also erred when it faulted the
appellant for failing to give evidence.



I have no doubt that the failure of the inquiring officer to disclose to the
appellant the proceedings of 07.07.76 caused grave prejudice to the appellant
in that she was deprived of the opportunity of controverting the evidence led
in her absence. She was lulled into a sense of security by the request to her
to tender her objections in writing, Hence, the Court of Appeal was wrong in
presuming that in the normal course the appellant ought to have put herself
upon inquiry as to what transpired on 07.07.76.

**377**



In the result, I hold that the impugned acquisition is void. I allow the
appeal, set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and direct the issue of
a writ of certiorari quashing the determination to acquire the premises No.
853, Galle Road, Katukurunda, Kalutara and the vesting order No. 42, published
in Gazette Extraordinary No. 44/11 dated 11th July, 1979. I also direct the
1st respondent to pay the appellant costs in a sum of Rs. 5000/- (Rupees Five
Thousand).



**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/40.html_  

