##  Haji Omar v. Wickramasinghe and Another - SLR - 105, Vol 1 of 2002 [2002]
LKSC 40; (2002) 1 Sri LR 105 (20 February 2002)

**105**

**HAJI OMAR  
v.  
WICKRAMASINGHE AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
EDUSSURIYA, J., AND  
J. A. N. DE SILVA, J.  
SC APPEAL (CHC) NO. 12/2001  
HC CIVIL NO. 36/98/1  
DC COLOMBO NO. 5033 SPL  
NOVEMBER 13 AND 27, DECEMBER 04, 2001  
  
_Interim injunction - Basis and scope of interim relief - Recovery of Loans by
Banks (Special Provisions) Act, No. 4 of 1990.  
_  
In an action for invalidating a sale of property mortgaged to the Seylan Bank
(2nd respondent) an interim injunction to prevent the issue of the certificate
of sale was refused by the trial court (presumably as the certificate of sale
had already been issued); whereupon, the plaintiff (the 1st respondent) filed
a petition seeking an order on the _ purchaser (the appellant) and the Bank,
inter alia, restraining them from demolishing or alienating the property. The
High Court issued an interim injunction to that effect. That order was set
aside by Amerasinghe, J. in SC Appeal (CHC) No. 28/98 SCM of 16th February,
1999, where it was held "the basis of injunctive relief should be the plaint
and the prayers contained therein; it is not designed to prevent other
activities of the parties to an action".  
  
At the trial Counsel for the 2nd defendant-appellant (the purchaser) raised
the following issue as issue No. 13 :  
  
"In view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in SC Appeal (CHC) No. 28/98, SC
(Spl.) LA (HC) No. 14/98 can the plaintiff have and maintain this action?"  
  
Of consent, the High Court Judge heard that issue as preliminary issue of law
and answered it in favour of the plaintiff (the 1st respondent).  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1) Although the plaintiff in his action questioned the validity of the sale
of the property, the main relief he claimed was a permanent injunction

**106**

restraining the issue of the certificate of sale. Since that certificate had
already been issued, the plaintiff sought an interim injunction which was
unrelated to the cause pleaded by him. Such relief was denied by the Supreme
Court on the basis that the certificate of sale had been issued. The validity
of that certificate was not questioned at any stage, nor did the plaintiff
seek an order invalidating or setting aside the certificate of sale. That
certificate was in law conclusive proof that all the provisions of the Act had
been complied with (section 15 (2) of the Act).  
  
(2) In the circumstances, issue No. 13 should have been answered in the
negative.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. _SC Appeal (CHC)_ No. 28/98 SCM of 16th February, 1999.*  
  
2. _National Development Bank of Sri Lanka v. Serendib Aisa_ (Pvt) Ltd. and Another - (1999) 2 Sri LR 56.  
  
* _Haji Omar v. Wickramasinghe and Another_ (1999) 1 Sri LR 82.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court.  
  
_Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ with _Priyanthi Gunaratne_ for the 2nd defendant-
appellant.  
  
_Nihal Jayamanne, PC_ with _J. M. Wijebandara_ for plaintiff-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

February 20, 2002  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
  
**While agreeing with the conclusions and order of Edussuriya, J. I wish to
state my reasons more fully.  
  
When Amerasinghe, J. made his order dated 16. 02. 99 in SC Appeal (CHC) No.
28/98, he did so on the basis that a certificate of sale had been issued on
01. 12\. 97. The validity of that certificate had not been questioned either
in the plaint filed on 17. 12\. 97, or in any other pleading or subsmission.
Accordingly, that order proceeded on the undisputed basis that a valid
certificate of sale had been issued.

**107**

Even thereafter, the plaintiff-respondent-respondent (the plaintiff) took no
steps to question that certificate. The issues suggested by him related to
other matters : the validity of the resolution, the timely payment of the
balance purchase price, and the publication of the notice of sale. There was
no consequential issue as to the validity of the certificate and / or as to
setting aside of the certificate.  
It is in that background that issue No. 13 must be considered. While it is
true that that issue might have been framed with greater particularity, it is
clear that it did raise the question whether - in view of the issue of a valid
certificate of sale - the title of the borrower (the plaintiff) had vested in
the purchaser (the 2nd defendant-appellant) and the certificate was in law
conclusive proof that all the provisions of the Act had been complied with.  
  
Even now there is no dispute as to the validity of the certificate. Section 15
(1) of the Act provides that upon the issue of the certificate the title of
the borrower vests in the purchaser, and section 15 (2) makes the certificate
"conclusive proof with respect to the sale . . . that all the provisions of
[the] Act relating to the sale . . . have been complied with". That includes
the passing of the resolution, the notice of sale, the payment of the price,
and the sale. Accordingly, none of the reliefs prayed for in the plaint can be
granted.  
  
The decision of Amerasinghe, J. in NDB v. Serendib Asia (Pvt) Ltd. [1990] 2
Sri LR 56, has been cited. That is distinguishable for several reasons. There
the Bank had fixed the upset price of property, mortgaged for Rs. 9.4 million,
at Rs. 1,000, and the Bank itself had bought the property at that price. Here,
the property had been bought by a third party and at a substantial price.
There allegations of fraud, abuse of power, unlawful conduct, etc., had been
made against the purchaser-Bank; here the purchaser was a bona fide purchaser
for value against whom no impropriety was alleged. In that case, the

**108**

certificate of sale was challenged on the ground stated, but in this case the
certificate of sale is not challenged in any way; and although certain
antecedent steps have been questioned no grounds have been specified. Further,
Amerasinghe, J. did not decide the serious questions of law and fact which
arose, but left them for determination by the trial Judge, granting interim
relief in order to preserve the status quo. Here the interim injunction stage
had been passed, and the trial Judge had to determine the questions of law and
fact which arose : the fact that a valid certificate had been issued was
admitted, and he had, therefore, to determine only its legal effect : that
title had passed and that the Act had been complied with. Having regard to the
state of the pleadings, he had no option but to answer issue No. 13 in the
affirmative.  
  
February 20, 2002  
  
**EDUSSURIYA, J.  
**  
The plaintiff-respondent had mortgaged the immovable property described in the
schedule to the plaint by three mortgage bonds referred to in paragraph 4 of
the plaint, to the 1st defendant-respondent Bank in order to secure the
repayment of a loan taken from the 1st defendant-respondent Bank.  
  
Admittedly, on the plaintiff-respondent defaulting in the payment  of the said
loan the 1st defendant-respondent had by letter dated 8th August, 1996,
informed the plaintiff-respondent that steps would be taken to sell the said
property and recover the money due.  
  
It was further admitted (paragraph 6 of the plaint) by the plaintiff-
respondent that the Board of Directors of the 1st defendant-respondent Bank
had passed a resolution to recover the money due with interest

**109**

at 30% by selling the said property by public auction and published the said
resolution in the Daily News, Dinamina and a Tamil newspaper and the
Government Gazette of 25th April, 1997. It was also admitted by paragraph 7 of
the plaint that it was published in the Island and Divaina newspapers of 24th
October, 1997, that the said property would be sold by public auction on 07th
November, 1997.  
  
In paragraph 8 of the plaint the plaintiff-respondent has stated that on a
date prior to 07th November, 1997, on the plaintiff having a discussion with
the legal officer of the 1st defendant-respondent Bank, that although the
legal officer agreed to have the mortaged property conveyed in the name of the
1st defendant-respondent and grant a period of two months to the plaintiff-
respondent to pay the outstanding sums of money, the 1st defendant-respondent
sold the said property by public auction on 7th November, 1997 and that the
2nd defendant-appellant had purchased the said property for a sum of Rs.
12,025,000 and paid 10% of the purchase price and that the 2nd defendant-
respondent is bound to pay the balance within thirty days of that date.  
  
In paragraph 11 of the plaint the plaintiff-respondent has averred that the
2nd defendant-respondent had failed to pay the balance of the purchase price
within thirty days and / or "does not know whether the said balance sum has
not been paid thereafter," and therefore the said sale is invalid, and as such
in terms of the provisions of section 15 of Act No. 4 of 1990 the 1st
defendant-respondent cannot issue a certificate of sale. The plaintiff-
respondent has, however, averred that the resolution passed by the 1st
defendant-respondent Bank is not in conformity with section 4 of the said Act
but does not give the reason for so stating. The plaintiff-respondent though
pleading that the publication of the sale was not in accordance with section 9
of the said Act has failed to give any reason for stating so. The plaintiff-
respondent then sought (a) a declaration that the said resolution is invalid
and (b) that therefore the said sale is also invalid, (c) that the 2nd
defendant-respondent did not become the owner of the

**110**

property described in the schedule to the plaint on his purchasing the said
property, (d) a permanent injunction restraining the 1st defendant-respondent
from issuing a certificate of sale to the 2nd defendant-respondent and (e) an
interim injunction to the said effect and till then an enjoining order on the
same lines. So, that it is clear from the plaint (1) that the plaintiff does
not state why the resolution passed by the Board of Directors of the 1st
defendant Bank is inconsistent with section 4 of the Act nor does he state why
the auction sale was not in conformity with section 9 of the said Act and (2)
that although in paragraph 11 of the plaint the plaintiff-respondent has
averred that the 2nd defendant-respondent has not paid the balance  sum within
thirty days of the auction, in subparagraph (c) of the prayer to the plaint
the plaintiff prays for a declaration that the 2nd defendant-respondent has
not become the lawful owner of the said property by virtue of the said
purchase, since a sale or purchase is completed only on the entire purchase
price being paid. The Sinhala words used in the plaint are" "which imply that
the entire purchase price has been paid by the purchaser.  
  
What is more important in this connection is that according to section 15 (1)
of the said Act the title of the borrower vests in the purchaser only on the
issue of the certificate of sale.  It is common ground now that the
certificate of sale had been issued on 12th December, 1997, five days prior to
the date of the plaint, and registered on 19th December, 1997. The plaintiff-
respondent thereafter on 18th March, 1998, sought revised injunctive relief by
petition and affidavit P7 and P7A to restrain the 1st defendant- respondent
and/or the 2nd defendant-appellant from demolishing the buildings standing on
the property which forms the subject-matter of this action, causing damage to
the same and / or selling the said property or encumbering the said property
by mortgaging or leasing it.  
  
The Commercial High Court decided the question of the issue of the interim
injunction on written submissions being tendered by both

**111**

parties, in favour of the plaintiff-respondent and issued an interim
injunction as prayed for as set out above.  
  
The 2nd defendant-appellant then applied for leave to appeal from the said
order issuing the interim injunction, and on leave being granted argued the
said appeal (SC Appeal (CHC) No. 28/98). After a hearing, this Court made
order on 16th February, 1999, setting aside the order of the High Court on the
ground that the basis of injunctive relief sought was not, as it should have
been, the plaint dated 17th December, 1997, and the prayers contained therein.
Amerasinghe, J. went on to state that interim relief is designed to prevent
the frustration of the Court's order if the reliefs prayed for in the plaint
are eventually granted: it is not designed to prevent other activities of the
parties to an action.  
  
Thereafter, when the case came up for trial several issues were raised by
parties. Then, on 30th June, 2000, the 2nd defendant-appellant's Counsel
raised the following issue as issue number 13. :  
  
"In view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in SC Appeal (CHC) No. 28/98, SC
(Spl) LA (HC) No. 14/98 can the plaintiff have and maintain this action?"  
  
On parties then agreeing that if the said issue which is an issue of law is
answered in favour of the 2nd defendant-appellant the action will have to be
dismissed, the Court took up the said issue for decision as a preliminary
issue and accordingly both parties tendered written submissions, and
thereafter on 9th October, 2000, the said issue was answered by Court in
favour of the plaintiff-respondent, on the basis that this Court had not in
its order of 16th February, 1999, made a determination on the substantive
relief claimed by the plaintiff in the plaint.

**112**

Counsel for the 2nd defendant-appellant contended that the finding by this
Court that the certificate of sale had been issued prior to the institution of
the action read with section 15 (2) of Act No. 4 of 1990 must result in a
dismissal of the action and therefore the issue in question should have been
answered in favour of the 2nd defendant-appellant.  
  
Counsel went on to contend that the certificate of sale is final and
conclusive of the title of the purchaser and cannot be challenged and that the
plaintiff-respondent being aware of this sought the issue of permanent
injunction to restrain the issue of the certificate of sale and since the
certificate of sale had been issued prior to the institution of the action the
Supreme Court held that the application for the interim injunction restraining
the issue of the certificate of sale was misconceived. Counsel further
submitted that consequently the action is also misconceived and must be
dismissed.  
  
The question is what is the substantive relief claimed by the plaintiff in the
plaint?  
  
Having made bald allegations in the plaint to the effect that (1) the
resolution passed by the Board of Directors was not in conformity with section
4 of Recovery of Loans by Banks Act, No. 4 of 1990 and (2) the notices
relating to the sale of the property in question had not been published in
accordance with section 9 of the said Act, the plaintiff-respondent sought the
following reliefs (1) that the resolution of the Board of Directors of the 1st
defendant-appellant was invalid (2) that the auction sale conducted on 7th
November, 1997, was invalid, (3) that the purchase by the 2nd defendant-
appellant of the property described in the schedule to the plaint did not make
the 2nd defendant-appellant the lawful owner of the said property (4) an
interim injunction restraining the 1st defendant-appellant issuing a
certificate of sale in terms of section 15 of the said Act to the 2nd
defendant-appellant and (5) a permanent injunction on the same terms as the
interim injunction. Therefore, reliefs 1, 2 and 3 are reliefs on which the
plaintiff based his main relief for an order restraining the issue of the
certificate of sale.

**113**

It is common ground that the certificate of sale had been issued prior to the
institution of this action, and it is on this basis that Amerasinghe, J. in
his order held that the application for an interim injunction restraining the
issue of the certificate of sale was misconceived. Consequently, the main
relief claimed by the plaintiff, namely a permanent injunction restraining the
issue of the certificate of sale cannot be granted.  
  
Therefore, this action must necessarily fail and cannot be maintained, since
the plaintiff has not sought an order invalidating or setting aside the
certificate of sale.  
  
The relief claimed by the plaintiff, namely that title to the property in
question did not pass on the 2nd defendant-appellant purchasing the said
property at the sale will not help the plaintiff, inasmuch title passes only
on the certificate of sale being issued as in the case of a Fiscal's sale
where title passes only on the Fiscal's conveyance being issued.  
  
Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent has drawn the attention of Court to the
decision in the case of National Development Bank of Sri Lanka v. Serendib
Asia (Pvt) Ltd., and Another 1999 - 2 SLR 56 which dealt with the question
whether it is open to a borrower under the National Development Bank Act, No.
2 of 1979 to move to invalidate a sale conducted under the provisions of the
said Act.  
  
Amerasinghe, J. held in that case that section 50 of the said Act (which is
the same as section 15 (1) of Act No. 4 of 1990) does not preclude the
borrower from moving the Court to invalidate the sale, since the plaintiff-
respondent had in that case alleged fraud and abuse of authority, etc.  
  
With due respect to Amerasinghe, J. it is my view that where it is not open to
a person claiming through or under any disposition whatsoever of the right,
title or interest of the borrower to and in the property to move to invalidate
a sale, certainly it cannot be said that the borrower on whose right, title
and interest in the property a third

**114**

party's claim is based, has a right to move to invalidate the sale. After all
when a resolution is passed under parate execution rights the borrower is in
the same position as a judgment debtor, and when the certificate of sale is
issued "the judgment debtor" cannot have rights which a person claiming
through "the judgment debtor" does not have since the third party's rights
flow the judgment debtor.  
  
Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent drew the attention of Court to issues
raised by the 2nd defendant-appellant at the trial. However issue No. 13 in my
view overrides those issues inasmuch as both parties agreed to the said issue
being decided by Court as a preliminary issue of law, on which the outcome of
the case rested.  
  
In any event, in this case the plaintiff has not prayed for the certificate of
sale to be set aside, and further Amerasinghe, J. has  stated in National
Development Bank of Sri Lanka v. Serendib Asia (P'vt) Ltd., and Another
(supra) that the plaintiff had alleged fraud and abuse of authority, and
commercial unreasonableness, whereas in the case before us now only bald
allegations that the resolution was not in conformity with section 4 of Act
No. 4 of 1990 and that the sale was not published in accordance with section 9
of the said Act have been made although at the same time producing with the
plaint a copy of the said resolution as published in the newspapers as well as
the publications of the sale in the Government Gazette. Issue No. 13 is
accordingly answered in the negative.  
  
For the above-mentioned reasons I allow the appeal and set aside the order of
the Commercial High Court and dismiss the plaintiff-respondent's action, with
costs in both Courts fixed at Rs. 25,000 payable by the plaintiff-respondent
to the 2nd defendant-petitioner-appellant.  
  
**J. A. N. DE SILVA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/40.html_  

