##  Senanayake v. Damunupola - SLR - 621, Vol 2 of 1982 [1982] LKSC 41; (1982)
2 Sri LR 621 (21 September 1982)

#  621

**  SENANAYAKE**

**v.**

**DAMUNUPOLA**

SUPREME COURT

SHARVANANDA, J., RATWATTE, J., AND VICTOR PEREIRA, J.

S.C. 10/82.

C. A. 2160/79

AUGUST 8, 1982.



_     Writ of Certiorari ‑ State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act 7 of 1979,
sections 3(1), 9 ‑ Land Survey Ordinance, section 6 ‑ Crown Lands Encroachment
Ordinance, section 2, 7(c),_

_  _

#  622



The petitioner was the owner of premises No.23/8 Pansalawatta Mulgampola Road,
Kandy, having inherited the property from one Reeves who owned and possessed
the property by virtue of a Deed of Transfer No.369 of 19.5.1908.



A small portion of land in extent 4 perches and bearing Lot No. 8104 in Plan
No. PP 2544 by the Surveyor‑General appears to have belonged to the State.



Two neighbours complained to the Government Agent who was the competent
authority under the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979
that the petitioner had encroached on the land by building on it.



The respondent issued notice on the petitioner requiring him to quit. The
petitioner applied for a Writ of Certiorari to the Court of Appeal, which they
refused. On appeal to the Supreme Court ‑



# Held ‑



That the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act was not meant to obtain
possession of land which the State had lost possession of by encroachment or
ouster for, a considerable period of time by ejecting a person in such
possession. Section 3 should not be used by a competent authority to eject a
person who has been found by him to be in possession of a land where there is
doubt whether the State had title or where the possessor relies on a long
period of possession.



**Case referred to:**



(1)        _Kiri Mudiyanse v. Attorney General_ (1947) 48 N.L.R. 438



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_  _

_Faiz Mustapha_ for the appellant.

_  _

_Douglas Premaratne, D.S.G.,_ for the respondent.



Cur. adv. vult

September 21, 1982.



**VICTOR PERERA, J.**



The appellant in this case had filed an application on the 31st December 1979
in the Court of Appeal for a Mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari to
quash a Notice dated 29th November 1979 issued by the Government Agent, Kandy,
the respondent, purporting to act as the Competent Authority under section
3(1) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No.7 of 1979 requiring
the appellant to quit an extent of land in extent 4 perches described in the
Schedule to the Notice on or before the 31st December 1979\. The Court of
Appeal by its order dated 12. 2. 1982 refused to issue the Writ and ordered
the appellant to pay costs to the respondent.



**  623**



The appellant having obtained leave from the Court of Appeal has preferred
this appeal to this Court against the said order.



At the hearing before us, it was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the
extent of land covered by the notice to quit included part of his residential
house and land called Pansalwatte bearing assessment No. 23/8, Mulgampola
Road, Kandy. It was his case that the said portion was part and parcel of a
land called Pansalwatte at one time owned and possessed by one M.H. Reeves by
right of purchase on Deed No. 369 dated 19th May 1908, that he had succeeded
to the interests of the said M.H. Reeves by inheritance and that he had been
living in the house on that land from the date of his birth (10th March 1924).
He produced with his application the original of a Plan dated 14th March 1912
made by R. Spencer, Licensed Surveyor (P1) in which the house that existed on
that date is depicted. He also produced the original of a Plan No. 1288 dated
1st September 1940 made by J.C.S. Misso, Licensed Surveyor" (P2) for the same
land called Pansalwatte it which is depicted the said house with the
extensions made thereafter. He also produced the original of a Plan No. 1951
dated 31st May 1967 (P3) which shows the same land and building. In his
application he has pleaded that he had obtained the requisite approval under
the provisions of the Housing and Town Improvement Ordinance and effected the
necessary additions and renovations to the building. He alleged that though he
and his predecessors in title had possessed the same for over 65 years this
Notice had been issued on him at the instance of the adjoining owners who had
brought pressure on the Government Agent and not in furtherance of any
specific requirement of the State.



The respondent has filed an affidavit dated 12th June 1980 in opposition to
this application. He admitted that in or about 1971 complaints had been
received by the then Government Agent from L.B. Kalugamana and E.S. Reeves
that the petitioner had encroached upon State land and had erected buildings
thereon. This was evidenced by a letter sent by them to the then Government
Agent dated 2nd November 1971 (R2). The contents of that letter support the
claim of the appellant that he had constructed the house with the permission
obtained from the Municipal Council, Kandy. It is therefore evident that the
inquiry was initiated on the receipt of this letter and that the Government
Agent took steps to ascertain whether State land had been encroached upon. The
Government Agent. referred this letter to a Kachcheri Surveyor and the latter
had submitted a report dated 6.01.72 (R3) And a Sketch (R4). According to his
Report he



#  624



has stated that Lot 8104 in P.P. 2544 was a Crown land in the possession of M.
B. Senanayake the appellant and that _it appeared that the house had
encroached upon_ the land and that a retaining wall too had been built on this
land. The sketch shows the location of the house, the parapet wall and a
stream. He had also superimposed on Plan No. 2147 filed in the District Court
case No. 737, Kandy, the reference to that Plan being suggestive of some
litigation in the District Court of Kandy. The Divisional Revenue Officer too
had made a report dated 8.02.72, (R5). This Report purports to state that Lot
8104 in P.P. 2544 was a _reservation for a public road_ , that M. B.
Senanayake the present appellant had put up a large house consisting of three
rooms 10 feet by 8 feet and a retaining wall 5 feet high, I foot wide and 20
feet long with the approval of the Municipal Council, Kandy. It would appear
from the document (R6) that the Government Agent had informed the appellant
that _he had encroached upon this land_ and called upon him to vacate the same
within a month as far back as January 1972.



Thereafter this matter had been in abeyance for nearly 5 years. In 1977 a
surveyor from the Survey General's Department had made a Plan No.1614 dated
26.01.77(R7) showing the location of the building occupied by the appellant
according to the information supplied to him by the Grama Sevaka of the area.
He had not surveyed the entire land claimed by the, appellant but had shown a
portion of Lot 8104 in his Plan in dotted lines. In a tenement list attached
to this Plan (R8) he described the land as Pansalwatta being premises No.
23/8, Mulgampola Road, containing part of a permanent building, with a note in
the remarks column to, be vested in the Municipal Council. This was followed
up by a letter dated 26.07.78 (R6) from the respondent which reads as
follows:‑



"Lot 8104 in Plan bearing No. P .P. 2544 is a Crown Land. _The Mulgampola Road
runs over this land._ According to inquiries it has been revealed that you
have constructed a retaining wall with a view to construct a house across this
land thereby obstructing this road.



In this regard I have notified you by my letter L/7/1/1925 dated 12.01.72 to
hand over peaceful possession of the land within a, calendar month of my
letter but you have failed to do so.



In these circumstances, you are hereby informed again to remove all the
improvements you have effected on the land to peacefully hand over the land
within one month. Should you fail to hand, never this land to the State, legal
action will be taken against you."

**  625**

**  **It is quite clear from all the documents produced that the Mulgampola
Road does not run over the land, that no road had been in fact obstructed and
that there is no road reservation. The Government Agent took no action in
regard to this complaint of encroachment on a land claimed to be State land.



The respondent, also relied on and produced a copy of Preliminary Plan No.
2544 dated 10th November 1880 made by the Surveyor General (R1). It shows 15
allotments of land bearing serial Nos.. 8091 ‑ 8106\. There is no statement in
this Plan that these lots formed parts of any road reservation or that it was
land that belonged to the Crown at that date. No Tenement Sheet or Gazette
showing that these lands were road reservations or State land have been
produced.



The Plan (R) purports to have been signed by the Surveyor General but on the
plan apart from the numbers given to each lot, there is no entry made in
regard to any other fact. The provisions of section 6 of the Land Survey
Ordinance (Chap. 316) are as follows:‑



"(6) If any Plan or survey offered in evidence in any suit shall purport to be
signed by the Survey‑General or officer acting on his behalf, such Plan or
survey shall be received in evidence and may be taken to be prima facie proof
of the facts exhibited therein, and it shall not be necessary to prove that it
was in fact signed by the Survey General or Officer acting on his behalf, nor
that it was made by his authority, nor that the same is accurate, until
evidence to the contrary shall have first been given."



The Plan would be prima facie proof of the facts established therein and
nothing more. This is as clearly set out in the judgment of the Supreme Court
in _Kiri Mudiyanse vs. The Attorney ‑General_ (1). At the argument before us
the Deputy Solicitor General frankly conceded that this document did not prove
or establish that the lots including lot 8014 now in dispute were road
reservations or lands belonging to the State.



However, on a closer examination of this Plan (R1) there are endorsements made
against all the lots except Lot 8014 that they had been sold from time to time
between 1888 and 1895. This Plan was produced from the respondent's custody
and these entries must be presumed to have been officially made. It has to be
noted also that in particular lots 8105 and 8106,which adjoin lot 8104 on the
South‑East and lot 8103 which adjoins Lot 8104 on the North‑East had been
sold. The fact that all, the lots except Lot 8014 had been

**  626**

 sold at the time those entries were made indicated that all the lots shown in
Plan (R1) were not road reservations. There is no indication in any of the
Plans produced that the Mulgampola Road passes through this land or that any
road had been obstructed.



In the light of the above facts it is quite clear that this action by the
respondent initiated as a sequel to the letter sent by E.S. Reeves and others
on 2nd November 1971 (R2) was not for any State purpose. The observations of
the Kachcheri Surveyor and the Divisional Revenue Officer and the contents of
the letters of the Government Agent dated 27.,06.78 (R3 ‑R8) do not
conclusively establish that the land belonged to the State. There is a serious
doubt whether the said land belonged to the State or whether it had vested in
the Municipal Council of Kandy by virtue of section  35 of the Municipal
Councils Ordinance (Chap. 252). To be regarded as a road reservation the
requirements in section 55 of the Crown Lands Ordinance (Chap. 454) have to be
established, and in the absence of the proof of such the respondent's
assertion that this was a road reservation does not merit consideration.



However, the inquiries by the respondent in regard to the complaint made by
his predecessor in office or by him had been concluded in 1978. The inquiries
disclosed that the appellant _had encroached upon the land_ that was thought
to be State land. A decision had been taken to take legal action against the
appellant in respect of the alleged encroachment. There was nothing to
indicate that the appellant had at any time been permitted or authorised to
occupy this land. If anything the inquiries revealed an alleged encroachment
of State land.



The Crown Lands Encroachments Ordinance (Chap. 465) as amended by Act No. 7 of
1954 has clearly provided for situations of this nature. Section 2 provided
that where there is an alleged encroachment of land where persons who having
entered upon or taken possession of land which belong to the Crown or which
prior to entry or taking possession, was in the possession of the Crown,
information of such encroachment could be laid before the District Court. The
District Court if' ssatisfied that the persons against whom the information,
had been laid had _entered upon or taken possession of the land without the
permission of the Government,_ could make an order for delivery of possession.
This Ordinance has provided a very summary or speedy procedure to eject such
persons. However, section 7(c) of this Ordinance permitted the rebuttal of the
presumption that the land belongs to the State on proof inter alia of
uninterrupted possession



**  627**

**  **

for not less than 30 years. The State had not chosen to proceed under this
Ordinance, to obtain a summary order from the District Court for delivery of
possession of the land on the basis that the land belonged to the State and
had been encroached upon. The respondent had decided to proceed under the
newly enacted State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No.7 of 1979 without
considering its applicability or otherwise to the facts established at the end
of his inquiries.



The State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979 came into force on
25th January 1979. It was amended by Act No. 58 of 1981\. This Act has not
repealed the Crown Lands Encroachment Ordinance (Chap.465). It was enacted to
make provision for the recovery of possession of "State lands" as defined in
the Act from persons in _unauthorised possession or occupation_ thereof and
matters connected, therewith or incidental thereto. It is clear that this Act
was intended to obtain an order of ejectment from the Magistrate's Court where
the _occupation or possession was unauthorised_. Where a person is authorised
to occupy or possess State Land which includes buildings, and where the
authorisation has come to an end or has ceased to be of any force or effect,
his occupation or possession becomes unauthorised. This position is made clear
by section 9 which provides for the scope of the inquiry before the Magistrate
and the only plea a person summoned could urge in defence:



"9(1)    At such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6 has been
served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the
application under section 5 except that such person _may establish that he is
in possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written
authority of the State_ granted in accordance with any written law and that
such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered
invalid.



       (2) It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any evidence from the competent authority in support of the application under section .5".‑



It is therefore necessary to examine the provisions of section 3 to determine
under what circumstances a competent authority could serve a quit notice. It
provides that when a _competent authority is of opinion that any person is in
unauthorised possession or occupation_ of State land he may serve a notice.
The opinion to be formed is not whether the property is "State land", but
whether the occupation or possession of such "State land" as defined in the
Act is authorised.



#  628



"State land" has been defined in the Act as _'land to which the State is
lawfully entitled or which may be disposed of by the State together with any
buildings_. A Competent Authority could form such an opinion of such
unauthorised possession or occupation on the basis that an antecedent valid
permit or written authority given had ceased or had deemed to have ceased to
be in force or had been revoked. The Act No.7 of 1979 as amended by Act No.58
of 1981 was intended to recover or to get back the possession or occupation of
such State land by initiating action under section 3. A purposive examination
and interpretation of this Law shows that it was enacted to get back
possession of State land which had been, given to a person on a contractual
footing and where there was an Obligation to vacate and give up possession or
occupation on the happening of some event as a necessary consequence. This
procedure could not be availed of where it is not clear that the land in
respect of which the right or title of the State was doubtful or in dispute.
The provisions of sections 12 and 13 no doubt, provide that an action in
vindication or compensation could be filed against the State by a person
ejected claiming to be the owner thereof. But this does not mean that the
State could act under this law in the circumstances such as have been
established in this case. The provisions of section 17 of this Act have
protected the rights of the State as follows:‑



"Provided that this Act shall not prejudice the State to proceed under the
provisions of any other law _to recover possession_ of any State land or to
_establish title_ thereto or to claim any relief in respect of such land."



The Court of Appeal was in error in taking the view that under the Act No 7 of
1979 what a Competent Authority was required too do under section 3(1) _was
merely to form an opinion that the land is State land,_ that once it forms
that opinion it is his duty to take necessary steps under the Act to have a
person in 'unauthorised occupation' ejected and to recover possession. Having
formed this view the Court of Appeal came to the erroneous finding that the
respondent was justified in the course of action he had adopted.



The scope of the State Land (Recovery Possession) Act was to provide a speedy
or summary mode of getting back possession or occupation of 'State land' as
defined in the Act, where there was not subsisting at the relevant date, in
the opinion of the Competent Authority, a valid permit or authority. It was
not meant to obtain possession of land which the State had lost possession of
by encroachment



**  629**

**  **

or ouster for a considerable period of time by ejecting a person in such
possession. Section 3 of this Law should not be used by a Competent Authority
to eject a person who has been found by him to be in possession of a land in
circumstances such as have transpired  in this case.



I therefore set aside the order of the Court of Appeal and direct that the
Writ applied for be issued. The appellant will be entitled to costs in this
Court and in the Court of Appeal.



**SHARVANANDA., J. ‑ **I agree.

**  **

**RATWATTE, J.** ‑ I agree.



Appeal allowed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/41.html_  

