##  Seelawathie Mallawa v. Millie Keerthiratne - SLR - 384, Vol 1 of 1982
[1981] LKSC 41; (1982) 1 Sri LR 384 (1 March 1981)

# 384



**SUPREME COURT**



**Seelawathie Mallawa**

**vs.**

**Millie Keerthiratne**



_S.C. No. 80/81 ‑ C.A. Application No. 103/81‑ D.C. Kandy_

_Case No. 12934/L_



_Injunction ‑ Circumstances when it will be granted ‑ suspension ‑
trespasser._

_ _

Ptff. R. was owner of premises known as Keerthi Cinema. According to Lease
Agreement dated 1st March 1979 Plaintiff leased Keerthi Cinema Hall for a
period of 2 years till 28.2.81. There was a reference in the schedule to the
machinery and equipment which were to be used for the business of exhibiting
films. The Defendant A. having registered the business name of New Keerthi
Cinema carried on the business of exhibiting films at the premises using the
machinery and equipment in the Hall.



Sometime before the lease expired the Ptff. R advertised the premises in the
hope of obtaining a higher rent and inquired from the Defendant Appellant
whether she would make a higher offer.



As the Defendant Appellant by her action made it known that she was going to
continue occupation on the earlier terms Ptff. R. became apprehensive and
brought this action, seeking a declaration that she was entitled to possession
of the premises and also sought an injunction to be operative till the final
determination of the said action restraining the Defendant A from entering
Keerthi Cinema Hall, to hand over the equipment and machinery and to prohibit
her from exhibiting any film at the said Cinema pending final determination of
action.



The D.J. after inquiry only restrained Deft. A. from exhibiting any films at
the Hall.



Deft. A. appealed against this order.



_Held      _1. That the order made by District Judge in restraining the
Defendant  Appellant from taking any benefits arising out of wrongful
possession after expiring of lease was justified.



2.  That the District Judge was also justified in refusing to grant an injunction removing the Defendant from the premises pending determination of trial.



# 385



**APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.



Before:             Wanasundera, J., Wimalaratne, J. and Victor

Perera, J.

**  **

Counsel: **            **_H. L. de Silva_ , Senior Attorney‑at‑law with

_T. B. Dillimuni_ for the defendant‑appellant.



_K. N. Choksy_ , Senior Attorney‑at‑law with _L. C._

_Seneviratne_ and _L. Perera_ for plaintiff­-respondent.

**  **

**Argued on:       **11.03.1982. & 31.03.1982

_Cur. adv. vult._

**  **

**Decided on:     **12.05.1982

**  **

**VICTOR PERERA, J.,**



_             _This is an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal
dated 25th September 1981 affirming the order of the District Court of Kandy,
granting an interim injunction restraining the defendant‑appellant, her
licensees, agents, servants and workmen from exhibiting any film in the Cinema
which was the subject matter of the dispute till the final determination of
the action on the plaintiff‑respondent furnishing security in a sum of Rs.
5000/‑.



The plaintiff‑respondent was admittedly the owner of the land called Rajatotam
Estate alias Rajawatte presently known as Keerthi Cinema and Grounds in extent
two roods and twelve decimal five perches (OA. 2R. 12.50). According to the
Indenture of Lease No. 6107 dated 26th August 1971 (P10) the
plaintiff‑respondent had leased the said land and buildings for the first time
to one A.P. Mallanayake. The Indenture is clearly a lease of the land and the
buildings and not of a business and the lessee was given a licence to use the
Cinema Hall, machinery and equipment for him to run the business of a Cinema
for exhibiting films. Though this lease of the premises was for a period of
ten years, it would appear that there has been an earlier termination of the
lease, as the plaintiff‑respondent had by Lease Bond No. 2033 dated 15th May
1975 (P6) leased the said



# 386



land, Cinema Hall and buildings appurtenant thereto to the defendant‑appellant
for four years from 1st March 1975 till 28th February 1979\. At the expiry of
this second lease, the plaintiff‑respondent by indenture No. 10 dated 1st
March 1979 (P1) leased the said land and buildings once again to the
defendant‑appellant for a further period of two years from 1st March 1979 till
28th February 1981.



On a careful examination of the Lease Bonds there is no doubt whatsoever that
the leases were in respect of the land, together with the Cinema Hall and
other buildings standing thereon. The Schedules thereto do not refer to any
business. There is reference to a separate inventory to be made of machinery,
equipment, furniture and fittings installed and lying in the premises which
were to be used for the business of a Cinema for exhibiting films. The Lessee
had to use her capital and her employees, she was responsible to their
employment, payment of wages and also the running of the Liquor Bar in
accordance with Excise Regulations. There is nothing in the Leases to justify
even an inference that what was let was a business as a going concern or the
goodwill of a business. The facts are similar to the lease of a building
described as a "workshop" which was the subject matter of the case of
_Nicholas Hamy v. James Appuhamy_ (52 NLR 137) where the Supreme Court held
that there was the lease of the building along with the machinery, tools and
implements but not a, lease of a business. It is therefore clear that the
defendant‑appellant was given a lease of the premises described in the
Schedule and a licence to use the Cinema Hall to run the only business that
could be run in the premises, namely that of exhibiting films during the
pendency of the lease. This licence was ancillary to the lease of the premises
and could not exist without the lease. Therefore when the lease expired in
terms of the Indenture of Lease on 28.2.81 the licence to exhibit films ceased
to exist and there was no further contractual relationship between the
parties.



The business belonged to the defendant‑appellant and she in 1977 had quite
legitimately registered the business name of _" New Keerthi Cinema"_ on 6th
March 1977 according to document "A" filed with her statement of objections,
claiming the business as one belonging to her and started by her on _6th
January 1977_ though the building leased to her was the 'Keerthi Cinema Hall.'



In anticipation of the termination of the lease on 28th February 1981 and the
consequent lapse of the licence to exhibit films thereafter, the
plaintiff‑respondent had from about November 1980 taken steps



# 387



to invite tenders for a new lease of the land and buildings from 1st March
1981. She had caused the publication of an advertisement in the Newspapers on
the 2nd November 1980 calling for such tenders. The plaintiff‑respondent had
by letter dated 19th November 1980 (P2) through her Lawyer written to the
defendant‑appellant herself adverting to the said advertisement, intimating to
her that she had received several offers of leases at a much higher rent then
what the defendant‑appellant was then paying, invited her to make an offer of
a higher rent if she was interested and notifying to her that she will have to
hand over the premises on the 28th February 1981 in the event of the
plaintiff‑respondent leasing the same to another. The defendant‑appellant by
letter  dated 28th November 1980 (P3) sent through her Lawyer to the
plaintiff‑respondent expressed her willingness to take a new lease for 5 years
at  the rental of Rs. 1,500/‑ per month and stating that she was ready to sign
a lease bond with the necessary conditions. The defendant‑appellant was thus
fully aware of the intentions and actions of the plaintiff‑respondent, but
does not appear to have pursued her own intention or desire to renew the
lease.



The plaintiff‑respondent had however in the meantime accepted an offer by one
R.M. Seneviratne who was prepared to pay a rental of Rs. 3,500/‑ per month and
she and Seneviratne had duly executed Indenture of Lease No. 24 dated _27th
January 1981_ (P9) with new terms and conditions to be effective from 1st
March 1981\. Curiously, on the very next date, that is, on _28th January
1981,_ the defendant‑appellant had sent an application to the Rent Control
Board, Kadugannawa, in an attempt to forcibly continue in occupation of the
leased premises. In her application she had stated that the land owner was
maintaining that the premises are _excepted premises_ and that they did not
come within the operation of the provisions of the Rent Act. The relief sought
for by the defendant‑appellant by that application was to have the premises
declared not to be _excepted premises_ as the fair rental value did not exceed
Rs. 1,500/- ­per month in terms of the Schedule 4 to the Rent Act No. 7 of
1972. Having forwarded this application to the Board the defendant‑appellant,
through her Lawyer, sent a letter dated 29.1.81 (P4) to the
plaintiff‑respondent stating that she was a statutory monthly tenant and
demanding a certificate of tenancy, but making no reference to her application
to the Rent Control Board. The Plaintiff‑respondent by letter dated 5.2.81
(P5) repudiated this assertion and noticed the defendant‑appellant to hand
over the premises to her on 28.2.81.



**388**



The plaintiff‑respondent becoming apprehensive of the threat by the
defendant‑appellant to continue in forcible occupation of the leased premises
after 28.2.81 in defiance of her rights thereby thwarting her implementation
of her contractual obligations towards R.M. Seneviratne, the new lessee, filed
this action on 16th February 1981 before the expiry of the lease, as a quia
time action, in the District Court of Kandy seeking a declaration that she was
entitled to the possession of the leased premises from 1st March 1981. She
also in her affidavit dated 23.2.81 applied for an interim injunction to be
operative till the final determination of the said action restraining the
defendant‑appellant from entering the "Keerthi Cinema Hall" and directing the
defendant‑appellant to hand over the Cinema Hall and the equipment therein to
her or to prohibit the defendant‑appellant from exhibiting any film at the
said Cinema pending the final determination of the action. After inquiry the
District Judge did not restrain the defendant‑appellant from entering the
premises but only stopped her from obtaining any benefits from her unlawful
acts by exhibiting films at the Cinema Hall.



These being the facts established both by the plaintiff‑respondent and the
defendant‑appellant, it will be necessary to ascertain whether the District
Judge had correctly used his discretionary powers in restraining the
defendant‑appellant in this particular manner.



The power to grant injunctions is now governed by Section 54 of the Judicature
Act No. 2 of 1978 read along with Sections 662 to 667 of the Civil Procedure
Code. Section 54 has merely re‑iterated the powers referred to in Section 86
of the Courts Ordinance No. 1 of 1889.



 The principles which the Court must take into account when deciding whether
to grant an injunction or not have been formulated from time to time in
decisions of our Courts and have sometimes been re‑formulated on the basis of
decisions of the English Courts. Generally the line of approach in exercising
the Court's discretion whether to grant an interim injunction or not has been,
first to look at the whole case before it. The primary consideration was the
relative strength of the parties cases. The Court must have regard not only to
the nature and strength of the plaintiff's claim and demand but also to the
strength of the defence. It is when the Court has formed the opinion that the
plaintiff had a strong prima



# 389



facie case, that the Court had then to decide what was best to be done in the
circumstances. No doubt this exercise entailed a close examination of the
merits at times almost bordering on a trial of the action, but without
deciding the main issues that will be raised at the trial. In deciding on the
nature or terms of such an interim injunction, the underlying principle to be
considered is that the _status quo_ must be maintained. Initially the
plaintiff therefore needs only to satisfy the Court that there is a serious
matter to be tried at the hearing. This was what was laid down by the Supreme
Court in the case of _Jinadasa v. Weerasinghe_ (31 NLR 33). In the later case
of  _Dissanayake v. Agricultural and Industrial Credit Corporation_ (64 NLR
283) the Supreme Court held that if it appears from the pleadings already
filed that such a matter does exist, the further question to be considered was
whether the circumstances are such, that a decree which may ultimately be
entered in favour of the party seeking the injunction would be nugatory or
ineffective if the injunction is not issued. It is in considering this second
matter that the question of balance of convenience or the damages are taken
into account with a view to ascertain the probable consequences to both
parties of granting or refusing an injunction and to decide whether there is
an alternative remedy other than an interim injunction.



Much of the argument before us was based on the plea that the
plaintiff‑respondent could be compensated by damages for the wrongful
possession of the land and buildings by the defendant‑appellant even though
the plaintiff‑respondent had made out a strong prima facie case in regard to
her claim. It was therefore contended that the order issuing an interim
injunction was not justified.



In the present case, the defendant‑appellant being an over‑holding lessee is a
trespasser in regard to the land and buildings leased to her and will be
liable to pay damages for wrongful possession thereof, but there is the
further fact that she was trying thereby to keep alive a licence to run a
business which licence had ceased to exist and to derive for herself the sole
benefit therefrom as long as the  litigation lasted.



An injunction is the normal way of stopping a wrong doer from obtaining the
benefit of such wrong doing to the detriment of the aggrieved party. In the
case of _Re W.J. King & Sons Ltd's Application_ (19761 AER 770) cited to us by
Counsel for the plaintiff‑respondent,



#  390



the appellant's father was the owner of a quarry and certain land adjoining
it. He had leased the said quarry and the land to a Company which carried on
its business of quarrying hard stone. The lease expired on 25th December
1974\. After the expiry of the lease the lessee Company continued to extract
hardstone from the appellant's quarry. The lessee Company made an application
to court pending the determination of the matters in dispute for an interim
order preserving the status quo and obtained an interim order granting the
lessee Company the right to continue the search for hardstone at the
appellant's quarry until the trial. In appeal, the Court of Appeal held that
since the lease granted to the lessee Company had already expired, the Company
was acting unlawfully by continuing to work the quarry which was the property
of the appellant and that the Court had no inherent power by way of an interim
order to override the rights of the appellant.



The principle enunciated in that case could be applied with full force in this
case. Here the defendant‑appellant's lease in respect to the land and
buildings including the Cinema Hall came to an end on the 28th February 1981.
After the expiry of this lease, if she continued to use the Cinema Hall,
machinery and equipment in the premises and exhibited films on the screen, she
would be doing so without any right whatsoever and unlawfully in the absence
of a valid contract or licence and the continuation thereof will not preserve
the _status quo_ at least as regards the machinery and equipment which belong
to the plaintiff‑respondent and which were not regarded as the leased
premises. The District Judge was therefore justified in exercising his
discretion in issuing an interim injunction only restraining the exhibition of
films pending the hearing of the action, but not disturbing her possession of
the leased premises.



It was contended for the defendant‑appellant that the District Judge having
refused to restrain the defendant‑appellant from entering the leased premises,
was not justified in preventing the defendant‑appellant exhibiting films in
the Cinema. The defendant‑appellant bid during the period covered by the lease
a licence to use the Cinema Hall, machinery and equipment for the Cinema
business of exhibiting films. But with the expiry of the lease the licence
ceased to exist. On the authority of the case of _Pounds v. Ganegama_ (40 NLR
73) the District Judge could not possibly have placed the plaintiff‑respondent
in possession of the leased premises pending the trial. The Supreme Court in
that case clearly held, that a Court by an‑interim injunction



**391**



had no power to remove a defendant in Possession pending the result of an
action. The District Judge quite correctly refused to grant such an
injunction. However, the District Judge had addressed his mind to the
underlying principle that if a person in unlawful possession could not be
ejected pending trial, he could still be restrained from taking any benefits
arising out of such wrongful possession, otherwise the Court would be a party
to the preserving for the defendant‑appellant a position of advantage brought
about by her own unlawful or wrongful conduct.



The order of the District Judge is hereby affirmed. The order of the Court of
Appeal  pending the operation of the interim injunction is vacated. The appeal
is dismissed with Costs.



**WANASUNDERA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**WIMALARATNE, J.** ‑ I agree.



### **Order of Court of**

**_Appeal suspending_**

**_operation of interim injunction_**

**_vacated._**

**_Appeal dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/41.html_  

