##  Jayawardena v. Megasuriya and Others - SLR - 101, Vol 3 of 1997 [1997]
LKSC 41; (1997) 3 Sri LR 101 (24 July 1997)

101

JAYAWARDENA

v.

MEGASURIYA AND OTHERS



SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

RAMANATHAN, J. AND

PERERA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 47/96

C.A. APPLICATION NO. 280/94.

JUNE 6, 1997.



_Writ of Certiorari - Paddy Lands - Agricultural Lands Law No. 42 of 1973 -
Magistrate's power to make an eviction order - Section 4(2) of the Law - Order
made without jurisdiction - Right of cultivator evicted by such order._

_ _

The original petitioner sought a writ of certiorari to quash a notice dated
9.1.84 issued by an Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services directing him
to vacate the paddy land called Inimage Kumbura and to hand over possession to
Megasuriya. The petitioner claimed that at an inquiry held by an Assistant
Commissioner in 1962, he was declared to be the tenant cultivator of two paddy
lands, Lindagawa Kumbura and Inimage Kumbura. But he was not restored to
possession of these lands. In the meantime it was reported that Inimage
Kumbura was being cultivated by one Megasuriya. Consequently, on a report made
under the Agricultural Lands law No. 42 of 1973 the Magistrate made order
under section 4(2) of the Law directing the Fiscal to restore the petitioner
to the possession of Inimage Kumbura which was done on 3.2.76. Whereupon
Megasuriya made a complaint of eviction from Inimage Kumbura. On 23.09.81 an
Assistant Commissioner held an inquiry into that complaint. This was followed
by the impugned notice.



**Held:**



1\. The order of eviction made by the Magistrate under section 4(2) of the
Agricultural Lands Law was void ab initio as there was a total want of
jurisdiction in the Court in that having regard to the proceedings had before
the Assistant Commissioner in 1962, the order which was sought to be enforced
through the Magistrate could not possibly relate to an eviction from Inimage
Kumbura. No evidence whatsoever had been lead in regard to alleged eviction
from Inimage Kumbura. The entirety of the evidence related to eviction from
Lindagawa Kumbura.

**102**



2\. Since the "Order" of eviction made by Court was a nullity, the Assistant
Commissioner had the authority to issue the impugned notice.



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_ _

_R. K. W Goonesekera_ with _Rohan Sahabandu_ for the substituted - petitioner
- appellant.

_ _

_N. R. M. Daluwatta, PC._ with _Ms. Samantha Abeyjeewa_ for the 1st
respondent.

_ _

_Cur adv vult._



July 24, 1997.  


**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

** **

The original petitioner made an application for a writ of certiorari to quash
the notice dated 9.1.84 issued by the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian
Services (4th respondent) directing him to vacate the paddy field called
Inimage Kumbura and hand over possession to the 1st respondent on or before
10.2.84 (P7). In his petition he averred: that he was the tenant cultivator of
two paddy lands known as Lindagawa Kumbura and Inimage Kumbura; that on or
about 17.4.62 he was evicted from these paddy lands; that he made a complaint
of eviction to the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services; that an
inquiry was held on 14.9.62; at the inquiry the Assistant Commissioner of
Agrarian Services determined that he was the lawful tenant cultivator of both
Lindagawa Kumbura and Inimage Kumbura; that an order for restoration of
possession was made; that he was not restored to possession of these paddy
lands and it was reported by the Cultivation Committee that the paddy land
called Inimage Kumbura was being cultivated by the 1st respondent (A. G.
Megasuriya); that the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services noticed the
1st respondent to vacate Inimage Kumbura; that on the failure of the 1st
respondent to vacate Inimage Kumbura steps were taken under the provisions of
the Agricultural Lands Law No. 42 of 1973 to file a written report in the
Magistrate's Court; that pursuant to the report to the Magistrate's Court an
order was made by the Magistrate restoring the petitioner to the possession of
Inimage Kumbura. The date of delivery of possession of Inimage Kumbura was
3.2.76; that on or about 23.9.81 the petitioner was summoned by

**103**



the 3rd respondent (Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services, Matale) and
was questioned about the eviction of the 1st respondent (Megasuriya) from
Inimage Kumbura on **3.2.76** ; that an inquiry was held into the 1st
respondent's complaint of eviction from Inimage Kumbura on 3.2.76; that the
petitioner had explained that it was on a complaint of eviction made by him in
1962 that he was restored to possession of Inimage Kumbura pursuant to an
order made by the Magistrate's court; that thereafter he received the notice
P7 directing him to vacate Inimage Kumbura.



It is the case for the petitioner that the notice P7 was issued without
jurisdiction inasmuch as the petitioner was restored to possession of Inimage
Kumbura on 3.2.76 by virtue of an order made by the Magistrate's Court. The
Fiscal, who is an officer of Court, acted on the directions of the Court and
lawfully evicted the 1st respondent who was in unlawful occupation of Inimage
Kumbura. The Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services therefore had no
authority to override an order of court and direct the petitioner to vacate
Inimage Kumbura.



The case for the 1st respondent is that although the original petitioner had
on 18.6.62 complained of an eviction from both Lindagawa Kumbura and Inimage
Kumbura, yet a scrutiny of the proceedings held before the Assistant
Commissioner of Agrarian Services (consequent upon the said complaint) makes
it manifest that no evidence whatsoever was lead in regard to the alleged
eviction from Inimage Kumbura. The proceedings held before the Assistant
Commissioner of Agrarian Services are marked as 1R4. The entirety of the
evidence related to the eviction from the paddy field called Lindagawa
Kumbura. It is true that a report was filed in the Magistrate's Court in
respect of an alleged eviction from Inimage Kurnbura and upon that report the
Court had made order directing the Fiscal to deliver possession of Inimage
Kumbura to the original petitioner. It is not disputed, as stated earlier,
that it was consequent upon the order of court that the 1st respondent was
evicted from Inimage Kumbura and possession of Inimage Kumbura was delivered
to the petitioner on 3.2.76.

**104**



Mr. R. K. W. Goonesekera for the substituted petitioner-appellant (the
original petitioner having died while the application was pending before the
Court of Appeal) strenuously contended that in these circumstances the
Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services had no authority whatever to issue
the notice P7 directing the petitioner to vacate Inimage Kumbura. On the other
hand Mr. Daluwatte for the 1st respondent strongly urged that the Magistrate's
Court in directing the Fiscal to evict the 1st respondent from Inimage Kumbura
acted without jurisdiction for the reason that the proceedings 1R4 were
confined to the eviction of the petitioner from Lindagawa Kumbura. There was a
total absence of evidence in regard to the alleged eviction from Inimage
Kumbura at the inquiry before the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services.



At this point it is necessary to refer briefly to the relevant provisions of
the Agricultural Lands Law No. 42 of 1973. Section 3(3) provides for a tenant-
cultivator to notify the Agricultural Tribunal that he has been evicted from
the paddy land and the Tribunal is empowered to hold an inquiry. Section 3(4)
enacts that where the "tribunal decides that the eviction had been made" the
person evicted is entitled to be restored to possession of the paddy land and
"the Tribunal shall in writing order that every person in occupation of such
extent shall vacate it on or before such date as shall be specified in that
order, and if such person fails to comply with such order, he shall be evicted
from such extent in accordance with the provisions of section 4...:



Section 4(1) reads thus:



"Where any person who has been ordered under this Law by the Tribunal to
vacate any extent of ,paddy land and to deliver possession thereof to any
specified person fails to comply with such order, the Tribunal or any person
authorised in that behalf by the Tribunal may present to the Magistrate's
Court within whose local jurisdiction such extent wholly or mainly lies a
written report specifying the nature of such order and the person to whom it
was issued, describing the extent of land to which such order relates,  


**105**



stating that such person has failed as required by such order to vacate or to
vacate and deliver possession of such extent, praying for an order to evict
such person and all other persons in occupation of such extent from such
extent, and mentioning the person to whom delivery of possession of such
extent should be made."



Section 4(2) is as follows:



"Where a written report is presented to a Magistrate's Court under subsection
(1), such court shall direct the Fiscal or peace officer to evict forthwith
the person specified in such report and all other persons in occupation of the
extent of land specified in the order and to deliver possession of such extent
to the person mentioned in such report as the person to whom delivery of
possession of such extent should be made."



The "written report to court" is based on the evidence and the finding reached
by the Tribunal after inquiry. The report to court must specify "the nature of
the order" and describe the "extent of the land to which the order relates."
Having regard to the nature of the evidence led at the inquiry, the "order"
could not possibly relate to an alleged eviction from Inimage Kumbura. t am
therefore of the opinion that there was no foundation for the exercise of
jurisdiction by the Magistrate's Court in terms of section 4(2) of the
Agricultural Lands Law No. 42 of 1973. In other words, there was a total want
of jurisdiction in the court and the purported order of eviction in respect of
Inimage Kumbura was void ab initio; it is an order which could be attacked
even collaterally. Since the "order" of eviction made by court against the 1st
respondent was a nullity, the Assistant Commissioner had the authority to
issue the notice P7. The application for Certiorari to quash P7 cannot
therefore succeed.



For these reasons the appeal fails and is dismissed, but in all the
circumstances, without costs.



**RAMANATHAN, J** \- l agree.

** **

**PERERA, J**. - I agree.



_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/41.html_  

