##  Thalwatte v. Somasundaram - SLR - 109, Vol 2 of 1997 [1996] LKSC 41;
(1997) 2 Sri LR 109 (12 February 1996)

109

THALWATTE  

V.  

SOMASUNDARAM



SUPREME COURT.

G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

KULATUNGA, J.

AND RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL 57/93.

C.A. NO. 845/85 (F).

D.C. MT. LAVINIA NO. 1156/RE.

MARCH 31, JULY 14, NOVEMBER 2, 1995.

JANUARY 23 AND 30 AND

FEBRUARY 1. 1996.



Rent Act - Action for ejectment - Arrears of Rent - Payment of arrears before
summons returnable date - Rent Act, section 22(3)(c) \- Appropriation of
payments - Civil Procedure Code, section 150(2).



**Held:**



1\. The appropriation of payments of rent as against arrears turns upon the
intention of the debtor, either express or implied. Applying this principle,
the defendant was not in arrears of rent as at the summons returnable date
having regard to the terms of section 22(3) (c) of the Rent Act.



2\. The question of appropriation of payments by way of rent did not arise for
the reason that the case was not presented before the District Court on that
basis. A party cannot be permitted to present in appeal a case materially
different from the case presented before the trial court.

** **

**Cases referred to:**

** **

1.       Kurukulasuriya v. Ranmenike - [ 1990] 1 Sri L. R. 331.   


2.       Setha v. Weerakoon 49 N.L.R. 225, 228, 229.

_ _

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_A. K. Premadasa, P.C._ with _T. B. Dillimuni_ for plaintiff-appellant.

_  
P. A. D. Samarasekera, P.C._ with _S. Mahenthiran_ for defendant-respondent.

_ _

_Cur adv vult._

**  
110**



February 12, 1996.  


**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.**



The plaintiff, as landlord, instituted these proceedings on 5.6.80 seeking,
inter alia, the ejectment of his tenant (the defendant) from the premises in
suit. The ground of ejectment was arrears of rent (section 22(2) (a) of the
Rent Act). The premises were residential premises.



The monthly rental was Rs. 290/64. By letter dated 24.4.79 the plaintiff gave
the defendant three months notice of termination of tenancy. The tenancy
terminated on 31.7.79. The summons returnable date was 8.12.80.



At the hearing before us, it was common ground that the period for which rent
was due from the defendant to the plaintiff was from 1.12.76 to 31.3.79. It
was for a period of 28 months and the arrears of rent amounted to Rs. 8137/92.
Furthermore, it was not disputed that the defendant had paid the plaintiff as
rent a sum of Rs. 10,744/50 before the summons returnable date (8.12.80). The
defendant was therefore not in arrears of rent having regard to the terms of
section 22(3) (c) of the Rent Act and the Court of Appeal reversed the
judgment of the District Court and dismissed the plaintiff's action. The
plaintiff has appealed against the judgment of the Court of Appeal.



At the hearing before us the principal submission of Mr. Premadasa, counsel
for the plaintiff-appellant, was founded on the decision of this court in
Kurukulasuriya v. Ranmenika(1). Mr. Premadasa pointed out that admittedly the
defendant had paid no rent during the relevant period, namely, 1.12.76 to
31.3.79. It was after 31.3.79 that the defendant commenced to pay the arrears
of rent, and what is more in each of the documents P4, P5, P6, P7 and P8 the
defendant had specifically stated the month or months for which payment was
being made. Mr. Premadasa repeatedly stressed the fact that in each of the
aforesaid documents the defendant had specified the month or months for which
payment was being made. And relying on the judgment in. Kurukulasuriya's case
(supra)



**111**



Mr. Premadasa argued that those payments cannot be reckoned for any period
other than the period specified in the documents. If this submission is
accepted, the result would be that the defendant is in arrears of rent and the
plaintiff must succeed in this appeal.



However, on a consideration of the relevant facts, this submission does not
commend itself to me. The facts in the appeal before us do not show that the
defendant **actually intended** to make payments for specified periods. The
period specified in the documents P4, P5, P6, P7 and P8 (referred to above)
was by reason of a **mistake** initially made by the defendant when he made
the first payment of P3 dated 24.7.79. What happened was that by P3 the
defendant sent the plaintiff a sum of Rs. 5510/- as arrears of rent stating
that it was for a period of **19 months** , the period set out being 1.12.76
to 30.6.79. This was obviously a mistake for in truth the period 1.12.76 to
30.6.79 covered **29 months** (and not 19 months as stated in P3). The
subsequent payments on P4, P5, P6, P7, and P8 were on the wrong assumption
that he had by P3 paid rent up to the end of June 1979. It was by reason of
that mistake that the very next payment P4 mentions the months of July, August
and September 1979. A scrutiny of the documents therefore clearly establishes
that the months specified in the documents were by reason of a mistake.



Citing a passage from Nathan, Common Law of South Africa, 2nd Edn. Vol. II,
page 659. Bandaranayake, J. states in Kurukulasuriya's case (supra) at pages
338 and 339:- "the whole doctrine of the Roman Dutch Law as to appropriation
of payments turns upon the intention of the debtor, either expressed, implied
or presumed." Since the facts in the appeal before us clearly show that there
was no such intention on the part of the defendant, Kurukulasuriya's case has
no application.



Besides, the question of appropriation of payments by way of rent does not
arise in the present case for the reason that the case was not presented
before the District Court on that basis. Neither the pleadings nor the issues
nor even the written submissions reflect the question of appropriation of
payments. A new contention of this kind

**112**



cannot be raised for the first time in appeal since it involves questions of
mixed fact and law - vide the judgment of Dias J. in Setha v Weerakoon(2). In
this connection, it is well to bear in mind the provisions contained in
Explanation 2 to section 150 of the Civil Procedure Code. A fortiori, a party
cannot be permitted to present in appeal a case materially different from the
case presented before the trial court.



Finally, in regard to Mr. Premadasa's reliance on Kurukulasuriya's case
(supra) (which was decided five years after the judgment of the District
Court) the Court of Appeal correctly and relevantly stated thus:- "It was not
the respondent's case (i.e. the plaintiff's case) that the ruling regarding
appropriation should apply and the **trial in the District Court was on the
basis of overall arrears and the overall picture is that the appellant was not
in arrears of rent. " **(The emphasis is mine).  


For these reasons the appeal fails and is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs.
750/-.



**KULATUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

** **

**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.



_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/41.html_  

