##  Upaliratne and Others v. Tikiri Banda and Others - SLR - 165, Vol 1 of
1995 [1995] LKSC 41; (1995) 1 Sri LR 165 (13 March 1995)

**165**

**UPALIRATNE AND OTHERS**

  **v.**

**TIKIRI BANDA AND OTHERS**

  
SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J.  
AMERASINGHE, J. AND  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
S.C. (FR.) APPLICATION NO. 86/95  
MAY 29, JULY 20, 21 AND 25, 1995.

_Fundamental Rights - Ousting of Time-Keepers appointed by the Central
Province Private Bus Workers Co-operative Society by unauthorised persons -
Role of State Officials and Police - Articles 12(1), (2), 17 and 126 of the
Constitution - Executive and administrative action - Rules 44(1), 44(1) (c) of
the Supreme Court Rules._

The Central Province Private Bus Workers Co-operative Society (21st
respondent) was a duly registered body under the Co-operative Societies Act,
No. 5 of 1972. It was formed, inter alia, for the purpose of providing the
Transport Ministry of the Central Provincial Council with certain services
such as ensuring that private omni buses arrived and departed on time and
providing the Transport Ministry with data gathered from the field through
"Time-Keepers" which assisted the Ministry in regulating private omnibus
operations. In terms of clause 4 of a contract entered into between the
Society and the Council on 21 January 1993 and amended on 30 March 1993,
subject to certain terms and conditions, the Council agreed to pay for the
services it had agreed to perform. The Society in turn paid its members on a
monthly basis for the services performed by them. On 14 February 1995, 35
members of the Society including the three petitioners were engaged in duties
for their Society in Kandy as "Time-Keepers" at various points. They had
identity cards where their names and distinctive identification numbers were
given.

From about 14 February 1995 the 7th to 19th respondents usurped the jobs and
powers, functions and duties of the petitioners and were unlawfully purporting
to continue in such employment. The respondents position is that they were
given to understand that the Time-Keepers posts at the Kandy Bus Stand had
fallen vacant and they, except 8th, 9th and 18th respondents moved in
individually and commenced work but did not do so unlawfully or forcibly.

The petitioners alleged that on 14 February 1995 a group of over 100 persons
armed with iron rods and poles arrived at the Kandy Bus Stand in the morning
and assaulted and/or abused and/or intimidated the petitioners and their

166

colleagues and prevented them from performing their legitimate duties and
forcibly and unlawfully took over and were functioning as Time-Keepers.

**Held:**

(1) The 8th, 9th and 18th respondents have been mistakenly made parties to
these proceedings. Their inclusion was due to mere error and not on account of
any attempt to deceive and mislead the Court. The preliminary objection that
the petition should be rejected on this ground fails.

(2) There is no obligation to tender an affidavit from any one or more of the
petitioners. What is required is evidence of the facts submitted through
affidavits and other documents as are available to them (Rule 44(1) (c)). The
contention that all the petitioners have not given affidavits and there is
non-compliance with Rule 44(1) also fails.

(3) The respondents had no right to the specified status of Time-Keepers and
therefore their so called "moving in" and commencement of work as Time Keepers
was unlawful and void of legitimacy. It was certainly riot open to any person
or group of persons to take the law into their own hands and arbitrarily and
unlawfully drive away the officially recognized Time-Keepers from their places
of work, intrude upon and infringe their rights and encroach upon their
legitimate domain, thereby creating the vacancies into which the new Time
Keepers "moved in".

(4) **The alleged involvement of the first Respondent R. J. Tikiri Banda,
Coordinating Secretary to Hon. Colonel Anuruddha Ratwatte, M. P., and Minister
of Irrigation, Power and Energy, and Deputy Minister of Defence, the second
respondent.**

The first respondent openly directed and co-ordinated the activities of the
illegal gang of over 100 persons who invaded the Bus Stand and assaulted
and/or abused and/or intimidated the petitioners and their colleagues and
prevented them from performing their legitimate duties at the Bus Stand in the
Kandy Town on 14 February 1995 and forcibly and unlawfully took over and were
now performing the functions of Time-Keepers.

Having regard to all the circumstances, it seems more probable than not that
Tikiri Banda played a key role in the unlawful eviction of the Time-Keepers
who were members of the Central Bus Workers' Co-operative Society and in
placing other persons in substitution. He seems to have been the master-mind
who planned and directed the enterprise in question. He was particularly and
specially marked for espousing the cause of the new Time-Keepers and
singularly and

167

conspicuously daring to implement by bold and extreme and unlawful measures
apply described as an act of thuggery, a scheme to provide employment for
certain favoured persons. The evidence sufficient entangle Tikiri Banda and he
has been unable to extricate himself.

(5) **The alleged involvement of the Second Respondent the Hon. Colonel
Anuruddha Ratwatte, M.P, Minister of Irrigation, Power and Energy, and Deputy
Minister of Defence.**

Although the second respondent may have planned to provide employment for
certain persons the ousting of the Time-Keepers by unlawful means was not an
inevitable or necessary eventuality of his design. Its execution was a
completely different matter. It has not been established that there
involvement of the police, the 1st respondent and the use of official vehicles
could not have taken place without the knowledge, involvement and acquiescence
of the second respondent. The use of official vehicles does add weight to the
submission that there was State action and the second respondent may have been
ultimately accountable as the Minister in charge of the various departments
for the use of official vehicles but it has not been established that he
personally ordered or sanctioned their use. Nor can he be held vicariously
liable for the unauthorised acts of his officers, including those of his Co-
ordinating Secretary Tikiri Banda, although he may have pretended to have been
acting with his authority.

(6) **The alleged involvement of the Peoples Alliance**

The new Time-Keepers may have been the beneficiaries of a spoils system of
some sort favouring a certain group of persons. However, it has not been
established that the ousting and replacement of the Time-Keepers depended on
political affiliations and therefore the claim that Article 12(2) of the
Constitution was violated an account of discrimination based upon political
opinion must fail.

(7) **The alleged involvement of the 7th to 19th respondents**

The 8th, 9th and 18th respondents were mistakenly named as respondents and
they were not in any way involved in the events of 10 and 14 February 1995.

Each and everyone who took office as Time-Keepers at the Kandy Bus Stand on
and after 14 February 1995 were and continue to be in unlawful occupation of
such offices and to that extent are responsible for depriving the former Time-
Keepers of their employment and for unlawfully obstructing the Central
Provincial Council and its Ministry of Transport in particular, from
discharging its legitimate duties. The alleged operations of 10 and 14
February were for the purpose of placing the new Time-Keepers in occupation of
the positions held by members of

168

the Co-operative Society. The new Time-Keepers were the beneficiaries of the
unlawful operations. They are obstacles in the way of the discharge of the
duties and functions of the duty appointed and only legitimate Time-Keepers.

Not all the new Time-Keepers may have been personally involved in the acts of
"thuggery" although some of them like Joseph Deva the 10th respondent may have
been involved. Joseph Deva's position that the new Time-Keepers including
himself came to occupy their positions without force and that they were
working together with the old Time-Keepers is not supported by the evidence.

Although some or even most of the new Time-Keepers may not have assaulted and
intimidated the old Time-Keepers, they had all concurred and combined privity
with the more active and conspicuous participants, including officers of the
State, to illegally and reprehensibly oust the old Time-Keepers and to take
their places and continue to unlawfully function as Time-Keepers. They did not
happen to be available to fill the vacancies in fortuitous circumstances.

(8) **The alleged involvement of the Police**

So far as the events of 10 February 1995 are concerned where locks had been
broken and some persons had unlawfully entered the premises, the Police while
realizing the importance of taking appropriate action to remove the
unauthorized persons took no steps to remove the trespassers and the events of
the day had been entrusted to a mere Reserve Constable without any supporting
staff. However the attempt to oust the Time-Keepers on 10 February did not
succeed despite the absence of the assistance of the Police. Yet the second
attempt of 14 February 1995 was a complete success. Sub-Inspector M. R.
Vijitha Kumara the 5th respondent was well identified in the incident of 14
February 1995 and he was seen forcibly dragging Time-Keepers from their sheds.
In addition to him, Police Constables Nos. 16520 and R 11064 and Police
Officer "Pot Abey" who arrived in an Irrigation Department vehicle were
identified as being present at the scene of the incident. Police Vehicle No.
32 - 4563 carrying about half a dozen police officers dressed in civil clothes
were also identified.

The fact that persons were trespassing on the premises of the Time-Keepers,
assaulting and intimidating people in unlawful behaviour cannot be explained
away by stating that the bus stand is a public place. This explanation of P B.
Ekanayake Asst. Supdt. of Police the third respondent had whitewashing as its
principal object. He was trying to cover up the unlawful activities in
question. Police had taken no action on the complaints of assault and
trespass.

Per Amerasinghe, J:

"The Police function fulfils a most fundamental obligation of Government to
its constituency. Public safety, the maintenance of public order and the
preservation of peace and tranquility depend not only on the existence of
adequate laws but also on the way in which it is applied.

169

By necessity the State has cloaked policemen with substantial discretionary
power. The Police may classify persons and draw lines in the application of
laws, but discrimination must not be based upon impermissible criteria or
arbitrarily used to favour or burden a group of individuals. In the matter
before this Court, the enforcement of the law against those who were alleged
to have violated the law, and the failure to afford protection to those who
were in need of protection are unsupported by any neutral justification and
were either totally irrational or entirely motivated by a desire to achieve
some impermissible purpose. If I might borrow the words of Matthews, J. in
**Yick Wo** , the police have used their powers 'with a mind so unequal and
oppressive as to amount to a practical denial by the State of that equal
protection of the laws which is secured to the petitioners, as to all other
persons, by the broad and benign provisions of "Article 12(1) of the
Constitution".

Article 12(1) of the Constitution was violated and continues to be violated by
the Police. The Police were implicated because of the role they had played in
ousting the old Time-Keepers and in unlawfully installing and keeping in
office a new group of people.

(9) State responsibility

The acts of the first respondent are those of a State Officer for the purpose
of determining whether he performs executive or administrative functions and
are fairly attributable to the state and therefore engaged state
responsibility for the purposes of Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution. He
may have exceeded the scope of his authority. However, when a public officer
takes action relating to his office, those actions should be considered to be
executive action even if they exceed the scope of his authority, for he acts
under colour of his office.

The state is also accountable because it has not merely been passive and
tolerated the unlawful ousting of the old Time Keepers by private persons,
yielding readily to the influence of others and by its disinclination to act
but also because it has associated itself with it through the positive action,
encouragement and assistance of the Police force and its officers. The
replacement of the Time-Keepers was brought about by the significant aid and
rendered by state officials, including the first respondent the want of
adequate action of the police in relation to the events of 10 February 1995
and the active role played by the Police on 14 February, 1995 and by their
subsequent lack of action.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Jayasinghe v. Principal, Anula Vdyalaya and Others S.C. Application 81 of
1994 S.C. Minutes 26 May 1994._  
_2\. Railway Express Agency Inc. v. New York 336 US 10-6 (1949_

170

  
_3\. Yick Wo v. Hopkins 118 US 356 (1886)._  
_4\. Perere v. University Grants Commission FRD Vol. 1 p. 103._  
_5\. Neal v. Delaware 25 Law. Ed. 567._  
_6\. Dennis v. Sparks 449 US 24 (1950)._  
_7\. Tower v. Glover 467 US 914 (1984)._  
_8\. Lugar v. Edmonson Oil Co. Inc. 457 US 922, 938 - 939._  
_9\. Mohammed Faiz. v. Attorney-General and Others SC Application 89/91 S.C.
Minutes of 19 November 1993._  
_10\. Screws v. United States 325 US 91 (1945)._  
_11\. Griffin v. Maryland 378 US 130 (1964)._  
_12\. Somawathie v. Weerasinghe (1990) 2 Sri LR 121._

**APPLICATION** for relief in respect of violation of Fundamental Rights.

_L. C. Seneviratne, P.C. with Nigel Hatch for petitioners._  
_Nihal Jayasinghe D.S.G. for 2, 3, 4, 5 and 22nd respondents._  
_Dr. Jayatissa de Costa with E. A. Upatissa for 1st respondent._  
_Gamini Perera with P. S. H. de Silva for 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17
and 18 respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 05, 1995.  
**AMERASINGHE, J.**

The Central Province Private Bus Workers' Co-operative Society - the 21st
Respondent was a duly registered body under the Cooperative Societies Act, No.
5 of 1972. (P1 A). It was formed, inter alia, for the purpose of providing the
Transport Ministry of the Central Provincial Council with certain services.
(P1 Clause 3). The Society, inter alia, ensured that private omnibuses arrived
and departed on time and provided the Transport Ministry with data gathered
from the field through "Time-Keepers" which assisted the Ministry in
regulating private omnibus operations. (P12). In terms of clause 4 of a
contract entered into between the Society and the Council on 21 January 1993,
and amended on 30 March 1993, subject to certain terms and conditions, the
Council agreed to pay a sum of Rs. 302,850/- per month to the Society for the
services it had agreed to perform. The Society in turn paid its members on a
monthly basis for the services performed by them (P15).

171

On 14 February 1995, thirty-five members of the Society, including the three
Petitioners, were engaged in duties for their Society in Kandy as "Time-
Keepers" at various points. The names of the members, their distinctive
identification numbers (each member had an identity card issued by the Society
para. 4 of P9) and work stations on 14 February 1995 are set out in P3.

The Petitioners in paragraph 20 of their Petition alleged that "from or about
14.2.1995 the 7th to the 19th Respondents whose names and identities the
Petitioners subsequently became aware of, have usurped the jobs and powers and
functions and duties of the Petitioners ... and are unlawfully purporting to
continue in such employment."

In paragraph 19 of his affidavit dated 19 May 1995, the First Petitioner
stated that the identities of other persons who had 'usurped the functions of
Time-Keepers had been ascertained after the filing of the application of the
Petitioners and submitted a list of the names and addresses of eighteen
persons. (P16).

The 7th, 8th, 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th, 16th, 18th and 19th Respondents in
their affidavit dated 23 April 1993 have pointed out that the 9th Respondent
had died in 1978 and that the 8th respondent is employed as a Technical
Officer at Yatiyantota; and that the 18th Respondent is a permanent employee
of the Kandy Municipal Council. The Minister of Transport in paragraph 4 of
his affidavit excludes the 8th and 9th Respondents from the category of those
who had forcibly taken over the functions of the Time-Keepers but does not
mention the 18th Respondent. The statements of the Respondents who did take
over the functions with regard to the 8th, 9th and 18th Respondents are
supported by other documentary evidence, and I hold that the 8th, 9th and 18th
Respondents have been mistakenly made parties to these proceedings. However, I
am unable to accept Mr. Perera's submission that the rest of the averments of
the petitioners must therefore be disbelieved. Nor am I able to accept Mr.
Jayasinghe's submission raised by way of a preliminary objection that the
petition should be rejected on the basis of the decision of this Court in
_Jayasinghe v. Principal, Anula Vidyalaya and Others_ (1). The Petition was
rejected in that case

172

because on the face of the affidavit and petition the Petitioner's statements
were manifestly false and necessarily known to the Petitioner to be untrue. In
the matter before us, the First Petitioner in Paragraph 15 of his affidavit
dated 18th May 1995 admits the mistakes of naming Maithri Bandara Wijesinghe
as the 8th Respondent and S. Bandara Wijesinghe as the 9th Respondent, and
explains that the mistakes were made in the process of "urgently collecting
material to file the instant application through inadvertence." I am satisfied
that the inclusion of certain Respondents was due to mere error and not on
account of any attempt to deceive or mislead the Court and I therefore hold
that the preliminary objection cannot be sustained.

Mr. Jayasinghe raised another objection in limine : He submitted that "the
Petitioners cannot have and maintain this application and/or that the
application is not properly constituted due to non-compliance with Rule 44(1)
in that all these Petitioners have not given affidavits." The obligation of a
Petitioner is to tender in support of the petition .such affidavits and
documents as are available to him." (Rule 44(1) (c)). There is no obligation
to tender an affidavit from any one or more of the Petitioners. What is
required is evidence of the facts submitted through affidavits and other
documents. I therefore overrule the objection.

The 7th, 8th, 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th, 16th, 18th and 19th, Respondents,
in paragraph 11 of their affidavit dated 23 April 1995 admit the fact that
they did take over the work of Time-Keepers and have continued to function as
Time-Keepers. This position was confirmed by Mr. Gamini Perera who appeared
for them. How did they come to function as Time-Keepers? The explanation of
Mr. Jayasinghe, that the new Time-Keepers had formed a Cooperative Society to
function as Time-Keepers was abandoned by him when it was pointed out that not
only was there no evidence of that but also that the Respondents concerned
were at great pains to assert that they did not act collectively as an
organized group. They had to do so in their attempt to deny the charge of
complicity in what the Petitioners alleged in paragraph 26 of their petition
was a "diabolical plan to forcibly take over the functions of Time-Keepers."
In response to paragraph 20 of the Petition, in which the Petitioners

173

stated that "from or about 14.2.1995 the 7th to the 19th Respondents ... have
usurped the jobs and powers, functions and duties of the petitioners ... and
are unlawfully and purporting to continue in such employment," the Respondents
concerned, in paragraph 11 of their affidavit of 23 April 1995 stated as
follows:

"We deny averment No. 20 and respectfully state that on being given to
understand that the Time-Keepers posts at the Kandy Bus Stand have fallen
vacant, we, except 8, 9 and 18th Respondents, moved in individually and
commenced work. Since then we continued to perform [the] normal functions of
Time-Keepers thereat without objections and/or hindrance. We did not
unlawfully commence work and purported to continue in such employment as we
have not gone there unlawfully and/or forcibly."

That was the position supported by learned Counsel who appeared for the new
Time-Keepers. Mr. Perera did not attempt to explain how the thirty-five Time-
Keepers of Kandy came to suddenly vacate their posts without attributed or
assignable cause. Nor was he able to explain how the new Time-Keepers "were
given to understand" that the posts had fallen vacant and at the opportune
time happened to come upon the good news and seized the opportunity of
becoming Time-Keepers. The legitimacy of the actions of the new Time-Keepers
was challenged by the Petitioners who, in paragraph 20 of their Petition, said
that the Respondents' concerned had "usurped" their jobs, powers, functions
and duties and that they were "unlawfully purporting to continue in such
employment."

Assuming that a post falls vacant, does it entitle any person to "move in" and
fill that vacancy? The harm and evil consequences wrought by such a course of
action are so plain that a person capable of ordinary reasoning and reflection
should not require elaboration. Further explanation, however, may not be out
of place in the extraordinary circumstances of this case.

The Transport Ministry of the Central Provincial Council has a duty to
regulate the transport services of the Province. The special business of
assisting the Ministry with regard to certain specified

174

matters and manner of performance was, by a contract (P2), entrusted to the
Central Province Bus Workers' Co-operative Society. The Society discharged its
duties through its members. The status - the legal standing and position - of
the Time-Keepers of the Central Province had to be determined by their
membership of that Cooperative Society. As long as the contract between the
Council and the C.P.B.W. Co-operative Society remained in force, only members
of that Society legally enjoyed the right to function as "Time-Keepers". And,
understandably, that is why the Minister of Transport of the Central
Provincial Council, Mr. Keheliya Rambukwella, - the 20th respondent - (See
paragraph 9 of the affidavit of Mr. Rambukwella dated 10 May 1995) - in an
attempt to resolve this matter, "offered to obtain employment for the said
group of persons who had unlawfully usurped the functions of Time-Keepers
**provided they joined the [Central Province Private Bus Workers' Cooperative]
Society. "** (The emphasis is mine.). (See also paragraph 12 of the affidavit
of the President and Secretary of the Co-operative Society and the first and
third Petitioners - P13 quoted below.).

The new Time-Keepers insist that they did not "unlawfully commence work" and
that they had "not gone there unlawfully". I must say that I have no
difficulty or doubt in holding that they had no right to the specified status
of 'Time-Keepers' and therefore that their so-called "moving in" and
commencement of work as 'Time-Keepers' was unlawful and void of legitimacy.

The new Time-Keepers claimed that after their assumption of office they had
"continued to perform (the) normal functions of Time-Keepers without
objections and/or hindrance". The discharge of the duties of Time-Keepers as a
normal, regular matter could only be performed in a manner conformable to the
standards, terms and conditions agreed to between the Provincial Council,
which was responsible for regulating transport services, and the Time-Keepers.
The "normal duties" were services attached to official employment under
constituted authority. Any variation, as the Minister of Transport explained
at the Governor's meeting held on 13 March 1995, required the approval of the
Board of Ministers of the Council. (Para. 6 of Document A). There was no
connection between the Council and the new Time-Keepers. The new Time-Keepers
had no obligations or directions or standards, or terms or conditions relating
to the performance of their duties; there could be no monitoring or

175

control of their activities, for there was a total lack of accountability to
the Council or to anyone else. As a result, the Director of Transport, in his
report to the Minister of Transport (P12), complained of the "serious
situation" that had arisen and listed several reasons for that conclusion
including the fact that

* "the regulatory functions cannot be exercised;"

* "management information essential from the field cannot be obtained"; 

* "buses that default in payment of various dues cannot be checked". 

* "renewal of route permits could be neglected by the bus operators and that would seriously affect the PC's revenue."

The Minister of Transport of the Central Provincial Council, Mr. Keheliya
Rambukwella, in paragraph 14 of his affidavit dated 10 May 1995, stated that
"as a result of the action of the said usurpers ... grave and irreparable loss
ha[s] been caused to those Time-Keepers affected and the members of the public
who use the bus transport services inasmuch as inter alia, the regulatory
functions exercised by the [Central Province Private Bus Workers' Co-operative
Society] through the said Time-Keepers have been jeopardized and affected." In
his letter to the Deputy Inspector-General of Police (P 10A) dated the 16th of
February 1995, Mr. Rambukwella refers to the "Crisis situation in the Bus
Stands in Kandy Town." Having explained the role of the Co-operative Society
and having adverted to the fact that "unlawful individuals had invaded the bus
stands in Kandy town ... and chased out the members of the Co-operative
Society", "the legal agent" of the Ministry of Transport of the Central
Provincial Council, "who were performing their legitimate duties", Mr.
Rambukwella stated as follows:

"05\. You would observe the lawlessness involved in this instance. Yet I was
shocked to learn that some of the Police Officers were also aiding and
abetting the intruders.

176

06\. It is no secret that the intruders have invaded the bus stands to earn
money from the bus operators. Before long, the bus operators would rise
against this exploitation. Those who have been ousted will also fight to come
back to their legitimate place of work and they have an understandable cause
for it. Thus there will be three parties, vociferous and aggressive. At any
moment, breach of peace is imminent and most probably with damages to buses.
The innocent passengers, especially school children, in busy and crowded
points like the Market, bus stand and Goods Shed bus stand etc. will be the
helpless victims of a violent crisis.

07\. In addition to these serious repercussions as far as the bus stands are
concerned, there is the irredeemable adverse effect on the law enforcing
capacity of the Provincial Council and consequently of the Police, because the
entire transport management system is threatened. Hence a total break down of
the administration would be unavoidable.

08\. You would undoubtedly understand the seriousness of this situation. What
would be the implications of the passivities on the part of the Police and the
alleged support to the intruders?

09\. I have therefore to request you emphatically that immediate steps should
be taken to remove the intruders from the bus stands, allow the legitimate
employees to function in their places of work and provide protection to them.
I should be thankful for your immediate response as to what steps are being
taken."

The gravity of the situation is reiterated by Mr. Rambukwella in his letter to
the Governor of the Central Province dated 1st March 1995 (P 10B) and in the
report Mr. H. M. Somatilake, the Director of Transport of the Provincial
Council (1312).

Moving into the vacant posts was indeed, and as might reasonably have been
expected, fraught with mischief. I shall refer to this matter again in dealing
with the question of the involvement of the police, in relation to Mr.
Jayasinghe's submission that the incident was a trivial matter.

177

In my view the claims of the new Time-Keepers that they had assumed office
lawfully, that they were performing the normal functions of Time-Keepers, and
that they were doing so without objections cannot be accepted. They profess
and claim that because of their outward bearing and deportment as Time-
Keepers, they are entitled to continue to be Time-Keepers. They are not. In my
view the response that the new Time-Keepers "purported" to continue "in such
employment" is a devious way of pleading off from the imputation of the
Petitioners that they were usurpers. It was not a satisfactory response to the
averments in paragraph 20 of the Petitioners' affidavit challenging the
legitimacy of the assumption and continuation in office of the new Time-
Keepers.

As for remuneration, Mr. Gamini Perera, said that the owners of the buses paid
the new Time-Keepers. He did not think this resulted in a conflict of
interests that impeded their regulatory functions and said that the previous
Time-Keepers too had been paid by the owners. Dr. de Costa, Mr. Jayasinghe and
Mr. Perera suggested that it was the practice of extorting money from the
owners that had led to their removal by what Dr. de Costa described as "an act
of thuggery" perpetrated by certain members of the public. The report of
Assistant Superintendent of Police D. B. Ekanayake (3R3 page 5) seems to
support the view that there was indeed such a notion; but there is no
indication of how he arrived at that conclusion. On the other hand, his own
belief was that the matter of the Time-Keepers appears to have had a political
basis, although even then, as we shall see, the picture is not altogether
clear and, on the evidence now available, he may have been mistaken. As I have
pointed out, the established system provided for the payment on a monthly
basis by the Co-operative Society. With regard to what they directly obtained
from bus owners is set out in paragraph 21 of the petition as follows:
"Furthermore, the petitioners and those affected have also been deprived of
earning a **proportionate part of the sum of around Rs. 500 per day** which
was paid to them as a matter of practice by the Bus Operators for the services
rendered." (The emphasis is mine). Was this an objectionable practice? I think
it was, both because it was expressly prohibited by Clause 11 of the contract,
as well as, as a matter of principle, regardless of the amount involved. It
was then for the Director of Transport and President and Secretary of the
Society to

178

take disciplinary action against the members of the Society concerned in terms
of the machinery provided by the contract. (See clauses 8, 9 and 10).

As Assistant Superintendent of Police Mr. D. B. Ekanayake found after his
investigations (3133 at p. 4 in fin. - 5), the Time-Keepers who were ousted
were acting in accordance with the terms of a lawful contract of employment.
It was certainly not open to any person or group of persons to take the law
into their own hands and arbitrarily and unlawfully drive away the officially
recognized Time-Keepers from their places of work, intrude upon and infringe
their rights, and encroach upon their legitimate domain, thereby creating the
vacancies into which the new Time-Keepers "moved in". Mr. Ekanayake in his
report attempted to give a harmless, innocent and fair appearance to the
faults and blemishes of the 14th February and cover up, conceal and gloss over
them. He stated in his report (3133 at p. 5) that because the bus stand was a
public place, the presence of the new Time-Keepers was not unlawful. The
matter for investigation was not the right of members of the general public to
be at the bus stand but how and why the legitimate Time-Keepers were forcibly
ousted by a certain group of persons who were not at the bus stand as
passengers but involved in one way or another with the ousting and replacement
of Time-Keepers. I shall refer to this matter again in dealing with the
question of the involvement of the police.

Learned Counsel for the Respondents did not deny that the new Time-Keepers had
occupied and do continue to occupy the vacancies created after the forcible
eviction of the Petitioners; but, understandably, they sought to demonstrate
that each of their clients had no hand in the forcible eviction.

It is convenient to deal with the matter of involvement and responsibility
under six heads:

(1) The alleged involvement of the First Respondent;

(2) The alleged involvement of the Second Respondent;

(3) The alleged involvement of the 7th to 19th Respondents;

(4) The alleged involvement of the Police;

(5) The alleged involvement of the Peoples' Alliance; and

(6) State responsibility.

179

**THE ALLEGED INVOLVEMENT OF THE FIRST RESPONDENT**

The First Respondent is Mr. R. J. Tikiri Banda, Co-ordinating Secretary to
Hon. Colonel Anuruddha Ratwatte, M.P. and Minister of Irrigation, Power and
Energy, and Deputy Minister of Defence, the Second Respondent.

In paragraph 15 of the Petition it is alleged that on 14 February 1995 "a
group of over 100 persons armed with iron rods and poles arrived at the Kandy
Bus Stand in the morning and assaulted and/or abused and/or intimidated the
Petitioners and their colleagues and prevented them from performing their
legitimate duties at Bus Stands in the Kandy town and have forcibly and
unlawfully taken over and are now performing the functions of Time-Keepers
from 14.2.1995 at the Kandy Bus Stand." In paragraph 18 of the Petition it is
alleged that the First Respondent "was openly directing and co-ordinating the
activities of the said illegal gang on 14.2.1995 at the said Bus Stand..."

The averment in paragraph 18 of the petition is supported by paragraph 19 of
the affidavit of the First petitioner, Mr. K. G. Upaliratne, dated 14 March
1995, and reiterated by him in paragraph 5 of his affidavit dated 18 May 1995.

In paragraph 19 of the Petition, the Petitioners alleged that the First
Respondent "had threatened K. G. Upaliratne (1st Petitioner) at the Kandy
Police Station on 14.2.1995 near the gate of the said Police Station when the
Petitioner had gone to the Police Station to make a complaint in relation to
these incidents." The First Respondent makes a general denial of the averments
in paragraph 19 of the Petition and claims that he was at Wattegama at a
meeting from 10.00 hours to 14.00 hours but does not specifically mention the
incident outside the Police Station.

In his statement to the police on 18.2.95 (P14) Mr. Upaliratne stated that
when he and others were outside the Police Station into which their President
and Secretary went to make a complaint, the Co-ordinating Secretary of Mr.
Anuruddha Ratwatte, "Tikiri", went inside the Station and came out and said
that the former Time-Keepers had "eaten enough" for 17 years and had been
thrown out

180

as it was time for "our people to eat." In the same statement to the Police
(P14 page 3), referring to an incident on 17 February 1995, Mr. Upaliratne
stated that "Tikiri" arrived in a "Pajero" bearing the Registration No. 64 -
3201 and asked him to tell the President and Secretary of the Society to meet
him.

In paragraphs 7 and 8 of his affidavit dated 14 March 1995 (P8), Mr. A. P. K.
Liyanage, after describing various incidents that occurred on 14 February
1995, including an assault on one of the Time-Keepers, stated as follows:

"7\. I state that when I saw these incidents I returned to my shop. I then saw
Mr. Tikiri Banda, the Co-ordinating Secretary to the Hon. Colonel Anuruddha
Ratwatte, M.P., Minister of Irrigation and Deputy Minister of Defence, with
others alongside the said Irrigation [Department] Pajero giving directions to
various persons and the operations that went on.

8\. I state that the said Tikiri Banda was directing persons to the several
sheds occupied by the several Time-Keepers as their offices. I saw the said
persons who were being directed as aforesaid forcibly evict the Time-Keepers
working there and forcibly occupy those sheds."

In paragraph 12 of his affidavit, Mr. Liyanage stated that the vehicle bearing
the Registration No. 64 \- 3201 was "involved in the violent operation". In
the written submissions made on behalf of the First Respondent it is stated
that "This is the Registered number of the vehicle normally used by the 1st
Respondent for his official travelling."

In their affidavit dated 14 March 1995 (P9), Mr. N. P. S. S. Nissanka, the
President, and Mr. R. M. T. B. Ranatunga, the Secretary, of the Central
Province Private Bus Employees Cooperative Society, after describing the
forcible ousting of the members of their Society by an armed gang of persons,
stated in paragraph 6 that "We have now become aware that the said gang of
unauthorised persons had the direct assistance of ... the 1st Respondent, Mr.
Tikiri Banda the Co-ordinating Secretary of the Hon. Minister of Irrigation
and Deputy Minister of Defence..."

181

In his report to the Senior Superintendent of Police dated 23 February 1995
(3133 at p. 3) the Assistant Superintendent of Police, Mr. D. B. Ekanayake,
reference is made to the fact that one Mr. Tuan Mehroon had said that,
although he could not identify those who committed the acts of assault, one of
such persons referred to another person who was present as "Tikiri Aiya".

Dr. de Costa submitted that "Tikiri" was a commonly used term of affection to
describe a younger person. If that were so, **" Tikiri Aiya" **was not such a
reference but perhaps a reference to an **older** person named "Tikiri". Or
was the term 'Aiya' used out of courteous regard to describe a person who bore
the name "Tikiri" to whom deference was due on account of his position? Dr. De
Costa also submitted that "Tikiri Banda" and "Tikiri Bandara" were common
names in the Kandy Region and that therefore Mr. Tuan Mehroon's observations
cannot be used to implicate the First Respondent. In his statement to the
Police (P14) Mr. Upaliratne referred to the man who explained the reasons for
ousting the Time-Keepers as the Co-ordinating Secretary to Colonel Anuruddha
Ratwatte and known as Tikiri. Mr. Liyanage's identification of the First
Respondent by name and designation removes any reasonable doubt as to the
identity of "Tikiri Aiya" and "Tikiri" in the matters relating to this
Petition.

There is no explanation with regard to the Irrigation Department vehicle
beside which the First Respondent was alleged to have been standing and
issuing directions. However, with regard to the allegation that the vehicle
bearing Registration No. 64-3201 was used in the operations of 14th February,
Mr. Tikiri Banda submitted affidavits from the Proprietor of Piyasiri Welding
Workshop and Motor Works (1R2) and from the driver of the vehicle (1R3) in
support of his averment that from 12 February 1995 to 16 February 1995 the
vehicle concerned was off the road for gear box repairs. The vehicle, as we
have seen, was used by Mr. Tikiri Banda on the 17th of February. Was that
vehicle really off the road from 12-16 February 1995? Why were the running
charts not made available? In any event, there is no evidence that the non
availability of his usual vehicle immobilized Mr. Tikiri Banda on the 14th of
February.

**182**

Mr. Tikiri Banda stated that he did not direct persons as alleged in paragraph
P8 of Mr. Liyanage's affidavit "forcibly or otherwise to evict the Time-
Keepers working there and forcibly (occupy] those sheds." Mr. Tikiri Banda, in
paragraph 10 of his affidavit dated 21 April 1995 states that he "neither
openly nor under cover was directing any activities on 14.2.1995 at any time
at the said Bus Stand as alleged."

His position was that he was at Wattegama on that day attending "a special
meeting with officers for the purpose of granting loan facilities to` lower
income persons in the area", and that he "was fully engaged at this meeting
from 10.00 hours to 14.00 hours on the said date at Wattegama." In support of
this, he submitted an affidavit from Mr. R. A. P Ranasinghe (1R1).

The affidavit of Mr. Ranasinghe is vague and ambiguous and less than
satisfactory. Who were the "officers" attending the meeting? Were they
Government officers attending a meeting, notwithstanding the fact that the
14th of February was a "Poya" day and therefore a public holiday? Or were they
officers of the Pata Dumbara Joint Development Foundation? What was this
foundation? Was it a Government body? Was it a Non-Governmental Organization?
Was there such a body at all? According to Mr. Tikiri Banda, Mr. Ranasinghe
was the General Secretary of that body but according to Mr. Ranasinghe, its
Chief Secretary. What is the Correct position? According to both Mr. Tikiri
Banda and Mr. Ranasinghe the meeting was held on the ground floor of 149
Panwila Road, Wattegama. Mr. Ranasinghe, in his affidavit states that his
residence was at the same place on the upper floor. For what was the ground
floor ordinarily used? both Mr. Ranasinghe and Mr. Tikiri Banda refer to the
meeting as a "special meeting". A special meeting of what body of persons?
What was it that made it "special"? The presence of Mr. Tikiri Banda? The
presence of the Co-ordinating Secretary to the Minister of Irrigation, Power
and Energy and Deputy Minister of Defence does seem unusual in that the
meeting had nothing to do with Irrigation, Power, Energy or Defence. It was,
according to Mr. Ranasinghe, concerned with loans for housing. How did Mr.
Tikiri Banda come to be involved in the matter of granting housing loans to
low-income earners? If this was a matter involving the Government's programme
of work, how could he claim, as Dr. de Costa urged on

183

his behalf, that, as a Co-ordinating Secretary, he was not performing the
duties and functions of a State Officer? Mr. Tikiri Banda states that he was
"fully engaged at this meeting from 10.00 hours to 14.00 hours." He does not
explain what his role was at the meeting. Mr. Ranasinghe states that the
meeting was held from 10.00 a.m. to 2 p.m. but he does not expressly and
plainly state that Mr. Tikiri Banda was in attendance at the meeting from 10
a.m. He merely states that the subject matter of the meeting was initiated,
and/or that the meeting was held under the guiding influence of Mr. Tikiri
Banda whose patronage was available till the end of the meeting. Learned
counsel for Mr. Tikiri Banda did not insist that the first Respondent was at
the meeting from the beginning to the end. Indeed, he volunteered the
explanation that "sometimes people have to wait for hours and hours till
important people come". Did the meeting commence and proceed till Mr. Tikiri
Banda arrived later? If that had been the case, Mr. Tikiri Banda could have
left Kandy after the events had taken place at the Kandy Bus Stand. At some
point of time after the ousting of the Time-Keepers, the Petitioner was
threatened on the 14th of February outside the Police Station by Mr. Tikiri
Banda. (See paragraph 20 of the Petition and the statement to the Police made
by Mr. Upaliratne on 18th February 1995 (P. 14)). Did Mr. Tikiri Banda leave
Kandy at all on the 14th of February? Mr. Ranasinghe at least had official
contact with Mr. Tikiri Banda. both of them, according to their affidavits,
were residents of Wattegama. Was it improbable that Mr. Ranasinghe provided
Mr. Tikiri Banda with an affidavit to help him in this matter?

On the other hand, Mr. Liyanage had no connections either with the petitioners
or with the respondents. No explanation was offered either by the First
Respondent in his affidavit nor by learned Counsel as to why Mr. Liyanage, a
neutral person, said what he did about the First Respondent.

If, as Mr. Tikiri Banda suggests, he had nothing to do with the events of 14th
February, why did he not confine himself to the matters implicating him? why
was he concerned with providing support in his affidavit for the case of the
new Time-Keepers? For example, why was it necessary for him to say that he did
not admit the purpose for which the Central Province Bus Workers Co-operative
Society was

184

formed? Why does he deny that P2 - the copy of the contract between the Co-
operative Society and the Ministry of Transport filed in these proceedings -
was a 'true copy'? On what basis does he say this? An Attorney-at-Law has
certified it to be a true copy. Had Mr. Tikiri Banda perused the original so
as to be in a position to declare the copy filed to be inaccurate, how could
he deny, as he says, "in toto" the contents of paragraph 8 of the Petition
which pertains to the matters dealt with in that contract? Was he challenging
these averments because the unlawfulness of the assumption and retention of
office by the new Time-Keepers is based on an admission of the existence and
validity of P2 and the stated purposes and objects of the Society? How can he
truthfully deny the contents of paragraph 11 of the Petition, as he says, "in
toto"? The Petitioner in paragraph 11 stated that "consequent upon the General
Elections at the Presidential Elections of August and November 1994 the
Peoples Alliance Government assumed power and the 2nd Respondent who is a
Member of Parliament from the Kandy District and Chief National Organizer of
the Sri Lanka Freedom Party was appointed inter alia as Minister for
Irrigation and Deputy Minister of Defence. The Central Provincial Council,
however remained under the political control of the U.N.P.". If Mr. Tikiri
Banda disputed the question of the political control of the Central Provincial
Council, why did he, as his Minister did, not deny **that** averment and
**admit the** **rest?** How could he as a Co-ordinating Secretary to the
Minister of Irrigation and Deputy Minister of Defence, truthfully deny the
rest of the averments? He denies "in toto" the averments contained in
paragraph 12 which narrates the events of 10 February 1995\. Likewise he
denies "in toto" the averments contained in paragraph 13, 14, 15, 16 and 18.
Being unaware of those events is one thing; but positively asserting that they
did not happen is another matter. In not confining himself to meeting the
averments in paragraph 19 of the Petition and merely stating that he was
unaware of the matters alleged in the rest of the averments, the 1st
Respondent took upon himself additional burdens which he has not discharged
and which creates serious doubts with regard to his veracity. In sum, it seems
to me that, although the First Respondent did not want to be implicated in the
events of 14th February, fearing perhaps that he may be exposed

185

 to sanctions for the infringement of the law, he did not also want to give
the impression in his affidavit that he had altogether abandoned his support
for the new Time-Keepers and left them in the lurch. He wanted to be the hero
of the events of February 14th. Indeed, having regard to all the
circumstances, it seems more probable than not that Mr. Tikiri Banda played a
key-role in the unlawful eviction of the Time-Keepers who were members of the
Central Bus Workers' Cooperative Society and in placing other persons in
substitution. He seems to have been the mastermind who planned and directed
the enterprise in question. In his attempt to avoid being implicated in the
events of 14th February he states in his affidavit: "I am known to most of the
residents in Kandy but only the affirmant of P8 has stated that I was seen."
Kandy is inhabited by many people and Mr. Tikiri Banda's claim to be known by
"most" of the inhabitants may have been extravagant and cannot reasonably have
been intended to be taken literally. However, he was sufficiently well known
to enable some members of the public to identify him. It was not, as he
claims, only Mr. Liyanage who identified him personally but also Mr.
Upaliratne and the other Petitioners. There is also the evidence of Mr. Tuan
Mehroon pointing a finger at him. MR. Tikiri Banda offers no explanation in
his affidavit why Mr. Upaliratne and the other Petitioners implicated him.
However, in the written submissions made on his behalf, it was stated that the
allegations made against the First Respondent "have been motivated by
political envity (sic.)" That explanation was not pursued by learned Counsel
for the First Respondent during the hearing. This was understandable, for
political fidelity does not provide an explanation of the events in question.

Why was Mr. Tikiri Banda particularly and specially marked? It was for
espousing the cause of the new Time-Keepers and singularly and conspicuously
daring to implement by bold and extreme and unlawful measures, which his
Counsel aptly described as an act of "thuggery", a scheme to provide
employment for certain favoured persons. I am now concerned with the sole
question of involvement. The significance of his involvement in relation to
State responsibility will be dealt with later. What we are presently concerned
with is

186

whether he could be implicated in the events complained of. In my opinion the
evidence sufficiently entangles him and he has been unable to extricate
himself.

**THE ALLEGED INVOLVEMENT OF THE SECOND RESPONDENT:**

The Second Respondent is the Hon. Colonel Anuruddha Ratwatte, M. P, Minister
of Irrigation, Power and Energy and Deputy Minister of Defence.

As far as the Petition is concerned, the alleged involvement of the Second
Respondent is based upon -

(1) the averment (Paragraph 17) that "a vehicle of the Irrigation Department
which is under the 2nd Respondent Minister" had been used in the operations of
14th February 1995;

(2) that Mr. R.J. Tikiri Banda, the 1st Respondent, was the Coordinating
Secretary to the 2nd Respondent; and

(3) that "the involvement of the Police" (for whose work and conduct, the 2nd
Respondent was responsible to the extent that he was the Deputy Minister in
Charge of the subject of the Police), and the use of vehicles belonging to
persons or institutions under the eventual control of the 2nd Respondent
"Could not have taken place without [his] knowledge, involvement and
acquiescence."

The President and Secretary of the Co-operative Society in their affidavit of
14 March 1995 (P9), after referring to the ousting of their members, alleged
that "this illegal operation could not have taken place without the knowledge,
consent and acquiescence of the 2nd Respondent, the Hon. Minister for
Irrigation and Deputy Minister of Defence."

Referring to a meeting on 13 March 1995 convened by the Governor of the
Central Province to discuss the matter, the president and Secretary of the
Society and the 1st and 3rd petitioners in their affidavit of 27 March 1995
(P13) stated as follows:

187

"9\. Mr. Jayaratne Bandara who throughout the said meeting acted as the
spokesperson for [the new Time-Keepers] and who we have credible grounds to
believe is the Co-ordinating Secretary of the 2nd Respondent Minister stated
that for 17 years there was a group of unemployed persons for whom employment
had been promised after the defeat of the U.N.P. at the last general
elections.

10\. The said Jayaratne Bandara further stated that they acted on the
instructions of the 2nd Respondent Minister and the 6th Respondent Member of
Parliament with regard to what happened on 10.2.1995 and 14.2.1995. He
admitted that as they failed in their objective, namely the forcible ouster of
the petitioner and those affected on 10.2.1995 that they returned with a
larger group on 14.2.1995 and achieved their objective which was the ouster of
those hitherto employed as Time-Keepers and the forcible placing of their
supporters in such employment.

11\. We state that the Hon'ble Governor on more than one occasion expressly
clarified from the said Jayaratne Bandara as to whether what had taken place
was done on the instructions [of] the 2nd Respondent Minister and the 6th
Respondent Member of Parliament. The said Jayaratne Bandara expressly replied
in the affirmative and confirmed that this was the case.

12\. The Hon. Keheliya Rambukwella stated that this issue should be settled
and said he would obtain employment for the said group of usurpers if they
joined the 21st Respondent Co-operative Society ...

13\. The Hon'ble Governor stated that this was perhaps the best solution to
the problem. The Police representatives present there at inquired whether
those who had been forcibly evicted and the usurpers could not work together
as Time-Keepers.

14\. We replied that we had no objections as aforesaid to the usurpers being
employed provided that those who were legitimately employed as Time-Keepers
got their jobs back. However, the said Jayaratne Bandara emphatically stated
that both groups could not work together and stated in Sinhala that snake and
mongoose could not work together.

188

15\. Thereupon the Hon'ble Governor told the said Jayaratne Bandara that the
approach he was adopting was incorrect. Mr. Jayaratne Bandara then stated that
he had no authority to agree to what was proposed at this meeting without
asking the 2nd Respondent Minister. No date was fixed for a further meeting."

Neither P13 nor Document A are verbatim records of the meeting; and therefore
some details may have been omitted from P13 and Document A. The matters
referred to at paragraphs 9 - 15 of P13 are not at variance with the official
minutes of the meeting with the Governor (Document A). However the matters
referred to in paragraph 11 of P13 are not referred to in Document A. Nor is
the reference in paragraph 15 of P13 to Mr. Jayaratne Bandara's statement that
he required the authority of the Minister to agree to the proposal mentioned
in the minutes. Paragraph 4 of Document A states as follows:

1995.02.14

Learned Counsel for the Petitioners maintained that the ousting of the old
Time-Keepers and the replacement by another group of persons was not
fortuitous. The vacancies into which the new Time-Keepers had moved in had not
occurred by chance. It was, he said,

189

a part of a "diabolical plan to forcibly take over the functions of Time-
Keepers in the, Central Province with the aid and assistance of powerful
political elements in the present P A. Government and with the illegal aid and
cover of Police protection to certain group." This is the position set out in
paragraph 26 of the Petition and, strange as it may seem, it is not an
averment denied by the Second Respondent in his affidavit. Learned Counsel for
the 2nd Respondent did not offer any explanation for this; nor did he explain
paragraph 4 of Document A. Mr. Jayasinghe merely said: "We do not know who
Jayaratne Bandara is". This came as a disappointing response, for Mr.
Jayaratne Bandara's role is mentioned in the affidavit P13 of 27 March 1995,
which, according to the Journal entries of this Court was filed on 29 March
1995\. On 20 March 1995, when the application for leave to proceed was
considered, learned Counsel for the Petitioners stated that "certain
discussions took place on 13.3.95 in the Office of the Governor of the Central
Province and that matters which transpired at that discussion further
establish the complicity of the 2nd and 6th Respondents in the matters
complained of in the Petition." Nothing had been done to ascertain what had
taken place at the meeting with the Governor. The minutes of the meeting with
the Governor were submitted by learned Counsel for the Petitioner during the
argument at which Mr. Jayasinghe was present. Although there was sufficient
time to do so, no effort had been made to ascertain who Mr. Jayaratne Bandara
was. In the absence of an express denial or explanation to the contrary, the
averment that Mr. Jayaratne Bandara was a Co-ordinating Secretary of the
Minister stands uncontradicted. There is no denial that Mr. Jayaratna Bandara
did attend the Governor's meeting, and both P13 and Document A support the
view that Mr. Jayaratne Bandara was the spokesperson for the new Time-Keepers.
He was by no means an ordinary person.

In paragraph 5 of his affidavit, Mr. Keheliya Rambukwella, the Minister of
Transport of the Central Provincial Council, said that he was informed that
the group of persons who had attacked the Time-Keepers "had the political
patronage of the 2nd Respondent." His informants were the President and
Secretary of the Co-operative Society.

190

Neither the Petitioners in their Petition nor the President and Secretary of
the Co-operative Society in their affidavit dated 14 March 1995 (P9) alleged
that the Second Respondent either arranged or instigated or actively
participated in the illegal and unlawful operations complained of. Although in
paragraph 11 of their affidavit dated 27 March 1995 (P13) the First and Third
Respondents stated that at the meeting convened by the Governor, the Governor
had been informed "On more than one occasion", by Mr. Jayaratne Bandara that
"what had taken place was done on the instructions [of] the 2nd Respondent
Minister", yet this is not borne out by the official minutes of the meeting.
(Document A). I have said that not everything stated at the meeting was
recorded in the minutes. However, even if Mr. Jayaratne Bandara had said that
he acted on the instructions of the Second Respondent and that he could not
agree to the proposed solution without the concurrence of the Second
Respondent, it was by no means conclusive evidence of the fact that the
incidents of 10 and 14 February had the secret approbation of the Second
Respondent, much less that they were the outcome of his instructions. Mr.
Jayaratne Bandara appears to have been acting for and on behalf of those who
had performed the evil deeds of 10 and 14 February and/or benefitted from
them. He may have been a Coordinating Secretary to the Second Respondent, yet,
there is nothing to show that he had been commanded or requested or permitted
to speak or act on behalf of the Second Respondent. In paragraph 16 of his
affidavit the Second Respondent states that "even if the said perpetrators had
used my name the same had been done without my knowledge, consent or
concurrence and I specifically deny any association with the said perpetrators
of the alleged incident." The repeated use of the word 'perpetrators' in my
view signifies the Second Respondent's condemnation of the unlawful acts in
question. Had there been any misunderstanding on the part of the Third, Fourth
and Fifth Respondents and other police officers, there should now be no doubt
they were not expected by the Second Respondent to support or protect the
First Respondent or the new Time-Keepers or those who ousted the old Time-
Keepers.

The Second respondent in his affidavit drew attention to the fact that Mr.
Upali Weeratunge in his letter dated 12 February 1995, addressed to the Second
Respondent (P5), after stating that about

191

200 persons had attempted to oust them alleging that they were "Minister
Anuruddha Ratwatte's men" and that they were taking over the functions of
Time-Keepers, had gone on to say that upon investigation they were of the
opinion that the Second Respondent did not have any connection with and had
not approved what had taken place. Mr. Weeratunge was writing on behalf of all
the former Time-Keepers. There may well have been a proposal to redress the
grievances of certain persons in which the Second Respondent had an interest.
He may have actively sought to bring relief to a group of disadvantaged
persons, as Mr. Jayaratne Banda said at the Governor's meeting. However, there
was nothing to show that the Second Respondent was privy to the so-called
"diabolical plan" or that he participated in any way in the events of the 10th
or 14th of February. The strategem may have been an outcome of the proposal to
find employment for certain persons; but the devising of the expedients and
the execution of the design were matters for which the Second Respondent was
not responsible. If the Second Respondent intended assisting certain
unemployed persons, what he wanted to accomplish was brought about unlawfully,
and therefore, as far as he was concerned, ill done. I reject the suggestion
that, merely because the Second Respondent may have planned to provide
employment for certain persons, the ousting of the Time-Keepers by unlawful
means was an inevitable or necessary eventuality of his design. Its execution
was a completely different matter. In my view it has not been established, as
alleged by the Petitioners, that "the involvement of the police, the 1st
Respondent and the use of [official] vehicles ... could not have taken place
without the knowledge, involvement and acquiescence of the Second Respondent
Minister ..." The use of official vehicles does add weight to the submission
that there was State action, and the Second Respondent may have been
ultimately accountable as the Minister in Charge of the various Departments
for the use of official vehicles, but it has not been established that he
personally ordered or sanctioned their use. Nor can he be held vicariously
liable for the unauthorized acts of his officers, including those of his Co-
ordinating Secretary, Mr. Tikiri Banda, although they may have pretended to
have been acting with his authority.

192

**THE ALLEGED INVOLVEMENT OF THE PEOPLES' ALLIANCE:**

In paragraph 26 of the Petition it is alleged that the forcible take over was
a part of a "diabolical plan" to take over the functions of the Time-Keepers
"with the aid and assistance of powerful political elements in the present PA
Government." The Central Private Bus Workers' Co-operative Society wrote a
letter (P6A) under the hands of its President and Secretary, addressed to the
President of the Republic, stating that although those who were attempting to
oust them had claimed to be entitled to do so because they were supporters of
the Peoples' Alliance, yet they were perhaps unaware of the effort and support
rendered by the members of the Society at the past General and Presidential
Elections to bring the Peoples' Alliance into power. In paragraph 7 of the
minutes of the meeting with the Governor, Mr. Upali Weeratunge, a member of,
and a spokesperson for, the Co-operative Society, is reported to have said
that he and many members of the Society supported the PA and therefore
regretted what had happened. In Mr. Upaliratne's complaint to the Police (P14)
he stated that "Tikiri", having said to him and certain others that they had
"eaten enough during seventeen years", addressed Sarath Weeratunge, Upali
Weeratunge, Niyandigala and others and said, "You have no problem. You are our
men. You should work." Niyandagala (No. 9), S. Weeratunge (No. 18) and Upali
Weeratunge (No. 23) were ousted despite their political loyalties. (See P3.
See also 3R3 - the Report of Mr. D. B. Ekanayake where Niyandagala (No. 7),
Upali Weeratunge (No. 23) and S. Weeratunge (26) are listed as complainants.)
Indeed, the petitioners themselves did not state that the alleged
discrimination was against persons who were not members of the Peoples'
Alliance. What they said was that Mr. Keheliya Rambukwella was a member of the
Board of Ministers of the Central Provincial Council which was comprised
"mainly of members of the United National Party which is the principle party
in opposition to the current Peoples' Alliance government".

The new Time-Keepers may have been the beneficiaries of a spoils system of
some sort favouring a certain group of persons. However, it has not been
established that the ousting and replacement of the Time-Keepers depended on
political affiliations and therefore the claim that Article 12(2) of the
Constitution was violated on account of discrimination based upon political
opinion must fail.

193

**THE ALLEGED INVOLVEMENT OF THE 7TH TO 19TH RESPONDENTS**

I have already pointed out that the 8th, 9th and 18th Respondents were
mistakenly named as Respondents and I hold that they were not in any way
involved in the events of the 10th and 14th of February 1995.

The case of the Petitioners against the 7th, 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th,
15th, 16th, 17th and 19th Respondents is that they and others whose names and
addresses appear in P16, "usurped" their functions as Time-Keepers. For the
reasons given, I am of the view that each and everyone who took office as
Time-Keepers at the Kandy Bus Stand on and after the 14th of February 1995
were and continue to be in unlawful occupation of such offices and to that
extent are responsible for depriving the former Time-Keepers of their
employment and for unlawfully obstructing the Central Provincial Council, and
its Ministry of Transport in particular, from discharging its legitimate
duties. In my view the alleged operations of the 10th and 14th of February
were for the purpose of placing the new Time-Keepers in occupation of the
positions held by members of the Cooperative Society. The new Time-Keepers
were the beneficiaries of the unlawful operations. They are the obstacles in
the way of the discharge of the duties and functions of the duly appointed and
only legitimate Time-Keepers.

The Petitioners have not alleged that the new Time-Keepers were personally
involved in the acts of "thuggery", although some of them may well have been
involved. Mr. Joseph Deva, the tenth Respondent, for instance, may have been
one of them. In his statement to the Police on 18th February 1995 (P14) the
First Petitioner stated that "Deva" was among those persons who assaulted him.
In the Report of Mr. D. B. Ekanayake, A.S.P. (3R3) it is stated that Mr.
Sarath Bandara complained that he was forcibly expelled by about 40 people
among who was "Deva of

194

Deiyanawela". (See also the notes of R.P.C. 10416 Dharmaratne of 11 February
1995 in 3R2). However, Mr. Joseph Deva, when he was produced before the
Officer-in-Charge of the Police Station on 19 February 1995, denied that the
complainants had been chased away or abused. He said: "We too work there. We
work on good terms." (See 3R2). Mr. Joseph Deva was named by Mr. Upaliratne,
the First Petitioner, in his complaint to the Police on 31 May 1995 (See
Document X) and is accused in M.C. Case No. 39193/95 of assaulting Mr.
Upaliratne. (See Document X2). The Seventh Respondent, Dhammika, and the
Eleventh Respondent, Jayawickrama, are co-accused persons in that case, and in
his affidavit dated 17 July 1995 Mr. Upaliratne states that they were involved
in ousting the former Time-Keepers. Mr. Joseph Deva has not filed an affidavit
in response to the Petition. His statement to the Police that the new Time-
Keepers, including himself, came to occupy their positions without force and
that they were working together with the old Time-Keepers is not supported by
the evidence in this case.

Although some or even most of the new Time-Keepers may not have assaulted and
intimidated the old Time-Keepers, I am of the view that they had all concurred
and combined privity with the more active and conspicuous participants,
including officers of the State, to illegally and reprehensibly oust the old
Time-Keepers and to take their places and continue to unlawfully functions as
Time-Keepers. I reject the suggestion that they happened to be available to
fill the vacancies in fortuitous circumstances.

**THE ALLEGED INVOLVEMENT OF THE POLICE**

The complaint against the Police is that -

1\. They had provided "illegal aid and cover" to the group of persons who were
responsible for the unlawful acts in question; and that

2\. By reason of their lack of sufficient and/or timely action, they had
failed to prevent such acts.

In the circumstances, the Petitioners alleged, that the constitutional
guarantee of equal protection was denied to the former Time-Keepers.

195

On 10th February 1995 Mr. Sarath Weeratunge and others complained to the
Police that when they arrived at their customary places of work, the locks had
been broken and others had unlawfully entered the premises. They reported
that, on being questioned, those in occupation of their premises had said that
from that day they had taken over the function of Time-Keepers. In their
complaint the old Time-Keepers said that they had informed the Minister of
Transport of the Provincial Council, Mr. Rambukwella, of this matter and that
he had in turn communicated the information to the President of the Republic
and to the Minister of Transport of Sri Lanka. Mr. Rambukwella had directed
the old Time-Keepers to report the matter to the Police. And so they requested
the Police to inquire into the matter and provide them with the opportunity of
discharging their usual functions. (See P4).

In answering, inter alia, the Petitioners' averment that the acts complained
of "occurred with the knowledge and/or under the cover of Police protection
inasmuch as the Police failed to take any action to prevent the criminal acts
perpetrated against the Petitioners and their colleagues and/or to enable them
to perform their legitimate and lawful functions even after they were apprised
of the aforesaid incidents", the Third Respondent, Mr. D. B. Ekanayake,
Assistant Superintendent of Police, in paragraph 19 of his affidavit, stated
that the complaint of Mr. Sarath Weeratunga on 10.2.95 (P4) was "investigated"
and that "R PC 10416 Dharmaratne was despatched to the scene of the incident
who dispersed unauthorised persons in occupation of the Time-Keeper Shed and
directed them to come to the Police to have their statements recorded.
Consequent to this direction only Joseph Deva came to the Police on 20.02.95 -
statement marked 3132, said Joseph Deva was produced before OIC, MO Branch."

The statement of Mr. Ekanayake is not borne out by 3132 which he filed in
support of his averments. That document contains copies of several entries
made on the 11th and 12th of February by Reserve Police Constable 10416
Dharmaratne. The incident of which Mr. Sarath Weeratunge had complained had
taken place on the 10th of February. Mr. Weeratunga's statement was recorded
by the Police on 10 February at 1440 hours. The statement of Mr. Ekanayake
that "Dharmaratne was despatched to the scene of the incident" is untrue and
known by him, if he had read the supporting evidence he has produced, to be
untrue. According to his inquiry notes, Dharmaratne

196

"while engaged on day patrol duty in the Central Bus Stand at 930 hours on
11.2.95 inquired for the complainant of MCR 707 C 3 291/186. [Mr. Sarath
Weeratunge,] and met him and recorded his complaint and his request to warn
those who had come there "not t0 come to this place hereafter and harass us."
On the following day, i.e. on the 12th of February, R. P. C. Dharmaratne
records the fact that he visited Mr. Weeratunga's residence but that on not
finding him there, left a message requesting him to come to the Police
Station. There is not a word about Dharmaratne having contacted any of the new
Time-Keepers, let alone having "dispersed unauthorised persons in occupation
of the Time-Keepers Sheds," either on the 10th or 12th. I unreservedly reject
the written submission of the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 22nd respondents "that on
receipt of information from one Sarath Weeratunga - depicted in P4 on 10.2.95
at about 2.40 p.m. the Police took prompt action dispersing (sic) the crowd
and establishing peace." Mr. Jayasinghe, understandably, did not support or
even refer to that submission in the course of the argument. Nor is there any
evidence produced by Mr. Ekanayake to show that any person other than Mr.
Weeratunga was asked to report to the Police Station. Mr. Joseph Deva did turn
up at the Police Station on 19th February 1995 (and not on 20.February as
stated by Mr. Ekanayake), but no evidence has been produced to show why he
turned up eight days after the incident that took place on the 10th of
February and about which a complaint had been lodged on the same day. The
statement of Mr. Joseph Deva which was recorded on 19 February is prefaced
with the entry "Vide paragraph 186, the Respondent to the complaint Deva
present in the station. I produce him to the O.I.C.". Paragraph 186 is the
statement of Mr. Sarath Wijetunga (P4). There is no reference in that
statement to Mr. Joseph Deva. On the other hand, Mr. Wijetunga had stated that
he could not identify any person who had gone into forcible occupation of
their places of work. The statement of Mr. Ekanayake that Mr. Joseph Deva came
to the Police Station on 20.2.95 "consequent to a direction" by R.P.C. Mr.
Dharmaratne is false because Mr. Joseph Deva came to the Station on 19.02.95
and not on 20.2.95, and because he did not come in response to any "direction"
given by Mr. Dharmaratne. Had he come in response to such a direction, one
would have expected a reference to an entry in the books of the Police in
which R.P.C. Dharmaratne had directed Mr. Joseph Deva to have come to the
Police Station. Instead, a misleading reference is made to an entry, namely to
paragraph 186, that does not explain Mr. Deva's presence. Why was this?

197

As far as the events of the 10th of February are concerned I am of the opinion
that the police, while realizing the importance of taking appropriate action
to remove those whom they frankly recognized as "unauthorized persons", took
no steps to remove the trespassers. Why were the events of the 10th of
February entrusted to a mere Reserve Constable without any supporting staff?

The attempt to oust the Time-Keepers on 10 February did not succeed, despite
the absence of the assistance of the Police. However, the second attempt was a
complete success. According to the Petitioner (see paragraph 15 of the
Petition and paragraph 16 of the affidavit of Mr. Upaliratne dated 14 March
1995 ) on the 14th of February 1995 "a group of over 100 persons armed with
iron rods and poles arrived at the Kandy Bus Stand in the morning and
assaulted and/or abused and/or intimidated the Petitioner and their colleagues
had prevented them from performing their legitimate duties at Bus Stands in
the Kandy Town and have forcibly and unlawfully taken over and are now
performing the functions of Time-Keepers from 14.2.1995 at the Kandy Bus
Stand." Mr. Mohideen Meera Saibo, the Second Petitioner, was one of the
victims and he made a complaint to the police with regard to the assault
committed on him. (P7A). Mr. N. P S. S. Nissanka, the President of the Central
Province Bus Workers' Co-operative Society complained to the Police of the
forcible ouster, alleging that it had taken place in the presence of and with
the assistance of Police Officers, and he sought police protection to enable
the members of the Society to resume their work on the following day. (P7B).

In his affidavit dated 14 March 1995, Mr. A. P. K. Liyanage, a textile trader,
stated as follows:

"3 ... at about 9 a.m. or 9.30 a.m. on 14/2/95 two motor cycles of the traffic
branch ridden by Police Constables Nos. 16520 and R 11064 came and stopped in
front of my boutique.

4\. Around the same time on the said date a police jeep bearing number 32 -
4563 came and stopped in front of my shop on the opposite side of the road.
There were about six (6) policemen in that vehicle and stand around it.

198

5\. I thereafter proceeded towards the Goodshed private bus halt which is
close to my shop. At that time I also saw a yellow coloured Pajero vehicle
bearing on it the legend "Irrigation Department" stop near my shop. In the
said vehicle I recognized a Policeman commonly referred to as "Pol Abey"
dressed in civvies. There were also about ten (10) others in the said vehicle
whom I could not recognize.

6\. I state that when I reached the Goodshed bus halt I witnessed a person
called Sarath Bandara who is a member of the Central Province Bus Workers' Co-
operative Society ... and who works as a "Time-Keeper" being assaulted. I
could not recognize his assailant.

7\. I state that when I saw these incidents I returned to my shop. I then saw
Mr. Tikiri Banda, the Co-ordinating Secretary to the Hon. Colonel Anuruddha
Ratwatte, M.P., Minister of Irrigation and Deputy Minister of Defence with
others alongside the said yellow coloured Irrigation Pajero giving directions
to various persons and the operations that went on.

8\. I state that the said Tikiri Banda was directing persons to the several
sheds occupied by the several Time-Keepers as their offices. I saw the said
persons who were being directed as aforesaid forcibly evict the Time-Keepers
working there and forcibly occupy those sheds.

9\. I noticed a crowd of about two hundred (200) persons involved in this
violent operation. These persons were armed with poles and iron rods concealed
in newspaper. There were to my estimate about fifteen (15) Policemen also
involved in this operation.

10\. I saw Sub-Inspector Vijitha Kumara of the Kandy Police forcibly dragging
Time-Keepers from their sheds.

11\. I saw inter alia, Sarath Bandara and G. Cyril Perera who work as Time-
Keepers being assaulted by persons whom I could not identify and who belonged
to the said group.

199

14\. I state that about a week thereafter two (2) persons said to be from the
C.I.D. made inquiries from me about what happened on 14.2.95 and I told them
what I have affirmed to above. The said persons took down some notes in their
field note books which was not shown to me or signed by me. No formal
statement was recorded from me. The said persons told me that an investigation
team would come from Colombo and directed me to keep my interview with them
confidential."

Mr. M. R. Vijitha Kumara, Sub-Inspector of Police, who is the fifth
Respondent, denies having been present at the place of the incident and states
that on the day in question he was "engaged in vice detection duty between
9.30 hours and 17.00 hours." In support of his alibi, he filed extracts from
the Information Book (5R1). Two sets of entries are set out in 5R1. The first
entry is recorded at 9.30 hours at page 73 of the Information Book wherein he
states that he and other officers, dressed in "Civil" (as distinguished from
official police) clothes, left the station on duty. The next entry is from
page 75 and is recorded at 17.00 hours. It gives a detailed list of activities
at 11.15, 11.45, 12.30, 13.30, 14.20, and 15.30 hours. There is no record of
what he was doing between 9.30 and 11.15 hours. Learned Counsel was unable to
explain why page 74 was not produced and what the Sub-inspector and the other
officers were doing. There was no question of being mistaken with regard to
his identity, for Mr. Vijitha Kumara states that he "regularly came [into]
contact with Liyanage." He suggests, however, that since he had "often warned
and reprimanded him" for obstructing the pavements, "this displeasure may have
motivated the said Liyanage to tender P8. Liyanage may have been happy to be
able to identify Mr. Vijitha Kumara, but Mr. Vijitha Kumara has failed to show
that Liyanage was uttering a falsehood.

Mr. Vijitha Kumara states that although he was well known, no other person has
identified him as being involved in the incident. There are various reasons
why he may not have been seen by some of those who complained. For instance,
the incidents took place at various places and Mr. Vijitha Kumara may not have
been at some of them. Mr. Vijitha Kumara was one of a large crowd of persons
and may well have been missed in the melee. Moreover, even if he had

200

been identified, there could have been an understandable reluctance to name
him. As Mr. Upaliratne explained in paragraph 17 of his affidavit dated 18th
May 1995: "I respectfully state that out of concern for my safety I did not
mention the presence and involvement of the 5th Respondent in what transpired
on 14.2.95 which I am personally aware of and saw." In his statement to the
police (P14) Mr. Upaliratne therefore confined himself to alleging that police
officers in uniform arrived in a "Land Rover Jeep" preceded by a police
bicycle and that they were moving about from place to place. He said he was in
fear for his life because when the assaulting took place the police did
nothing to assist them.

In addition to Mr. Vijitha Kumara, Police Constables Nos. 16520 and R11064 and
Police Officer "Pol Abey" who arrived in an Irrigation Department vehicle were
identified as being present at the scene of the incident. Police vehicle
bearing Registration No. 32-4563 carrying about half a dozen police officers
dressed in civil clothes was identified. Persons moving from place to place
directing the operation were formally dressed and identified as police
officers. In paragraph 8(iii) of the affidavit of Mr. Vijitha Kumara, the
Fifth Respondent, - which is reproduced word for word in paragraph 15(iii) of
the affidavit of Mr. P. B. Ekanayake, the third Respondent - it is stated that
"Liyanage who claims to have witnessed and known meticulous details including
the names of the purported attackers and vehicle numbers had not transmitted
this information to any interested person or other authority prior to the
preparation of P8." P8 is Mr. Liyanage's affidavit. If, as suggested by Mr.
Vijitha Kumara in paragraph 8(i) of his affidavit and by Mr. Ekanayake in
paragraph 15(1) of his affidavit, Mr. Liyanage was anxious to implicate Mr.
Vijitha Kumara for purely personal reasons, one might have expected him to
have volunteered a statement on an earlier occasion. He did not rush to give
information, for he had no personal interest in the matter. When he was asked
by two police officers from the C.I.D. about two weeks after the incident, he
related what had happened. These matters were recorded and the two persons who
had interrogated him had told him that an investigation team would come from
Colombo and he was directed to keep the "interview with them confidential"
(see para. 14 of Liyanage's Affidavit P8). Both Mr. Vijitha Kumara and Mr. P.
B. Ekanayake refer to P8 but neither of them denies the averments in

201

 paragraph 14 of Mr. Liyanage's affidavit, according to which the information
had been given to the police two weeks after the incident, that is on or about
28 February, whereas P8 is dated 14 March 1995. It is incorrect for the Third
and Fifth Respondents to state that Mr. Liyanage's first intimation took place
when P8 was prepared. Mr. Vijitha Kumara's alibi has not been established and
there is no explanation of the presence and role of Police Constables Nos.
16520 and R11064 and Police Officer "Pol Abey" and police vehicle bearing
Registration No. 32-4563. Nor is there any refutation of the allegation that
police officers in official and casual garb were identified as moving about
and/or passively lending support.

In his affidavit Mr. Ekanayake, the Third Respondent, states that "On
14.[2].95 when the alleged incident took place S.I. Amarasinghe and P.C. 10649
Dissanayake were on mobile patrol and having observed a large crowd intervened
and prevented a possible breach of the peace." There are no affidavits from
S.I. Amarasinghe or from PC. Dissanayake nor is there any other evidence
supporting this statement. No. reference to the intervention of the police is
made in Mr. Ekanayake's report 3R3. What he does say in that report is that
the Time-Keepers who were legitimately performing their duties were forcibly
ousted by another group of persons. Mr. Ekanayake in his report attempts to
explain away the fact that persons were trespassing on the premises of the
Time-Keepers, assaulting and intimidating people and indulging in unlawful
behaviour by stating that the bus stand was a public place. I think his
explanation had whitewashing as its principal object. I have already referred
to Mr. Ekanayake's attempt to cover up the unlawful activities in question.
The problem, he suggests, appears to have been based on some political
consideration. In his opinion "the main dispute" was "prima facie civil in
nature", and he says that he "is in the process of referring this dispute to
the relevant Mediation Board." At the same time he says he had recommended
that the information Book Extracts should be forwarded to the Attorney-General
for advice. Five months after his report no progress has been made.

What action has the Police taken with regard to the complaints of assault and
trespass? Mr. Ekanayake says that he is "presently continuing with the
investigation" and attributes the tardiness of the

202

police to the fact that sufficient evidence was not available. He says that
only the President of the Co-operative Society and the Second Petitioner "had
made statements to the Police on their own volition. The Police had to go on a
voyage of discovery to identify the other victims including the 1st and 3rd
Petitioners". He says that the victims "were reluctant to complain and failed
to provide the police with the necessary information." In his report (3133)
Mr. Ekanayake gives the names of 34 persons who had complained. What action
was taken on their complaints? None. What action was taken on the complaint of
the President of -the Society who asked for police protection for all the
members (P7B)? None. What action was taken on Mohideen Meera Saibo's complaint
(P7A)? None. What action was taken on the statement of Mr. Upaliratne on 18
February (P14)? None. What action was taken on the several complaints made on
the telephone to the Deputy Inspector General of Police by Mr. Keheliya
Rambukwella and in his letter dated 16 February 1995 (P10A)? None. The Second
Respondent who is among other things, the Deputy Minister of Defence states in
his affidavit that he became aware of the alleged incident through a newspaper
report and "directed the relevant police authorities to take immediate and
necessary action to maintain law and order and investigate thereto." What
action has the Police taken? None.

The Police function fulfils a most fundamental obligation of Government to its
constituency. Public safety, the maintenance of public order and the
preservation of peace and tranquility depend not only on the existence of
adequate laws but also on the way in which it is applied. In Railway Express
Agency Inc. v. New York (2), Justice Jackson observed that "Nothing opens the
door to arbitrary action so effectively as to allow officials to pick and
choose only a few to whom they will apply legislation. Courts can take no
better measure to assure that laws will be just than to require that laws be
equal in operation." Matthews, J. observed in Yick Wo v. Hopkins (3). "Though
the law itself be fair on its face and impartial in appearance, yet, if it is
applied and administered by public authority with an evil eye and unequal
hand, so as practically to make unjust and illegal discriminations between
persons in similar circumstances, material to their rights, the denial of
equal justice is still within the prohibition of the Constitution."

203

By necessity the State has cloaked policemen with substantial discretionary
power. The police may classify persons and draw lines in the application of
laws, but discrimination must not be based upon impermissible criteria or
arbitrarily used to favour or burden a group of individuals. In the matter
before this Court, the lax enforcement of the law against those who were
alleged to have violated the law, and the failure to afford protection to
those who were in need of protection are unsupported by any neutral
justification and were either totally irrational or entirely motivated by a
desire to achieve some impermissible purpose. If I might borrow the words of
Matthews, J. in Yick Wo, the police have used their powers "with a mind so
unequal and oppressive as to amount to a practical denial by the State of that
equal protection of the laws which is secured to the petitioners, as to all
other persons, by the broad and benign provisions of "Article 12(1) of the
Constitution. In the circumstances, I am of the view that Article 12(1) of the
Constitution was violated and continues to be violated by the Police.

Faced with the inability to explain the role and presence of Substantial of
Police Mr. Vijitha Kumara, the presence of Police Constables Nos. 16520 and R
11064, Police Officer "Pol Abey" and other police officers, whether dressed in
the distinctive clothing worn by police officers or otherwise, learned Counsel
for the Third, Fourth and Fifth Respondents, Mr. Jayasinghe, attempted to
discredit the evidence adduced by the Petitioners in general: He submitted
that the various complaints made were not consistent in that they referred to
various number of persons who were present. The ousting of the Time-Keepers
took place at several locations and therefore the number of persons present
must necessarily have varied from the point of view of the person reporting
aspects of the incident taking place at the location he was. Whatever the
numbers were precisely, the Third Respondent refers to the presence of "a
large crowd" who were involved in the incident.

Mr. Jayasinghe then suggested that the averments of the Petitioners and the
affidavits filed in support of their contentions lacked credibility because
there was a progressive exaggeration of the events that were supposed to have
taken place as time went on. In that connection Mr. Jayasinghe said that no
reference had been

204

made in affidavit P9 to the use of clubs and iron rods. Mr. Jayasinghe,
however, failed to explain the significance of the statement in P9 that "over
a hundred **armed** persons had been involved."

Mr. Jayasinghe then argued, mixing his metaphors, that what took place was, "a
minor incident," "a storm in a tea cup", although "now an attempt is being
made to make a mountain out of a molehill by implicating the Minister and the
Police". One is hardly justified in describing the forcible ousting and
replacement of a group of persons who were legitimately employed in the
business of assisting a Provincial Council to discharge its vital public
service of ensuring an orderly transport service as trivial. The assessment of
the situation by Mr. Rambukwella, in his affidavit and in his letter to the
Deputy Inspector-General of Police, which I have referred to earlier, seems to
me to be more realistic. Nor am I able to accept learned Counsel's submission
that the Police had been implicated merely for the purpose of obtaining relief
from this Court. The Police were implicated because of the role they had
played in ousting the old Time-Keepers and in unlawfully installing and
keeping in office a new group of people.

**STATE RESPONSIBILITY**

Dr. de Costa and Mr. Gamini Perera submitted that the acts of the First
Respondent and the new Time-Keepers were private acts and could not be a
matter for complaint under Article 126 of the Constitution, for the Court had
jurisdiction only to hear and determine a question relating to the
infringement or imminent infringement of a fundamental right by executive or
administrative action. In support of their submission, learned Counsel cited
the decision of this Court in _Perera v. University Grants Commission_ (4) in
which it was stated that:

"Constitutional guarantees of Fundamental Rights are directed against the
State and its organs. Only infringement or imminent infringement by Executive
or Administrative action of any Fundamental right or Language right can form
the subject matter of a complaint under Article 126 of the Constitution. The
wrongful act of an individual, unsupported by State authority is simply a
private wrong. Only if it is sanctioned by the State or

205

205 in this is page is not content

206

assistance of officer of the State. In the circumstances, those who consider
with the Government officials to deprive-the old Time-Keeper of their
fundamental right did so under "colour of law" and their conduct may be fairly
attributed to the State as executive action. (See _Dennis v. Spark_ (6),
_Tower v. Glover_ (7)). As Mr. Justice Brennan, writing for the Court, said in
Lugar v. Edmonson Oil Co. Inc. (8) a person charged with a deprivation of a
constitutional guarantee may fairly be said to be a State actor either because
he is a State official or because he has acted together with or has obtained
significant aid from State officials, or because his conduct is otherwise
chargeable to the State."

In _Mohammed Faize v. Attorney-General and Others_ (9) Fernando, J. said that
... the act of a private individual would render him liable if in the
circumstances that act is Â 'Executive or Administrative'. The act of a
private individual would b Executive if such act is done with the authority of
the Executive; and such authority transforms an otherwise purely private act
into an Executive or Administrative action; such authority may be expressed or
implied from prior or concurrent acts manifesting approval, instigation,
connivance, acquiescence, participation, and the like, including inaction in
circumstances where there is a duty to act; and from subsequent acts which
manifest ratification or adoption."

Dr. de Costa submitted that the First Respondent was not a State officer and
that his acts could not be regarded as Executive or Administrative action. It
would also follow that if he was not a State Officer, then the assistance he
gave the new Time-Keepers would not make them State actions. He admitted,
however, that as the Coordinating Secretary to a Minister, the First
Respondent was paid by the Government, that he used Government vehicles,
Government telephones, and other facilities and performed public functions. He
was, as he claimed, known to several people, and indeed he was identified as
the Co-ordinating Secretary to the Minister and he appeared to the public to
be exercising the authority of his office. de Costa's contention, however, was
that a Co-ordinating secretary's tenure of office depended on the continuation
in power of political party to which he belonged; and since a change of
Government after an election would result in the termination of his Â

207

services, he was not a State Officer capable of exercising Executive or
Administrative functions. I have no hesitation in rejecting that submission,
for the question of determining whether someone performs Executive or
Administrative functions depends on the nature of his office including its
powers, duties and functions.

I am of the view that the acts of the First Respondent are fairly attributable
to the State and therefore engaged State responsibility for the purposes of
Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution. He may have exceeded the scope of his
authority. However, when a public officer takes acts relating to his office,
those actions should be considered to be executive action even if they exceed
the scope of his authority, for he acts under colour of his office. ( _Screws
v. United States_ (10)).

The State is also accountable because it has not merely been passive and
tolerated the unlawful ousting of the old Time-Keepers by private persons,
yielding readily to the influence of others and by its disinclination to act,
but also because it has associated itself with it through the positive action,
encouragement and assistance of the police force and its officers. I am in
agreement with learned Counsel for the Petitioner that the replacement of the
Time-Keepers was brought about by the significant aid rendered by State
officials, including the first Respondent, the want of adequate action of the
police in relation to the events of 10th February 1995, and the active role
played by the Police on 14th February 1995 and by their subsequent lack of
action. Admittedly some of the officers who took part in the operations were
not in uniform. However, they were identified as police officers. In _Griffin
v. Maryland_ (11) it was held that when a private business hired an off duty
police officer to act as a security guard, there was State action connected to
his actions taken on behalf of the private business to the extent he appeared
to the public to be exercising the authority of a police officer.

**ORDER**

For the reasons set out in my judgment, I declare that the State has violated
Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

The First Respondent shall pay the Petitioners a sum of Rs. 15,000 as costs.

208

The State shall pay each. of the Petitioners a sum of Rs. 15,000 as
compensation.

The 7th 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th,15th, 16th, 17th and 19th Respondents are
hereby ordered forthwith to -'

(1) vacate the Time-Keepers premises at the locations set out in document P3;
and

(2) desist from performing the duties and functions of Time-Keepers at those
locations or elsewhere in Kandy.

The Inspector-General of Police is directed to ensure that the 7th, 10th,
11th, 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th, 16th, 17th and 19th Respondents comply with the
orders referred to in the preceding paragraph.

The Inspector-General of Police is further directed forthwith to -

1\. assist the persons named in document P3 to regain possession of the
premises vacated by them on 14th February 1995; and

2\. provide such persons with the protection required to enable them to
discharge their duties and functions as Time-Keepers.

The Inspector-General of Police is directed to report to this Court on or
before the 20th of September 1995 on the steps he has taken to comply with the
directions issued to him in this Order.

Mr. Jayasinghe submitted that persons other than the petitioners are not
entitled to any relief and he cited the decision in Somawathie v. Weerasinghe
(12) in support of his view. The Case of Somawathie deals with the threshold
question of the jurisdiction of the Court in terms of Article 126(2) of the
Constitution to entertain a petition filed by a person whose rights have not
been infringed, and not the question of relief the Court may eventually grant
in the exercise of its powers under Article 126(4).

**FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/41.html_  

