##  Ghaffar v. Vivian Perera - SLR - 114, Vol 3 of 1994 [1994] LKSC 41; (1994)
3 Sri LR 114 (1 October 1994)

114

GHAFFAR

v.

VIVIAN PERERA



SUPREME COURT

BANDARANAYAKE, J.,

M. D. H. FERNANDO, J. AND

KULATUNGA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 23/86

S.C. SPECIAL L.A. NO. 10/88

L.A. NO. 22/77

M.C. WATTALA NO. 43/RE

JULY 9, 1992.



_Landlord and tenant - Notice - Rent Restriction (Amendment) Act, No. 12 of
1966._

_ _

**Held:**



Where the statute does not prescribe the period of notice, the common law
requirement of one month's notice is applicable.



Under the Rent Restriction (Amendment) Act, No. 12 of 1966 the requirement of
one month's arrears and three months' notice of termination were maintained
for premises of which the standard rent exceeded Rs. 100/- per mensem. In
regard to premises of which the standard rent did not exceed Rs. 100/- a
month, the new section 12A further restricted the ground of ejectment
available to a landlord by requiring three months' arrears but no provision
was made in regard to the period of notice of termination of tenancy.
Accordingly the common law requirement of one month's notice of termination
once again became applicable.



Thus in 1969 since the standard rent of the premises in suit did not exceed
Rs. 100/- per mensem, section 12A required three months' arrears, but the
requirements of three months' notice contained in section 131 (A) was
inapplicable. Hence one month's notice of termination was sufficient.



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_D. R. P. Gunatilleka_ for defendant-appellant.  


_S. Ediriweera_ for substituted plaintiff-respondent.  
  


_Cur adv vult.  
 _

July 9, 1992.  


**M. D. H. FERNANDO, J.**

** **

The only question which arises in this appeal is whether in 1969 the
Plaintiff-Respondent, the landlord of the premises, the standard rent

**115**



of which did not exceed Rs. 100/- per mensem, was required to give - as he did
- **one month's** notice of termination of the tenancy, or **three months'**
notice.



Under Section 13 (1) of the Rent Restriction Act (Cap. 274) as originally
enacted in 1948, the landlord of any premises to which the Act applied was
entitled to eject the tenant on the ground of arrears of rent for one month.
No provision was made in regard to notice of termination of the tenancy, and
hence the common law requirement of one month's notice was applicable.



The Rent Restriction (Amendment) Act, No. 10 of 1961, introduced a new section
13 (1A) restricting the landlord's right to ejectment

on the ground of arrears of rent for one month: he was required to give
**three months** ' notice of termination. The common law requirements of **one
month's** notice was thus superseded, in the case of **all** premises to which
the Act applied.



The Rent Restriction (Amendment) Act, No. 12 of 1966, drew a distinction
between premises the standard rent of which exceeded Rs. 100% per mensem, and
those which did not exceed Rs. 100% per mensem. In regard to the former, the
requirements of one month's arrears, and **three months** ' notice of
termination, were maintained, despite the amendment of sections 13 (1) and 13
(1A): those provisions continued to apply, but only to such premises. In
regard to the latter, the new section 12 A further restricted the ground of
ejectment available to a landlord, by requiring three months' arrears, but no
provision was made in regard to the period of notice of termination of
tenancy. Accordingly, the common law requirement of **one month's** notice of
termination once again became applicable.



Thus in 1969 since the standard rent of the premises in suit did not exceed
Rs. 100/- per mensem, section 12A required three months' arrears, but the
requirement of three months' notice contained in section 13 (1A) was
inapplicable. It is common ground that one month's notice of termination had
been given: the landlord was, therefore, entitled to succeed. The order of the
Court of Appeal was right, and the Defendant-Appellant's appeal is dismissed
with costs. The stay order made stands dissolved.



**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.



**KULATUNGA, J.** \- I agree.



_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/41.html_  

