##  Tillekeratne Banda and Another v. Kalubanda and Another - SLR - 95, Vol 1
of 1993 [1993] LKSC 41; (1993) 1 Sri LR 95 (2 March 1993)

**95**

**TILLEKERATNE BANDA AND ANOTHER** **  
v.** **  
KALUBANDA AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT.  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CA., KULATUNGA, J.  
AND RAMANATHAN, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 29/92.  
MARCH 02, 1993.

_Tenant cultivator - Dispossession by injunction - Eviction - Agrarian
Services Act s. 5 (5) - Jurisdiction of District Court._

The respondent was deprived of the occupation of a paddy field pursuant to an
interim injunction issued by the District Court. An Assistant Commissioner of
Agrarian Services made order that the respondent was a tenant cultivator and
that he had been evicted. The Court of Appeal affirmed the said order holding
that the District Court had no jurisdiction to issue an injunction as the
matter was within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Commissioner of Agrarian
Services.

**Held**

1\. The District Court lacks jurisdiction where the owner of a paddy field
seeks to have his tenant cultivator ejected from it.

2\. Here the landlord instituted the action on the basis that the respondent
was a trespasser ; hence if cannot be stated that the interim order was made
without jurisdiction.

3\. The view that there was an eviction of the respondent by the landlord is
erroneous.

**Cases relied on**

_Hendrick Appuhamy v. John Appuhamy_

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_K. S. Tillekeratne for appellant._  
  
_S. C. B. Walgampaya for respondent._

96

March 02, 1993.  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C. J.**

The respondent to this appeal made an application dated 15th March 1977 to the
Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services complaining that he was evicted by
the landlord (who is now the appellant before us) from the paddy field called
' Webodakumbura '. The basic ground of his complaint was that by virtue of an
order of the District Court of Kurunegala he was prevented from cultivating
the paddy field. The other point that arises for decision on this appeal is
whether the fact that the applicant was prevented from cultivating the paddy
field by virtue of an order of Court amounts to "eviction" within the meaning
of section 5 (5) of the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979 read with the
definition of the expression "eviction" in section 68 of the said Act. The
Court of Appeal took the view that the order of the District Court amounts to
"eviction" within the meaning of the Act.

It is to be noted that the respondent who relied on the order of the District
Court has not produced a copy of that order nor had he produced a copy of the
plaint and proceedings in the District Court. In fact the Court of Appeal in
the course of its judgment observed that "it is rather unfortunate that
neither the plaint nor the order of the District Court had been produced at
the inquiry (before the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services) or in
this Court". Mr. Walgampaya for the respondent contended that the District
Court had no jurisdiction to issue the order complained of, and he relied
strongly on the judgment in _Hendrick Appuhamy v. John Appuhamy_ (1) . In the
first place, it would appear that Hendrick Appuhamy's case was an action
instituted by the owner of a paddy field seeking to have his tenant cultivator
ejected from it. Mr. Walgampaya stated that according to the proceedings
before the Assistant Commissioner for Agrarian Services, the landlord had
instituted in the District Court of Kurunegala an action of declaration of
title and ejectment of the respondent on the basis that the respondent was a
trespasser. Therefore in our view Hendrick Appuhamy's case has no application
to the instant case.

Moreover having regard to the fact that the action in the District Court was
on the basis that the respondent was a ' trespasser ', it cannot be stated
that the issue of the order by the Court was made without jurisdiction. In
these circumstances we are of the view that

97

the Court of Appeal was in error when it took the view that there was an
eviction of the respondent by the Appellant-Landlord. We accordingly allow the
appeal and set aside the order of the Court of Appeal and the order of the
Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services. The decision in this appeal will
not effect any proceedings pending in any Court or other forum. In all the
circumstances we make no order for costs.

**KULATUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/41.html_  

