##  K.T.D.S.N. De Silva and Others v. Salinda Dissanayake, Minister of Land
Development and Minor Agricultural Export Produce and Others - SLR - 52, Vol 1
of 2003 [2002] LKSC 41; (2003) 1 Sri LR 52 (11 September 2002)

**52**

**K.T.D.S.N. DE SILVA AND OTHERS** ****

**v.** ****

**SALINDA DISSANAYAKE, MINISTER OF LAND** ****

**DEVELOPMENT AND MINOR AGRICULTURAL EXPORT** ****

# PRODUCE AND OTHERS

** **  

SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

WIGNESWARAN, J., AND

WEERASURIYA, J.

SC APPEAL No. 34/2002

CA APPLICATION No. 703/2001

11TH SEPTEMBER, 2002



_Writ of mandamus - Divesting of an order of acquisition of land under the
Land Acquisition Act - Section 39A of the Act_ \- _Jurisdiction of the Court
of_ _Appeal - Ouster of jurisdiction_ \- _Sections 2 and 4 of the Urban_
_Development Projects (Special Provisions) Act, No. 2 of 1980_ -
_Circumstances in which jurisdiction is not ousted._

A notice under section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act ("the LA Act") was issued
on 08.10.91 in respect of a land owned by the applicants and an order under
section 38 proviso (a) dated 25.04.1992, was published in the Gazette on
04.05.1992, directing that immediate possession of that land be taken on the
ground of urgency. The President then made an order under section 2 of the
Urban Development Projects (Special Provisions) Act, No. 2 of 1980 ("the UDP
Act") that the said land was urgently needed for the pur­poses of an Urban
Development Project. That order did not specify or iden­tify the project.

On 07.07.1992 an application was made to the Court of Appeal for a writ of
certiorari to quash the section 38 Proviso (a) order. It was dismissed _in
lim_ _ine_ on 15.08.1994 for want of jurisdiction in view of section 4 of the
UDP Act and on the basis that writ jurisdiction can only be exercised by the
Supreme Court. No appeal was made to the Supreme Court from that order, nor
was any writ application made to the Supreme Court.

It was only in December 1999 that an attempt was made to take possession of
the land. Whereupon on 11.05.2001 the appellants applied to the Court Appeal,
_inter alia,_ for a writ of mandamus directing the Minister to make a
"divesting order" in terms of section 39A of the LA Act divesting the State of

53

the land vested under the aforesaid acquisition. On a preliminary objection
raised, the Court of Appeal held that in view of section 4 of the UDP Act, it
had no jurisdiction to hear and determine the matter.

**Held :**

Having regard to the purpose for which the UDP Act was enacted and the
provisions of section 4(2), where no steps have been taken for a long peri­od
of time, to implement a proposed project upon land in respect of which a
section 2 order has been made, an application for mandamus in respect of an
omission to divest the acquired land does not fall within the scope of section
4 of the UDP Act, and must be filed in the Court of Appeal.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal

**Cases referred to :**

1.                     _De Silva v. Atukorale_ (1993) 2 Sri LR 283

2.          _Amerasinghe v. Attorney-General_ (1993) 1 Sri LR 376  
_Sanjeeva Jayawardene_ with _Faizer Markar for_ appellants

_A. Gnanadasan,_ Deputy Solicitor General for 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 6th
respon­dents.

_Gamini Perera_ with _P.A. Amerasinghe_ for 4th and 5th respondents.

_ _

## Cur. adv. vult

November, 13, 2002

**FERNANDO, J.** ****

This is an appeal against the order of the Court of Appeal upholding a
preliminary objection, in an application for writs of Prohibition and
Mandamus, that the Court of Appeal had no juris­diction by virtue of the
provisions of section 4 of the Urban Development Projects (Special Provisions)
Act, No. 2 of 1980 (the "UDP Act").

54

The relevant facts are not in dispute. A notice under sec­tion 2 of the Land
Acquisition Act (the "LA Act") was issued on 8.10.91 in respect of an
allotment of land owned by the Petitioners-Appellants ("the Petitioners").
That was followed by an order under proviso (a) to section 38, dated 25.4.92
and pub­lished in the Gazette of 4.5.92, directing that immediate posses­sion
of that land be taken on the ground of urgency. The President then made an
order under section 3 of the UDP Act, published in the Gazette of 29.6.92,
declaring that the said land was urgently needed for the purpose of carrying
out an urban development project. That order did not specify or otherwise
identify the project. On 2.7.92 an application was made to the Court of Appeal
for a writ of Cetiorari to quash the section 38 pro­viso (a) order. A
preliminary objection - that, in respect of that matter, the jurisdiction of
the Court of Appeal, under Article 140 of the Constitution, could only be
exercised by the Supreme Court \- was upheld and the application was dismissed
on 15.8.94.



The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court was not invoked either by way of an
appeal against the Court of Appeal order or by a writ application to quash the
section 38 proviso (a) order and/or the section 2 order. According to the
Petitioners, it was only in December 1999 that an attempt was made to take
pos­session of the land.



On 11.5.2001 the Petitioners applied to the Court of Appeal for, _inter alia,_
a writ of Mandamus directing the 1st Respondent-Respondent, the Minister of
Land Development, to divest the said land. The Petitioners' position was that
the conditions spec­ified in section 39A of the LA Act had been satisfied in
relation to that land, and that accordingly the 1st Respondent became sub­ject
to a duty to make a divesting order in respect of that land.

Section 39A of the LA Act provides:



"(1) Notwithstanding that by virtue of an Order under section 38....any land
has vested absolutely in the State and actual possession of such land has been
taken... the Minister may, subject to subsection (2), by
subse­quent..."divesting Order" divest the State of the land so vested....

55

(2) The Minister shall prior to making a divesting order....satisfy him­self
that-

(a)       no compensation has been paid under this Act...

(b)       the said land has not been used for a public purpose after
possession of such land has been taken...

(c)       no improvements to the said land have been effected....

(d)       the person or persons interested in the said land have con­sented in
writing to take possession...immediately after the  
divesting Order is published...."

The UDP Act provides as follows:



"An Act to provide for the declaration of lands urgently required for carrying
out urban development projects.



2\. Where the President.. is of opinion that any particular land is, or lands
in any area are, urgently required for the purpose of carrying out an urban
development project.... The President may, by Order published in the Gazette,
declare that such land is, or lands in such areas as may be spec­ified are,
required for such purpose....



3.          No person aggrieved by an Order made or purported to have been made  
under section 2...shall be entitled-



(a)       to any remedy, redress or relief in any court other than by way of
compensation or damages;

(b)       to a permanent or interim injunction....or other order having the
effect of staying, restraining, or impeding any person or authority in  
respect of-

(i) any acquisition of any such land or any land in such area;

(ii) the carrying out of any work on any such land or in any land in such
area;

(iii) the implementation of such project in any manner whatso­ever.

4\. (1) The jurisdiction conferred on the Court of Appeal by Article 140 of
the Constitution shall, in relation to any particular land or any land in any
area in respect of which an Order under or purporting to be under section 2 of
this Act has been made, be exercised by the Supreme Court and not by the Court
of Appeal.



(2) Every application invoking the jurisdiction referred to in subsection (1)
shall be made within one month of the date of commission of the act in respect
of which or in relation to which such application is made and the

56



Supreme Court shall hear and finally dispose of such application within two
months of the filing of such application."



Section 5 made consequential provisions in regard to cases which were pending
when a section 2 order was made.



The Court of Appeal, after setting out the facts and the rel­evant provisions
of the UDP Act, upheld the preliminary objection as follows:



"It is an important rule in the construction of statutes that what a Court or
person is prohibited from doing directly, it may not do indi­rectly or in a
circuitous manner.



The Petitioner in the present application now seeks to have the same land,
[in] regard to which the original vesting order was chal­lenged divested.
Having come to this Court originally on the basis that vesting was illegal he
now seeks to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court on the basis that vesting
was a valid vesting and the Court seems to have complied [sic] with the
divesting of the said land.



It appears that the Petitioner is seeking to _approbate and reprobate_ in the
same matter and therefore this application is not tenable in law. In any event
in terms of sections 4 and 5 of the [UDP Act] this Court has _no jurisdiction_
to hear and determine this matter."



The finding that the Petitioners were seeking to approbate and reprobate is
plainly mistaken. While it is true that in the 1992 application the
Petitioners' position was that the vesting was illegal, the present
application does not relate to any such claim. In 2001 the Petitioners sought
a divesting order, and their claim did not depend on, or acknowledge, the
validity of the original vesting. The obligation imposed by section 39A does
not depend on a valid vest­ing: indeed, the Minister's duty to divest would be
all the greater if the original vesting was illegal. The long title of Act,
No. 8 of 1979, which introduced section 39A, shows that section 39A was
intend­ed to provide relief to persons whose lands had been acquired _with­_
_out adequate justification_ (see _de Silva v. Atukorale_ C), where too an
initial unsuccessful challenge to the vesting was followed by an application
for Mandamus to divest.

57

In regard to the jurisdictional issue, the Court of Appeal gave no reasons for
its conclusion. Mr. Jayawardene's contentions on behalf of the Petitioner may
be summarized as follows: that sec­tion 4(1) must be interpreted together
with, and in the context of, section 4(2); that _every_ writ application under
section 4(1) had to be made "within one month of the date of _commission of
the act_ in respect of which that application was made; that, when read with
section 4(2), it was clear that section 4(1) was restricted to applications in
respect of the "positive commission of an act"; that although "act" might
sometimes include an "omission", in this context the phrase "commission of the
act" did not include an omission; that there was no method whereby the period
of one month could be reckoned in the case of an omission, as no date could be
ascribed to such omission; that the Petitioner's griev­ance was in respect of
an omission to which no date could be ascribed, namely, the failure to perform
the duty to make a divesting order when the requisite conditions were
satisfied; that accordingly section 4 did not apply to an application for
Mandamus to compel the performance of that duty; and that the intention of
Parliament was to transfer to the Supreme Court for expeditious disposal
within two months only those writ applica­tions in respect of positive acts of
commission in relation to the acquisition of land urgently required or an
urban development project, and not the entire writ jurisdiction of the Court
of Appeal in respect of land acquisition matters involving lands covered by an
order made under section 2 of the UDP Act. He added that even if there was an
inconsistency between the seemingly wide language of section 4(1) and the
restrictive phraseology of sec­tion 4(2), the latter provision must prevail,
as it was the later expression of the will of Parliament.



Although section 4 of the UDP Act appears to erode the jurisdiction vested in
the Court of Appeal under Article 140 of the Constitution, that is no reason
for interpreting section 4 restrictively. While the vesting of even a part of
the constitutionally entrenched jurisdiction of one of the superior Courts in
some _other_ body or institution may be viewed with disfavour, as being an
erosion of judicial power, the position is different in the case of a re-
distribution of such jurisdiction between the superior

58

Courts themselves, as in this case. Besides, the First Amendment introduced a
proviso to Article 140:



"Provided that Parliament may by law provide that, in any such cate­gory of
cases as may be specified in such law, the jurisdiction con­ferred on the
Court of Appeal by the preceding provisions of this Article shall be exercised
by the Supreme Court and not by the Court of Appeal."



Section 4 of the UDP Act is a valid exercise by Parliament of the power
conferred by that proviso, and cannot be restrictively interpreted upon an
assumption that there was an erosion of the jurisdiction of the Court of
Appeal.



However, giving section 4(1) a wide literal interpretation creates serious
anomalies, and even absurdities, in several respects.



The phrase "any particular land or any land in any area" contemplates two
distinct situations; first, where a particular land has already been
identified as suitable for the relevant urban development project (e.g. the
extension of a public market or public vehicle park will almost invariably
require the acquisition of a particular identified adjacent land); and second,
where a pro­ject (e.g. to provide housing for public officers) requires land
located within a large area (e.g. within an electoral division, or a Grama
Sevaka division, or an AGA's division, or a Municipal ward), but further
investigations of various kinds are required in order to identify which land
is most suitable for the project. Another example of the latter would be the
acquisition of lands for an expressway (as in _Amerasinghe v Attorney-
General,_ where the most suitable route for the expressway cannot be
identified without entering, examining and surveying many lands in several
areas. Such areas may well include State land as well.



In the first situation, the ultimate result of the acquisition process would
be (a) the acquisition of the particular land, or (b) the acquisition of part
of that land, and the abandonment of the rest, or (c) the abandonment of the
entire acquisition. In the sec­ond situation, the ultimate result would be (a)
the acquisition of a defined land out of the larger area, or (b) the
abandonment of the entire acquisition.

59

If section 4(1) is given a wide literal meaning, where any land is acquired
and the project is thereafter fully implemented, that land would nevertheless
continue to be "land in respect of which [a section 2 order] has been made".
Thus in the case of land acquired for housing, disputes may arise, many years
later, in regard to the allocation of houses, termination of occupation,
ejectment, etc, giving rise to the need to invoke the writ jurisdic­tion. Even
land which was ultimately _not_ acquired would contin­ue to be "land in
respect of which [a section 2 order] has been made", and disputes may later
arise (e.g. by reason of the exer­cise of powers under the LA Act or other
statutes) requiring recourse to the writ jurisdiction. Was it the intention of
Parliament when enacting the UDP Act, that in all such cases writ
applica­tions must be filed in the Supreme Court simply because at some time
in the past a section 2 order had been made in relation to that land in an
entirely different context? That would mean that a section 2 order had the
effect of attaching to the land (creating as it were, an encumbrance) an
obligation to apply to the Supreme Court. Besides, there are practical
difficulties, as for instance where such land has passed to a new owner, who
many years later wishes to invoke the writ jurisdiction: how can he ascertain
whether a section 2 order was ever made in respect of that land, in order to
decide whether to apply to the Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court?



What is more, a literal interpretation would result in attach­ing such an
"encumbrance" to land - not only a "particular land" but to all land in an
entire "area" \- even where the relevant sec­tion 2 order had been quashed in
the exercise of the writ juris­diction.



The purpose of the UDP Act was to ensure that lands urgently required for
urban development projects were obtained without the delays caused by (1) the
exercise of the writ jurisdic­tion, original and appellate, and (b) the
exercise of the jurisdic­tion of other courts. Accordingly, section 4
abolished the appel­late jurisdiction, and transferred the original writ
jurisdiction to the Supreme Court, with time limits, thereby considerably
reduc­ing delays attributable to the exercise of the writ jurisdiction; and
section 3 prevented other courts granting injunctions and making

60



orders which would stay, restrain or impede the acquisition of any land, the
carrying out of work thereon, and the implementa­tion of the project. In that
context, I am of the view that section 4(1) must be interpreted in the light
of that purpose and inten­tion. One consequence is that section 4(1) does not
require recourse to the Supreme Court where the dispute arises after the
project has been implemented or where the dispute relates to land in respect
of which the acquisition had been quashed or abandoned.



The phrase "jurisdiction. _...in relation to_ any....land...." gives rise to
further questions. Land acquisition proceedings may result in a wide variety
of disputes _" in relation to" _the land affect­ed by the section 2 order but
which would not in any way hinder either the speedy acquisition of the land
actually needed for an urban development project or the expeditious
implementation of the project. I will refer to a few examples.



Section 4(6) of the LA Act prohibits a decision to acquire only a part of a
building if the owner desires that the whole build­ing be acquired unless such
part can be severed or demolished without serious detriment to the rest of the
building. A landowner may accept the need for the project, and may therefore
not object to the acquisition. However where the part to be acquired cannot be
severed without serious detriment to the rest, he may properly insist that the
entirety of his building be acquired. Although that would not be a dispute _as
to_ the part to be acquired it would nevertheless be a dispute _in relation
to_ or connected with the part to be acquired. If there is an _omission_ on
the part of the Minister to acquire the rest as well, and the owner seeks
Mandamus to compel the acquisition of the rest of his building, should
application be made to the Supreme Court? The grant or refusal of such an
application will not affect the speedy imple­mentation of the project. It
would not be reasonable to attribute to Parliament an intention that such
matters too should be trans­ferred to the Supreme Court for expeditious
disposal. Likewise, disputes regarding the assessment and payment of
compensa­tion for acquired land would constitute disputes _in relation to_ the
land acquired. Accordingly, Mandamus may be the remedy for disputes arising
from such omissions, e.g. the omission to refer a

61



disputed claim to title to the District Court as required by sec­tion 10(2),
the failure to make an award under section 17, the omission to honour a
written agreement (under section 36) to transfer alternative land in lieu of
compensation. Since such mat­ters do not involve a date of _commission_
section 4(1) read with section 4(2) would not require application to the
Supreme Court. Again, a landowner may seek Prohibition, on the ground of bias,
against an officer holding a compensation inquiry under section 9. Requiring
that such applications be dealt with by the Supreme Court does not in any way
facilitate the implementation of pro­jects. Such applications do not appear to
fall within the scope of section 4(1).



I must now turn to other situations in which writ applica­tions may be _in
relation to_ omissions and acts which, though anticipated or imminent, have
not yet been committed. If a notice under section 2 of the LA Act fails to
state the public purpose for which land is required, a person whose land is
affected by such notice may seek Certiorari to quash it, or Prohibition to
restrain acts proposed to be done thereunder. If the Minister is about to
decide under section 4(5) to acquire a land, unlawfully ignoring the owner's
legitimate claim under section 4(6), the owner may seek Prohibition in respect
of that imminent breach of his rights. In such cases recourse to the Court of
Appeal would entail delay, and that would hinder the speedy implementation of
the project concerned. I incline to the view (which I acknowledge is no more
than _obiter)_ that in such instances, notwithstanding section 4(2), section 4
requires recourse to the Supreme Court, even though there is no "positive
commission of an act"; and, conversely, that where there is no such urgency,
section 4 does not require recourse to the Supreme Court even in respect of
the commis­sion of an act. Legislative clarification is desirable, as
otherwise litigants may be forced out of an abundance of caution to file writ
applications simultaneously in both Courts.



Having regard to the purpose for which the UDP Act was enacted, and the
provisions of section 4(2), I hold that, where no steps have been taken, for a
long period of time, to implement a proposed project upon land in respect of
which a section 2 order has been made, an application for Mandamus in respect
of an

62



omission to divest the acquired land does not fall within the scope of section
4 of the UDP Act, and must be filed in the Court of Appeal, I must add that
this judgment deals only with the jurisdictional issue, and I express no
opinion on the question whether the conditions set out in section 39A have
been satisfied.



I allow the appeal, and direct the Court of Appeal to enter­tain, hear and
determine the application on the merits. The Petitioners will be entitled to a
sum of Rs. 20,000 as costs in both Courts, payable by the State.

**WIGNESWARAN, J.** \- I agree.

**WEERASURIYA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal allowed; Court of Appeal directed to hear application on merits._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/41.html_  

