##  Walgamage v. The Attorney General - SLR - 1, Vol 3 of 2000 [1991] LKSC 42;
(2000) 3 Sri LR 1 (10 July 1991)

**1**

**WALGAMAGE  
v.  
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
KULATUNGA, J. AND  
GOONEWARDENE, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 38/90  
CA NO. 126/85  
MC MATARA NO. 5/83  
3RD DECEMBER 1990, AND  
1TH JANUARY AND 3RD MARCH 1991  
  
_Penal Code - Criminal misappropriation and Criminal breach of trust -
Sections 386 and 388 of the Penal Code - Whether an innocent taking in the
first instance is essential to constitute the offence - Meaning of
"entrustment' in criminal breach of trust.  
_  
The appellant was the Manager of a Rural Bank functioning in the premises of a
multi-purpose co-operative Society ("M.P.C.S"). The Bank accepted savings
deposits and granted small loans, and also carried on the business of a pawn
broker. According to prescribed operating procedures, its cash balance at any
given time should not have exceeded Rs. 5000/-. Whenever the Bank required
cash, on the request of its cashier the appellant prepared a voucher and
submitted it to the Manager M.P.C.S. for approval. Upon approval, a cheque
drawn in the name of the appellant was issued. The appellant would endorse it
and present it to the cashier M.P.C.S. who would pay cash. The appellant was
expected to hand over the cash to the cashier of the Bank. Fourteen cheques
for Rs. 5000/- each had been issued, and in respect of ten of these, the
M.P.C.S. cashier had paid cash to the appellant, which he had not handed over
to the Bank's cashier. The appellant was convicted of criminal breach of trust
in respect of the said sum of Rs. 50,000/-.  
  
It was argued on behalf of the appellant that the offence of criminal breach
of trust had not been made out because  
  
(a) there had been no initial taking bereft of a dishonest intention, the
offender being already in possession at the time the offence was committed.  
  
(b) there had been no entrustment (of property) on the basis of true consent.

**2**

**Held :  
**  
(1) Ex facie section 386 of the Penal Code does not impose a requirement that
the initial taking must be innocent, but only that a dishonest intention must
exist at the time of misappropriation or conversion. Insistence upon an
initial innocent taking amounts to adding a further ingredient, which is not a
permissible principle of interpretation.  
  
Per Fernando, J.  
  
"Illustrations (b), (c) and (f) to explanation 2 to section 386 are against
learned President's Counsel's contention that criminal misappropriation deals
with cases where the offender is already in possession, for they show that a
person who finds property not in the possession of any one, and immediately
misappropriates it is guilty of that offence."  
  
2\. In the instant case there was an entrustment of property within the
meaning of section 388.  
  
Per Fernando, J.  
  
""entrustment" does not contemplate the creation of a trust with all the
technicalities of the law of trust; it includes the delivery of property to
another to be dealt with in accordance with an arrangement made either then or
previously."  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
_1\. A. G. v. Menthis (1960) 61 NLR 561  
  
2\. Ranasinghe v. Wijendra (1970) 74 NLR 38  
  
3\. King v. Kabeer (1920) 22 NLR 105  
  
4\. Rajendra v. State of Uttar Pradesh AIR (1960) Allahabad 387  
  
5\. Ram Dayal (1886) P.R. No. 24 1886  
  
6\. Shamsooudur (1870) 2 N.W.P. 475  
  
7\. Raza Husain (1905) 25 A.W.N. 9, 2 Cr. L. 394  
  
8\. Mc lver (1935) 69 M.L.J. 681  
  
9\. Stickney v. Sinnatamby (1886) 5 Tamb 112  
  
10\. Peries v. Anderson (1928) 6 Times 49  
  
11\. Georgesy v. Saibo (1902) 3 BR. 88  
  
12\. Kanavadipillai v. Koswatta (1914) 4 Bal. N.C. 74  
  
13\. R v. Suppaih (1901) 5 NLR 119  
  
14\. S.C. 61 PC. Chilaw 29737; 4.3.1910, 6 C.L. Revision 137,153  
  
15\. Gratiaen Perera v. The Queen (1960) 61 NLR 522_

**3**

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal reported in (1990) 2 Sri
LR 212  
  
_D.S. Wijesinghe, P.C., with Ananda Malalgoda, Nihal Somasiri and M.D.
Dharmadasa_ for accused-appellant.  
  
_A .R .N. Fernando, S.S.C._ for Attorney General.

_Cur. adv. vult._

July 10, 1991.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
Special leave to appeal was granted in this case in view of conflicting
decisions (in A.G. v. Menthis,(1) and Ranasinghe v. Wijendra,(2) and the
decisions cited therein) upon the question whether to constitute the offence
of criminal misappropriation or criminal breach of trust it is essential that
the initial taking be innocent.  
  
The Appellant was convicted of criminal breach of trust, in respect of a sum
of Rs. 50,000/- while being employed as Manager of a Rural Bank. The Rural
Bank accepted savings deposits, and granted small loans, and also carried on
the business of a pawn broker. According to prescribed operating procedures,
its cash balance at any given time should not have exceeded Rs. 5,000/-. If
the Bank required cash, a sum not exceeding Rs. 5,000/- at a time was obtained
from the Multi-Purpose Co-operative Society ("M.P.C.S.") within whose premises
it functioned. The Bank's cashier would make an oral request for cash to the
Appellant, who would prepare a voucher for that purpose, and submit it to the
Credit Manager of the M.P. C .S. The latter was expected to satisfy himself
that cash was actually required, and would then authorise a cheque to be drawn
for the stipulated amount, in the name of the Appellant. A cheque would then
be prepared, and duly signed, and delivered to the Appellant, who would
endorse it; his endorsement would be authenticated by the Accountant, and the
cheque would then be presented to the cashier of the M.P.C.S., who would pay
cash. The Appellant was expected to hand over the cash to the cashier of the
Bank.

**4**

Fourteen vouchers for Rs. 5,000/- each were prepared by the Appellant, at
times when the cashier had not required cash, and had made no request for
cash; the Credit Manager had approved the vouchers and sanctioned payment
without due care. Fourteen cheques for Rs. 5,000/- each had been issued, and
in respect of ten of these, the M.P.C.S. cashier had paid cash to the
Appellant, which he had not handed over to the Bank's cashier. The Appellant
was found guilty by the High Court of Matara of criminal breach of trust under
section 391 of the Penal Code, and was sentenced to two years R.I., and a fine
of Rs. 50,000/- (in default 1 1/2 years R.I.). The Court of Appeal while
upholding the conviction, suspended the prison sentence for a term of five
years, and affirmed the fine and default sentence, with appropriate directions
to the High Court.  
  
If there was an "entrustment", it was not merely of the cheque but also of the
cash obtained in exchange. In King u. Kabeer,(3) a jail guard was entrusted
with a railway warrant, and instructed to accompany a prisoner who had served
his sentence to the railway station, to receive a train ticket in exchange for
the warrant, and to give him the ticket. Having obtained the ticket the jail
guard sold it. De Sampayo, J., upheld an acquittal on a charge of criminal
breach of trust in respect of the warrant. The trust in respect of the railway
warrant was to deliver it to the proper officer at the railway station and to
receive a ticket in exchange; although it was true that he had failed to
perform the further duty of handing the ticket to the prisoner, that had no
immediate connection with the trust in respect of the warrant. That case is
distinguishable: there was no charge of criminal breach of trust in respect of
the ticket, and in any event, the ticket was not "entrusted" by the prison
authorities, but handed over by a third party, the railway officer. In the
present case, the Bank had an arrangement with the M.P.C.S. whereby the latter
would provide cash to designated officers of the Bank. The M.P.C.S., through
one or more of its officers, provided cash, and as part of its internal
procedure (and it is immaterial

**5**

whether this was made known to the Bank or not) first issued a cheque through
one officer, and cash upon presentation of the cheque to another officer. That
transaction cannot be separated into two distinct components: the delivery of
a cheque subject to a "trust", and the delivery of cash in exchange for the
cheque, free of such "trust". In pursuance of an arrangement with the Bank,
the M.P.C.S. through its officers caused cash to be delivered to the
Appellant, and it was part of the arrangement that this sum was "entrusted" to
the Appellant to be handed over to the Bank's cashier. It is true that the
officers of the M.P.C.S. did not themselves, personally, "entrust" the cash;
they were no more than the hands which delivered the cash, there being an
entrustment by the legal person, namely the M.P.C.S., whose business
organisation they served.  
  
It is possible that the Appellant had no dishonest intention on the first
occasion (and perhaps even on the second) when he obtained cash in this way;
it may well be that he obtained cash in anticipation of requests by the Bank's
cashier in order to expedite the Bank's business, by immediately responding to
a request for cash without having to spend time in going through the process
of approval, documentation, and payment. But the sum obtained on the first
occasion was not actually paid to the Bank's cashier. Hence it is reasonable
to conclude that at least on the subsequent occasions, he had a dishonest
intention at the outset. Learned President's Counsel submitted that the
Prosecution evidence thus established the offence of cheating; and that
criminal breach of trust had not been made out because  
  
(a) there had been no initial taking bereft of a dishonest intention, and  
  
(b) there had been no entrustment: because a trust implies confidence reposed
by one person in another, and it is of the essence of confidence that it must
be freely given and that there must be a true consent; there is no true
consent, if consent is obtained as a result of a trick.

**6**

In support of his contention that the initial taking must be innocent, and
that a dishonest intention must be formed subsequently, learned President's
Counsel advanced three arguments. He conceded that ex facie section 386 does
not impose such a requirement, but only that a dishonest intention must exist
at the time of misappropriation or conversion to the offender's own use.
Insistence upon an initial innocent taking amounts to adding a further
ingredient, namely "whoever having obtained possession of any movable property
without a dishonest intention thereafter dishonestly misappropriates or
converts to his own use such movable property . . ." His first submission was
that in respect of offences against property there are clear lines of
demarcation in the Penal Code between those where the victim is in possession
at the time the offence is committed (such as theft and cheating) and those
where the victim is out of possession the offender being already in possession
(such as criminal misappropriation and criminal breach of trust); all these
offences are intended to be self-contained without any overlapping, so that
the same act could not constitute both cheating and criminal misappropriation.
He urged that "it is an established principle that criminal laws must be
construed narrowly or in favorem vitae aut libertatis'', citing Maxwell
(Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Edition, p. 245):  
  
"Similarly, statutes dealing with jurisdiction and procedure are, if they
relate to the infliction of penalties, strictly construed: compliance with
procedural provisions will be stringently exacted from those proceeding
against the person liable to be penalised, and if there is any ambiguity or
doubt it will, as usual, be resolved in his favour. This is so even though it
may enable him to escape upon a technicality."  
  
Secondly he contended that the Indian Courts had consistently taken this view;
the decision in Rajendra v. State of Uttar Pradesh,(4) cited in the Court of
Appeal judgment was not in line with the Indian trend.

**7**

In support of these two contentions reference was made to the observations of
Weeramantry, J., in Ranasinghe v. Wijendra (Supra)  
  
"This indeed would appear to be the understanding of this offence in India as
well. Thus Ratanlal & Thakore begin their comment on this section with the
observation that "criminal misappropriation takes place when the possession
has been innocently come by, but where, by a subsequent change of intention,
or from the knowledge of some new fact with which the party was not previously
acquainted, the retaining becomes wrongful and fraudulent. The offence
consists in the dishonest misappropriation or conversion, either permanently
or for a time, of property which is already without wrong in the possession of
the offender." The authors go on to point out that in this, respect the Penal
Code is at variance with the English law according to which the intention of
the accused only at the time of obtaining possession is taken into account.  
  
So also the original texts of the Penal Law of India by Sir Hari Singh Gour
himself would appear to draw this distinction. It is there stated: "The
question whether the act is theft or misappropriation depends upon when the
dishonesty began - was it before or after the thing came into possession. This
is a point of division as much between the two offences of theft and criminal
misappropriation in the Code, as between criminal misappropriation and a civil
wrong under English law." This absence of wrongful initial taking is stressed
again for he observes in a later passage that in theft the initial taking is
wrongful but in criminal misappropriation it is indifferent and may even be
innocent but becomes wrongful by a subsequent change of intention or from
knowledge of some new fact with which the party was not previously acquainted.
The word "indifferent" in this passage would appear to refer to a neutral
state of mind - that is where the doer has not affirmatively formed a wrongful
intention at the time of taking.

**8**

Later editions of this celebrated work by other editors seem to depart however
from the view of the distinguished author, for the 8th edition states that it
is difficult to say that misappropriation cannot be committed if the accused
had a dishonest intention at the moment of taking possession of the article. I
would prefer on this point to follow the view expressed by Sir Hari Singh Gour
himself. "(pp 42-43)"  
  
Thirdly he urged that the cursus curiae in Sri Lanka was to regard innocent
initial taking as an indispensable ingredient of criminal misappropriation,
except for a brief interlude of ten years between A. G. v. Menthis and
Ranasinghe v. Wijendra (Supra) this was the view expressed by professor G. L.
Peiris (Offences under the Penal Code, p 460).  
  
Neither the Penal Code nor any other statute lays down a principle of
interpretation that the there is no offences in the Penal Code must be
presumed not to overlap. It is because the Criminal Procedure Code of 1898
recognised that there maybe such overlapping that section 180(2)
(corresponding to section 175(2) of the present Code of Criminal Procedure
Act) provided that:  
  
"If the acts alleged constitute an offence falling within two or more separate
definitions of any law in force for the time being by which offences are
defined or punished the person accused of them maybe charged with and tried at
one trial for each of such offences . ."  
  
The first illustration to that section demonstrates that the same act could
constitute the offence of causing hurt as well as of using criminal force. The
principle that penal statutes are to be strictly construed does not apply
where a statute is clear and unambiguous. I am therefore of the view that the
suggested principles of interpretation cannot be applied so as to introduce an
additional ingredient into the definition of an

**9**

offence. It is unnecessary to consider when and how those principles could be
utilised to resolve an ambiguity, because we are here concerned not with an
ambiguity but with the imposition of an additional ingredient through
interpretation. It is true that at the time the Penal Code was enacted in
India larceny in English law did not include cases where property was taken
without a dishonest intention; probably the offence of criminal
misappropriation was intended to cover such cases. However, the definition
actually adopted to give effect to that intention covers not only such cases,
but extends also to cases where a dishonest intention existed at the outset.
Illustrations (b), (c) and (f) to explanation 2 to section 386 are against
learned President's Counsel's contention that criminal misappropriation deals
with cases where the offender is already in possession, for they show that a
person who finds property not in the possession of any one, and immediately
misappropriates it is guilty of that offence. This explanation, is not an
exception to, or an extension of, the section, but namely illustrates the
principle contained therein. It serves to emphasise that all that is required
is dishonesty at the time of the act of misappropriation or conversion.  
  
The position in India is by no means consistent. Gour's view has not been
acted upon in many instances. Cases referred to in the Commentaries on the
Indian Penal Code include the following:  
  
"A Hindu girl having picked up a gold necklet and made it over to a sweeper
girl, the accused, the brother of the finder, represented to the latter that
the necklet belonged to a person of his acquaintance and thus got possession
of it from her. On inquiry by a police constable a few hours later, he
repeated the representations, but afterwards gave up the necklet. These
representations were found to be untrue to the knowledge of the accused. It
was held that he had committed this offence (criminal misappropriation)." Ram
Dayal,(5).

**10**

"Where money is paid to a person by mistake, and such person, either at the
time of the receipt or at any time subsequently, discovers the mistake, and
determines to appropriate the money, that person is guilty of criminal
misappropriation." Shamsooudur,(6).  
  
"A and B were about to travel by the same train from Benares City. A had a
ticket for Ajudhia. B had two tickets for Benares Cantonment. A voluntarily
handed over her ticket to B in order that he might tell her if it was right. B
under the pretence of returning A's ticket, substituted therefore one of his
own, and kept A's ticket. It was held that the offence committed by B was that
of criminal misappropriation rather than that of cheating." Raza Husain,(7).  
  
"Even though the accused when they induced the complainant to part with
certain properties had the intention of deceiving him, a subsequent
misappropriation by them of the property to their own use would amount to
criminal breach of trust. The fact that there was a complete offence of
cheating when the property was received would not prevent the accused being
guilty of the offence of criminal breach of trust." Mc Iver,(8).  
  
[Ratanlal and Thakore, Law of Crimes, 22nd ed, pp 1040, 1041, 1045, 1051,
Gour, Penal Law of India, 10th ed, pp 3450, 3459, 34601  
  
In view of such decisions it is not suprising that the present edition of
Gour's work (at p. 3453) states  
  
"The argument that criminal misappropriation cannot be committed if the
accused had dishonest intention at the time of taking possession of the
article, cannot be accepted."

**11**

The first of the local cases relied on as establishing a cursus curiae is
Stickney v. Sinnatamby,(9). There, upon being asked for his gun by the
accused, the complainant voluntarily parted with it. The accused ran away with
it. It was held that the accused was wrongly convicted of theft and that he
could not be convicted of cheating as there was no dishonest or fraudulent
inducement to the complainant to deliver the gun. The conviction was altered
to criminal misappropriation. In Peries v. Anderson,(10) the Appellant gave
his chauffeur an identifiable 25-cent coin, and sent him to a boutique to buy
cigarettes. The chauffeur placed the coin on the table, whereupon it rolled
into the drawer, but the salesman denied receipt of the money and refused to
give the cigarettes. When this was told to the Appellant, he insisted on
searching the drawer, and found the coin; he then took the salesman to the
Police Station, using some degree of force or compulsion. The Appellant was
charged for that offence, and the question was whether he could justify the
arrest of the salesman on the basis that the salesman had committed a
cognisable offence. It was held that the salesman had not committed theft as
"there was no taking of the property from (the chauffeur); ... there was
nothing dishonest in the manner in which he acquired possession of it, but the
dishonesty occurred when he denied the receipt of the money. This offence
therefore was dishonest misappropriation."  
  
These decisions are not authority for the principle that if a dishonest
intention exists at the time possession is acquired, there can be no
conviction for criminal misappropriation.  
  
In Georgesy v. Saibo,(11) the payee of a cheque, having endorsed it, put it
into an envelope with a letter addressed to his banker requesting that the
proceeds be placed to his credit. The accused having come into possession of
the cheque, endorsed it in favour of a Chetty who thereupon paid him the
amount of the cheque, less his commission. The accused was found guilty under
section 394 of dishonestly receiving stolen

**12**

property. It was held in appeal that there was no definite evidence that the
cheque had been stolen, for it might have been lost in the post. Faced with an
imminent acquittal, Counsel suggested that the Court should consider whether
the accused could be convicted of criminal misappropriations. Middleton, j.,
having held that on the evidence the only inference was that the accused had
come dishonestly by the cheque, observed:  
  
"Now all the cases which have been decided by the Indian Courts point to the
conclusion that in order to constitute the offence of criminal
misappropriation there must be first an innocent possession . . . and then a
subsequent change of intention. If I find that the man dishonestly came by the
cheque, as I do, although that would put him in a worse position morally than
if he had come by it in such a way as would make him amenable under section
386, yet I am bound to confess that it is impossible to meet the weight of
authority that has been put before me, and to say that the original
misappropriation constitutes an offence under section 386."  
  
However, neither the names nor the references of the Indian decisions are set
out in the judgement. In Kanavadipillai v. Koswatta,(12) the accused asked a
boutique keeper for a box of matches, and having obtained it, gave a five
rupee note. The boutique keeper said he had no change and gave back the note.
The accused took the note and the box of matches "to the railway station,
there got the note changed, and was returning when he met the constable and
the complainant." Although it was observed that he should not have been
convicted of criminal misappropriation, as that offence requires an initial
innocent acquisition of possession, yet it was held on the facts that there
was no appropriation or conversion to his own use by the accused, nor an
intention to cause wrongful loss to the complainant. These two decisions do
not discuss the provisions of section 386, and state the proposition that
criminal misappropriation requires an initial innocent possession almost as if
it were axiomatic. Georgesy v.

**13**

Saibo Supra) referred to this proposition only in reference to the invitation
to convict the accused on a different charge, and Kanavadipillai v. Koswatta
(Supra) could have been determined, on the facts, without any reliance on this
proposition.  
  
On the other hand, in R. v. Suppaiya,(13) it was held that a servant who
receives money on behalf of his master and enters the amount received in his
master's book, but afterwards denies the receipt of the money is guilty of
criminal breach of trust. Although the judgment does not consider whether the
dishonest intention should have been formed after receiving the money, yet the
contention for the prosecution on appeal was that "the original taking was
with dishonest intention." Clearly, the Court did not consider this to
negative criminal misappropriation. In the sixth volume of the Ceylon Law
Review there is a note of a decision that:  
  
"It is not enough in a case of criminal misappropriation of property to say
that the accused must have known at the time he took the property that it
belonged to the complainant. There must be undoubted proof of such knowledge
on the part of the accused. "(14)  
  
Thus it can hardly be said that by 1960 there was a clear, definite and
consistent line of authority on this point. In Gratiaen Perera v. The
Queen,(5) Sinnetamby, J., stated that "the authorities seem to suggest that
there must be an initial honest possession followed by a dishonest conversion"
but it was not necessary to decide the point; when it did become necessary, a
week later, he held in A. G. v. Menthis, (Supra) that if the initial taking of
property, not in the possession of anyone, was dishonest, the offence was made
out.  
  
In Ranasinghe v. Wijendra,(2) Weeramantry, J., distinguished A.G. v.
Menthis(1) as applicable only to the taking of property not in the possession
of anyone. Relying on Georgesy v. Saibo(11) and Kanavadipillai v.
Koswatte,(12) and Gour's views as to the demarcation between theft and
criminal

**14**

misappropriation, he held that for the latter offence an initial innocent
taking was essential. R v. Suppaiya (Supra) does not appear to have been
cited.  
  
With much respect to that distinguished Judge, I regret that I am unable to
agree. The plain language of section 386 imposes no such requirement; the
Penal Code does not contain any rigid demarcation between offences; the cursus
curiae in India and Sri Lanka does not reveal an emphatic and uniform
insistence on such a requirement. Section 388 is even plainer: it refers to an
ingredient of "entrustment" (which is anterior to and distinct from the
dishonest misappropriation, conversion, use or disposal which is another
ingredient), but does not require that there be an innocent intention at the
time of entrustment. The Appellant's first contention therefore fails.  
  
The Appellant's second contention is based upon the assumption that the M.P.
C. S. and its officers were induced to entrust each cheque to him by a trick.
The arrangement between the Bank and the M.P.C.S. was that upon a voucher
being submitted, a cheque would be issued to the Appellant; the M.P.C.S. was
not required to inquire into the motives of the Appellant or whether the Bank
actually needed cash; the operative cause of each cheque being entrusted to
the Appellant was the submission of vouchers in due form. Thus even if it be
correct that an entrustment induced by a trick will not satisfy section 388 -
and I express no opinion as to whether that is an inflexible rule - that
question does not arise here. "Entrustment" does not contemplate the creation
of a trust with all the technicalities of the law of trust; it includes the
delivery of property to another to be dealt with in accordance with an
arrangement made either then or previously. That was the case here.  
  
I therefore dismiss the appeal and affirm the order of the Court of Appeal.  
  
**KULATUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**GOONAWARDENE, J**. - I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/42.html_  

