##  Fonseka v. Gulamhussein - SLR - 77, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC 42; (1981) 1
Sri LR 77 (18 March 1981)

**77**

**FONSEKA  
 V.  
 GULAMHUSSEIN**

**SUPREME COURT.  
WEERARATNE, J., SHARVANANDA, J. AND WANASUNDERA, J.  
S. C.  APPEAL  No. 29/79; C. A. 725/75 (F); C. R. COLOMBO 4394/ED.  
FEBRUARY 5,1981.  
**  
Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, section 28 (1)- Action for ejectment on the ground of
non-occupation by tenant-Premises in suit occupied by employees of a company
of which tenant the Managing Director-Landlord entitled to judgment.  
  
 This action was filed by the plaintiff for the ejectment of his tenant, the
defendant, under the provisions of section 28 (1) of Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972,
on the ground of non-occupation for a continuous period of over six months
without reasonable cause. The defendant came into occupation under a tenancy
agreement dated 10.3.1945 and it was common ground that for a period of five
years prior to the institution of this action he had resided elsewhere. These
premises were during this period occupied by employees of Savoy Theatres Ltd.,
a company of which the defendant was Managing Director. Having analysed the
evidence placed before Court, the learned Magistrate entered judgment in
favour of the plaintiff. The defendant's appeal to the Court of Appeal was
also dismissed. On appeal to the Supreme Court-  
  
**Held**  
  
The defendant had ceased to occupy the premises in suit for over the period of
six months stipulated by section 28 of the Rent Act. The occupation of the
premises by the employees of Savoy Theatres Ltd., which was a distinct legal
entity, was not, in the circumstances occupation by the defendant and the
plaintiff's action must succeed.  
  
**Cases referred to  
**  
_(1) Sabapathy v. Kularatne, (1951) 52 N. L. R. 425.  
  
(2) Suriya v. Board of Trustees of Maradana Mosque, (1954) 55 N. L. R. 309; 50
C. L. W.45.  
  
(3) Pir Mohamed v. Kadibhoy, 1957) 60 N.L.R. 186.  
  
(4) Amarasekera v. Gunapala, (1970) 73 N. L. R. 469.  
  
(5) Wijeratne v. Dschou, (1974) 77 N.L.R. 157.  
  
(6) Samarawickrema v. Senanayake, S.C. 21/73-D.C. Kandy 22104, S. C. Minutes
of 23.11.77  
  
(7) Skinner v. Geary, (1931) 2 K.B. 546; (1931) All E.R. Rep. 302.  
  
(8) Dando v. Hitchcock, (1954) 2 Q. B. 317; (1954) 3 W. L. R. 76; (1954) 2 All
E. R. 535.  
  
(9) Salomon v. Salomon & Co., (1897) A.C. 22; (1895-9) All E.R. Rep. 33;75 L.
T. 426; 13 T. L. R. 46.  
_  
**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_A. C. Gooneratne, Q.C._ with _D. R. P. Goonatillake_ , for the defendant-
appellant.  
  
_C. Thiagalingam, Q.C_. with _K. Kanag-Isvaran_ , for the plaintiff-
respondent.

_Cur.adv. vult._

**  78**

March 18, 1981.  
**  
WEERARATNE, J.  
**  
This is an action instituted by the plaintiff, the land-lord to have the
defendant, the tenant ejected from the premises No. 5, Rohini Road, Colombo 6,
on the ground that he had ceased without reasonable cause to occupy the said
premises for a continuous period of over 6 months, under section 28 (1) of the
Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972.  
  
It would be convenient to set out the salient facts, which have given rise to
the legal question which has to be determined in this case.  
  
It was common ground at the trial that the defendant went into occupation of
the premises under the tenancy agreement dated 10th March, 1945, marked P1,
and that for a period of five years prior to the institution of this action,
he had been residing at Queens Avenue, Colombo 3, during which time the
employees of' the Savoy Theatres Ltd., of which the defendant was the Managing
Director, were occupying the premises in suit. Then although he stated in his
evidence that at the time he signed P1 he made it clear that the premises will
be used by his employees, later in the course of his evidence he conceded that
neither in the tenancy agreement (Pl), nor in his letters to the plaintiff was
there any suggestion made in regard to his renting out the premises for his
employees. Further when the plaintiff was cross-examined by counsel for the
defendant, there was no question put to him bearing on the occupation of the
premises by the defendant's employees on the basis that the premises were
taken for them.  
  
It would thus be seen that there was no proof that the plaintiff had either
expressly or impliedly consented to the use or occupation of the premises by
the employees of the defendant. On the other hand in his letter (P3) the
plaintiff requested the defendant to give over possession of the premises as
he was no longer in occupation of it and was residing elsewhere.  
  
The Magistrate, having analysed the evidence refers to document (P6) wherein
the defendant states that in 1945 he occupied the premises along with his
family and that he continues to occupy the premises with his staff (which I
presume to be

**79**

business employees). The defendant goes on to state that,".......the only
difference now being that I occupy No. 37, Alfred Place, besides the above. .
." In this connection the, Magistrate states, "Although he may have done so it
cannot be said that the premises in suit was given to the defendant for the
use and occupation of his employees." If that was so he could have got the
plaintiff to provide for it in P1. P1 clearly states that the land-lord wanted
the defendant to be his tenant of the premises. The magistrate held that
consequently a cause of action has accrued to the plaintiff to have the
defendant ejected under section 28 (1) of the Rent Act and entered judgment
accordingly in favour of the plaintiff.  
  
The Court of Appeal too held in favour of the plaintiff and dismissed the
defendant's appeal.  
  
The sole question to be determined is whether under section 28( 1) of the Rent
Act of 1972, occupancy of residential premises by the employees of Savoy
Theatres Ltd., of which the defendant was the major shareholder and Managing
Director, is occupation by the tenant even though the defendant tenant resided
elsewhere. The assumption of the defendant was that Savoy Theatres Ltd., which
is an incorporated company with the controlling interest therein enjoyed by
him, was his alter ego and that its employees were his employees.  
  
Learned counsel for the defendant submitted that the premise had been occupied
by his employees to the knowledge of the plaintiff without any dispute, and
that consequently the plaintiff has acquiesced in the defendant's occupancy of
the premises through employees working in the Savoy Cinema. In regard to this
submission it is in point to mention that the tenancy agreement (P11) entered
on 1st March, 1945, makes no provision for any employees. Reference may be
made to the document (P4) dated 30th November, 1961, in which the plaintiff
gave notice to the defendant to quit the premises and deliver possession on
the ground that the latter had sub-let the premises to others. Thereafter even
though a plaint was prepared by the plaintiff's lawyers the latter did not
think that any useful purpose would be served by filing action since the Rent
Act of 1948, which was applicable at that time, afforded no relief in the
situation the plaintiff was placed. The situation changed however with the
implementation of the Rent Act of 1972 which contained the

**80**

provisions of section 28 (1). It was the plaintiff's contention that there was
no acquiescence by him to the defendant's "employees" occupation of the
premises.  
  
The Court of Appeal held that section 28 of the Rent Act of 1972 gives no
protection to a tenant of residential premises who has ceased to be in actual
physical occupation for a period of 6 months prior to the institution of
action for ejectment. The Court further stated that the fact that the mode of
occupation was through the tenant's employees will not be a reasonable cause
within the meaning of section 28, if that mode of occupation has not been with
the express or implied consent of the land-lord, which in this instance has
not been proved.  
  
A scrutiny of the Rent Act of 1948 indicates that it is intended largely to
protect the tenant of premises in such areas as are covered by the Act. There
are for instance specific provisions setting out restrictions in regard to
increases of rent (sections 3 and 4) and a detailed method of computing the
authorised rent (section 5). There is a prohibition against excessive premiums
and advance payments (section 8). Section 13 of the Act contains restrictions
of the right to institute proceedings for ejectment of the tenant. Sections 14
and 18 give further protection to the tenant. Protection of the land-lord is
provided only in the obvious situations of the tenant sub-letting the
premises, or part of it without the prior consent of the land-lord (section
7), or the tenant using the premises for any purpose other than that of
residence (sections 9 and 10). The only circumstances in which a tenant could
be ejected by a land-lord apart from sections 9 and 10 of the Act are set out
in section 13 (1) of the Act.  
  
The concept of the "non-occupying" tenant has been discussed in a number of
local and English cases. In a case reported in (1) Gratiaen, J. considered for
the first time the case of such a tenant. He said at page 426,  
  
" In my opinion a non-occupying tenant in the sense in which that term has
been explained in Brown v. Brash (1948) 1 AER 922, should be regarded as
having forfeited the special statutory protection afforded by the provisions
of the Rent Restriction Ordinance."  
  
In (2) Gratiaen, J. stated at page 310,  
  
     "Brown v. Brash which declared that a non-occupying 

**81**

tenant prima facie forfeits his status as a statutory tenant under the Rent
Act must not be misunderstood. In 52 N.L.R. 425 1 intended only to accept the
decision that questions of relative hardship cannot arise where the tenant has
completely abandoned possession of the premises, and thereby removed himself
from the protective orbit of the Act. But a tenant who lawfully sub-lets a
premises can in no sense be equated ... Such instances, as far as I am aware,
have not arisen in any action instituted in Ceylon and I do not doubt if they
do, the Courts would refuse to interpret the local Act as to permit the tenant
to claim protection. But in the normal cases the land-lord can only obtain an
order for ejectment by one or other of the conditions specified in the Act."  
  
In the above two cases Justice Gratiaen inclined in favour of the English
judicial concept of the "non-occupying" tenant, but as he himself stated in
the latter case, the question itself did not directly arise for decision in
either of the two cases decided by him (vide page 310 of the latter case).  
  
In the case of Pir Mohamed v. Kadibhoy (3), Basnayake, C. J. stated that the
English concept of the "non-occupying" tenant finds no place in our Rent Act.  
  
In the case reported in (4), Alles, J. held that since the defendant in the
case was a non-occupying tenant, he was not entitled to claim the protection
of the Act. He referred to the view taken by Justice Gratiaen, but makes no
reference to Justice Basnayake's judgment. This was the first case where the
point directly arose.  
  
In the case of Wijeyratne v. Dschou (5), Justice Sharvananda had to consider
this question which arose in a direct form. He expressed the view that non-
occupation is not one of the grounds for ejectment under the 1948 Act as
amended by the 1966 Act. He however states, "We are glad to note that the
Legislature has now become alive to the casus omissus and has provided by
section 28 for such a contingency."  
  
In Samarawickrema v. Senanayake (6) Justice Wanasundera delivering the
judgment of the Divisional Bench held that it was not competent for the Court
to entertain an action for the ejectment of a tenant on the ground of non-
occupancy without the authorisation of the Rent Control Board

**82**

 Mr. A. C. Gooneratne, Q.C., cited the judgment of Wanasundera, J. for our
consideration in the light of the different views expressed by the learned
Judges in the cases cited therein. He conceded that the case of Samarawickrema
v. Senanayake proceeded on the premises of an earlier Act prior to the 1972
Rent Act.  
  
To my mind the conflict of judicial opinion in Sri Lanka which was resolved by
a Divisional Bench in Samarawickrema v. Senanayake has now ceased to be of
significance by reason of section 28 of the Rent Act of 1972. It is now clear
by reason of the 1972 Act that a court has jurisdiction under section 28 to
enter an order for the ejectment of a non-occupying tenant in an action for
ejectment of the tenant filed by the land-lord.  
  
Section 28 reads as follows:  
  
"(1) Notwithstanding anything in any other provisions of this Act, where the
tenant of any residential premises has ceased to occupy such premises, without
reasonable cause, for a continuous period of not less than six months, the
landlord of such premises shall be entitled in an action instituted in a court
of competent jurisdiction to a decree for the ejectment of such tenant from
such premises."  
  
This section stands by itself. It has not been made part of section 22, which
provides the grounds for ejectment. The narrow restrictions or pre-conditions
contained in section 22 do not fetter or circumscribe an action instituted by
a landlord under section 28. It applies to all residential premises
irrespective of the standard rent. Section 28 commences with the use of the
words 11 notwithstanding anything in any other provisions of this Act. . .".
It would also be noticed that sub-section 2even prescribes a special mode for
the service of summons. The normal requirement of personal service has been
dispensed with. Further" section 28 not merely confers jurisdiction, but also
sets out all the constituent elements of such an action. They are:  
  
(a) The premises must be residential (not business).  
  
(b) The tenant should have ceased to occupy such premises.  
  
(c) The non-occupation must be for a continuous period of at least 6 months.  
  
(d) The non-occupation should have been without reasonable cause.

**83**

The items (a) and (c) are capable of easy determination. Item (d) would not
arise unless the tenant gives some excuse for non-occupation. In item (b) the
words, "ceased to occupy", might be open to judicial interpretation because
section 28 does not specify as to what is meant by the phrase, "...ceased to
occupy..."  
  
Mr. Thiagalingam, Q.C., in the course of his submissions stated that there are
three situations that could be contemplated:  
  
(1) Where the tenant continues to live with his servants. Then both are
protected.  
  
(2) If the tenant goes abroad with the intention of coming back within a
reasonable time, his servants are protected. However,  
  
(3) occupation by the employees of a concern of which the tenant is the
Managing Director (as the defendant in this case), would not be protected.  
  
Mr. Thiagalingam argued that the protection of the Rent Act extends only to
the occupation by the tenant's servants and not to his business employees. The
phrase "ceased to occupy" takes within its sweep a number of situations in
regard to occupancy which have to be given consideration. If we take for
instance the case where the tenant lives with his servants it seems quite
practical and obvious that both should be protected. If the tenant goes
abroad, leaving his servants to look after the household until his return,
such occupation by his servants must be protected. Accordingly, it seems
reasonable that mere absence from the house will not deprive a statutory
tenant of his protection under the Rent Act, if he regards it as a residence
and has an intention to return there and there is evidence of his intentions
in the form of his domestic servants or caretaker who are left behind to look
after the home and occupy it during his absence. What then is the position in
regard to a case such as this .. where the defendant takes a house on rent and
allows the employees of a company (the Savoy Theatres Ltd.) of which he is the
Managing- Director, to be in occupation? He has not made it a term of his
tenancy agreement (Pl) that the employees too be permitted to occupy the
premises along with him. The defendant subsequently leaves the said premises
with his family and takes residence elsewhere leaving behind the employees of
the cinema in occupation of the leaving behind the employees of the cinema in
occupation of the premises taken by him. The premises in question was
undoubtedly

**84**

residential. The defendant was not in physical occupation of the premises for
a continuous period of over 6 months. There was a finding by the Magistrate
that the non -occupation of the defendant was "without reasonable cause",
within the meaning of section 28. Accordingly all the elements of section 28
of the Rent Act of 1972 were subscribed to by the plaintiff who is the
landlord. The only question is whether in the circumstances set out above, the
tenant has "ceased to occupy such premises", within the meaning of the Act.
Mr. Thiagalingam for the plaintiff strenuously argued that the said employees
of the Savoy Theatres Ltd., are strangers who can receive no protection on the
basis that their occupation is through the defendant. Learned counsel further
submitted that the Rent Act does not apply to employees of a concern of which
the defendant is the Managing Director. He went on to submit that a company
(the Savoy Theatres Ltd.) cannot be in occupation of residential premises,
take a place as tenant since it cannot reside there, but that it could occupy
business premises only for business purposes. Learned counsel in concluding
his submissions stated that the simple point is that the defendant took the
premises on rent and ceased to occupy it thereafter and that accordingly the
provisions of section 28 of the Rent Act are clearly applicable.  
  
Whilst with respect I agree with Justice Wanasundera that English decisions
and doctrines must be used carefully and with discrimination, I am inclined to
believe that in seeking to interpret the phrase "ceased to occupy" in section
28 (1), the decisions of the English Courts relating to non-occupation under
the English Rent Acts are helpful in determining the criteria of non-
occupancy. I n the case of Skinner v. Geary (7), the tenant had lived
elsewhere for over ten years and had placed his relations and sister in
possession. The occupation of the relations and sister was not for the purpose
of preserving the house for the tenant. The circum­stances indicated that the
tenant had no intention of returning, but was keeping the tenancy going so as
to provide a place of residence for his relations and sister. It was held that
he had ceased to occupy.  
  
The observation of Lord Goddard in the case of Dando v. Hitchcock (8), does
commend itself in regard to the meaning that could be given to the words
"ceased to occupy" in our Rent Act. He said, "Where there is a tenant who does
not live in the house, never intends to live in the house, and declares that
his intention is never to live in it, I can see no reason why his tenancy
should be protected to enable him to keep in the house a Manager or a

**85**

partner, or anyone else it may be convenient to have there."  
  
It seems to me that the defendant's absence from the premises for about five
years since he took residence there initially gives rise to the inference that
he has "ceased to occupy such premises" within the meaning of the phrase in
section 28 of the Rent Act. Neither the Savoy Theatres Ltd. nor its employees
had any dealings with the plaintiff in respect of the said premises. It was
decided in Salomon v. Salomon (9), by the House of Lords, that a company and
the individual or individuals forming a company were separate legal entities,
however complete the control might be by one or more of the company. The
fundamental fallacy in the defendant's argument was the assumption that the
employees of Savoy Theatres Ltd. were his employees because of the control he
exercises over the company. In law the Savoy Theatres Ltd. is a distinct legal
entity and its employees are in law not the employees of the defendant. In the
circumstances the occupation of the premises by such employees cannot be
regarded as occupation by the defendant. The defendant in this view of the
matter had ceased to occupy the premises in suit for much more than the six
months stipulated by section 28 of the Rent Act.  
  
The appeal is accordingly dismissed with costs.  
  
**SHARVANANDA, J. - I agree.  
  
WANASUNDERA, J. - I agree.**

_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/42.html_  

