##  Jayasinghe and Others v. Jayaratne, R.S., Secretary, Ministry of Public
Administration and Others - SLR - 385, Vol 2 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 42; (1999) 2
Sri LR 385 (30 November 1999)

**385**

**JAYASINGHE AND OTHERS  
v.  
R. S. JAYARATNE, SECRETARY, MINISTRY OF PUBLIC  
ADMINISTRATION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
GUNASEKARA, J. AND  
WEERASEKERA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NOS. 770/97, 772/97 AND 798/97  
JULY 6, 1999.

_Fundamental Rights - Reference of an application to the Human Rights
Commission - Human Rights Commission Act, No. 21 of 1996 - Powers of the
Supreme Court and the duty of the Commission upon a reference made in terms of
section 12 of the Act_

The Supreme Court referred three fundamental rights applications to the Human
Rights Commission (the Commission) established under the Human Rights
Commission of Sri Lanka Act, No. 21 of 1966, in terms of section 12 thereof.
The Chairman of the Commission requested clarification from the Court on two
matters.

(1) Section 12 (1) confers powers on the Court to make a reference 'in the
course of a hearing of an application' : does that provision empower the Court
to make a reference only after leave to proceed has been granted?

(2) Section 12 (2) casts a duty on the Commission to 'inquire and report':
does that provision require or enable the Commission to express its view upon
the question whether the relief prayed for should be granted?

**Held:**

1\. Seeking leave to proceed occurs during the 'hearing' of, or the
'inquiring' into, a fundamental rights application, and the Court is empowered
to make a reference under section 12 (1) even before the grant of leave to
proceed.

386

2\. While section 12 empowers the Court to refer a matter to the Commission,
it is quite dear that the Court cannot delegate its powers and jurisdiction to
the Commission, and will not be bound by the findings and views of the
Commission. The Commission itself cannot delegate its powers to one or more of
its members. The purpose of a reference under section 12 is to obtain the
benefit of the collective wisdom of all the members of the Commission.

Per Fernando, J.

. . . a request by this Court for the ''views'' or 'recommendations' of the
Commission would be within the scope of the 'inquiry and report' contemplated
by section 12 read with section 11 (e).''

3\. Upon a reference under section 12, the Commission is obliged to inquire
into and submit a report containing the Commission's findings upon the matter
referred to it, together with the reasons therefor; also to submit its views
and recommendations, if so required by the Court; and to take other steps as
it may be directed to take by the Court in terms of section 11 (e). Such
findings, views and recommendations will not bind either the parties or the
Court. (Obiter) The provisions of section 26 (2) of the Act provides for non
disclosure of any document received by or any matter or thing coming to the
notice of, the Commission in the course of any inquiry or investigation under
the Act, to any Court. The expression ''Court'' in that section does not
include the Supreme Court.

**APPLICATIONS** for infringement of fundamental rights (directions to the
Human Rights Commission).

_D. S. Wijesinghe, PC with Gayathri Fernando for the petitioners in No. 770/97
and No. 772/97._

_R. K W. Goonasekera with Shiranthi Jayatilleke for the petitioner in No.
798/97._

_Asanga Gunawansa for the respondents_

_Cur. adv. vult._

387

September 24, 1999.  
**FERNANDO, J.**

Orders were made by this Court in October, 1997, referring these three
fundamental rights applications to the Human Rights Commission (the
Commission) established under the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka Act,
No. 21 of 1996, for inquiry and report. Leave to proceed had not been granted.
The Commission submitted a report dated 28.10.98 from which it was not clear
what the findings and recommendations of the Commission were. On 27.1.99 the
Court called for the Commission's findings and recommendations.

Part II of that Act deals with "Powers of Investigation of the Commission",
and section 12 provides:

"(1) The Supreme Court may refer any matter arising in the course of a hearing
of an application made to the Supreme Court under Article 126 of the
Constitution to the Commissioner for inquiry and report.

(2) The Commission shall inquire and report to the Supreme Court on the
matters referred to it under subsection (1), within the period, if any,
specified in such reference."

The Chairman of the Commission by his letter dated 23.2.99 requested
clarification from this Court on two matters: .

(1) Section 12 (1) confers power on this Court to make a reference 'in the
course of a hearing of an application" does that provision empower this Court
to make a reference only after leave to proceed has been granted?

(2) Section 12 (2) casts a duty on the Commission to "inquire and report":
does that provision require or enable the Commission to express its views upon
the question whether the relief prayed for should be granted?

388

All counsel appearing in these three applications, having previously made
written submissions, made oral submissions on 6.7.99.

(1) STAGE AT WHICH A REFERENCE MAY BE MADE

A fundamental rights application is in two stages: initially, an ex parte
request for leave to proceed (at which stage the question for decision is
whether an infringement has been established prima facie), and then, if leave
is granted, the determination of all matters arising in the application after
the respondents have been afforded an opportunity of filing pleadings, and
both sides have been heard. While the first stage is usually ex parte, there
have been more than a few occasions on which the Court has heard the Attorney-
General, or other respondents, even before granting leave.

A verbal distinction is often drawn between those two stages: by describing
the first as being "for grant of leave" or `for support", and the second as
being "for hearing", or "for argument". But, that is not of much assistance in
determining whether the phrase "in the course of a hearing of an application"
used in section 12 covers only the stage after the grant of leave.

In my view, the plain meaning of a 'hearing", in the context of adjudication,
is a proceeding in the course of which the Court "hears" (or listens to ) the
evidence and/or arguments adduced by or on behalf of one party (if it is an ex
parte proceeding) or both parties (if it is inter partes); and that would
usually take place in open Court (and, most exceptionally, in Chambers). When
leave to proceed is sought, reference is made to affidavits and documents, and
legal arguments are advanced, and I have no doubt whatever that that
constitutes "a hearing" of the application. Although that is only a
preliminary (and not a final) hearing, it is nevertheless a hearing. Further,
it seems to me that section 12 is not intended to be confined to just two
stages \- of seeking leave, and the subsequent inquiry - but would apply to
all other intermediate stages at which a fundamental rights application comes
up for consideration in open Court: including, for

**389**

instance, an application for interim relief, or for an order for the
production of documents, or for the addition or substitution of parties. If at
any stage of the proceedings the Court considers that the assistance of the
Commission would be useful, section 12 permits recourse to it.

The Sinhala text draws no distinction between a "hearing" by this Court and an
"inquiry" by the Commission: the word "vibhagaya" is used in both instances.
This Court can therefore make a reference while it is "inquiring" into a
fundamental rights application.  
I hold that seeking leave to proceed occurs during the "hearing" of, or the
"inquiry" into, a fundamental rights application, and that this Court is
empowered to make a reference under section 12 (1) even before the grant of
leave to proceed.

That interpretation gains support from a consideration of the preexisting
practice of this Court (in the context of which section 12 was introduced) as
well as the provisions of sections 14 and 15 of the Act, to which -I must now
turn.

(a) Previous practice:

This Court does not grant leave to proceed unless a prima facie case has been
made out. Sometimes counsel .who has failed in that respect implores the Court
nevertheless to grant leave, confidently asserting that the material which the
respondents themselves will produce with their objections will prove the
petitioner's case. I have often pointed out that such a submission recognises
that if the respondents file no objections, the petitioner must fail. The
invariable practice of the Court has been to refuse leave if a prima facie
case has not been made out.

However, there are exceptions to that rule. When it appears to the Court that
a prima facie case has not been made out, due to the lack of material which
seems likely to be forthcoming from official

**390**

or independent sources - to which the petitioner lacks access - the Court
often postpones the decision whether or not to grant leave, and makes an
attempt (in the interests of justice) to obtain that material. This it does,
sometimes by asking the Attorney-General to assist as amicus curiae, and
sometimes by directing a respondent or a third party to produce documentary
evidence. Thus, when petitioners complain of torture, unlawful detention, and
denial of access to lawyers, the Court may call for the production of medical
records from Prison hospitals, detention orders, and Police reports filed in
Magistrate's Courts, in order to determine whether prima facie violations of
Articles 11 and 13 have been established. If the Court had narrowly
interpreted its power to call for such material, so as to confine it to the
stage after leave had been granted, many a meritorious claim would have failed
for want of evidence which - despite the exercise of due diligence - could not
have been obtained without a Court order. Not only does the grant of a
jurisdiction generally carry with it, by necessary implication, such powers as
are necessary to make that jurisdiction effective, but in any event the
Constitutional jurisdictions of this Court must be interpreted broadly rather
than narrowly, so that "fundamental rights shall be respected, secured and
advanced" by this Court in compliance with Article 4 (d).

In like manner, I have no doubt that the purpose of a reference to the
Commission under section 12 was to make the fundamental rights jurisdiction
more fruitful and effective. In the absence of words of limitation, there is
no reason to think that Parliament intended this Court to have the benefit of
assistance from the Commission only after leave is granted. Section 11 (e)
provides, with no hint of any limitation:

"For the purpose of discharging its functions the Commission may exercise any
or all of the following powers: . . . (e) take such steps as it may be
directed to take by the Supreme Court, in respect of any matter referred to it
by the Supreme Court; . . . "

391

Likewise, section 28 imposes duties on officials, who arrest or detain
persons, to inform the Commission, and the Commission may authorize its agents
to visit Police stations, prisons, and places of detention. The Commission
will thus have valuable contemporaneous information about the time of arrest
and the places and conditions of detention, and whether a detainee has fresh
injuries or shows signs of ill-treatment. There is no reason to think that
Parliament intended that this Court should be denied the benefit of such
information when it is considering whether to grant leave to proceed.

(b) Sections 14 and 15:

Section 12 occurs in the same part as sections 14 and 15. Section 14 empowers
the Commission, on its own motion or on a complaint made to it, to investigate
alleged fundamental rights infringements. Where such investigation discloses
an infringement or imminent infringement by executive or administrative
action, the Commission has power to refer the matter for conciliation or
mediation. Where the Commission considers such reference inappropriate, or
where any of the parties object, or where such conciliation or mediation is
unsuccessful, the Commission may, under section 15 (3):

"(a) recommend to the appropriate authorities that prosecution or other
proceedings be instituted against the person or persons infringing such
fundamental right;

(b) refer the matter to any court having jurisdiction to hear and determine
such matter in accordance with such rules of court as may be prescribed
therefor, and within such time as is provided for invoking the jurisdiction of
such Court, by any person;

(c) make such recommendations as it may think fit, to the appropriate
authority or person or persons concerned, with a view to preventing or
remedying such infringement, or the continuation of such infringement."

392

This Court has sole and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine any
question relating to the alleged infringement or imminent infringement by
executive or administrative action of any fundamental right, and hence it is
only to this Court that the Commission can refer a matter under section 15 (3)
(b). Our attention was not drawn to any relevant regulations or rules of Court
which have been made. While it is, therefore, not clear how exactly such a
reference may be made, how this Court will decide whether to entertain it, and
what procedure should be followed in hearing and determining such matter, what
is important, for the present purpose, is that the Commission can only make a
reference to this Court if and when its investigations disclose an
infringement or imminent infringement of a fundamental right by executive or
administrative action. It must, therefore, have evidence before it (and
sections 18 and 19 make provision for the taking of evidence), justifying the
conclusion that there has been an infringement or that an infringement is
imminent. Any reference which it then makes will necessarily be before the
grant of leave to proceed.

Thus, when the Commission makes a reference to this Court it will inform this
Court - before the grant of leave - of the facts found by the Commission and
its conclusions. I cannot discern from the Act, or elsewhere, any principle
which would justify a different result when the Commission is called upon to
make a report to this Court (upon a reference under section 12): what possible
prejudice or harm could there be if the Commission similarly discloses to this
Court the facts found and its conclusions, before this Court grants leave to
proceed? If it is suggested that the Court might be "influenced" by the
Commission's report, that will apply equally to a reference by the Commission.
Since the Act does not expressly prohibit the making of a reference by this
Court, or the submission of a report by the Commission, until after the grant
of leave to proceed, section 12 must be interpreted, harmoniously with
sections 14 and 15, so as to permit a reference before the grant of leave to
proceed.

393

(2) EXPRESSION OF VIEWS BY THE COMMISSION

While section 12 empowers this Court to refer a matter to the Commission, it
is quite clear that this Court cannot delegate its powers and jurisdiction to
the Commission, and will not be bound by the findings and views of the
Commission.

At the same time, the "inquiry and report" contemplated by section 12 is not
simply a matter of securing the production of relevant documents and the
recording of evidence of witnesses; the Commission is not expected merely to
conduct an investigation, and to submit its notes of investigation to this
Court. Upon a reference I hold that the Commission must act in much the same
way as upon a complaint under section 14 - the Commission must analyse the
evidence and ascertain whether it discloses an infringement or an imminent
infringement of a fundamental right by executive or administrative action.

The view that the function of the Commission upon a reference under section 12
is not simply to record evidence is supported by another consideration.
Section "2 of the Act establishes the Commission as a body corporate, which
"shall" consist of five members. It would appear that the Commission must act
through all its members, because the Act makes provision neither for a quorum
nor for the delegation of the powers of the Commission to one or more of its
members; section 7 only enables the Commission to act notwithstanding a
vacancy or a defect in the appointment of a member. The purpose of a reference
under section 12 was thus to enable this Court to obtain the benefit of the
collective wisdom of all the members of the Commission, and not just its notes
of investigation.

Section 15 (3) (b) does not refer to "recommendations". On the other hand, a
reference by this Court may involve some rule or practice which a petitioner
claims has given rise to the alleged infringement; the Court may wish to have
assistance as to the changes which are desirable and/or feasible. Likewise,
the Court may wish to be advised whether the grant of the relief sought by the
petitioner may give rise

394

to anomalies or injustices. In that context, a request by this Court for the
"views' or 'recommendations" of the Commission would be within the scope of
the 'inquiry and report" contemplated by section 12, read with section 11 (e).

I hold that upon a reference under section 12 the Commission is obliged to
inquire into and submit a report containing the Commission's findings upon the
matter referred to it, together with the reasons therefor; also to submit its
views and recommendations, if so required by this Court; and to take any other
steps as it may be directed to take by this Court in terms of section 11 (e).
Such findings, views and recommendations will not bind either the parties or
this Court.

The provisions of section 26 (2) need consideration:

"A member of the Commission . . . shall not be required to produce in any
Court, any document received by, or disclose to any Court any matter or thing
coming to the notice of, the Commission in the course of any inquiry or
investigation conducted by the Commission under this Act, except as may be
necessary for the purpose of proceedings for contempt or for an offence under
this Act."

Considered in isolation, that provision would seem to authorize non production
and non-disclosure to this Court, and that would be inconsistent with the
duties imposed on the Commission by other provisions of the Act (including
sections 11 (e) and 12). 1 hold that, when section 26 (2) is construed in the
context of the entire Act, 'Court' does not include this Court.

The Commission is directed to forward its findings and recommendations in all
these cases on or before 30.11.99.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

**WEERASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Powers of the Supreme Court and duties of the Human Rights Commission
determined._  


* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/42.html_  

