##  Rajaguru, Inspector General of Police v. Range Bandara and Others - SLR -
96, Vol 2 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 42; (1998) 2 Sri LR 96 (21 May 1998)

**96**

**RAJAGURU, INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF POLICE  
v.  
RANGE BANDARA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
A. DE Z. GUNAWARDANA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 128/96

_Application for revision/review - Judgment of the Supreme Court - Fundamental
Rights - Interpretation of Articles 15 (8), 55 (5) and 126 of the
Constitution.  
_  
The petitioner (Inspector-General of Police) who was the 2nd respondent in the
above application and whose order for the summary transfer of the petitioner
in that application (a Sub Inspector) was quashed by the Court later applied
for a review of the judgment and for an interpretation of certain Articles of
the Constitution by a fuller Bench.  
  
**Held:  
**  
1\. Article 15 (8) of the Constitution does not permit derogation from Article
12 in the case of members of the Police Force otherwise than by means of law.
For the purpose of Article 15 (8) "Law" means only legislation.  
  
2\. Article 55 (5) does not purport to impose any limitation on the
jurisdiction of the Court under Article 126.  
  
3\. Before he invoked the jurisdiction under Article 126 the petitioner need
not have exhausted all other remedies such as redress from the Minister of
Defence, the President, the Public Service Commission or the Inspector General
of Police.  
  
Per Fernando, J.  
  
"The Questions of Law and fact sought to be raised by the Inspector - General
of Police for the first time are patently untenable, and do not merit
consideration by a fuller Bench. The application is thus wholly devoid of
merit, quite misconceived and inexcusably delayed. . ."  
  
**APPLICATION** for revision and/or review of a judgment of the Supreme Court.
* [*1997 - 1 - SLR].

_Cur. adv. vult._

**97**

May 21, 1998  
  
**ORDER OF COURT  
**  
For the reasons stated in our judgment dated 26.9.97, in which the facts are
fully set out, we quashed the order of the 2nd respondent (the Inspector-
General of Police) summarily transferring the petitioner (a Sub-Inspector)
from Weerambugedera to Moratuwa. In this order, the parties . are referred to
as in the original application SC No. 128/96.  
  
More than six months later, on 2.4.98, the 2nd respondent filed this
application \- which is described as being "an application for revision and/or
review, and. an application under article 132 of the Constitution for
consideration by a fuller Bench, and an application for the interpretation of
Article 15 (8), under Articles 118, 125 and 126 read with Article 12 of the
Constitution and an application to interpret sections 114 (e), (f) and (h) and
section 63 (2) of the Evidence Ordinance, as matters of general and public
importance".  
  
The petitioner had been serving as officer-in-charge, Weerambugedera, from
August, 1992; by a Police message received on 5.1.96, he was informed that the
2nd respondent had ordered his transfer to Moratuwa, as a sub-inspector
(supernumerary) with effect from 5.1.96. He filed an application under Article
126 on 30.1.96 alleging that that transfer was not in terms of the
Establishments Code and the Departmental regulations, but had been made at the
request of the 3rd respondent, an Attorney-at-law and the SLFP chief organizer
for Polgahawela. Leave to proceed was granted on 5.2.96, and an interim order
staying the transfer was made on 16.2.96.  
  
The petitioner says that on 6.1.96 he "called on the 3rd respondent". The 3rd
respondent admits that he gave the petitioner a letter dated 6.1.96 (P7),
addressed to the 1 st respondent, the Deputy Minister for Defence, stating
that at the 3rd respondent's request one sub-inspector Ratnatilleke had been
transferred from Puttalam to Weerambugedera (in the Polgahawela electorate)
with effect from 6.1.96, and that in consequence the petitioner had been
transferred to Moratuwa. He requested that the transfer of the petitioner, who
was a good, honest and efficient (or enthusiastic) officer, to Moratuwa be
cancelled and that he be transferred to a place like Kegalle, Kandy or
Anuradhapura.

**98**

The petitioner says that he posted that letter to the 1st respondent on
13.1.96, along with a covering letter (P7A) addressed to the 1st respondent.  
  
The relevant portions of the affidavits of the 1st and 2nd respondents, dated
8.3.96 and 12.3.96, have been quoted in our judgment. The 1st respondent did
not frankly admit or deny the receipt of P7 and P7A, but claimed that he had
no personal recollection as to whether P7 had been received by him. He did not
say what steps he had taken to have his files checked to see whether there had
been any such correspondence, and if so what action had been taken. The 2nd
respondent said that he was unaware of P7 and P7A, necessarily implying that
even if P7 and P7A had reached the 1st respondent, the 2nd respondent had not
received them (or copies) from the 1st respondent.  
  
Neither the 1st nor the 2nd respondent suggested any reason why the 3rd
respondent should have falsely stated that he had made a request for the
transfer of SI Ratnatilleke.  
  
The petitioner then filed a counter-affidavit dated 19.4.96, and produced (as
P8) a letter dated 6.2.96 signed by Major S. M. Wijeratne, as private
secretary to the 1 st respondent, addressed to the petitioner. The subject-
matter was stated to be the variation of the transfer of the petitioner. That
was an acknowledgement of the receipt of a letter (date unspecified) addressed
to the 1st respondent. P8 stated that, on the instructions of the 1st
respondent, that letter had been referred, for suitable action, to the
Inspector-General of Police, to whom all future queries should be addressed,
and P8 also indicated that, on the directions of the 1st respondent, a copy of
P8 was being sent to the Inspector-General of Police, for suitable action and
reply, together with the letter in question (presumably, the original).  
  
During the sixteen months between then and the hearing, the 1st and 2nd
respondents made no attempt to contradict that affidavit; or to clarify the
position as to the receipt of P7 and P7A by the 1st respondent, and their
transmission to the 2nd respondent, and whether P8 referred to P7 and P7A or
to some other letter.  
  
As for the petitioner's transfer, the 2nd respondent's position was that it
was "a continuation of the end of the year transfers for 1995"; that the
decision to transfer him "to a distant station" was taken after

**99**

considering two reports (made in October, 1994), and because he "was made
aware that some other complaints against the petitioner were pending"; and
that he considered a transfer necessary "so that proper inquiries could be
conducted".  
  
Several questions of fact arose. Had SI Ratnatilleke been transferred at the
3rd respondent's request? Had P7 and P7A reached the 1st respondent? Had P7
and P7A been forwarded on the 1st respondent's instructions to the 2nd
respondent? Had the 1st and 2nd respondents denied or adequately explained the
3rd respondent's statement that SI Ratnatilleke had been transferred at the
3rd respondent's request? Finally, were the transfers of St Ratnatilleke and
the petitioner normal year-end transfers for 1995?  
  
In the 2nd respondent's recent affidavit dated 2.4.98, he makes reference both
to the letters P7, P7A and P8, as well as to the 1995 year-end transfers. He
claims that the 1st respondent had, in his affidavit dated 8.3.96, "admitted
having received a letter from the petitioner and the fact that his Private
Secretary, Major S. M. Wijeratne acknowledged that letter by P8". That
averment is quite incorrect, because the 1st respondent had made no such
admission. Further he admits that "According to P8, P7 and P7A had been
forwarded to the 2nd respondent ... for necessary action". However, elsewhere
in the same affidavit he says, inconsistently, that "P8 . . . did NOT prove
that it referred to P7 and P7A. Copies of P7 and/or P7A were NOT sent to the
IGP by either registered mail or ordinary mail or in any other manner". He
also says that P7A is not a true copy of the covering letter which the
petitioner sent to the 1st respondent, but does not produce that covering
letter even now to verify the truth of his allegation.  
  
These are all matters which were within the knowledge of the 1st and 2nd
respondents: Did the 1st respondent receive P7 and P7A? What exactly was
acknowledged by P8, and forwarded to the 2nd respondent with a copy of P8? Did
the 2nd respondent receive that copy of P8, and if so what - if anything - was
annexed thereto? They had ample opportunity to clarify the position and to
produce the relevant documents from the official files, between 19.4.96 and
21.8.97. The 2nd respondent did not do so then, and has not done so even now.
His present affidavit does not frankly admit or deny whether P8 and its
enclosure(s) were received by him, and does not annex whatever document he did
receive if P8 reached him.

**100**

There is thus absolutely no reason to reconsider our finding that the 3rd
respondent probably did request the transfer of SI Ratnatilleke to
Weerambugedera; that as a result it became necessary to transfer the
petitioner out of Weerambugedera; and that the petitioner's transfer was thus
the consequence of the 3rd respondent's request.  
  
As for the 1995 year-end transfers, the 2nd respondent now refers to new
material in support of this claim that the petitioner's transfer was just one
of 69 year-end transfers. Since SI Ratnatilleke's name was on the same list of
transfers, it must necessarily follow that his transfer too was one of the
1995 year-end transfers. The 2nd respondent has produced a circular dated
11.7.95 signed by him in his (then) capacity of Senior DIG (Administration)
for the Inspector General of Police. That circular stipulates the following,
inter alia:  
  
(a) Such transfers will be made either on application by the officer
concerned, or upon a nomination by supervisory officers (there was never a
suggestion that the petitioner made any such application);  
  
(b) Nominations were possible only in respect of two categories:  
  
(i) those whose work and conduct were considered unsatisfactory and whose
transfer out of the Division was considered desirable: these had to be in Form
51 (pink);  
  
(ii) those who had completed 8 years, service in the Division: these had to be
in Form 51 (white);  
  
(c) . The OIC Divisions had to forward nominations, with his personal comments
and recommendations, to the Range DIG by 31.7.95; the latter had to send them
to Headquarters by 10.8.95; Transfer Board decisions had to be conveyed by
1.9.95, the closing date for appeals was 20.9.95; and Appeal Board decisions
had to be communicated by 15.10.95;  
  
(d) No nominations were to be entertained after the closing date, unless delay
was due to unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.

**101**

There are two significant aspects of this scheme. The first is the safeguard
of a decision by the Transfer Board subject to an appeal as well. If nothing
else, the grant of a right of appeal implies a duty to give reasons. The
second is that the scheme contemplated that in general there would be no
summary transfers; an officer would know that he was being transferred by mid
October, more than two months before the commencement of the next year, thus
facilitating his arrangements about housing, spouse's employment, and, most
important, children's schooling. Indeed, the circular specified, among other
guidelines, that "the ages of children must be given and if a transfer would
affect schooling it must be clearly indicated with reasons". The scheme did
not contemplate that an officer could be denied the safeguards implicit in the
scheme, by delaying or withholding a "nomination", and then summarily dealing
with his transfer as a "continuation of the end of the year transfers"; the
same safeguards applied, mutatis mutandis.  
  
Since SI Ratnatilleke's name was on the same list, it follows that there
should have been either a pink or a white form for him. His form, as well as
the petitioner's, has not been produced even now; and there is no explanation
why the petitioner's transfer was delayed beyond the stipulated deadline. But
we do have the 3rd respondent's categorical assertion that transfer was at the
3rd respondent's request.  
  
As for the reasons for the petitioner's transfer, the only two reports which
the 2nd respondent mentioned were those of October, 1994; the second, dated
28.10.94, was from DIG, Kurunegala, to the 2nd respondent. He has now produced
the sequel to that report. By a memorandum dated 21.12.94, the DIG, Personnel,
asked the DIG, Kurunegala, what action had been taken on the seven complaints
referred to in that report. The reply, minuted on 3.1.95, was that all the
allegations had been dealt with, except a 316 charge pending before the
Mediation Board; reference was made to a report "appearing at pages 3 to 4",
which has not been produced. There are two handwritten minutes, of February,
1995, "lay by". Those are the same allegations in respect of which the 2nd
respondent said in his original affidavit: "many of the complaints had to be
dropped due to lack of evidence whilst some other complaints had been
withdrawn or settled on a later date before steps could be taken to conduct a
fuller inquiry or to prosecute the petitioner".

**102**

Assuming that a "nomination" under the 1995 year-end transfer scheme was
nevertheless possible on the basis of those allegations, the process should
have commenced by July, 1995; the Transfer Board decision and reasons should
have been communicated by 1.9.95; and the petitioner ought not to have been
deprived of his right of appeal, and of his right to a timely decision on
appeal by 15.10.95. The fact that 2nd respondent has produced neither the
relevant pink nomination form, nor any part of the proceedings of the Transfer
Board or the Appeal Board, indicates that some other transfer procedure had
been followed for the petitioner, and perhaps also for SI Ratnatilleke.  
  
The new material produced by the 2nd respondent thus confirms that, beyond
doubt, the petitioner's transfer was not in accordance with the circular which
he himself issued on 11.7.95. It confirms the petitioner's claim that his
transfer was not in terms of the departmental regulations.  
  
There is thus no reason whatever to consider issuing notice of the 2nd
respondent's present application on the other parties.  
  
As noted in our judgment, that judgment does not preclude disciplinary
proceedings against the petitioner for any past misconduct, or his transfer,
in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations.  
  
It is, however, necessary to refer to some other aspects of this application.
A petitioner has to lodge an application under article 126 within one month.
Here eighteen months elapsed between the grant of leave to proceed and the
hearing; the 2nd respondent had ample opportunity to place all the material he
wished to before the Court, but he did not seek to reply to the petitioner's
counter-affidavit of 19.4.96. After judgment was delivered on 26.9.97 the
petitioner, although represented by the Attorney-General, apparently took no
steps to obtain advice about seeking review, for nearly four months until
21.1.98. While the proxy he had given the state attorney remained in force,
another attorney-at-law (presumably on the instructions of the state attorney,
cf. Rule 4 of the Code of Conduct and Etiquette for attorneys-at-law) advised
him on the merits of a revision application. That delay of nearly four months
in seeking advice is unacceptable, as is the subsequent delay of over two
months in filing this application. However, the 2nd respondent seeks to
explain that delay, by giving all sorts of reasons. One is that "the
Jayasikuru operation was **to recapture the Northern and Eastern Provinces**

**103**

from the LTTE terrorists... I was extremely busy with the attendant work in
the operations"; another is that " **the Provincial Council Elections in the
North-Eastern Provinces** doubled the work of the Police Department". Errors
and omissions are possible in affidavits, but the Head of the Police Force
should have been able, without any difficulty, to describe correctly the
objective of the Jayasikuru operation, as well as the nature of the elections
which took place recently in the Jaffna District. Such a lack of care and
accuracy, in a 23 page affidavit stated to have been drafted, by counsel and
"read over and explained" by a DIG (instead of an independent Justice of the
Peace), creates doubts as to the reliability, of the other averments therein.  
  
Having delayed for over six months to file this application until 2.4.98 -
which was one but the last working day for the first term - it was tendered
with a letter addressed to the Registrar from the new registered attorney-at-
law stating that counsel who would be appearing to support the application was
a practitioner in Australia; that he was "long overdue in Australia to appear
in the cases he has undertaken to do there"; that cases in which he is
appearing are adjourned until his arrival in Australia; and that "any day in
April would be convenient". Since the second term commenced on 27th April, the
Court was in effect being asked to fix this application for one of the last
four days of April - regardless of benches already constituted, and other
cases set down, much earlier, for hearing during that period, as well as of
the need to issue notice on the other parties giving them adequate time for
preparation. Undoubtedly, the judiciary in the course of its service to the
community in the administration of justice does consider the convenience of
Attorneys-at-law, but never to the extent of subservience to their
convenience.  
  
In support of that request two facsimile messages from Australia were annexed
to the 2nd respondent's affidavit, in order "to emphasise the need to obtain
priority to get this case listed at your earliest". One facsimile message is
dated 13.2.98 and refers to an appointment in District Court chambers on
17.2.98, while the other is dated 16.3.98 and refers to a hearing on 10.4.98.
The messages do not indicate that counsel was required for either matter. In
any event, they have no bearing on counsel's alleged inability to appear in
Sri Lanka in May or thereafter.

**104**

Other submissions have been simply thrown into the 2nd respondent's petition.
One is that Article 15 (8) permits derogation from Article 12, in the case of
members of the Police Force, otherwise than by means of legislation: that is
patently untenable, because "law" is defined; in regard to the entire chapter
on fundamental rights, "law" includes only legislation, save in the
exceptional cases where emergency regulations are expressly included; and the
definition of "written law" is totally irrelevant. Another is that Article 157
recognises bilateral treaties, and that the court should therefore have
considered the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In what way that would have affected
our decision is not stated. An examination of Article 157 reveals that it is
confined to bilateral investment treaties (entered into for the specific
purpose of promotion and protection of foreign investments in Sri Lanka) after
approval by Parliament in the manner prescribed therein, and has no
application in this instance. A third argument is that Article 55 (5) gives
only a limited power to this Court in respect of transfers of police officers.
It is enough to say that Article 55 (5) does not purport to impose any
limitation on the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 126. Finally, it is
urged that "an applicant must exhaust all the other remedies under the law, if
available, before he invokes [the jurisdiction under Article 126] . . : and
the petitioner failed to (first] seek redress from the Minister of Defence,
Her Excellency the President, the Public Service Commission or the Inspector-
General of Police or the District Court". All these contentions are wholly
devoid of merit, and were quite rightly not urged by learned state counsel who
appeared at the original hearing.  
  
The material now furnished by the 2nd respondent confirms the findings of this
Court in its judgment delivered on 26.9.97. The questions of law and fact
sought to be raised for the first time are patently untenable, and do not
merit consideration by a fuller bench. The application is thus wholly devoid
of merit, quite misconceived, and inexcusably delayed, and there is therefore
no reason to issue notice on the other parties. The application is rejected.  
  
**FERNANDO, J. - I agree.  
  
WIJETUNGA, J. - I agree.  
  
GUNAWARDENA, J. - I agree.  
**  
**_Notice refused._**  
  
_**Application rejected.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/42.html_  

