##  Gnanasambandam v. The Rehabilitation of Property & Industries Authority
(Repia) and Others - SLR - 178, Vol 3 of 1997 [1997] LKSC 42; (1997) 3 Sri LR
178 (5 September 1997)

178

GNANASAMBANDAM

V.

THE REHABILITATION OF PROPERTY & INDUSTRIES

AUTHORITY (REPIA) AND OTHERS



SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

PERERA, J. AND

DR. SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.

S.C. APPEAL 105/96.

C.A. 1195/87.

JULY 25, AUGUST 4, 1997.



Writ of Certiorari - Emergency (Rehabilitation of Affected Properties,
Business or Industries) Regulations No. 1 of 1983 - Divesting of vested
property - Tenant's Rights.



The appellant was the tenant of the disputed premises which was burnt down
during civil disturbances in July 1983\. Such property vested in the state in
terms of regulation 9 of the Emergency (Rehabilitation of Affected property
Business or Industries) Regulations No. 1 of 1983. On 23.12.83 the appellant
sought relief in respect of the disputed premises. On 17.1.84 the body called
REPIA under the Emergency Regulations divested the property in terms of
regulation 14. Thereafter the owner of the premises (The 5th respondent)
repaired it and obtained a letter dated 28.6.84 from REPIA granting him
permission to deal with his property to the exclusion of the tenant.



**Held:**

** **

When the property was divested, the tenancy with the appellant revived by
operation of law, in terms of regulation 14(2); and the decision of REPIA
contained in its letter dated 28.6.84 was made without the appellant being
heard, in breach of the audi alteram partem rule. That decision was made by
REPIA in excess of its authority and was devoid of legal effect.



**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_A. R. Surendren_ with _G. Ranawaka_ for the appellant.  


Faisz Musthapha, P.C. with Gaston Jayakody for the 5th respondent.

_ _

_Cur adv. vult._

September 5, 1997.  


**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

** **

The petitioner who sought relief by way of certiorari and mandamus was
admittedly the tenant of the premises which are the

**179**



subject-matter of these proceedings for many years prior to the civil
disturbances which occurred in the latter part of July 1983. It is also not
disputed that the premises were burnt and the petitioner's household goods and
vehicles were also burnt during the period of the civil disturbances in July
1983. The petitioner and his family were thus compelled to leave the premises.



The petitioner had on 23.12.83 made an application by way of an affidavit
(1R1) for relief to the body known as the Rehabilitation of Property and
Industries Authority (REPIA) established under the Emergency (Rehabilitation
of Affected Property. Business or Industries) Regulations No. 1 of 1983,
published in gazette extraordinary No. 257/3 of 7.8.83. Regulation 9(1)
provides that "Every affected property ... shall with effect from the date
these regulations come into force vest absolutely in the State free from all
encumbrances." "Affected property" is defined as "any immovable property
damaged or destroyed on or after July 24, 1983, by riot or civil commotion."
It is common ground that the 5th respondent, one of the co-owners of the
premises, had by his affidavit dated 16.1.84 (1R4) given a specific
undertaking to REPIA that he would "restore tenancy to the previous tenant
after effecting repairs ...". The previous tenant is the petitioner. On
17.1.84 the REPIA had "divested" the premises; provision for "divesting" is
found in Regulation 14 which reads thus:



"14(1) Notwithstanding that, any affected property, or industry or business
has vested in the State by reason of the operation of these regulations REPIA
may at any time by Order published in the gazette divest such property,
industry or business.



(2) The following provisions shall apply to a divesting Order made under
paragraph (1):



(a) the property, industry or business shall be deemed never to have vested in
the State by reason of the operation of these regulations and any question
which may arise as to any right, title or interest in or over such property,
industry, or business shall be determined accordingly.

**180**



(b) the divesting Order shall have the effect of reviving any arrangement,
agreement or other notarially executed instrument in and over that property,
industry or business subsisting on the date on which such property, industry
or business vested in the State."



There, by virtue of the operation of Regulation 14(2) the contract of tenancy
with the petitioner "revived". In other words, the tenancy revived by
operation of law.



The Chairman of the REPIA, (3rd respondent) however, by his letter dated
28.6.84 (1R6 and also marked as 5R2) addressed to the 5th respondent has
stated as follows:



"This is to inform you that you are absolved of the undertaking you had given
in your affidavit of 16.1.84 to the effect that you would restore tenancy of
the above premises to your previous tenant, as he has not claimed it to date.
Please also be informed that the divesting order dated 17.1.84 issued in your
name is valid and that you are free to do whatever you desire with your
property."



The reasons for the decisions contained in 1R6 are set out by the 3rd
respondent in his affidavit dated 23.2.88 filed before the Court of Appeal.
The first reason is that the 5th respondent by his letter dated 16.6.84 had
informed the Chairman, REPIA "that the premises had been repaired and kept
vacant to be given to the previous tenant, the petitioner, but as his
whereabouts were not known 'and as he was losing income by keeping the
premises closed indefinitely and requested that he be released from the
undertaking to give the premises to the petitioner." The second reason is
"that no application had been made by the petitioner to retain the tenancy."
In my view both reasons do not bear scrutiny. In the first place, REPIA had
acted on the representations made by the 5th respondent that the whereabouts
of the petitioner were unknown **without the petitioner being heard.** There
was thus a clear violation of the audi alteram partem rule on a matter which
vitally affected the rights of the petitioner. The letter P6 addressed to
REPIA by the petitioner clearly established his continued interest in
returning to the premises. Secondly, the statement in 1R6 that "no application
has been made by the petitioner to retain the tenancy" is in the teeth of the
affidavit

**181**



1R1. Moreover, REPIA has no authority to make a "divesting order" in the name
of a particular person; nor has it the authority to inform the 5th respondent
"that you are free to do whatever you desire with your property." 1R6 is
devoid of legal effect as it has been issued without authority. i accordingly
hold that REPIA has clearly acted in excess of its authority.



The Court of Appeal has upheld the preliminary objection to the application on
the erroneous assumption that REPIA is not a party to the proceedings. REPIA
is in fact the first respondent in the present application.



Prayer (b) of the application, namely a writ of Mandamus on REPIA. is,
however, misconceived. The proper party should have been REPIA established
under and in terms of the Rehabilitation of Persons Properties and Industries
Authority Act No. 29 of 1987. But REPIA was not made a party to these
proceedings and hence mandamus cannot issue.



It was submitted on behalf of the 5th respondent that REPIA was not in
existence at the time the petitioner filed his application for writ of
Certiorari and Mandamus in November 1987. There is no merit in this
submission; the 1st respondent (REPIA) and the 3rd respondent (Chairman,
REPIA) filed a statement of objections on 24.2.88, but nowhere in their
objections have they taken up the position that REPIA ceased to exist by
November 1987. Nor has the 3rd respondent pleaded this position in his
affidavit dated 23.2.88.



In the result, I set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal in so far as it
has dismissed the application for a writ of certiorari and I direct that a
writ of certiorari do issue to quash 1R6 (also marked as 5R2 by the 5th
respondent). 1R6 (5R2) is accordingly quashed.



I make no order as to costs.



**PERERA, J.** \- I agree.



**DR. SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.



Appeal allowed  
_writ of certiorari issued._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/42.html_  

