##  Wickramasinghe v. Edmund Jayasinghe, Secretary, Ministry of Media, Tourism
and Aviation - SLR - 300, Vol 1 of 1995 [1995] LKSC 42; (1995) 1 Sri LR 300
(30 October 1995)

**300**

**WICKRAMASINGHE** **  
v.** **  
EDMUND JAYASINGHE, SECRETARY, MINISTRY OF MEDIA,  
TOURISM AND AVIATION**

 SUPREME COURT  
G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.  
KULATUNGA, J.  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
OCTOBER 30, 1995.

_Fundamental Rights - Articles 12(1), 12(2), 14(1)(a), 15(7) and 126(2) of the
Constitution - Emergency (Restriction of Public and Transmission of Sensitive
Military Information) Regulations No. 1 of 1995. - Public Security Ordinance
(Cap 40) Section 5 - Pre-censorship._

The petitioner stated that in view of certain regulations made by the
President under Section 5 of the Public Security Ordinance, he has been
compelled to cease publication of news items, inter alia, relating to the
conduct of military operations and related matters pertaining thereto in the
"Janajaya" newspaper of which tie is the Chief Editor and Publishes

**HELD:**

(1) Section 5(1) of the Public Security Ordinance empowers the President to
make regulations "as appear to him to be necessary or expedient". The power is
thus very wide; and so long as the regulations are within the ambit of the
section the court will not strike down the regulations, unless-there are good
reasons for doing so.

(2) The fact that some newspapers or other media are said to have been
permitted to exercise self regulations would not per se constitute
discrimination. The Competent Authority has not (and cannot) abdicate his
power to act under the regulations even against such media, if it becomes
necessary to do so.

In the case of the petitioner, it would appear that he is uncompromising and
publish news of his choice relating to military operations, without in under
the impugned regulations which he alleges are unguided violative of his
fundamental rights.

(3) The impugned censorship has been imposed at a time of national crisis n
the context of an on going civil war. Its validity has to be considered having
regard to the reality of the current situation.

301

(4) The Court will no doubt consider whether the regulations are bad for over
breadth and impringe upon fundamental rights. In an appropriate case, the
court may also hold that there has been an infringement of rights under
Articles 12(1) and 12(2) in the implementation of regulations.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Hettiarachchi v. Seneviratne et al S.C. App 127/94 S.C.M. 4.7.1994_  
_2\. Joseph Perera v. The Attorney General (1992) 1 Sri L.R. 199._  
_3\. New York Times v. US [1971] 403 US 713._  
_4\. Banton Books v. Sullivan (372 US 58-70)._  
_5\. Organisation for a Better Austin v. Kiefe (1971) 402 US 415._  
_6\. The Zamora [1916] AC 77._

**APPLICATION** for infringement of fundamental rights.

_L.C. Seneviratne, P.C. with Nigel Hatch for the petitioner._

_Cur adv vult._

November 7, 1995.  
**KULATUNGA, J.**

The petitioner states that he is the Chief Editor and Publisher of a weekly
Sinhala Newspaper "Janajaya" registered under the Newspapers Ordinance. He
states that he had been a Member of Parliament from 1984 - 1994 and a Cabinet
Minister. He complains that his rights (qua Editor and Publisher of the said
newspaper) guaranteed by Articles 12(1), 12(2) and 14(1) (a) of the
Constitution have been infringed by executive or administrative action by the
application of Emergency (Restriction of Publication and Transmission of
Sensitive Military Information) Regulations No. 1 of 1995 published in Gazette
(Extraordinary) No. 889/16 dated 21.09.95 as amended by a notification
published in Gazette (Extraordinary) No. 89113 dated 02.10.95.

The said regulations made by the President under S. 5 of the Public Security
Ordinance (Cap. 40) prohibit inter alia, the Editor or Publisher of a
Newspaper, whether in or outside Sri Lanka, to publish, distribute ....... or
cause to be so done any material containing any matter which pertains to any -

302

(a) operations carried out, or proposed to be carried out by the Armed Forces
or the Police Force (including the Special Task Force);

(b) procurement of proposed procurement of arms or supplies by any such
Forces;

(c) deployment of troops or personnel, or the deployment or use of equipment,
including aircraft or naval vessels, by any such Forces;

(d) any statement pertaining to the official conduct or the performance of the
Head or any member of any of the Armed Forces or the Police Force.

The petitioner complains that by virtue of the said regulations, the State has
imposed a "blanket censorship"; that the said regulations are unwarranted as
they stifle legitimate criticism of Government policy in relation to military
operations; hence the regulations are ultra vires and infringe his rights
under Article 14(1) (a). Further, the 1st respondent who is the Competent
Authority appointed under the regulations is reported to have relaxed the
application of the prohibitions prescribed by the regulations in respect of
the State controlled newspapers, the electronic media and foreign media, by
permitting them to exercise self regulation censorship, without reference `to
the Competent Authority The petitioner complains that such favoured treatment
to a part of the media infringes his rights under Articles 12(1) and 12(2):

The, petitioner states that in view of the said regulations, he has been
compel cease publication of news items inter alia, relating to the conduct of
military operations and related matters pertaining thereto in the "Janajaya"
newspaper.

The petitioner has produced marked P2A - P2E copies of certain news items
published in the "Janajaya" prior to the imposition of censorship. Some of the
criticisms leveled against the government in the sad news items are as
follows:

(1) Acts of the government such as the shifting of the Pooneryn Army Camp and
the supply of prohibited items to the North have strengthened the LTTE and
demoralised the Army.

303

(2) The Army Commander is not ready for war and the Deputy Minister of Defence
has no knowledge of war measures.

(3) The Army Commander's period of service has been extended for extraneous
reasons.

(4) Major General Daluwatte who is in charge of the Eastern Province is an
officer having a poor record of service. He is a timid officer who would order
his, men to surrender to the enemy.

(5) The Navy Commander should resign; The Army Commander should be retired;
Algama or Seneviratne should be appointed as Army Commander.

(6) Rohan Daluwatte should not be given any responsibilities.

(7) The ability of the Forces both as regards attack and counter attack is
unsatisfactory. There is no co-ordination among the Forces. Consequently, the
LTTE was able to launch a successful attack on the Government Forces at
Mandativu.

(8) The LTTE bomb attacks in Colombo have been planned in Wellawatte. But the
Wellawatte Police is inactive; in fact according to some reports, officers
attached to that Police Station are in collusion with the "tigers".

The above news items indicate the kind of criticism the petitioner desires to
engage in through the newspaper media and which he considers to be in the
public interest in the prosecution of the present war. It is also clear from
his petition that he is not prepared to subject himself to the censorship
imposed by the impugned regulations.

Admittedly, several newspapers some of which appear to be critical of the
Government are presently, publishing news relating to military operations in
the North, subject to censorship.

S. 5(1) of the Public Security Ordinance empowers the President to make
emergency regulations as appear to him to be necessary or

304

expedient in the interest of public security and the preservation of public
order and the suppression of mutiny, riot or civil commotion etc. This power
is couched in subjective language. The section empowers the President to make
regulations "as appear to him to be necessary to expedient". The power is thus
very wide; and so long as the regulations are within the ambit of the section,
the Court will not strike down the regulations, unless there are good grounds
for doing so.

The Court will no doubt consider whether the regulations are bad for over-
breadth and impinge upon fundamental rights. In an appropriate case, the Court
may also hold that there has been an infringement of rights under Articles
12(1) and 12(2) in the implementation of regulations. If any regulation is
inherently discriminatory, any person affected by such a regulation may
petition this Court for relief under Article 126 on the ground that the
regulation is violative of rights under Article 12(1), in which event relief
can be granted in limine, even before it is implemented.

The question before this Court is whether on the material placed before it,
the petitioner has made out a prima facie ease for the grant of leave to
proceed. Article 126(2) provides inter alia, that an application for relief
may be proceeded with only with leave to proceed first had and obtained from
the Supreme Court, which leave may be granted or refused as the case may be.
In Hettiarachchi v. Seneviratne et al (1)this Court observed:

"It must not be supposed, or suggested, that the need to obtain leave to
proceed under Article 126(2) is a mere formality. The onus is on the
petitioner seeking relief to establish a prima facie case. Even if an
important question of law, or jurisdiction, does appear to be involved it must
not be assumed as some do, that this must necessarily be deferred for
consideration at the final hearing. If it is relevant as a threshold
consideration that resold must be crossed by obtaining leave to proceed before
seeking to proceed further".

It may appear that the Regulation 3 imposes an almost absolute prohibition on
the publication of matters relating to military operations. There is also a
power vested in the Competent Authority

305

to stop the publication of a newspaper which contravenes the regulations
contravention of the regulations is also an offence However, the exercise of
the power of the Competent Authority is discretionary and not automatic. He
may exercise the Power only such directions as he considers necessary to
effect compliance with the regulations". Apparently such directions are given
whenever the Competent Authority subjects any news report to censorship. The
resulting position is that there is no total bar against publication of
matters relating to military operations.

However, the petitioner has on his own ceased to publish any news relating to
military operations. He has not been stopped from publishing his newspaper;
nor has he been prosecuted for any offence. Some of the matters he desires to
discuss in the media may appropriately be raised elsewhere e.g., the
Parliament, the Security Council or within the Establishment - whether by the
members composing such bodies or on the basis of representations received from
citizens. But, I cannot agree that in a war situation of the dimensions which
is presently raging, the petitioner can claim the freedom to publish all such
news items as appear in P2A- P2E, without restriction.

The fact that some newspapers or other media are said to have been permitted
exercise self regulation would not per se constitute discrimination. The
Competent Authority has not (and cannot) abdicate his power to act under the
regulations even against "such media, if it becomes necessary to do so. In the
case of the petitioner, it would appear that he is uncompromising and wishes
to publish news of his choice relating to military operations, without
censorship under the impugned regulations which he alleges are unguided and
violative of his fundamental rights.

Article 15(7) of the Constitution permits restrictions on rights inter alia,
under Articles 12 and 14, as may be prescribed by "Law" (which expression
includes regulations made under the Public Security Ordinance) in the interest
of national security, public order etc. Learned President's Counsel for the
petitioner rightly submitted that any such restrictions imposed by emergency
regulations may be reviewed by Court. In support, he cited Joseph Perera v.
The Â

306

Attorney-General (2) where it was held that it is competent for the Court to
question the necessity of the emergency regulation and whether there is a
proximate or rational nexus between the restriction imposed on a citizens'
fundamental rights by emergency regulation and the object sought to be
achieved by the regulation. I On the basis of the same decision, Counsel also
submitted that the impugned regulations do not provide adequate guidelines for
the exercise of powers of the Competent Authority; that the guidelines, if,
any, are vague; hence the regulations are inherently violative of rights under
Article 12(1).

In Joseph Perera's case (Supra) the Court had to consider he validity of the
arrest and detention of the petitioner for publishing a leaflet issued by the
"Revolutionary Communist League", a Political Party of which the petitioner
was a member. It was alleged, that the said leaflet which was issued on the
occasion of a proposed meeting and a lecture on the rights of students brought
the Government into hatred and ridicule and constituted "subversive
literature". in breach of Emergency Regulations 26 and 33, respectively. It
was also alleged that the distribution of the said leaflet violated Emergency.
Regulation 28 (1) which prohibited the publication inter alia, of any leaflet
without the permission of the Inspector General of Police. Police.
Wanasundera, J. said (p.235)-

"The Petitioners were in possession of, literature, which on cursory glance
could have appeared to be subversive. Document Xl appeared to contain if not
seditious statements at least statements that can be regarded as tendentious".

Accordingly, the Court held that there was no illegal arrest. But, on a closer
scrutiny of the leaflet, it could not be said to justify a charge under
Regulation 26 or be described as "subversive Literature" under Regulation 33,
hence the prolonged detention of the petitioner was illegal.

As regards the prohibition in Regulation 28(l), the Court held that the
regulation was invalid for lack of objective guidelines, Sharvanada, C.J. said
(p.229)

307

"Pre-censorship is under our law not necessarily unconstitutional and can be
justified if brought within the ambit of Article 15\. However, any system of
pre-censorship which confers unguided and unfettered discretion upon executive
authority without narrow objective and definite standards to guide the
official is unconstitutional".

Counsel for the petitioner, also relies on the following passages in the
judgment at p. 229

The general rule is that any form of previous restraint is regarded on the
face of it as an abridgement of, the freedom of expression and offends
Article. 14(l) (a) of the Constitution.

It was said in _New York Times v. US_ (3) that any system of prior restraints
of expression comes to this Court, bearing a heavy presumption against its
constitutional validity. _Banton Books v. Sullivan_. (4) The Government thus
carries a heavy burden of showing justification for the enforcement of such
restraint. Organisation far a _Better Austin v. Kiefe_. (5).

On the basis of these authorities, Counsel submits that the petitioner has
made out a prima facie case for the grant of leave to proceed.

Of the decisions cited by Sharvananda, C. J., only one case i.e., New York
Times case involved a restraint on newspapers against a publication which
appears to relate to a war situation. The Government sought to enjoin
newspapers from publishing contents of classified study on the "History of
U.S. Decision making Process on the Vietnam Policy". It was held that the
Government failed to meet its burden of showing justification for imposition
of the restraint. That case is clearly distinguishable for the reason that the
policy under discussion there was the involvement of the United States of
America in the affairs of a foreign State.

In the instant case, it cannot be said that the occasion and the manner of
pre-censorship is arbitrary. The Government is faced with a serious civil war.
The matters in respect of which censorship is

308

imposed are specified. The restriction is against the publication of matters
which could be classified as "sensitive information". All such matters relate
to the prosecution of the war. Hence, the impugned censorship cannot be
described as a "blanket censorship"; clearer guidelines may not be demanded in
the present circumstances. In this connection, a reference may be made to the
decision of the _Privy Council in The Zamora_ (6) even though the dicta
appearing therein may require modification in the light of constitutional
provisions which secure fundamental rights and freedoms of the citizen. The
Privy Council observed thus (p. 107):

"Those who are responsible for national security must be the sole judges of
what the national security requires. It would be obviously undesirable that
such matters should be made the object of evidence in a Court of law or
otherwise discussed in public"

"The Zamora was decided during the first world war, in relation to acts of the
Crown, in defence of the realm. I have referred to it not because it is
exactly in point nor because I have formed any opinion that such dicta can be
applied in our legal system, without qualification but because it is of some
assistance in viewing the case before us, in its correct perspective.

The impugned censorship has been imposed at a time of national crisis and in
the context of an ongoing civil war. Its validity has to be considered having
regard to the reality of the current situation, Viewed from this stand point
Joseph Perera's case (Supra) is of no assistance. The facts of that case are
significantly different. I am of the opinion that no prima facie case has been
made out that the impugned regulations are ultra vires or violative of the
petitioner's fundamental rights Leave to proceed is accordingly refused

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree  
  
**RAMANATHAN . J** \- I agree  
  
_Leave to proceed refused._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/42.html_  

