##  Hettiarachchi v. Hettiarachchi - SLR - 188, Vol 2 of 1994 [1994] LKSC 42;
(1994) 2 Sri LR 188 (15 December 1994)

**  188**

**HETTIARACHCHI**

**v.**

**HETTIARACHCHI**

 SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.

KULATUNGA, J. AND

WADUGODAPITIYA, J.

S.C. APPEAL 58/94.

C.A. N0. 446/92 (F).

D.C. MT. LAVINIA NO. 2618/RE.

SEPTEMBER 21, OCTOBER 21 AND NOVEMBER 25, 1994.



_Landlord and tenant ‑ Residential premises occupied by owner and let out
after 01 January 1980 ‑ Proof of ownership ‑ Rent Act, section 2(4)(c)._

_  _

Where exemption from the Rent Act is claimed on the basis of section 2(4)(c)
of the Rent Act the onus is on the plaintiff to prove,



(i)         that the premises were residential premises,



(ii)        that the plaintiff was in occupation of the premises on 1st
January, 1980,



(iii)       that the plaintiff was in occupation of the premises on 01 January
1980 in the capacity of owner.



Proof of ownership need not necessarily be only by due proof of title deed.
Oral testimony which is not challenged and extracts from Assessment Registers
are sufficient. The section is concerned with the nature of the occupation and
the question of title is irrelevant.



**APPEAL** from judgement of Court of Appeal.



_P. A. D. Samarasekera P.C._ with _Jayantha de Almeida Gunaratne_ for the
plaintiff appellant.

_Faiz Musthapha P.C._ with _Sanjeewa Jayawardene_ for defendant‑respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

December 15, 1994.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.**



The plaintiff instituted these proceedings _inter_ alia for the ejectment of
this tenant, the defendant, from premises No. 78, Devala Road, Nugegoda. The
case for the plaintiff was that the Rent Act (as

**  189**

amended) did not apply to the premises by reason of the provisions of section
2(4)(c). Section 2(4)(c) reads thus:



"So long as this Act is in operation in any area, the provisions of this Act
shall apply to all premises in that area, other than ‑

(a)        ........

(b)        ........

(c)        residential premises occupied by the owner on January 1, 1980, and
let on or after that date."



It is thus seen that the onus was on the plaintiff to establish (i) that the
premises were residential premises; (ii) that he (the plaintiff) was in
occupation of the premises on 1st January 1980 and that the premises were let
on or after 1st January 1980; (iii) that the plaintiff was in occupation of
the premises on 1st January 1980 in the capacity of owner. At the trial (i)
above was recorded as an admission. It was also not disputed that the premises
were let to the defendant after 1st January 1980. The clear finding of the
District Judge was that the plaintiff was in occupation of the premises on 1st
January 1980; this finding was amply supported by the orai and documentary
evidence and was not seriously contested in appeal. The District Judge,
however, dismissed the plaintiff's action on the ground that he had failed to
prove that his occupation of the premises as on 1st January 1980 was in his
capacity as owner. The plaintiff's appeal to the Court of Appeal was
unsuccessful; the Court of Appeal affirmed the finding of the District Judge
that there was no proof that the plaintiff was the owner of the premises as on
1st January 1980. Hence the plaintiff's appeal to this Court.



At the trial, the plaintiff sought to prove ownership of the premises by
producing the deed of transfer No. 1568 dated 20.6.64 and attested by W.
Rajasingham, Notary Public (PB). The deed P8 was admitted subject to proof. It
is common ground that the plaintiff failed to prove the due execution of the
deed as required by the provisions of the Evidence Ordinance (Sections 68 and
69).



Mr. Musthapha for the defendant‑respondent strenuously contended (1) that an
essential basis of the plaintiff's claim that the Rent Act did not apply to
the premises in suit was that the plaintiff

**  190**

was the owner of the premises; (2) that the deed P8 upon which he purported to
base his claim of ownership remained unproved.



In considering the submissions of Mr. Musthapha it seems to me that it is
intensely relevant to note that this is a tenancy action. It is not a _rei
vindicatio_ action which is an action founded on ownership. There was the
unchallenged oral evidence of the plaintiff that he was the owner of the
premises as on 1st January 1980. It was not even suggested that the plaintiff
was not the owner of the premises or that someone else was the owner. In
short, there was no suggestion that the plaintiff was making a false claim as
owner. There was nothing to contradict the plaintiff's assertion in his
evidence that he was the owner of the premises on the relevant date. Besides,
the plaintiff marked in evidence entries in the Assessment Registers (P19 and
P20) where his name appears as the owner. This is an item of evidence which
tends to support the plaintiff's unchallenged and uncontradicted oral evidence
that he was the owner of the premises on the relevant date.



Turning now to the wording in section 2(4)(c) of the Rent Act, it seems to me
that the distinction drawn is between premises occupied by the owner as on 1st
January 1980, and premises which had been let to a tenant on the said date, as
submitted by Mr. Samarasekera for the plaintiff‑appellant. Mr. Samarasekera
rightly stressed that the section is concerned with the nature of the
occupation and the question of title is irrelevant. The present action is
based on a contract of tenancy and the plaintiff is seeking to eject the
defendant whose occupation of the premises is admittedly as a tenant.



On a consideration of the matters set out above, I hold that the evidence on
record is sufficient to establish the fact that the plaintiff was the owner of
the premises for the purpose of section 2(4)(c) of the Rent Act,
notwithstanding the failure to prove the deed or transfer P8. I accordingly
allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the District Court and of the
Court of Appeal and direct that decree be entered for the ejectment of the
defendant as prayed for in the plaint. I further direct writ of ejectment not
to issue till **31st December 1995.** The plaintiff will be entitled to take
out writ of ejectment and to be

**  191**

placed in possession of the premises in suit after 31st December 1995. The
defendant must pay the plaintiff a sum of Rs. 750/‑ as costs of appeal.



**KULATUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/42.html_  

