##  Herath Banda v. Sub Inspector of Police, Wasgiyawatte Police Station and
Others - SLR - 324, Vol 2 of 1993 [1993] LKSC 42; (1993) 2 Sri LR 324 (25
October 1993)

**324**

**HERATH BANDA  
v.  
SUB-INSPECTOR OF POLICE, WASGIYAWATTE  
POLICE STATION AND OTHERS **

SUPREME COURT.  
AMERASINGHE, J.

PERERA, J. AND

WIJETUNGA, J.  
S. C. APPLICATION NO. 270/93.  
OCTOBER 25, 1993.

_     Fundamental Rights - Application to withdraw application for
infringement _

**Held**

There may be certain occasions where in the circumstances of a particular case
the Court may permit the withdrawal of an application for infringement of
fundamental rights. Each case must depend on its own circumstances, leave to
withdraw being a matter within the absolute discretion of the Court.
Applications pertaining to fundamental rights are not ordinary private
matters.

**Cases referred to**

_1\. Basheshar Nath v. Commissioner of Income Tax AIR 1959 S.C. 149, 157-
159._  
_  
2\. Velmurugu v. The Attorney-General and another Vol. 1 FRD 180._

**APPLICATION** to withdraw application for relief for infringement of
fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 11 of the Constitution.

_K. Tiranagama for petitioner._

  
_D. P. Kumarasinghe, D. S. G. with S. Rajaratnam S.C. for Attorney-General._

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 29, 1993.  
**AMERASINGHE, J.**

On 28 May 1993 the Petitioner complained as follows: The first respondent, a
Sub-Inspector of Police, came to his home and ordered him to accompany him to
the Police Station; when he sought an explanation, he was addressed in rude
terms, slapped and dragged out and struck all over his body with a thick stick
drawn out of the

325

fence in his garden until he was rendered unconscious. The Petitioner was
taken to the Polpitigama Government Hospital and later admitted to the
Kurunegala Government Hospital and examined by the Judicial Medical Officer.
After being in the Kurunegala Hospital for five days, he was transferred to
Ehetuwewa Government Hospital where he was treated for two days. Thereafter he
was treated by an Ayurvedic physician. As a result of the assault he is now
bedridden.

The Petitioner prayed that the Court declares his fundamental rights enshrined
in Article 11 of the Constitution had been violated and claimed Rs. 200,000 as
compensation.

On 3 June 1993, this Court granted the Petitioner leave to proceed with his
application and in terms of his prayer the Court directed the Judicial Medical
Officer, Kurunegala, to examine the petitioner and report to this Court.

When the matter came up for argument on 24 August 1993, Counsel for the
Petitioner moved that the Petitioner be allowed to withdraw the petition since
the petitioner had " settled his differences with the police officer."

The respondents were absent and unrepresented on that date. The Court directed
that the matter be set down for hearing on 25 October 1993 and that the
Attorney-General be asked to assist the Court on the question whether the
request of the petitioner should be acceded to.

On 25 October 1993 the learned Deputy Solicitor-General, citing Basheshar
_Nath v. Commissioner of Income Tax_ (1), submitted that an application in
respect of the alleged violation of fundamental rights was not a private
matter between parties which could be settled or withdrawn at the instance of
the parties especially with regard to a violation of Article 11 of the
Constitution.

I agree that applications pertaining to fundamental rights are not ordinary
private matters. However, I am reluctant to accept any suggestion that the
question of withdrawal depends on the importance of the right violated. I do
not think any useful purpose will be served by attempting to arrange the
rights on a hierachical scale although

326

admittedly, as pointed out in _Velmurugu's Case_ (2), Article 11 has special
distinguishing features.

There may be certain occasions where in the circumstances of a particular case
the Court may permit the withdrawal of an application. Indeed, hundreds of
applications are withdrawn in this way each term. Each case must depend on its
own circumstances, leave to withdraw being a matter within the absolute
discretion of the Court.

In the matter before us the medical evidence clearly supports the averments in
the petition relating to the brutal assault complained of. The reasons for a
change of heart are not clear, but the petitioner in his petition did allege
that attempts had been made to prevent him from seeking redress in Court. In
the circumstances, permission to withdraw the petition is refused.

I declare that the petitioner's rights under Article 11 of the Constitution
have been violated. As the petitioner has, according to learned Counsel,
"settled" his 'differences' with the Police Officer, no compensation is
awarded.

The Inspector-General of Police is directed to investigate the complaint
against the Police Officer concerned and report to this Court on or before 10
April 1994 as to what action he has deemed fit to take in the matter. The
Registrar should forward certified copies of the petition, affidavits and
Medical Reports to the Inspector-General of Police with a copy of this order.

**PERERA, J. -** I agree

  
**WIJETUNGA, J. -** I agree  
  
_Application to withdraw refused._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/42.html_  

