##  Union Apparels (Pvt) Ltd. v. Director General of Customs and Others - SLR
- 27, Vol 1 of 2000 [1999] LKSC 43; (2000) 1 Sri LR 27 (7 December 1999)

**27**

**UNION APPARELS (PVT) LTD.  
v.  
DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF CUSTOMS AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 490/99  
20th AUGUST AND 6th SEPTEMBER, 1999  
  
_Fundamental rights - Failure to file written submissions in terms of Rule
45(7) of the Supreme Court Rules 1990 - Whether such noncompliance amounts to
a failure to prosecute the application - Application of Rule 34 - Difference
between Rule 30 and Rule 45 (7) - Rule 45 (8).  
_  
The petitioner company filed its application on 3.6.1999. Leave to proceed was
granted on 08.06.1999 and the hearing was fixed for 20.8.1999. The written
submissions were filed by the petitioner on 19.8.1999. The petitioner thereby
failed to comply with Rule 45(7) (contained in Part IV of the Rules) which
requires written submissions to be filed at least "one week before the date
fixed for hearing". At the hearing on 20.8.1999 counsel for the 2nd respondent
took a preliminary objection that the application must stand dismissed in
terms of Rule 34 (contained in Part II of the Rules) as the written
submissions of the petitioner, though filed on 19.8.1999, were not filed in
terms of the Rules. Rule 45(8) provides that "the provisions of Part II of
these Rules shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to applications under Article 126."
Rule 34 provides inter alia that where a petitioner fails to show due
diligence in taking all necessary steps for the purpose of prosecuting the
application the court may declare the application to stand dismissed for non-
prosecution.  
  
**Held:**  
  
Having regard to the purpose of Rule 45(7) particularly when it is compared
with Rule 30 and the purpose of rule 34 and the circumstances of the case, if
cannot be said that the petitioner had failed to show due diligence in taking
all necessary steps for the purpose of prosecuting the application. As such
the preliminary objection must be overruled.

**28**

**Cases referred to:**  
  
1\. Mendis v. Abeysinghe (1989) 2 Sri LIZ 263 at 270  
  
2\. Houseman v. Waterhouse 191, App Div 850, 182 N. Y. S. 249, 251  
  
3\. Coomasaru v. Leechamn and Company Sc Appl. No. 27/73 SC Minutes 26 May
1976  
  
4\. Samarawickrama v. Attorney-General (1983) 1 Sriskantha's Law Reports 47  
  
5\. Mylvagnam v. Reckitt and Colman SC Appeal No. 154/87 SC Minutes 8 July
1987  
  
6\. Jayasinghe v. Jayasinghe SC Appeal No. 53/87 SC Minutes 26 May 1988  
  
7\. All Ceylon Match Workers' Union v. Jauffer Hassan and Others (1990)2 Sri L
R 420  
  
8\. Jayasuriya v. Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation (1995) 2 Sri L R 379  
  
9\. Kiriwanthe and Another v. Navaratne and Another (1990) 2 Sri L R 393 at
404  
  
10\. Priyani Soyza v. Arsecularatne (1999) 2 Sri L R 179  
  
11\. Piyadasa and Others v. Land Reform Commission SC (AP) No. 30/97 SC
Minutes 08 July 1998.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights. Preliminary
objection.  
  
Romesh de Silva P.C. with G.G. Arulpragasam, M. Illiyas and H. de Alwis for
petitioner.  
  
H.L. de Silva P. C. with Anil Tittawella, Avindra Rodrigo and Ms. Shehara
Vansa for 2nd respondent.  
  
K. C. Kamalasabeyson P C., S. G. with S. Fernando, SSC, for 1st and 3rd
respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**29**

December 07, 1999.  
**AMERASINGHE, J.  
**  
I have had the advantage of reading the draft of the judgment of
Bandaranayake, J. I am in agreement with the conclusion reached on the issue
before the Court and the order proposed.  
  
However, I should like to add the following observations. In my view, the
question whether an application should be rejected for the failure to comply
with a rule of the Court depends on whether, having regard to the words of the
relevant rule, the Court has a discretion to entertain or reject the
application, and whether having regard to the object of the rule and the
circumstances of the case the Court is justified in arriving at its decision.  
  
In Priyani Soysa v. Arseculeratne, S. C. (Spl.) L. A. No. 141/98, S. C.
Minutes 04.05.1999, for the reasons given, I was of the view that one of the
preliminary objections was entitled to succeed, because the exercise of the
discretion of the Court was subject to the terms of the rule invoked and such
terms were not satisfied. There are no such limitations contained in the rule
invoked in the matter before me, namely, rule 34. Having regard to the purpose
of that rule, namely to discourage persons who do not prosecute their
applications or appeals with activity and perseverance, in my view the filing
of the written submissions by the petitioner on the 19th of August 1999 cannot
per se be taken as evidence of a lack of due diligence. The journal entries
show that the petitioner had not been negligent and had been assiduous and
attentive. Learned counsel for the second respondent submitted that the
purpose of requiring a party to file his or her written submissions before a
prescribed date was to enable the Court and the parties to be aware of the
contentions of that party. In this case, the written submissions of the
petitioner were available when the matter came on for argument and there was
sufficient material to inform the Court and the respondents of what learned
counsel

**30**

for the second respondent described as "the rival contentions of the parties"
which, of course, would have to be supplemented by oral argument, and, if
necessary in the opinion of the Court, by further written submissions.  
  
The objection of the second respondent must be overruled and the application
shall be heard. The parties will bear their own costs.  
  
**SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
**  
The petitioner is an enterprise established under the Greater Colombo Economic
Commission Law, No. 4 of 1978 and is presently under the Board of Investment
of Sri Lanka (P1). The petitioner submitted that under and in terms of the
agreement entered into with the Board of Investment of Sri Lanka, (P1), the
facilities of import/export clearance and customs procedures were handled by
the Board of Investment. According to the petitioner, this facility was
withdrawn without prior notice and the petitioner became aware of it by
reading the notice which appeared in the Daily News of 28.05.1999. (P7). The
petitioner submitted that the withdrawal of the said facilities was done
arbitrarily and thus its fundamental rights under Article 12(1) were violated
by the respondents.  
  
This matter was supported inter partes and the Court granted leave to proceed
in respect of the alleged violation of Article 12(1) of the Constitution, on
08.06.1999. It was fixed for argument on 20.08.1999. When the matter was taken
up for hearing on 20.08.1999, learned President's Counsel for the 2nd
respondent took a preliminary objection that the application of the petitioner
must stand dismissed in terms of rule 34, as the written submissions of the
petitioner, though filed on 19.08.1999, were not filed in terms of the Rules.  
  
Rule 34 of the Supreme Court Rules 1990 reads as follows:  
  
"Where an appellant, or a petitioner who has obtained leave to appeal, fails
to show due diligence in taking all necessary steps for the purpose of
prosecuting

**31**

the appeal or application, the court may, on an application in that behalf by
a respondent, or of its own motion, on such notice to the parties as it shall
think reasonable in the circumstances, declare the appeal or application to
stand dismissed for non prosecution, and the costs of the appeal or
application and any security entered into by the appellant shall be dealt with
in such manner as the Court may think fit."  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the petitioner submitted that his application
should not stand dismissed in terms of Rule 34, for the following reasons :  
  
Firstly, learned President's Counsel for the petitioner submitted that Rule 34
has no application to the filing of written submissions and the rule, if
applicable, dealing with written submissions is Rule 30 and not Rule 34. His
position was that, if written submissions were not tendered by the due date,
at most that party would not be entitled to be heard. In any event, he
submitted that, due to the non-filing of written submissions, the application
could not be dismissed in limine. Regardless of the non-filing of written
submissions, learned President's Counsel contended that "in appropriate
instances" the Court would permit the petitioner to be heard. In support of
this submission, learned President's Counsel for the petitioner referred to
Mendis v. Abeysinghe(1) where H. A. G. de Silva, J., had stated that,  
  
"The Rule contemplates that this Court will proceed to hear the appeal: all
that it does is to disentitle the party in default from claiming a right to be
heard, but preserves the undoubted discretion of this Court to give such party
such hearing as it thinks appropriate. If that be the only consequence of the
failure to lodge written submissions, it is impossible to interpret the Rule
as requiring a more severe penalty for a far less serious default, namely the
failure to give notice of the lodging of written submissions to the respondent
together with a copy thereof in terms of Rule 35(e)."

**32**

Secondly, he contended that Rule 34 has no application to fundamental rights
applications. Referring to the wording of Rule 34, it was submitted that this
Rule only applies to cases where a party has obtained leave to appeal and not
leave to proceed. The position of learned President's Counsel for the
petitioner was that, according to Article 126(2) of the Constitution, in a
fundamental rights application leave to proceed has to be obtained from the
Supreme Court. In terms of Article 128(i) of the Constitution, the Court of
Appeal may grant leave to appeal to the Supreme Court and under Article
128(ii), the Supreme Court may grant special leave to appeal. In these
circumstances, learned President's Counsel submitted that there is a clear
distinction between leave to appeal and leave to proceed. In a fundamental
rights application, there is no question of leave to appeal but leave to
proceed has to be obtained. Rule 34 only deals with leave to appeal and
therefore this Rule cannot be applied to fundamental rights applications.  
  
Thirdly, it was submitted that in any event the petitioner has not failed to
show due diligence in terms of Rule 34. Fourthly, it was contended that under
Rule 34, there is an unfettered discretion vested in the Supreme Court.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the 2nd respondent, however, submitted that
these Rules are equally applicable to applications made under Article 126 of
the Constitution. He referred to Rule 45(8) which states that "the provisions
of Part II of these Rules shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to applications under
Article 126." He further submitted that, "the expression 'mutatis mutandis' is
commonly used in legal drafting indicating the power to adapt statutory
language applied in one context to a wholly different situation which
necessitates the making of changes where necessary." His position was that the
whole of Part II of the Rules, which comprises Rules 29 to 41, applies "in so
far as they are capable of being applied." Therefore, his contention was that
Part II of the Rules would be applicable to applications made under Article
126 of the Constitution too.

**33**

Learned President's Counsel for the 2nd respondent also submitted that
compliance with the Rules relating to the filing of written submissions is
imperative. Referring to Rules 30(5) and 30(6) it was submitted that the Rules
have laid down what the written submissions should contain and the time within
which the submissions must be filed in Court. Accordingly the written
submissions of the petitioner must be filed within 6 weeks of the grant of
leave to proceed and the' petitioner must give the respondent notice of it by
serving a copy on the respondent. This in his view is to enable the respondent
to prepare his reply before the hearing commences, so that the Court may be
apprised of the contentions of the respondent. He conceded that in the event
of default there is provision for the defaulting party to make an application
for extension of time. In such an event, a judge would have the discretion to
consider the reasons as to why he was unable to comply with the rule and may
grant an extension. However, counsel disagreed with the contention that the
filing of written submissions is not an imperative requirement.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the 2nd respondent relied on Maxwell,
Interpretation of Statutes, 12th edition, pg. 321, where it is stated that.  
  
"Notwithstanding that the Rules of the Supreme Court provide that non-
compliance with the Rules shall not render proceedings void unless the Court
so directs, in several cases it has been held that a defect in following the
procedure laid down by the Rules may be so grave that it renders the entire
proceedings, a nullity, not curable by any order of the Court."  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the petitioner contended that Rule 34 has no
application to fundamental rights applications as the very wording of Rule 34
refers to "an appellant or a petitioner who obtains leave to appeal" and there
is no reference to a petitioner who obtains "leave to proceed." Therefore,
learned President's Counsel for the

**34**

petitioner expressed the view that Rule 34 applied only to cases where a
person has obtained leave to appeal and referred to Article 126(2) of the
Constitution which states that,  
  
"Such applications may be proceeded with only with leave to proceed first had
and obtained from the Supreme Court. . ."  
  
Article 128(1) and (2) on the other hand refers to the Court of Appeal
granting leave to appeal to the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court granting
special leave to appeal, respectively. In an application under Article 126,
there is no leave to appeal but, leave to proceed and therefore his position
was that Rule 34 does not apply to fundamental rights applications. Rule 34 is
in Part II of the Rules of the Supreme Court, which refers to "general
provisions regarding appeals and applications." Rule 45(8) states that,  
  
"the provisions of Part II of these Rules shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to
applications under Article 126."  
  
Black's Law dictionary, (4th edition, 1951, pg. 1172) refers to the meaning of
the word, "mutatis mutandis" in the following terms:  
  
"with the necessary changes in points of detail, meaning that matters or
things are generally the same, but to be altered when necessary, as to names,
offices, and the like. Housman v. Waterhouse(2)."  
  
I shall now consider the matter before us in the light of these submissions.
Rule 45(8) is in Part IV of the Rules of the Supreme Court, which deals with
applications under Article 126 of the Constitution. Certain Rules in Part II
refer specifically to applications made under Article 126 of the Constitution
(eg. Rule 37). If we are to restrict the application of Rule 45(8) only to
such Rules which appear in Part II, then in my view it would render the whole
of Rule 45(8) meaningless. The purpose of Rule 45(8) is to provide for the
application

**35**

of the general provision regarding appeals and applications in Part Il of the
Rules to applications made under Article 126 of the Constitution.  
  
There is no doubt that the tendering of written submissions is a mandatory
requirement in respect of appeals under Rule 30 of the Supreme Court Rules.
However, it is necessary to consider whether the provisions applicable to
appeals under Article 128 must be applied to applications under Article 126 of
the Constitution as well. Rule 45(7) states that the petitioner and
respondents must file their written submissions at least "one week before the
date fixed for hearing" with notice to every other party. Rule 30, which deals
with appeals states that  
  
"No party to an appeal shall be entitled to be heard unless he has previously
lodged five copies of his written submissions ... complying with the
provisions of this Rule."  
  
In respect of appeals, the appellant is required to tender written submissions
within six weeks of the grant of special leave to appeal or leave to appeal.
On the other hand, in an application under Article 126, written submissions
have to be filed at least one week before the date fixed for hearing.
Accordingly, in the case of an appeal, the period commences from the date on
which leave is granted and the date fixed for hearing is not a relevant
consideration. Moreover, Rule 30 provides a penalty for non-tendering of
written submissions, whereas there is no such provision made under Rule 45(7)
with regard to the failure to file written submissions in applications under
Article 126 of the Constitution. Furthermore, in an application under Article
126, written submissions have to be filed by each of the parties having regard
to the date of hearing.  
  
Preliminary objections taken in several cases of noncompliance with the Rules
have been the subject of decisions of this Court. In Coomasaru v. Leechman and
Company(3) it was held by the majority (Tennekoon, C.J., Vythialingam,

**36**

Sharvananda and Colin Thome, JJ., Rajaratnam, J. dissenting) that where an
appellant had failed to comply with the Rule without excuse, the appeal should
be dismissed. In Samarawickrame v. Attorney General(4) and in Mylvagnam v.
Reckitt and Colman(5) and the appeals were dismissed for failure to comply
with Rule 35 of the Rules of 1978. In Jayasinghe v. Jayasinghe(6), no written
submissions were tendered "at all" by the appellant after he obtained special
leave to appeal to this Court. In fact, even on the day the matter was taken
up for hearing, no written submissions were tendered by the appellant. In view
of the provisions of Rule 35(b) of Supreme Court Rules of 1978, Ranasinghe,
C.J. upheld the preliminary objections taken by the respondent and dismissed
the appeal. In All Ceylon Match Worker's Union v. Jauffer Hassan and
others(7), a preliminary objection was taken that the petitioner had not filed
any written submissions and there was therefore a failure on the part of the
appellant to comply with Rule 35(b) of the Supreme Court Rules. Amerasinghe,
J. upheld the objection and dismissed the appeal with costs. In Jayasurtya v.
Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporatio(8), the written submissions of the
respondent which were required to be filed within 30 days by Rule 35 were
delayed and the excuse for the delay in lodging them was that learned Counsel
to whom a draft of the submissions was given `generally practices in the
outstations and has periodically fallen ill in the last few months." It was
held by Amerasinghe, J., that the respondent's delay to file written
submissions in compliance with Rule 35 was inexcusable and he could not be
heard.  
  
In Kiriwanthe and another v. Navaratne and another(9) the question of failure
to comply with the Rules of the Supreme Court was considered comprehensively.
Fernando, J., was of the view that,  
  
"The weight of authority thus favours the view that while all these Rules must
be complied with the law does not require or permit an automatic dismissal

**37**

of the application or appeal of the party in default. The consequence of non-
compliance (by reason of impossibility or for any other reason) is a matter
falling within the discretion of the Court, to be exercised after considering
the nature of the default, as well as the excuse or explanation therefor, in
the context of the object of the particular Rule."  
  
The question of failure to comply with the Rules of the Supreme Court was
considered by this Court in Priyani Soysa v. Arsecularatne(10), where the
petitioner as well as the respondent took preliminary objections in regard to
noncompliance with the Rules of the Supreme Court. The petitioner submitted
that the respondent had not complied with Rule 8(6) whereas the respondent
raised an objection that the petitioner had not complied with Rule 2 read with
Rule 6 of the Rules of the Supreme Court. It was held by the majority
(Wijetunga and Bandaranayake JJ., Amerasinghe, J. dissenting) that it was an
appropriate case for both preliminary objections to be overruled. Wijetunga,
J., stated there that.  
  
"Kiriwanthe's case, to my mind, is a watershed in judicial thinking in regard
to the question of noncompliance with the Rules of the Supreme Court."  
  
I am in complete agreement with this view.  
  
Moreover, there are other instances where this Court has overruled such
preliminary objections. In Piyadasa and others v. Land Reform Commission(11),
a preliminary objection was taken by learned counsel for the petitioner that
the respondents had filed their written submissions 197 days after the date on
which they were required by Rule 30(7) to be filed. It was submitted that the
respondents' belated submissions should not be accepted and that the
respondents should not be heard. Although there was no explanation offered
regarding the delay, Amerasinghe, J., overruled the preliminary objection and
stated that,

**38**

"In my view Rule 30 is meant to assist the Court in its work and not to
obstruct the discovery of the truth. There were numerous documents that had to
be considered; and, in our view, we needed the assistance of learned counsel
for the petitioner as well as the respondents, including their written
submissions to properly evaluate the information that we had before us. It
was, therefore, decided that the preliminary objection should be overruled."  
  
In the instant case, the petition was filed on 03.06.1999. It was supported
for interim relief on 04.06.1999 and order was made in terms of paragraph "c"
of the prayer to the petition, valid only up to 09.06.1999. When the matter
was supported on 08.06.1999, leave to proceed was granted and the interim
order was extended until the final hearing and determination of the
application. An early date was given for the hearing, considering the gravity
of the violation complained of, the hearing was thus fixed for 20.08.1999. A
motion was filed by the Attorney-at-law for the 2nd respondent seeking to
support an application to vacate or set aside the interim order issued against
him. This was supported on 09.07.1999. On that day when learned President's
Counsel for the 2nd respondent moved to make submissions with regard to the
interim order, on the ground that the 2nd respondent was absent and
unrepresented, learned President's Counsel for the petitioner objected on the
ground that notice had been issued on the parties and the Solicitor-General
had represented all the respondents. The learned Solicitor-General submitted
that he had represented only the 1st and the 3rd respondents as stated in the
record. The objection taken by learned President's Counsel for the petitioner
was overruled and learned President's Counsel for the 2nd respondent was
heard. This Court made order on that day that no variation of the order in
relation to the interim order, in any respect, should be made. The petitioner
was given two weeks' time to file counter affidavit, if any. On 23.07.1999,
the petitioner moved for one week's time to file the counter affidavit and
this was allowed. The counter affidavit of the Director/

**39**

General Manager of the petitioner Company was filed on 30.07.1999. The written
submissions were filed by the petitioner on 19.08.1999. The written
submissions had been forwarded to the judges along with the briefs and
therefore the written submissions were available with the judges when this
matter was taken up for argument on 20.08.1999. Learned President's Counsel
for the 2nd respondent submitted that the requirement that the petitioner
should file written submissions within a prescribed time was to "enable the
respondent to make reply before the hearing commences, so that the Court may
be apprised of the rival contentions." If this is the purpose of having the
written submissions well before the hearing commences, it is my view that
there was sufficient material provided by the petitioner for the 2nd
respondent to know the position of the petitioner well before the date of
hearing. It is to be noted that, in addition to the documents already filed,
the petitioner had filed his counter affidavit on 30.07.1999. Furthermore, if
and when the need arose, this Court has allowed parties to file written
submissions as well as further written submissions, even after a full hearing
has been afforded to both parties.  
  
I therefore find it difficult to agree with learned President's Counsel for
the 2nd respondent that this matter must stand dismissed for "non-
prosecution". Taking into consideration all the circumstances of this case, it
cannot be said that the petitioner had "failed to show due diligence in taking
all necessary steps for the purpose of prosecuting the appeal or application."  
  
For the reasons aforesaid, I am of the view that the preliminary objection
must be overruled and the application set down for hearing. There will be no
costs.  
  
**WIJETUNGA. J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Preliminary objection overruled; Application set down for hearing_.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/43.html_  

