##  Rifaideen v. Sub Inspector of Police Jayalath, Wellawatte Police Station
and Others - SLR - 253, Vol 2 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 43; (1998) 2 Sri LR 253 (25
September 1998)

**253**

**RIFAIDEEN  
v.  
SUB-INSPECTOR OF POLICE JAYALATH,  
WELLAWATTE POLICE STATION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
SC (SPL) NO. 71/96  
SEPTEMBER 1 1998.

_Fundamental Rights - Torture - Article 11 of the Constitution._

The 1st respondent, a Sub-Inspector of Police subjected the petitioner to an
assault whilst the petitioner was in Police custody.

**Held:**

The 1st respondent violated the fundamental right of the petitioner guaranteed
by Article 11 of the Constitution.

**AN APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Dr. T. Thirunavukarasu for the petitioner.  
  
H. G. Hussain for the 1st respondent.  
  
P. D. Ratnayake SC for the 3rd and 4th respondents. _

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 25, 1998  
  
**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

The petitioner who was 59 years old, was a "broker" by profession. He has
averred that on 27.05.1996, the 1st respondent with some other police officers
attached to the Police Station, Wellawatte, took him into custody while he was
travelling from Panadura to Colombo. The petitioner alleges that he was taken
to the Police Station and

254

was assaulted by the 1st respondent at the instigation of the 2nd respondent.
The allegation is that the petitioner was assaulted with sand filled S-lon
pipes and he thereby sustained injuries to his head, eyes, legs and hand. He
complains that owing to this assault his right index finger was fractured. He
cannot use his finger at present and he suffers from frequent "head and muscle
pain". This Court granted leave to proceed in respect of the alleged
infringement of Article 11.

Learned counsel for the petitioner informed the Court on 08.06.1998 that the
2nd respondent died on 04.06.1998 and that he is not proceeding against the
heirs of the 2nd respondent. It was decided to continue the application as
against the 1st, 3rd and 4th respondents.

The 1st respondent in his affidavit averred that the 2nd respondent made a
complaint to the Police Station, Wellawatte, on 16.05.1996 with regard to a
theft of precious stones owned by him and that he. suspected the petitioner in
this regard. In the course of his investigations he had arrested the
petitioner not on 27.05.1996 as alleged by the petitioner but on 28.05.1996 at
5.20 p.m. after informing him the reason for such arrest. Thereafter the 1st
respondent had produced the petitioner before the Magistrate, Mount Lavinia on
29.05.1996 and he was enlarged on bail on the same day. The plaint was filed
thereafter in the Magistrate's Court, Mount Lavinia, against the petitioner
for the offence of theft under case No. 16309 and the case is pending in
Court. Learned counsel for the 1st respondent submitted that the 1st
respondent was not involved in the alleged assault on the petitioner. Learned
counsel for the 1st respondent referred us to the inquiry notes of the 1st
respondent (1 R2) made on 28.05.1996 at 5 p.m. near Roxy Film Hall,
Wellawatte. It states that when the 1st respondent informed the petitioner
that he is wanted with regard to a robbery of Gem stones, the petitioner had
started to run. The 1st respondent and 3 other police officers had pursued the
petitioner. The petitioner had jumped over a 6 foot wall. The 1st respondent
and the other 3 officers had jumped over the wall and they had found the
petitioner fallen over some stones. At that time the 1st respondent had seen
some old wounds on the petitioner (1 R2).

However the petitioner's statement dated 28.05.1996 does not mention the
incident where the petitioner had jumped over a 6 foot wall. At the time of
the incident, as mentioned earlier, the petitioner was 59 years old. He
appeared in Court at the hearing which was

255

2 years after the said incident and I am unable to accept the version of the
1st respondent that the petitioner had jumped over a 6 foot wall. This is an
improbable story.

Learned counsel for the 1st respondent further submitted that the petitioner
was taken into custody on the complaint made by the 2nd respondent at the
Police Station, Wellawatte. This complaint was made on 16.05.1996 (1R1) and
the 2nd respondent has stated in this statement that he became aware of the
loss of the Gem stones on 06.05.1996. When the 2nd respondent inquired about
the theft from his employees, one Sriyani, had reminded him that the
petitioner had come to 2nd respondent's office on 10.04.1996 and that he would
have taken the Gem stones. This shows that the petitioner had visited the 2nd
respondent's office on 10.04.1996, the 2nd respondent had found out that some
of his Gem stones were missing on 06.05.1996, and he had waited for 10 days
until 16.05.1996 before he made the complaint. The 1st respondent arrested the
petitioner, according to the petitioner on 27.05.1996 and according to the 1st
respondent on 28.05.1996. The 1st respondent also had waited for more than 10
days before arresting the petitioner.

The petitioner was examined by the Medical Officer at the Teaching Hospital,
Colombo South (Kalubowila) on 04.06.1996. The medical report (P2) is as
follows:

10th July, 1996.

Re Mr. A. R. M. Rifaideen

This patient was first seen by me on the 4th of June, 1996, with a history of
assault sustained on the 27th of May, 1996.

Examination revealed a contusion on the right frontal region of skull, painful
swollen right index finger and several bruises over the trunk and legs. He was
asked to come to the accident service the following day and x-rays of skull
and right hand done. Skull x-ray normal; hand x-ray showed an undisplaced
fracture of proxional phalanx.

Treatment given for the hand injury.

Present status stiffness of right index finger, occasional attacks of frontal
headache.

256

I am not inclined to accept the submission for the 1st respondent that the
petitioner has sustained the said injuries by reason of the fall from the 6
foot wall. The medical report, in my view, supports the version of the
petitioner that he sustained the said injuries owing to the assault by the 1st
respondent at the Police Station, Wellawatte. I accordingly hold that the 1st
respondent has violated the fundamental right of the petitioner guaranteed by
Article 11 of the Constitution.

I direct the State to pay Rs. 20,000% and the 1st respondent to pay personally
Rs. 20,000/- to the petitioner as compensation. In all the petitioner would be
entitled to a sum of Rs. 40,000% as compensation. This amount must be paid
within three (3) months from today.

The Registrar of the Supreme Court is directed to send a copy of this judgment
to the Inspector-General of Police.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.** \- I agree.  
**  
WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/43.html_  

