##  Ismalebbe v. Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services - SLR - 332, Vol
2 of 1991 [1991] LKSC 43; (1991) 2 Sri LR 332 (9 November 1991)

**332**

** **

## ISMALEBBE

**v.**

**ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER OF**

**AGRARIAN SERVICES**

** **

SUPREME COURT.

BANDARANAYAKE, J., AMERASINGHE, J. AND DHEERARATNE, J.

S. C. APPEAL NO. 25/91.

S. C. L. A. 154 OF 90

C. A. 978/83.



AUGUST 19, 1991.



_Tenant Cultivator ‑ Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979, proviso to section
4 ‑ Statutory interpretation ‑ Discretion of Commissioner to prevent_ _owner
cultivator who owned paddy land in excess of five acres from cultivat­ing
paddy land as tenant cultivator ‑ Ultra vires ‑ Lack of Jurisdiction ‑
Cer­tiorari._



The Commissioner of Agrarian Services made Order declaring that the Appellant
was not entitled to the rights of a tenant cultivator in terms of the proviso
to section 4(2) of the Agrarian Services Act. The proviso gives a dis­cretion
to the Commissioner to declare that a tenant cultivator who is also an owner
cultivator of not less than five acres of paddy land is not entitled to his
rights under the Act. The Appellant sought to quash the Order on the ground
that the Commissioner had acted ultra vires and without jurisdiction, since
the proviso applied only where the Minister determines the extent of paddy
land cultivable by a tenant cultivator under sub‑section (2) of section 4 of
the Act.



**  333**



**Held:**

**  **

1\.         The proviso to section 4 is intended to govern the contents of
both sub‑sections (1) and (2).



2\.         Legislative intent should be gathered by reading the section in
its entirety in the context of the object and purpose
the legislature had in mind in enacting the provision. An intention to produce
an unreaso­nable result is not to be                         imputed to a
statute if some other construc­tion is available.



3\.         The Commissioner of Agrarian Services acted within his rights to
declare the tenant cultivator who owned paddy land in excess of five acres as
not being entitled to cultivate any further land as a tenant cul­tivator.



**Case referred to:** _Artemion v. Procopioa_ 1966 (1) Q.B.D. 878.



**APPEAL** from a judgement of the Court of Appeal.



_L. Kadirgammar_ with _K. Thevarajah_ and _Miss Lalitha Senaratae_ for
Appellant.



_R. K. W. Goonesekera_ with _S. Mahenthiran_ for 2nd to 5th Respond­ents.



_Cur.adv.vult._



November 08, 1991.



**BANDARANAYAKE, J.**



The arguments in this case have centered around the inter­pretation of s.4 of
the Agrarian Services Act. Much time has been spent on examining the Section,
in particular, the pro­viso, and as to whether the proviso applies to
sub‑section 2 only having regard to the fact that it is placed immediately
after sub‑section 2 or whether the proviso applied to sub­section 1 as well.



It seems to me that on a plain reading of the Section it car be considered
that the proviso stands by itself regardless of its position.



**334**





Sub‑section 1 absolutely limits to five acres, the extent of land that any
tenant cultivator can cultivate. By Sub‑section 2 the Minister is given the
power to further limit the extent of paddy land that a tenant cultivator may
cultivate. In addition, the proviso permits the Commissioner of Agrarian
Services, after due inquiry, to make order that, if a tenant cultivator is
also the owner cultivator of not less than five acres of paddy land, he shall
not be entitled to his rights as a tenant cultivator under the provisions of
the Agrarian Services Act; that is to say that the Commissioner is given a
discretionary power of preventing an owner cultivator of 5 or more acres of
paddy land from cultivating any paddy land as a tenant cultivator as well. It
seems that as a matter of policy, recognising the pres­sure on the
availability of paddy land in certain areas the legis­lature is seeking to
make available as much land as possible to tenant farmers who otherwise would
have no access to culti­vating paddy land. The proviso empowers the
Commissioner to give effect to that intention. In respect of any such excess,
the provisions of Sections 4(3), 4(4), 4(5) and 4(6) will apply as follows:
with regard to the tenant's rights of choice of land to be cultivated (section
4 (3); the tenant's obligation to vacate the excess land (section 4(3); the
remedies in the event of a failure of a tenant to observe his duty to vacate
excess land (section 4(3) and the utilization of the excess land vacated by a
tenant cultivator after the exercise of his choice (section 4(5) and sec­tion
4(6).



In this view of the matter, the Commissioner was within his rights to declare
the tenant cultivator who owned paddy land in excess of five across as not
being entitled to cultivate any further land as a tenant cultivator. I
therefore dismiss the appeal with costs.



**Amerasinghe, J. __      ** I agree.



#### 335



November 09, 1991.



**DHEERARATNE, J.**



This is an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal refusing to quash
by way of a writ of certiorari the order made by the Commissioner of Agrarian
Services declar­ing that the appellant was not entitled to the rights of a
tenant cultivator in terms of the proviso to section 4(2) of the Agrar­ian
Services Act, No. 58 of 1979. The foundation for the application by way of the
writ was that the Commissioner had acted ultra vires and without jurisdiction.



In order to appreciate the point of law urged on behalf of the appellant, it
would be useful at this stage to set out in full section 4 of the relevant
Act.



" 4        (1)        The maximum extent of paddy land that could be
cultivated by a tenant cultivator shall be five acres.



(2)        The Minister may subject to the provisions of sub­section (1) by
Order published in the Gazette deter­mine the extent of paddy land that may be
cultivated by a tenant cultivator in any district to which such Order relates:



Provided, however, that where the Commissioner is satisfied after due inquiry
that a tenant cultivator is also an owner cultivator of any paddy land of not
less than five acres in extent, the Commissioner may declare that such tenant
cultivator shall not be entitled to his rights as a tenant cultivator under
the provisions of this Act, and accordingly the provisions of subsections (3),
(4), (5) and (6) of this section shall apply to such tenant cultivator,



(3)        The tenant cultivator shall, if he is in occupation of an extent of
paddy land in excess of the extent specified in an Order under sub‑section
(2), subject to



**336   **

** **

the approval of the Commissioner, be entitled to select the extent of paddy
land which he is entitled to cultivate, and shall vacate the balance extent on
being ordered to do so by the Commissioner.



(4)        Where a tenant cultivator fails to comply with the provisions of
sub‑section (3) he shall be evicted from the extent of paddy land in excess of
the extent speci­fied in the Order under sub‑section (2) and the provi­sions
of section (6) shall apply to any such eviction.



(5)        On vacation of such extent by the tenant cultiva­tor, the landlord
shall, with the approval of the Commissioner.



(a)        be entitled to cultivate such extent on such con­ditions as may be
prescribed; or



(b)        appoint one or more tenant cultivators for such extent within such
period as may be prescribed.

(6)        On failure of the landlord to take action under the provisions of
paragraph (a) or paragraph (b) of sub­section (5) within the prescribed period
the Commis­sioner shall be entitled to appoint a suitable person to cultivate
that extent of paddy land".



It is common ground that no order has been made by the Minister so far in
terms of sub‑section (2) applicable to the particular district in which the
disputed paddy land is situated and for that matter my own inquiries reveal
that no such order has been made in respect of any district in the island. The
con­tention advanced on behalf of the appellant is that the proviso governs
only sub‑section (2) and it springs into life solely upon the Minister making
an Order in terms of that subsec­tion. If that contention is correct clearly
the Commissioner has acted ultra vires and without jurisdiction.



Apart from several points of criticism of the judgment of the Court of Appeal
which I need not enumerate here, two





##  337



principal grounds were urged on behalf of the appellant in support of the
contention seeking to restrict the operation of the proviso to the contents of
sub‑section (2) only, and they are:__



(1)        The punctuation used in section 4 namely that a full stop appears
at the end of sub‑section (1) whereas a colon appears in sub‑section (2)
before the proviso beg­ins.



(2)        To enable the proviso to be extended to sub‑section (1) of section
4, that section should be rewritten as follows:__

           

                        (i)         In the proviso the words "and accordingly the provi­sions of subsections (3), (4), (5) and (6) of this section shall apply to such tenant cultivator" would have to be deleted in toto; and/or



(ii)        (a)        in sub‑section (3) the words "in excess of such extent
specified in the Order under sub‑section (2)" will have to be deleted and
words such as eg. "in excess of five acres as specified in sub‑section (1) or
in excess of the extent specified in an Order under sub‑section (2)" would
have to be substituted.



(b)        In sub‑section (4) the words "in excess of the extent specified in
the Order under sub‑section (2)" would have to be deleted and words as at (a)
above have similarly to be substituted.



(The above formulation of this submission taken verbatim from the petition of
appeal, was adopted by learned counsel for the appellant in the course of his
argument.)



Bindra's Interpretation of Statutes (7th Edition) after an exhaustive
dissertation on the use of punctuations as an aid to



#### 338



interpretation, at page 68 sums the position in the following words:__



"To summarize, while marks of punctuation contained in a statute will not
generally be wholly ignored by the Court in interpreting a statutory
provision, it may not always be safe to rely on punctuation as a delivering
factor. Great importance will be attached by the Court to the ...... (sic)
employed by the legislative and if it is found that the word (sic) used in the
sec­tion when read as a whole, clearly furnish a clue to the legisla­Like
intent underlying the section and they admit of an inter­pretatian consistent
with the said legislative intent, any nunctuatiora work which is inconsistent
with such construction :will be disrcgurded and the punctuation will not be
allowed to control the  plain meaning of the text".



Thus it appears that the punctuation cannot be considered to be a decisive and
a safe guide for discovering the legislative intent. In any event the comma
appearing at the end of that very proviso in the original Act which cannot be
justified under any circumstances and rightly substituted by a fullstop in the
Revised Enactments of 1980, fortifies me in the view I have taken that
punctuation cannot be considered that sacro­sanct.



The second argument of learned counsel for the appellant that section 4 has to
be rewritten as suggested, "if the proviso is meant to be annexed to
sub‑section (1) as well" does not appear to me to bear scrutiny at all. I see
no necessity to delete from the proviso the words "and accordingly the
provi­sions of sub‑sections(3), (4), (5) and (6) of this section shall apply
to such tenant cultivator," to enable tile proviso to be made applicable to
sub‑section (1) as well. The proviso con­templates the case of a tenant
cultivator, who, by virtue of tile fact that he is also an owner cultivator of
an extent of paddy which is not less than five acres, becoming disentitled to
his rights of a tenant cultivator upon a declaration made by the Commissioner
after inquiry. So, even if the proviso applies



#### 339



only to the case of a tenant cultivator in a district to which an Order made
by the Minister relates as contemplated in sub­section (2), the words
suggested to be deleted from the proviso must necessarily remain. The
submission made regarding the necessity to delete the words "in excess of the
extent specified in the Order under sub‑section (2)" in both sub‑sections (3)
and (4) and the substitution therefor the words "in excess of five acres as
specified in sub‑section (1) or in excess of the extent specified in an Order
made by subsection (2), **in order to enable the proviso to be annexed to
subsection** **(1),** appears to be manifestly fallacious, because it conceds
the necessity of such amendment even if the proviso is annexed to sub‑section
(2) only.



In my view the legislative intent should be gathered by reading section 4 in
its entirety in the context of the object and purpose the legislature had in
mind in enacting the provision. It will be perhaps useful to bear in mind the
legal character of a "cultivator" in attempting to do so.



By section 68, Act, No. 58 of 1979 defines a cultivator as follows:__



"Cultivator with reference to an extent of paddy land means any person other
than an Agrarian Services Committee, who by himself or by any member of his
family or jointly with any other person, carries out on such extent:



(a)        two or more operations of ploughing, sowing and reaping; and



(b)        the operation of tending or watching the crop in each season during
which paddy is cultivated on such extent".



The above definition contained in the Act, except for some insignificant
modifications, substantially corresponds to the definition of a cultivator
given in its legislative predecessor the



**340**



Law No. 42 of 1973. It is significant to observe that whether a cultivator is
an owner cultivator or a tenant cultivator such a person must necessarily
possess the attributes of a cultivator as defined above. The law apears to
have been consistent in frowning upon both absentee landlordism and absentee
tenan­try and ensuring the personal attendance of a cultivator in certain
major operations of cultivating paddy. This principle accords with one of the
purposes of the Act as evidenced from its preamble namely, "....... to provide
for maximum productivity of paddy lands  through the proper use and management
of Agricultural crops".



In this legislative background it is not surprising that the law endeavoured
to ensure that no tenant cultivator should bite off more than he could chew.
Thus the Act, No. 58 of 1979 brought in a new feature by enacting section 4(1)
which was absent in any of its legislative predecessors in limiting the
maximum extent of paddy land that could be cultivated by a tenant cultivator.
With the birth of this new concept of a ceil­ing, two other questions
naturally arose. Firstly, should the ceiling be uniformly applied to all parts
of the country irres­pective of the possible differing conditions like the
availability of paddy lands? Secondly, should an owner cultivator of not less
than five acres of paddy land whose personal attendance is required for such
cultivation be permitted to be a tenant culti­vator of any extent of paddy
land which in turn demands his personal attendance? The law appears to have
provided the answers in enacting sub‑section (2) with its proviso, the
pro­viso thus manifestly intended to govern the contents of both sub‑sections
(1) and (2). Had the legislature intended the pro­viso to govern only
sub‑section (2) I would have expected it to have used the words "such a tenant
cultivator" instead of the unrestricted words "a tenant cultivator" in the 2nd
line of the proviso.



If the interpretation sought to be placed on the proviso to sub‑section (2) on
behalf of the appellant is correct, an owner



**341**



cultivator of not less than five acres of paddy is liable to lose his rights
as a tenant cultivator in an area covered by the Order of the Minister,
whereas his counterpart in the area out­side would not be so liable. We have
not been persuaded to accept a rationale emanating from within the four
corners of the Act justifying such differential treatment. As stated by
Dankwert L.J. in Artemion v. Procopioa, "An intention to produce an
unreasonable result is not to be imputed to a sta­tute if some other
construction is available".



Although the foregoing reasons are sufficient to dispose of this appeal I am
constrained to make a few observations on section 4 before I part with this
judgment. While the section makes provision for ejectment of a tenant
cultivator who is in occupation of an extent of paddy land in excess of the
extent specified in an order made by the Minister under sub‑section (2), it
has failed to make parallel provision for ejectment of a tenant cultivator who
is in occupation of an extent of paddy land in excess of a maximum paddy land
stipulated in subsec­tion (1). The words of the proviso of the subsection (2)
"and accordingly the provisions of sub‑sections (3), (4), (5) and (6) of this
section shall apply to such tenant cultivator" would be senseless and would
remain unworkable, unless having regard to the obvious legislative intent,
they are construed to mean that those sub‑sections shall apply " _mutatis
mutandis_ ". For the above reasons I am unable to commend the wording of
section 4 as a thoughtful exercise in model draftmanship. However, these
infirmities in the section in no way help to buttress the contention of the
appellant.



The appeal is dismissed with costs.



  _ **  Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/43.html_  

