##  Virasinghe v. Virasinghe and Others - SLR - 264, Vol 1 of 2002 [2002] LKSC
43; (2002) 1 Sri LR 264 (22 March 2002)

**264**

**VIRASINGHE  
v.  
VIRASINGHE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA, CJ.,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
YAP A, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 47/2001  
CA NO. 707/93 (F)  
DC COLOMBO NO. 14447/P  
15 OCTOBER, 2001  
  
_Partition - Partition Law, No. 27 of 1977 - Monthly tenancy - Whether it
comes within the scope of a partition action - At what stage may such claim be
dealt with -Sections 5, 48 (1) and 52 of the Partition Law - Section 14 (1) of
the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972.  
_  
The plaintiff-appellant (the plaintiff) filed action for partition of a land
which included premises No. 21/4, Butlers Lane, Colombo 7\. The 4th defendant-
respondent (the 4th defendant) claimed that he was a lessee of the premises
upon an indenture of lease which had been notarially attested. At the trial of
the action the 4th defendant put the lease in issue (issue No. 10) and further
claimed that the Rent Act applies, that the plaintiff was estopped from
denying tenancy and that he was a tenant of the co-owners of the premises
(issues Nos. 11, 12 and 16). The 4th defendant also claimed that he was
entitled to compensation for useful and necessary improvements which he had
effected (issue No. 13).  
  
**Held :  
**  
In view of the provision of section 5 (a) read with section 48 (1), the claim
of a monthly tenant is not within the scope of a partition action. It is not
permissible to enter a finding, in a judgment, interlocutory decree of final
decree, in a partition action with regard to any claim of a monthly tenant in
respect of the land sought to be partitioned. Such question should be
considered, if at all, at the stage of execution in terms of section 52 of the
Law.

**265  
 **

_Per_ S. N. Silva, CJ.  
  
"In this instance the claims of the 4th defendant on the Indenture of Lease
and compensation for improvements, have been validly brought within the
partition action. But, the 4th defendant should not have been permitted to add
another string to his bow by raising issues based on a monthly tenancy, being
a matter in respect of which the Court could not enter a decree having
finality."  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. _Peris v. Perera -_ 1 NLR 362 at 364.  
  
2\. _Bernard v. Fernando -_ 16 NLR 438.  
  
3\. _Seedin v. Thedias -_ 53 NLR 63.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_Ikram Mohamed, PC with Harsha Soza and A. M. Faaiz_ for plaintiff-appellant.  
  
_Amarasiri Panditharatne_ for 4th defendant-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 22, 2002  
  
**SARATH N. SILVA, CJ.**  
  
The plaintiff instituted this action on 14. 08. 1985, in terms of partition
Law, No. 21 of 1977, for the sale of the land described in the 4th schedule to
the plaint, subsequently depicted as premises bearing No. 21/4, Bullers Lane,
Colombo 7, in the preliminary survey plan No. 3903 dated 24. 10. 1986, in
extent 18 perches, which belongs in common to the 1st and 2nd defendants and
himself. The plaintiff has sought a sale since a substantial house located in
the premises covers almost the entirety of the land and a partition thereof is
not possible.  
  
The 1st and 2nd defendants and the plaintiff are brothers. They together with
another brother purchased the land in 1972 in equal shares. In 1981 the
plaintiff purchased the share of the brother who

**266**

is not a party to the action and thereby became entitled to 1/2 share of the
land. The 1st and 2nd defendants are entitled to 1/4 share each. Although, the
proceedings in the partition action have gone on for more than 16 years,
ironically there was no dispute as to the corpus, nor devolution of title
according to the pedigree filed by the plaintiff and the respective shares of
the parties.  
  
Two lines of contest emerged when issues were formulated and recorded by
Court, at the commencement of the trial in June, 1990.  
  
These are issues 5-9 raised by the 3rd defendant (Bank of Ceylon) on the basis
of a mortgage executed in favour of the Bank in respect of the corpus. The
other, arising from the issues raised by the 4th defendant who claimed -  
  
(i) that he was a lessee of the premises upon Indenture of Lease bearing No.
74 attested by S. Thurairajah, NP. (issue No. 10).  
  
(ii) that, the Rent Act of 1972 applies in respect of the premises; the
plaintiff is estopped in law from denying tenancy and that he is a tenant of
the co-owners of the premises (issues Nos. 10, 11, 12 and 16).  
  
(iii) that he has effected useful and necessary improvements to the premises
and is entitled to compensation (issue No. 13).  
  
Since there was no contest as to the devolution of title and the shares, the
trial related to the aforesaid lines of contest.  
  
At the conclusion of the trial, it was held that no money was due to the Bank
on the mortgage. The Bank (3rd defendant) did not appeal from these findings
and dropped out of the case. As regards the Indenture of Lease relied on by
the 4th defendant, it was held that

**267**

the lease was executed after the _lis pendens_ was registered and as such was
void in terms of section 66 (2) of the Partition Law. This 40 is undoubtedly
so, and the 4th defendant has not appealed from these findings. As regards the
claim for compensation, the Court has held that the documents produced as to
the expenditure have not been proved and the 4th defendant failed to establish
that he got the consent of the plaintiff and the 1st and 2nd defendants to
effect any improvements. Therefore, these issues were also answered against
the 4th defendant and he has not appealed from the findings.  
  
The issues as to tenancy have been answered in favour of the 4th defendant and
it was held that the Rent Act applies in respect of the premises and that he
is the tenant of the co-owners  (issues No. 10, 11, 12 and 16). The plaintiff
appealed from the said findings to the Court of Appeal. The appeal was
dismissed by the Court of Appeal.  
  
This Court granted leave to appeal on questions raised in the petition of
appeal as to the findings on tenancy; alternatively on the question whether
the matter of a monthly tenancy can come within the scope of a trial in a
partition action and whether such question should be considered, if at all, at
the stage of execution in terms of section 52 of the Partition Law.  
  
I would deal with the alternative question first since, if the matter of a
monthly tenancy cannot come within the scope of a partition action and should
be properly dealt with, if at all, at the stage of execution, we do not have
to examine the merits of the findings of the District Court in regard to
issues relevant to tenancy.  
  
As the question involves the scope of a trial and the procedure in a partition
action, it has to be dealt with on the basis of a conspectus of the applicable
law. The history of this type of action and its evolution

**268**

which can be described; as unique to this country, can be traced through the
plethora of judgments on the subject, over the years.  
  
Common ownership of property may arise from inheritance or from other means of
acquisition of property. As pointed out by Bonser, CJ., in one of the early
judgments in Peris v. Perera, the common law of the Island differing from the
English common law set its face against co-ownership and provided for two
actions for division, that of, familiae erciscundae and communi dividundo. The
former having application to the case of co-heirs and the latter to the case
of co-owners who have become so otherwise than by inheritance. These two
common law actions were replaced by the statutory action provided for in
Ordinance, No. 21 of 1844, which gave a right to a co-owner to institute an
action to compel the partition of co-owned property or, to compel sale where
partition would be injurious or impossible. From a socio-legal perspective it
is interesting to note that the recital to Ordinance, No. 21 of 1844 stated
that -  
  
"the undivided possession of landed property is productive of very injurious
consequences to inhabitants of the colony . . .".  
  
It is a matter of common knowledge even one and half centuries later the
situation remains the same with many festering disputes between persons that
stem from common ownership of property. Be that as it may, the point I note,
is that from its inception the action has been for the severance of common
ownership of immovable property.  
  
The formal procedure in a partition action with the first stage of an
interlocutory decree deciding on the respective rights and shares, followed by
a scheme of partition and a final decree declaring ownership of divided lots,
which is preserved in the currently applicable Partition Law, No. 21 of 1977,
(as amended by Acts 5 of 1981, 6 of 1987,

**269**

32 of 1987 and 17 of 1997), was introduced by Ordinance, No. 10 of 1863.  
  
The characteristic feature of a partition action and its consequences as noted
by Sampayo, AJ. in Bernard v. Fernando (2) and by Rose, CJ. in Seedin v.
Thedias (3) is that - "Partition decrees are conclusive by their own inherent
virtue, and do not depend for their final validity upon anything which the
parties may or may not afterwards do. They are not, like other decrees
affecting land, merely declaratory of the existing rights of parties inter se.
They create a new title in the parties absolutely good against all other
persons whosoever".  
  
Thus, a partition action transcends the characteristic of an inter partes
action with a decree binding only on the parties and their successors in
interest and, acquires the characteristic of an action in rem resulting in
title good against world.  
  
The significance of a partition action and its proceedings stems from the
finality of the decrees that are entered in the course of such an action. They
are, the Interlocutory decree entered in terms of section 26 of the Partition
Law, which decides on the rights in respect of land and the shares and which
may include an order for sale of the land in the whole or in lots and the
final decree entered in terms of section 36, which confirms the scheme of
partition of the corpus into specific lots to which the respective parties are
entitled to.  
  
The finality of these decrees is stated in section 48 (1) and the portion
relevant to the matter at issue in this appeal provides that  these decrees -  
  
"shall ... be good and sufficient evidence of the title of any person as to
any right, share or interest awarded therein to him and be final and
conclusive for all purposes . . .".

**270**

It is further provided that -  
  
"the right share or interest awarded by any such decree shall be free from all
encumbrances whatsoever other than those specified in that decree."  
  
The encumbrances that may come within the purview of a decree are defined in
the subsection to mean -  
  
"any mortgage, lease, usufruct, servitude, life interest, trust, or any
interest whatsoever howsoever arising except a constructive or charitable
trust, a lease at will or for a period not exceeding one month."  
  
Thus, it is seen that the Partition Law makes the same distinction as section
2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance of 1840 as amended, in respect of the
type of lease that would not be considered as an encumbrance affecting land.
In both laws, whilst a lease for a specified period exceeding one month is
considered an encumbrance affecting land and should be notarially executed, a
lease at will or for a period not exceeding one month (same language used in
both laws) is not considered an encumbrance affecting land.  
  
Therefore, it is not permissible to enter a finding, in a judgment,
interlocutory decree or final decree, in a partition action with regard to any
claim of a monthly tenant in respect of the land that is sought to be
partitioned.  
  
A partition action as noted above is designed to terminate co-ownership of
immovable property. The scope of the trial in such an action is the
examination of the title to, any right, share and interest in the land claimed
by the respective parties. The scope could extend to the examination of
encumbrances that pertain to such right, share

**271**

or interest. The decree has the effect of wiping out encumbrances as are not
specified therein. It is for this reason that persons who have any interest on
the basis of encumbrances that pertain to title should be disclosed as
necessary parties in terms of section 5 (a). Significantly, a person having a
claim in respect of a lease at will or for a period not exceeding one month,
is not necessary party to the action.  
  
The provisions of section 5 should be construed in the light of the definition
of "encumbrances" as contained in section 48 (1) and the reference to a
"lease" in section 5 (a) should be limited to a lease for a specified period
exceeding one month which has to be notarially executed in terms of the
Prevention of Frauds Ordinance.  
  
Section 14 (1) of the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, also postulates that rights of
a tenant as provided for by the Act are not affected by a decree in a
partition action.  
  
The clearly structured procedure of a partition action and the sanctity
attaching to decrees that are entered in such an action, require that its
scope should be restricted to the matters in respect of which under the law
the decrees will have finality. A Court should desist from embarking on a
trial as to claims in respect of which it is not empowered to enter a decree
having a finality.  
  
In this instance the claims of the 4th defendant on the Indenture of Lease and
compensation for improvements, have been validly brought within the partition
action. But, the 4th defendant should not have been permitted to add another
string to his bow by raising issues based on a monthly tenancy, being a matter
in respect of which the Court could not enter a decree having finality.  
  
The law contains adequate provisions to safeguard the interests of a monthly
tenant and to protect him from unlawful eviction at the stage of execution.

**272**

Sections 52 (2) (a) and (b) of the Partition Law provides specifically as
follows:  
  
2 (a) Where the applicant for delivery of possession seeks to evict any person
in occupation of a land or a house standing on the land as tenant for a period
not exceeding one month who is liable to be evicted by the applicant, such
application shall be made by petition to which such person in occupation shall
be made respondent, setting out the material facts entitling the applicant to
such order.  
  
(b) After hearing the respondent, if the Court shall determine that the
respondent having entered into occupation prior to the date  of such final
decree or certificate of sale, is entitled to continue in occupation of the
said house as tenant under the applicant as landlord, the Court shall dismiss
the application, otherwise it shall grant the application and direct that an
order for delivery of possession of the said house and land to the applicant
do issue.  
  
Section 52 (2) (a) appears to contemplate a situation where the applicant for
an order for delivery of possession recognizes the person in occupation as a
tenant but moves for eviction on the basis that he is not entitled to continue
in occupation of the house as a tenant under the applicant as landlord. If,
however, the applicant, on the premise that he does not recognize the person
in occupation as a tenant, moves for an order for the delivery of possession
in terms of section 52 (1), any person in occupation who claims to be a tenant
entitled to continue such occupation of the house as tenant under the
applicant as landlord, could resist the Fiscal and seek hearing from Court to
establish his right in terms of section 52 (2) (b).  
  
This provision incorporates the rule of audi alteram partem being a principle
of natural justice and should be given effect to whenever

**273**

invoked by a party entitled to such hearing, whether he is named as a
respondent or not in the application.  
  
The foregoing analysis shows that the genuine claims of a tenant who is
entitled to continue in occupation in that capacity under the applicant as
landlord, are well safeguarded by the provisions of sections 48 (1) and 52 (2)
of the Partition Law read with section 14 of the Rent Act.  
  
It would be inconsistent with the scheme of the Partition Act and the
provisions in the Rent Act to bring the claim of a monthly tenant within the
scope of trial in a partition action.  
  
Accordingly, I allow the appeal and set aside the findings of the District
Court in respect of issues Nos. 10, 11, 12 and 16 on the basis that these
issues should not have formed the subject-matter of the trial in the partition
action.  
  
The judgment of the Court of Appeal is also set aside. The 4th defendant-
respondent will pay a sum of Rs. 15,000 as costs to the plaintiff-appellant
and also bear the costs of contest in the District Court.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J. -** I agree.  
  
**YAPA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/43.html_  

