##  Cornel & Company Limited. v. Mitsui and Company Limited and Others - SLR -
57, Vol 1 of 2000 [1999] LKSC 44; (2000) 1 Sri LR 57 (30 September 1999)

**57**  

**CORNEL & COMPANY LIMITED  
v.  
MITSUI AND COMPANY LIMITED AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 36/98  
SC (HC) L/A 21/98  
HC (Civil) No. 1/98 (2)  
24th JUNE, 1999  
  
_Jurisdiction of the High Court in respect of commercial transactions -
Section 2(1) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No.
10 of 1996 read with item (1) of the First Schedule to the Act - Whether
reference to "actions" in item (1) includes not only actions for recovery of a
debt but also actions for annulment or denial of a debt - Sections 7 to 9 of
the Act \- Inconsistency between Sinhala and English texts of item (1) - The
right of a litigant to canvass in appeal an interlocutory order not directly
challenged when made.  
_  
The plaintiff-appellant instituted action in the High Court of the Western
Province as a share-holder of the 5th defendant - respondent company, praying
inter alia, for a declaration that four agreements entered into by the 5th
defendant - respondent with Mitsui Company Ltd., Japan, Taiser Corporation of
Japan and one Amarasekera (the 1st, 2nd and 4th defendants - respondents) for
the payment of certain monies to the 5th defendant - respondent were null and
void, not binding and were unenforceable against the 5th defendant \-
respondent. In filing the said action the plaintiff invoked the jurisdiction
conferred upon the High Court by section 2(l) of the High Court of the
Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 10 of 1996 read with item (1) of the
First Schedule to the Act.  
  
The High Court Judge granted enjoining orders which were also sought by the
plaintiff, but on 31.3.98 refused the plaintiffs application for interim
injections, holding that he had no jurisdiction in respect of the action; but
he did not dismiss the action. Having realised it the judge proceeded ex mero
motu to dismiss the plaint on 27.8.98. The plaintiff

**58**

challenged both orders in two separate proceedings (i) a leave to appeal
application in the Supreme Court (ii) a notice of appeal in the High Court
followed by a petition of appeal to the Supreme Court. Counsel for the 1st and
2nd defendants took a preliminary objection that the plaintiff could not
proceed with both matters but must first opt which one he wished to pursue and
abandon the other.  
  
**Held:**  
  
1\. Taking into consideration the Sinhala text of Item (1) of the First
Schedule to the Act which must prevail over the English text in view of an
inconsistency and the provisions of sections, 7, 8, and 9, a wider
construction should be given to Item (1). Accordingly, it is not limited to
actions for the recovery of a debt exceeding the prescribed amount but
includes an action which "relates to" or "involves" such a debt. Therefore,
the plaintiffs action which is for the annulment or denial of a debt is within
the jurisdiction of the High Court, conferred by Item (1).  
  
Per Fernando, J.  
  
"Even if there had been some ambiguity ................ the wider
interpretation must be preferred"  
  
2\. Sections 7 to 9 indicate that the jurisdiction of the High Court (a) is
not exclusive in some respects, and (b) is wider than section 2(1) and the
First Schedule suggest.  
  
Per Fernando, J.  
  
"Accordingly, section 8 gives the District Court competence to dispose of any
claim in reconvention even though it involves a matter beyond its
jurisdiction."  
  
Per Fernando,. J.  
  
"Where an action, which should have been filed in the High Court, is filed in
the District Court, section 9 compels transfer to the correct court,
.................... But the 1996 Act makes no provision for the converse
case, where an action that should have been filed in the District Court is
filed in the High Court; expressio unius, exclusio alterius, and so the
inference would be that the transfer to the District Court was not
permissible"

**59**

3\. Section 7, considered in the context of section 9 impliedly confers on the
High Court jurisdiction to entertain and determine certain actions which
otherwise would have been within the exclusive jurisdiction of the District
Court subject to the power to deny the successful plaintiff his costs, unless
the court chose to exercise its discretion in his favour.  
  
4\. On the preliminary objection  
  
Per Fernando, J.  
  
"........................... it has long been recognised that it is the clear
right of every litigant to invite the Appeal Court to consider on a final
appeal any interlocutory decree (or order) even if he does not directly
challenge it at the time when it was made"  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
1\. Shannon Realties Ltd. v. Ville de St. Michel (1924) AC 185, 192-3  
  
2\. Nagan v. Rodrigo (1914) 7 NLR 348  
  
3\. Werthelis v. Daniel Appuhamy (1909) 12 NLR 196  
  
4\. James v. Meddurna Kumarihamy (1957) 58 NLR 560  
  
5\. Ponnambalarn v. Pararnanayagarn (1905) 9 NLR 282  
  
6\. Don Siman v. Johanis (1898) 4 NLR 343  
  
7\. Abubakker v. (small Lebbe (1908) 11 NLR 309, 313  
  
8\. Perera v. Battaglia (1956) 58 NLR 447, 449  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgement of the High Court of the Western Province.  
  
_S. Sivarasa, PC, with S. L. Gunasekera, S. Mahenthiran and N. R. Sivendran_
for the plaintiff-appellant.  
  
_M. A. Sumanthiran_ for the 1st and 2nd defendants-respondents.  
  
_Nihal Jayawardena, SSC, with Milinda Gunethilaka_ for the 3rd defendant-
respondent.  
  
_I. S. de Silva, PC with N. Bartholomeusz_ for the 4th to 9th defendants-
respondents.  
  
_Harsha Cabraal with M. A. Sumanthiran_ for the 10th and 11th defendants-
respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult_

**60**

December 16. 1999  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
The Plaintiff-Appellant in SC Appeal 36/98 (which is also the Plaintiff-
Petitioner in SC (HC) Leave to Appeal Application 21/98), instituted action,
on 27.3.98, in the High Court of the Western Province against the ten
Defendants-Respondents. I will refer to them as "the Plaintiff" and "the
Defendants", respectively. The principal question I have to decide is whether
or not the High Court had jurisdiction in respect of that action, under and by
virtue of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 10 of
1996 (which I will refer to as "the 1996 Act") - particularly, by virtue of
section 2(l) read with item (1) of the First Schedule thereto.  
  
Although this is one of a series of actions, some of which have resulted in
proceedings in the Court of Appeal and in this Court, the facts relevant for.
the purpose of deciding that question of jurisdiction are few. The Plaintiff
filed this action as a shareholder of the 5th Defendant-Company. On behalf of
the Plaintiff, Mr. Sivarasa, PC, relied on just one aspect of the Plaintiffs
claim, and the pleadings relevant to that aspect may be summarized as follows.  
  
The 5th Defendant-Company had entered into four Agreements (P36 to P39) with
Mitsui & Company Ltd of Japan, Taisei Corporation of Japan, and one Nihal
Srinath Ameresekera (the 1st, 2nd and 4th Defendants). While submitting that
the four Agreements were inter-related and interconnected, Mr. Sivarasa relied
mainly on the first of those Agreements (P36). According to clause 4 of that
Agreement the rescheduled balance due to the 1st and 2nd Defendants (from the
5th Defendant) was Japanese Yen 7.834 billion, and was to be repaid in 15
equal annual instalments of Japanese Yen 522 million (together with interest
thereon), commencing 1.7.96; details were set out in Annexure "A". The next
instalment falls due on 1.7.2000.

**61**

Clause 5(b). of P36 stipulated that for the purpose of making such payments to
the 1st and 2nd Defendants, the 5th Defendant shall open a separate bank
account in the name of the Secretary to the Treasury, and shall deposit in
that account in Japanese Yen, from time to time, such sums as will enable it
to meet its obligations.  
  
The reliefs which the Plaintiff prayed for included declarations that the four
Agreements were null and void, we e not binding, and were of no force or avail
in law, and that they were not binding and were unenforceable against the 5th
Defendant; an order that the 5th Defendant was not obliged to comply with
them; permanent injunctions restraining the Government of Sri Lanka, its
agents the Secretary to the Treasury and its nominee directors on the board of
the 5th Defendant), and the 5th Defendant (and its directors etc), from
implementing and/or giving effect to the terms and provisions of those
Agreements; and interim injunctions and enjoining orders to the like effect.  
  
The learned High Court Judge granted enjoining orders, ex parte, on 31.8.98,
and issued notice of interim injunction. . After inquiry, on 13.8.98, he
refused the Plaintiff's application for interim injunctions, holding that he
had no jurisdiction in respect of the action; but he did not dismiss the
action on 27.8.98, he noted that he had already determined that he had no
jurisdiction, but that he had not then dismissed the action - for the reason
that the plaint had already been accepted and any subsequent order made in
respect of such a plaint was subject to appeal. Observing that during the
preceding two weeks no appeals had been filed against the order made on
13.8.98, and that it was necessary to prevent an abuse of the process of the
Court, he proceeded, ex mero motu, to "dismiss the plaint acting under section
839" of the Civil Procedure Code.  
  
The Plaintiff challenged both orders in two separate proceedings : on 31.8.98
he filed SC (HC) Leave to Appeal application No. 21/98 in this Court.

**62**

When SC (HC) LA application No 21/98 was supported in this Court, on 10.9.98,
Counsel for the Defendants took a preliminary objection that this Court had no
jurisdiction to grant leave to appeal. Mr. Sivarasa stated that the petition
of appeal, in respect of the connected appeal, would be filed within a week.
The Court directed that the application for leave to appeal b taken up
together with the appeal.  
  
The Plaintiff then filed a petition of appeal, on or about 15.9.98, and that
appeal was numbered as SC Appeal No. 36/98.  
  
When these two matters were taken up in this Court on 24.6.98, Mr.
Sumanthiran, on behalf of the 1st and 2nd Defendants, took a preliminary
objection, that the Plaintiff could not proceed with both matters but must
first opt which one he wished to pursue, and abandon the other.  
  
If a party aggrieved by an order is uncertain whether in law it is a final
order or not, obviously he would not know whether the correct remedy is an
appeal or an application for leave to appeal. It seemed to us, at first sight,
that it is not unreasonable for a party in that situation to invoke both
remedies, so that he might avoid procedural obstacles, and ensure that his
substantive grievance would be determined on the merits. However, as Counsel
desired to press that point, we directed that written submissions be filed on
that point, and confined the oral hearing to the substantive issue of
jurisdiction.  
  
Exhaustive written submissions were filed by all the parties the last being on
30.9.99 and that has contributed to the delay in preparing this judgment.  
  
**JURISDICTION OF THE HIGH COURT  
**  
Section 19 of the Judicature Act, No 2 of 1978, as amended, provides that:

**63**

"Every District Court shall be a court of record and shall within its district
have unlimited original jurisdiction in all civil, revenue, trust,
matrimonial, insolvency and testamentary matters save and except such of the
aforesaid matters as are by or under this Act or by virtue of the provisions
of any other enactment exclusively assigned by way of original jurisdiction to
any other court or vested in any other authority . . ." [emphasis added
throughout]  
  
That Act conferred no civil jurisdiction on the High Court (other than
Admiralty jurisdiction).  
  
Section 2(1) of **the 1995 Act** provides:  
  
"Every High Court ... shall, with effect from such date as the Minister may
... appoint, have exclusive jurisdiction and shall have cognizance of and full
power to hear and determine, in the manner provided for by written law, all
actions, applications and proceedings specified in the First Schedule to this
Act, if the party or parties defendant to such action resides or reside, or
... within the Province for which such High Court is established".  
  
The dispute in this case is mainly about the meaning of **item** **(1)** of
the First Schedule ("item (1)")  
  
"(1) All actions where the cause of action has arisen out of commercial
transactions (including causes of action relating to banking, the export or
import of merchandise, services, affreightment, - insurance, mercantile
agency, mercantile usage, or the construction of any mercantile document) is
(sic] which the debt, damage or demand is for a sum exceeding on [sic] million
rupees or such other amount as may be fixed by the Minister from time to time,
by Notification published in the Gazette, other than actions instituted under
the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act, No. 2 of 1990."

**64**

Reference to the Bill confirms that "is" and "on" are misprints for "in" and
"one", respectively.  
  
We were informed that before this action was instituted the Minister had fixed
"three million rupees" in place of "one million rupees".  
In the course of the hearing reference was made to the original Sinhala text
of the 1996 Act, as printed. As there appeared to be an ambiguity in the
Sinhala text of item (1), as well as inconsistencies between the Sinhala and
English texts, we obtained from the Secretary-General of Parliament
photocopies of the original Bill, as enacted by Parliament and certified by
the Speaker.  
  
There is no inconsistency - relevant to the question now before us - between
the Sinhala and English texts in regard to section 2(1), and I do not need to
refer to the Sinhala text of that section. The Sinhala text of item (1), which
gives rise to a difficult question of interpretation, is as follows

  
  
**Item (1) of First ScheduIe**  
  
Mr. Sivarasa conceded that the Plaintiff' s claim was not for the recovery of
a sum (exceeding three million rupees) based on a debt, damage, or demand.
However, he contended that the phrase "actions ... in which the debt, damage
or demand is for a sum exceeding [three] million rupees" includes not only
actions for the recovery of a debt, but also actions for the annulment or
denial of a debt exceeding three million rupees - and that, he argued, was the
substance of the Plaintiffs ' claim.

**65**

All four Counsel appearing for the Defendants submitted, however, that this
phrase only covers actions in which recovery is sought of a sum of money,
exceeding three million rupees, by way of debt, damage, or demand.  
  
Mr. I. S. de Silva, PC, submitted further that the intention of Parliament in
enacting the 1996 Act was to provide for the speedy disposal of cases of a
commercial nature, avoiding the long delays in litigation in the District
Court:  
  
According to the English text of the 1996 Act, item (1) gives the High Court
jurisdiction in respect of an action only if two conditions are satisfied: (a)
that the action is one "in which the debt, damage or demand is for a sum
exceeding [three] million rupees", and (b) that the cause of action had arisen
from a commercial transaction.  
  
(Although the question arose during the oral hearing whether according to the
Sinhala text the High Court has jurisdiction even if only one of those
conditions was satisfied, on further consideration I think that the better
view is that both conditions must be fulfilled.)  
  
If the English text prevails, there is much to be said for the Defendants'
contention that in order to satisfy the first condition an action must be for
the recovery of a sum (exceeding three million rupees) in respect of or
arising from a debt, damage or demand. Counsel also cited several decisions
interpreting the very similar language used in the Courts Ordinance (1956
Revision) when conferring jurisdiction on the Court of Requests  
  
"75\. Every Court of-Requests shall be a court of record and shall have
original jurisdiction, and shall have cognizance of and full power to hear and
determine all actions in which the debt, damage, or demand shall not exceed
three hundred rupees, and in which the party or parties defendant shall be
resident within the jurisdiction of such court, or in which the cause of
action shall have arisen within such jurisdiction, . . ."

**66**

The English text of item (1) has, besides the phrase "debt, damage or demand",
the additional words "is for a sum . That text does not easily lend itself to
an interpretation which includes an action to annul or to deny, or which
"relates to", a debt, damage or demand, exceeding three million rupees. Such
an action can hardly be described as "an action ... in which the debt [etc] is
for a sum exceeding three million rupees", and therefore would not satisfy the
first condition. Further, that condition is not satisfied by the mere fact
that the value of the commercial transaction, from which the cause of action
or the debt arises, exceeds three million rupees.  
  
However, the Sinhala text - which must prevail in the event of inconsistency -
is significantly different. In describing the required link between an action
and the relevant debt, damage or demand, the word used is Counsel for the
Defendants did not come to grips with this aspect in their submissions, oral
or written.  
  
In the context, that word only requires that the action "relates to", or is
"connected with", or "involves", a debt, damage or demand (exceeding the
prescribed amount), and that is consistent with its dictionary meanings. It is
unnecessary for me to try to determine the exact English equivalent of that
word. For the purpose of the question of interpretation that arises in this
case, it is enough to note that Parliament has used that word repeatedly in
the Sinhala text of the 1996 Act in a wider sense. In particular, it has used
that word twice in section B (quoted later in this judgment) - in the wider
sense - and I find that the English text of that section translates it as
"involves" and "relates to". There is no reason to think that in item (1)
Parliament used the same word in any different or narrower sense.  
  
Accordingly, the first condition is much wider than the English text suggests,
and is satisfied even if the action only "relates to" or "involves" a debt,
damage or demand in a sum which exceeds three million rupees (although it does
not seek

**67**

to recover such a sum). Turning to the plaint, I find that the Plaintiff seeks
declarations that certain agreements are null and void, etc: so the action
"relates to", or "involves", those agreements. Those agreements are alleged to
create or to give rise to a debt which exceeds three million rupees: therefore
the action also "relates to", or "involves", a debt (and not just a
transaction) exceeding in value the prescribed amount. I hold, therefore, that
the Plaintiffs action is within the jurisdiction of the High Court, conferred
by item (1).  
  
This interpretation must be preferred for two other reasons. Not only does it
tend to avoid anomalies, and to reduce the inconvenience, expense and delays
of litigation, but other provisions of the 1996 Act converge to compel a wider
rather than a narrower interpretation of item (1).  
  
**Consequences of the Defendants' interpretation**  
  
An illustration is useful. A "creditor" may claim that he is entitled to a sum
exceeding three million rupees by virtue of a commercial transaction, which is
founded on an agreement (or instrument). The "debtor" may allege that the
agreement is null and void (or should be annulled, or declared unenforceable)
- on the ground of fraud, forgery, duress, **ultra vires** , or otherwise.
That dispute may give rise to litigation.  
  
The "creditor" may be the first to institute action, to recover the sum
claimed. If he files that action in the High Court (because it has "exclusive
jurisdiction"), the "debtor" would resist the claim. Apart from other
defences, he would wish to make a claim in reconvention to have the agreement
declared void (etc). But if the Defendants' interpretation is right, such a
claim in reconvention would be outside the jurisdiction of the High Court, and
can only be made in the District Court. Thus one claim will be dealt with by
the High Court (with a single appeal to the Supreme Court), while the other,
arising out of the same transaction, will be determined by the District Court
(with appeals first to the Court of Appeal,

**68**

and thereafter to this Court). There will then be not only a multiplicity of
proceedings in the original courts, but also in appeal. Further, unacceptable
conflicts of jurisdiction may result: the District Court may decide that the
"agreement" is null and void, but the High Court may give judgment for the
"creditor" without considering the "debtor's" position that the "agreement" is
a nullity on the ground that it has no jurisdiction over that claim. Although
the High Court is higher in the hierarchy of courts, yet on principle, the
decree of the District Court that the "agreement" is null and void must
prevail: because a Court should not permit the enforcement of an agreement
which is a nullity. In any event, can the decree of the High Court be
executed? Obviously, justice and convenience, and the elimination of
anomalies, delay and expense, demand that both claims should be considered -
as far as possible - by the same Court and in the same proceedings. Thus
accepting the Defendants' interpretation would defeat the objectives of
"speedy disposal of cases of a commercial nature, avoiding the long delays in
litigation in the District Court", while the Plaintiff's interpretation would
not.  
  
On the other hand, the "debtor" may file action first, in the hope of having
the agreement speedily declared void. On the Defendants' interpretation, that
action can only be instituted in the District Court. The "creditor" would be
free to make his claim in the High Court. Indeed - if only item (1) is
considered - the jurisdiction of the High Court would be exclusive, and the
"creditor" would have no choice but to make that claim in the High Court:
giving rise to two distinct and parallel proceedings, and consequent
inconvenience, delay and expense.  
  
As observed in Shannon Realties Ltd. v. Ville de St. Michel(1),  
  
"Where alternative constructions are equally open, that alternative is to be
chosen which will be consistent with the smooth working of the system which
the statute

**69**

purports to be regulating; and that alternative is to be rejected which will
introduce uncertainty, friction or confusion into the working of the system."  
  
I therefore hold that even if there had been some ambiguity as to the meaning
of  the wider interpretation must be preferred.  
  
**Sections 7 to 9  
**  
Furthermore, in their written submissions Counsel have referred to other
sections of the 1996 Act. These provisions indicate that the jurisdiction of
the High Court (a) is not exclusive in some respects, and (b) is wider than
section 2(1) and the First Schedule suggest.  
  
I will deal first with section 8:  
  
"8\. Where in any proceeding before any District Court any defence or claim in
reconvention of the defendant involves a matter beyond the jurisdiction of the
Court, such defence or claim in reconvention shall not affect the competence
or duty of the Court to dispose of the matter in controversy in so far as it
relates to the demand of the plaintiff and the defence thereto, and the claim
in reconvention.  
  
Provided that. . . ."  
  
Accordingly, section 8 gives the District Court competence to dispose of any
claim in reconvention even though it involves a matter beyond its
jurisdiction.  
  
Thus in the illustration I have taken, if the "creditor" institutes action in
the "higher" Court, that Court lacks jurisdiction to entertain the "debtor's"
claim. in reconvention; but if the "debtor" institutes action in the "lower"
Court, that Court would nevertheless have jurisdiction over the "creditor's"
claim in reconvention (despite section 2(1) having

**70**

conferred "exclusive jurisdiction" on the High Court). The wider
interpretation of item (1), which commends itself to me, has the advantage of
reducing that anomaly.  
  
Section 8 is virtually a re-enactment of section 79 of the Courts Ordinance
(1956 Revision)  
  
"79\. Where in any proceeding before any Court of Requests any defence or
claim in reconvention of the defendant involves matter beyond the jurisdiction
of the court, such defence or claim in reconvention shall not affect the
competence or duty of the court to dispose of the matter in controversy so far
as relates to the demand of the plaintiff and the defence thereto, but no
relief exceeding that which the court has jurisdiction to administer shall be
given to the defendant upon any such claim in reconvention  
  
Provided always that. . . ."  
  
It appears, at first sight, that section 79 created a similar anomaly, in that
it did not expressly provide that the District Court could likewise determine
a claim in reconvention which was within the jurisdiction of the Court of
Requests. But in fact there was no anomaly. Section 62 of the Courts Ordinance
gave the District Court general civil jurisdiction, and section 75 gave the
Court of Requests jurisdiction (but not exclusive jurisdiction) over certain
small claims. Hence an express grant, to the District Court, of jurisdiction
in respect of claims in reconvention was superfluous.  
  
What is more, the jurisdiction given to the Court of Requests was restricted:
its power to give relief was subject to the same limit as its jurisdiction.  
  
Under the Courts Ordinance there was no anomaly of the "lower" Court being-
able to determine a claim in reconvention which was beyond its jurisdiction,
but the "higher" Court being unable to entertain a claim which was beneath its
jurisdiction.

**71**

The Courts Ordinance, the Judicature Act and the 1996 Act are statutes in pari
materia. In enacting section 8, Parliament departed from the scheme of section
79 of the Courts Ordinance, and gave the District Court jurisdiction to deal
with all claims in reconvention, whether or not they arose from commercial
transactions, and regardless of their value; and omitted - and it must be
presumed, deliberately \- the limitation as to value imposed by section 79.
While giving the "lower" Court jurisdiction over a claim which would otherwise
be within the exclusive jurisdiction of the "higher" Court, Parliament
refrained from making a similar provision giving the "higher" Court a similar
jurisdiction over a claim which was within the jurisdiction of the "lower"
Court.  
  
This Court cannot, under the guise of interpretation, cure that anomaly by
holding that the High Court has jurisdiction over all such claims. However,
adopting the wider, rather than the narrower, interpretation of item (1), has
the virtue of reducing the extent of that anomaly.  
  
There is another implication of section 8. Since section 8 expressly confers
on the District Court a jurisdiction in derogation of the exclusive
jurisdiction which section 2(1) (read with item (1)) purports to confer on the
High Court, it follows that the ambit of the jurisdiction of the High Court
cannot be determined solely by reference to section 2(1) - it is subject to
express and implied provisions elsewhere in the 1996 Act.  
  
I turn now to section 7, which in my view enlarges, by necessary implication,
the jurisdiction conferred by section 2(1). Section 7 provides:  
  
objection to jurisdiction  
  
 7\. If any action or proceeding is commenced in objection any High Court
established by Article 154P of to the Constitution for any debt, demand or
damage which might have been recovered in a District Court, the plaintiff in
such action or

**72**

proceeding shall not be entitled to any costs whatever but it shall be
competent for the judge to make such order as to costs as justice may require.  
  
(The marginal note is clearly misleading. The section does not deal with
objection to jurisdiction, but with the deprivation of costs. I will come back
to this later. The wider term  used in the Sinhala text has been. translated
as "for" and "as to" in the English text).  
  
Let me consider those provisions, taking another illustration. A claim of,
say, one million rupees (arising from a commercial transaction) does not come
within the scope of item (1). If the creditor nevertheless institutes action
in the High Court, does section 7 impliedly grant that Court jurisdiction to
entertain and decide that action?  
  
Undoubtedly, section 7 does not expressly empower or require the High Court
either to hear such an action or to refuse to entertain it.  
  
One possible interpretation is that section 7 impliedly requires the High
Court to refuse to hear such an action. If that is correct, then the Court
must dismiss the action (subject to section 47 of the Civil Procedure Code).
The plaintiff would not be entitled to costs, but the Court would have a
discretion to award costs (and that can only be to the defendant). But even if
section 7 had been omitted; that would have been the legal position. This
interpretation makes section 7 superfluous.  
  
The other interpretation is that it is implicit in section 7 that the High
Court can entertain and determine the action, even though it is outside the
scope of item (1), and that its effect is only to penalize the successful
plaintiff for having instituted proceedings in the "higher" Court, by denying
his entitlement to costs, unless the Court chose to exercise its discretion in
his

**73**

favour. This interpretation gives some meaning to section 7, and is therefore
preferable.  
  
Further, section 7 must be considered in the context of section 9, which
provides  
  
"9\. Where there is evidence that the value [sic] of any action filed in any
District Court is one that should have been filed in a High Court established
by Article 154P of the Constitution exercising jurisdiction under section 2,
the Judge shall record such fact and make order accordingly and thereupon the
action shall stand removed to the appropriate Court."  
  
(The first clause - ". . . evidence that the value of any action . . : is one
that should have been filed . . ." \- is clearly ungrammatical. What seems to
have been intended is that if by reason of its value, an action is one which
should have been instituted in any High Court, it shall stand removed to the
appropriate Court. The Sinhala text adds to the confusion by omitting any word
equivalent to "appropriate").  
  
Where an action, which should have been filed in the High Court, is filed in
the District Court, section 9 compels transfer to the correct Court; it does
not require or permit dismissal of the action on that ground. But the 1996 Act
makes no provision for the converse case, where an action that should have
been filed in the District Court is filed in the High Court: expressio unius,
exclusio alterius, and so the inference would be that transfer to the District
Court was not permissible. That seems even to exclude the principle recognised
in section 47 of the Civil Procedure Code:  
  
"In every case where an action has been instituted in a court not having
jurisdiction by reason of the amount or value, involved, or by reason of the
conditions made necessary to the institution of an action in any particular
court by section 9 not being present, the plaint shall be returned to be
presented to the proper court."

**74**

Section 47 has been applied even at the stage of appeal: Nagan v Rodrigo(2),
(1914) 7 NLR 348; Werthelis v Daniel Appuhamy(3), (1909) 12 NLR 196.  
  
I have again to choose between two interpretations: first, that although an
action wrongly instituted in the "lower" Court shall stand removed to the
"higher" Court, an action wrongly instituted in the "higher" Court, an action
wrongly instituted in the "higher" Court must be dismissed; second, that
Parliament proceeded on the basis that section 7, by necessary implication,
gave the "higher" Court jurisdiction over such an action, and therefore that a
provision for transfer was unnecessary.  
  
I think this Court must lean in favour of the latter view, because Parliament
must be assumed to have intended that Courts should hear and decide on their
merits, rather than dismiss them on grounds unrelated to the merits.  
  
I therefore hold that section 7 impliedly confers on the High Court
jurisdiction to entertain and determine certain actions which otherwise would
have been within the exclusive jurisdiction of the District Court.  
  
Reference to the legislative history of section 7 confirms that view. Section
7 is virtually a re-enactment of section 72 of the Courts Ordinance (1956
Revision), except for the portion underlined:  
  
_Penalty for proceeding in district court where case congnizable by court of
requests  
_  
72\. If any action or suit shall be commenced penalty for in any District
Court for any debt or demand proceeding which might have been recovered in
some in District Court of Requests, the plaintiff or plaintiffs court where in
any such action or suit shall not by reason case of any judgement for him or
them, or other cognizable wise, have or be entitled to any costs what by court
ever, but it shall be competent for the judge of Requests to make such order
as to costs as justice may require.

**75**

This section has been interpreted (e.g. James v Medduma Kumarihamy(4),
Ponnambalam v Paramanayagam(5), Don Siman v Johanis(6) as recognising the
jurisdiction of the District Court to entertain an action which was within the
jurisdiction of the Court of Requests, subject to the power of the Court to
deprive a successful plaintiff of the whole or part of his costs - as a
penalty for having instituted action in the "higher" Court. That assumption
was unquestionably justified under the Courts Ordinance, because (as I have
already noted) the District Court did have concurrent jurisdiction. The 1996
Act has enacted a similar provision, on a similar assumption that the High
Court has jurisdiction.  
  
Section 9 also throws light on the scope of item (1). It shows that the factor
which determines whether an action should have been instituted in the High
Court is not the "debt, damage or demand" for the recovery of which the action
is brought, but "the value" of the action - which is plainly consistent with
the wider interpretation of item (1).  
  
I must add that needless confusion has been caused by the marginal note to
section 7 - "objection to jurisdiction". Section 7 does not provide for any
such "objection". Section 72 of the Courts Ordinance contained the appropriate
marginal note: "penalty for proceeding in District Court when case cognizable
by Court of Requests". "Objection to jurisdiction" was the marginal note to
section 71, which actually dealt with such objections and their waiver. The
1996 Act has inadvertently combined the marginal note to section 71 with the
substance of section 72.  
  
I hold that section 7 only imposes a penalty for instituting an action in the
High Court, and impliedly recognizes that the High Court nevertheless has
jurisdiction over such an action.  
  
For all these reasons I hold that the High Court did have jurisdiction over
the Plaintiffs action, and should not have dismissed it.

**76**

**PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS  
**  
The Defendants' submissions are as follows. Since the Plaintiff s action had
been dismissed on 27.8.98, thereby fully disposing of the Plaintiffs claims,
it was only a regular appeal that could have been filed; leave to appeal was
not available. The notice of appeal was bad in law as it also sought to
challenge the first order made on 13.8.98. The petition of appeal "contains
the number SC Appeal (HC) 21/98", which is the number of the leave to appeal
application, and was therefore defective and should be rejected.  
  
It is unnecessary to decide whether the first order was a final order or not.
If it was, there can be no objection to a notice of appeal being lodged in
respect thereof. If it was not, nevertheless it has long been recognised that
it is "the clear right of every litigant to invite the Appeal Court to
consider on a final appeal any interlocutory decree for order] even if he did
not directly challenge it at the time when it was made": Abubakker v Ismail
Lebbe(7), cited with approval in Perera v Battaglia(8).  
  
In any event, however defective the notice of appeal might have been in
relation to the first order, it was valid in regard to the second.  
As for the error in regard to the number of the appeal, that is a mere
misdescription.  
  
The preliminary objection must therefore fail in regard to the appeal, and it
is unnecessary to consider either the preliminary objection to the application
for leave to appeal or that application itself - which is, pro forma,
dismissed.  
  
**ORDER  
**  
I hold that the High Court had jurisdiction over the Plaintiff's action. I
allow the Plaintiffs appeal, and set aside the orders dated 13.8.98 and
27.8.98 in relation to the question

**78**

 of jurisdiction. The Defendants will file answer on or before 21.1.2000, and
the High Court will make every endeavour to conclude the hearing of the action
before 1.6.2000. Since the next instalment falls due on 1.7.2000, it is
unnecessary to make any order for interim relief at this stage.  
  
Having regard to all the circumstances, I make no order in regard to costs.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/44.html_  

