##  Miriam Lawrence v. Arnolda - SLR - 232, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC 44;
(1981) 1 Sri LR 232 (6 February 1981)

**232**

**MIRIAM LAWRENCE  
v.  
 ARNOLDA**

**SUPREME COURT  
SAMARAWICKREMA J, ISMAIL J. AND WANASUNDERA J.  
S. C. APPEAL 39/80  
C. A. APPLICATION NO. 45/80  
D. C. COLOMBO NO. 563 RE  
OCTOBER 30 & 31.1980.  
**  
_LANDLORD AND TENANT -Action for ejectment under S. 22(1A) of Rent Act No.7 of
1972 - S. 22(1)(bb) of Rent ACT - Essentiality of pleading that landlord is a
owner of a single house.  
_  
Landlord and Tenant- Action for ejectment under S. 22(1 A) of Rent Act No. 7
of 1972\. S. 22(1)(bb) of Rent Act - Essentiality of pleading that landlord is
a owner of a single house.  
  
(1) the landlord. should be the owner of only. a single. house  
  
(2) the landlord should have caused notice of the action or proceeding to be
served on the Commissioner of National Housing.  
  
An action under S. 22(1) (bb) can only be maintained if the premises had been
let to the tenant prior to the coming into operation of the Rent Act i.e.
1.3.1972 and it was the duty of the trial judge to determine this:. It was
also necessary for the Court to have considered whether the defendant became a
statutory tenant after the death of his father the original tenant or whether
he was a tenant on a fresh tenancy.. Issues on these two matters should be
framed by the Court as the determination of the case depended on them..  
  
Case referred to:  
  
_(1) Daryanani v The Eastern Silk Emporium 64 N.L.R 529.  
_  
**Appeal** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_A. K. Premadasa with T. B. Dillimuni and G. H. A. Suraweera for the plaintiff
appellant.  
_  
_Walter Jayawardene Q.C. with P. Somatilakan and M. Mahendran for the
Defendant Respondent._

_Cur.adv. vult_

**233**

February 6, 1981.  
  
**ISMAIL, J.**  
  
The Plaintiff is the landlord of premises No. 129, Pickering Road, Colombo 13
and the defendant is in occupation of the premises as the tenant of the
plaintiff on a monthly rental of Rs. 100/-. No question of arrears of rent
arises for determination in this case. The plaintiff pleads that on 27.2.78
she had through her Attorney-at-law, given. notice to the defendant to quit
and deliver peaceful vacant possession of the premises in question on 31.8.78
and the defendant continues to be in unlawful occupation of these premises.
The plaintiff bases this action on the provisions of Section 22(1) (bb) of
Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 as amended by  Law No. 10 Of 1977 and states that the
premises in suit are reasonably required for her use and occupation as a
residence for herself and members of her family.  
  
The defendant in his answer while denying the several averments in the plaint
has taken up the position that the defendant's father became the tenant of the
premises in suit in 1914 and continued to be the tenant of the premises until
his death on 31st August 1972 and that the defendant became the tenant from
14th September 1972 and therefore Law No. 10 of 1977 would have no application
in view of the facts of this case. The defendant further pleaded that the
plaintiff and her husband have been provided with residential quarters by the
Government and therefore there was no present need for the plaintiff to come
into occupation of the premises in suit and, takes up the position that the
plaint does not disclose a valid cause of action for ejectment of the
defendant.  
  
At the outset of the trial, Counsel appearing for the defendant had taken up
the position that this plaint could not be entertained because the plaintiff
had not specifically pleaded that he is the owner of a single house, since it
was the specific requirement of the law under Law No. 10 of 1977. He referred
to section 22(1A) and stated that unless there was this specific pleading it
would be a positive bar to the plaintiff to invoke the provisions of section
22 of Law No. 10 of 1977. He had addressed the Court at length - vide pages
175 to 177 and the Court in its order had taken up the posilaw that the
requirement under the Rent (Amendment) Law No. 10 of 1977 that the plaintiff
is not the owner of more than one house is a matter of evidence and is not a
matter which need have been pleaded. Section 22(1A) of Rent (Amendment) Law
No. 10 of 1977 reads:

**234**

"(1A) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the Landlord of any
premises referred to in paragraph (bb) of that sub-section shall not be
entitled to institute any action or proceedings for the ejectment of the
tenant of such premises on the ground that such premises are required for
occupation as a residence for himself or any member of his family, if such
landlord is the owner of more than one residential premises, and unless such
landlord has caused notice of such action or proceedings to be served on the
Commissioner of National Housing."  
  
It will be noted that under sub-section (1A) there had to be two essential
pre-requisites before institution of any action or proceedings for ejectment
of a tenant. There are, firstly, that` the said landlord will not be entitled
to institute any action or proceedings for ejectment of a tenant if he is the
owner of more that one residential premises and secondly, the said landlord
had caused notice of such action or proceedings to be served on the
Commissioner of National Housing. The plaintiff had complied with the latter
of these requisites for he states in paragraph (7) of the plaint that he has
sent a copy of the notice to quit to the Commissioner of National Housing. But
there is no averment at all in the plaint that he is not the owner of more
than one residential premises or that he is the owner of only one residential
premises.  
  
It will be seen from the proceedings that the plaintiff's husband who gave
evidence on behalf of the plaintiff had been cross-examined at great length
for several days and in the course of this cross-examination he had been
repeatedly examined and his attention had been focussed to the question
whether the plaintiff was the owner of a single residential house or whether
she owns more than one residential house. When one reads the entirety of the
plaintiff's evidence an analysis of the evidence indicates that he is unable
to .state with authority that the plaintiff is not the owner of more than one
residential premises. It appears to me that this question of owning only one
residential premises is fundamental to the invoking of the provisions of Law
No. 10 of 1977 and is a matter that should have been pleaded in the plaint in
order to enable the plaintiff to invoke.-the provisions of this Act. Though
the attention of the Trial Judge had been drawn to this at the outset of the
trial, the learned Trial Judge had not chosen either to reject the plaint or
return the plaint for amendment but had contended himself with the bare
assertion that this was only a matter of evidence:  
  
To invoke the provisions of Law No. 10 of 1977, it is an essential requisite
that the person should be possessed of only one

**235**

 residential premises; and it appears to me that if this is clearly pleaded
only, would the Court have jurisdiction to entertain and proceed with the case
instituted under the provisions of this Law. Therefore it appears to me that
objection cannot be dismissed by purely contending that it is only a matter of
evidence when ex facie it is a fundamental requirement under the law.  
  
Since a large volume of evidence had been admitted on this aspect of the
matter and parties had placed in the forefront of this case the importance of
a decision on this point, namely whether the plaintiff is the owner of only
one residential premises, I am of the view that it was necessary, even if the
parties failed to do so, for Court to have in the course of the proceedings to
have raised issues to bring into focus the existence or non-existence of the
requirements necessary for the maintenance of this action in terms of Section
22(0). There could be no doubt that the question whether the plaintiff was the
owner of only one residential premises has been in the forefront of this case
right throughout the proceedings. Attention of the plaintiff's husband was
also drawn to the other question namely, as to when the plaintiff became the
landlord of the premises, in suit. Issue No. 7 reads :  
  
"Did the defendant become the tenant of the plaintiff as from 1. 9. 72?"  
  
Issue No. 10 has been framed:  
  
"If any one or more of the issues are answered in favour of the defendant,
could the plaintiff. have maintained this action ?"  
  
The learned District Judge had answered issue (7) in the affirmative, that is,
in favour of the defendant but in answering issue (10) he had stated "does not
arise". Section 22(1) (bb) of Act No. 7 of 1972 clearly indicates that an
action under this law can only be maintained if the premises had been let to
the tenant prior to the date of commencement of the Act. The Act had come into
operation on 1\. 3. 1972. Therefore, it was the duty of the Trial Judge to
have determined whether the premises had been let prior to 1. 3. 72 or
subsequent to that date. If the premises had been let after that date clearly
the provisions of the Act would not apply.  
  
It is also in evidence that the defendant's father was the original tenant of
this premises since 1914 and the defendant had become the tenant of the
premises only after the father's death in August 1972. Therefore, it was
necessary for Court to have considered

**236**

whether the defendant became a statutory tenant after the death of his father
or whether there was a fresh contract of tenancy between the plaintiff and the
defendant. No issues have been framed to this effect and therefore there is no
determination as to whether the defendant was a statutory tenant succeeding to
his father's tenancy of the premises in suit on the death of the father under
the provisions of the Rent Restriction Ordinance or whether he became the
tenant on afresh contract of tenancy.  
  
Section 93 of the Civil Procedure Code states that a Court shall have full
power of amending. at its discretion and upon such terms as to costs etc. all
pleadings and processes in an action by way of addition, alteration or
omission. The limitation with regard to the scope of the amendment is
contained in the proviso to Section 45 of the Civil Procedure Code.  
  
In the case reported in 64 N.L.R 529 it was held that in exercising the
discretion vested in Court by Section 93 of the Civil Procedure Code regarding
amendment of a plaint, two main rules emerged from decided cases, (1)
amendment should be allowed if it is necessary for the purpose of raising the
real question between the parties and (2) an amendment which works an
injustice to the other side would not be allowed. In the case reported in AIR
1957 S. C. 357, it was stated that :  
  
"Circumstances are a factor to be taken into account in the exercise of the
discretion as to whether amendment be ordered and does not affect the power of
the Court to order it after what is required in the interests of Justice."  
  
In the case reported in 64 N.L.R para 25 it was stated _obiter:_  
  
"The Civil Procedure Code gives in section 93 ample power to amend pleadings.
Moreover, by virtue of section 146 of the Code, a case must be tried upon the
'issues on which the right decision of the case appears to Court to depend,'
and it is well settled that the framing of such issues is not restricted by
the pleadings."  
  
Under Section 146 of the Civil Procedure Code the ultimate responsibility of
framing issues is .cast upon Court and for that purpose the Court has to
ascertain upon what material proposition of fact or of law the parties are-at
variance and thereupon record issues upon which the right decision of the case
appears to the Court to depend.

**237**

A large volume of evidence had been led in respect of these two matters . and
there could be no doubt that from the evidence that the real issues in this
case which had arisen for determination are in respect of these two legal
positions on which no issue had been framed. I accordingly set aside the
judgment of the Court of Appeal and remit this case for further trial in the
original Court on the following additional issues only in addition to the
issues already framed in this case.  
  
Answers to issues 1 to' 14 already given will stand and will not be affected
by the four additional issues 15 to 18 :  
  
15\. Is the plaintiff the owner of more than one residential premises ?  
  
16\. If this issue is answered in the affirmative, can the plaintiff maintain
this action in terms of paragraph 22(1A) of Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 as amended
by Rent Amendment Law No. 10 of 1977 ?  
  
17\. Did the defendant become the tenant of the Plaintiff as from 1. 9. 72 on
a fresh contract of tenancy ?  
  
18\. If so, can the plaintiff have and maintain this action under the
provisions of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 as amended by Law No. 10 of 1977 ?  
  
Parties would be at liberty to lead further evidence on matters raised on
these issues only. The order for costs made by the District Court and Court of
Appeal are set aside and I make order that all costs in this action be costs
in the cause.  
  
**SAMARAWICKREMA, J. -I** agree  
  
**WANASUNDERA, J. -I** agree.  
  
**_Appeal Allowed and case remitted for trial on additional issues framed by
Court._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/44.html_  

