##  Samadasa v. Wijeratne, Commissioner General of Excise and Others - SLR -
85, Vol 2 of 1999 [1998] LKSC 44; (1999) 2 Sri LR 85 (17 November 1998)

**85**

**SAMADASA  
v.  
WIJERATNE, COMMISSIONER-GENERAL OF  
EXCISE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
GUNAWARDANA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 495/97 WITH  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 172/98  
NOVEMBER 4, 1998.

_Fundamental rights - Refusal of a liquor licence - Abdication of authority by
the licensing authority - Article 12 (1) of the Constitution._

The petitioner's application for a liquor licence was recommended by the Grama
Seva Niladhari, the OIC in charge of the area police station and the excise
authorities. it was objected to by the Divisional Secretary on the ground of a
possible breach of the peace and religious, and moral considerations. However,
on the recommendation of the SLFP organiser for the area, a licence had been
granted to one Ariyasena without weighing such considerations, Besides, four
other liquor stores had been permitted to operate in Matara in dose proximity
to one another.

**Held :**

1\. There was no rational basis for treating the petitioner's application
differently.

2\. The 1st respondent, Commissioner-General of Excise was the person
empowered by law to issue or refuse the licence. He had abdicated his
authority by blindly accepting the recommendation of the Divisional Secretary.

3\. In the circumstances the respondent had violated the petitioner's rights
guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_L C. Seneviratne,_ PC with _Ronald Perera_ for petitioner.

86

_K. Siripavan,_ DSG with _Harsha Fernando,_ SC for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 17, 1998.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.**

These two connected matters were heard together. The petitioner applied to the
Commissioner-General of Excise in January, 1997, for a licence in respect of
the sale of liquor at premises No. 85, Sri Ratnapala Mawatha, Izzadeen Town,
Matara. The application was refused and the petitioner instituted Fundamental
Rights Application No. 55/97 in the Supreme Court praying, inter alia, for a
declaration that there had been a violation of the fundamental rights of the
petitioner under Articles 12 (1), 12 (2) and 14 (1) (c) and (g) of the
Constitution. When the matter was supported before this Court on the 30th
January, 1997, learned counsel for the respondents stated that the licence for
1997 would be issued to the petitioner forthwith on payment of the necessary
charges. The Court made order accordingly.

However, it was found that the premises had in the meantime been occupied by
another tenant to whom a licence had been issued despite the existence of a
valid' contract of tenancy between the petitioner and the landlord of the said
premises. When the petitioner complained about this to the Divisional
Secretary, Matara, the petitioner was advised to find alternate premises to
carry on his retail liquor business. The petitioner found alternate premises
at Jayanthi Buth Kade, Galle Road, Kamburugamuwa and made an application to
the Commissioner General of Excise requesting permission to carry on his
business at the new premises. By his letter dated the 2nd of April, 1977, the
Commissioner-General of Excise directed the Divisional Secretary, Divisional
Secretariat, Weligama, to make her recommendations with regard to the
petitioner's application. On the 4th of April, 1997, the 6th respondent wrote
to the Grama Seva Niladhari and on the 6th of April, 1997, the Grama Seva
Niladhari of Kamburugamuwa recommended the issue of the licence. On the 7th of
April, 1997, the Grama Seva Niladari of Weragampitiya also recommended the
issue

87

of the licence. On the 10th of April, 1997, the officer in charge of the
Matara Police station too recommended the granting of the licence stating that
after due investigation, there was no likelihood in his opinion, of a breach
of the peace as a result of the establishment of the proposed liquor retail
store.

On the 5th of April, 1997, the 7th respondent, one Saman Weeraman, the Sri
Lanka Freedom Party Organiser for Weligama and a Member of the Southern
Provincial Council, wrote to the Headquarters Inspector of Matara stating that
he objected to the licence being granted to the petitioner as he had not
recommended the grant of the licence at the location of the proposed liquor
shop. He stated that the proposed shop was in his electorate. On the 24th of
April, 1997, the Superintendent of Excise, Gaffe and the Assistant
Commissioner-General of Excise (Southern Province) considered the objections
of the 7th respondent, but nevertheless recommended the issue of the licence.
On the 5th of May, 1997, the Assistant Commissioner of Excise also recommended
the issue of the licence.

The Divisional Secretary, notwithstanding these reports, took it upon himself
to advise the Commissioner-General of Excise against the issue of the licence
in her letter 1R5 dated 7th of July, 1997. She pointed out that there had been
public protests against the issue of the licence because the applicant
happened to be "an outsider" and because of the close proximity of the
proposed premises to other premises that had already been licensed. She stated
that there would be a breach of the peace and that religious and moral
consideration stood in the way of the issue of the licence to the petitioner.

The Divisional Secretary's reasons for refusing the licence are untenable. As
we have seen the Police, who might be expected to be in the best position to
assess and comment upon the question of a likely breach of the peace had,
after investigations, ruled out that possibility. Moreover, the question of
religious and moral considerations should have applied equally to Ariyasena
who had already been granted a licence: no explanation is given as to why

88

such considerations did not weigh in the case of the licence granted to
Ariyasena but weighed against the petitioner. The real difference it seems is
to be found in the fact that Ariyasena was a person recommended by the 7th
respondent, Saman Weeraman. Moreover, it has been pointed out in para 38 of
the petition in SC FR 172/98 that four liquor stores have been permitted to
operate in close proximity to each other. Eg In the case of Sunil Wine Stores
and Fredrica Wine Stores at Hakmana Road, Matara and in the case of S. K.
Oriental Wine Stores and City Wine Stores, New Tangalle Road, Matara. There is
no rational basis for treating the application of the petitioner differently.

First respondent, the Commissioner-General of Excise, was the person empowered
by law to issue or refuse the licence. He has in my view abdicated his
authority ' by blindly accepting the recommendation of the Divisional
Secretary, with the result that he has acted in violation of the petitioner's
rights to equal treatment under the law. In the circumstances, the respondent
has violated the petitioner's fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 12 (1)
of the Constitution. I declare that the petitioner is entitled to the issue of
the liquor licence for 1998.

I make order that State shall pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 50,000 as
compensation and Rs. 5,000 as costs.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNAWARDANA, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/44.html_  

