##  Independent Newspapers Limited. v. Commercial and Industrial Workers'
Union - SLR - 197, Vol 3 of 1997 [1997] LKSC 44; (1997) 3 Sri LR 197 (9 July
1997)

197

INDEPENDENT NEWSPAPERS LIMITED

v.

COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL WORKERS' UNION



SUPREME COURT.

DHEERARATNE, J.

WADUGODAPITIYA, J.

GUNAWARDENA, J.

S.C. APPEAL 106/96.

H.C. COLOMBO (A) 795/93 TO 887/93.

L.T. 8/3859/91 ET AL

MAY 30 AND JUNE 19, 1997.



Industrial Dispute - Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special Provisions)
Act No. 45 of 1971 Section 2(1) - Section 31 B(5) of the Industrial Disputes
Act - Section 6B(2) of Termination of Workmen (Special Provisions) Act.



Subsection 2(1) of the Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special
Provisions) Act No. 45 of 1971 enable the employer to apply to the
Commissioner for approval to terminate the services of workmen as was done' in
this case. This application should obviously be made before the termination of
the services of a workman. In the case of a workman, the provision
specifically enabling him to apply to the Commissioner against the termination
was brought in by subsection 613(1) (see Amendment No. 51 of 1988). However,
before the amendment came into force, the Commissioner did entertain
applications made by workmen for relief. In terms of that new subsection, such
applications should be made to the Commissioner within six months of
termination of services.



The effect of the words of subsection (5) of Section 31 B is to affect the
jurisdiction of the labour tribunal where a workman has first resorted to any
other legal remedy. Subsection 6B(2) of the Termination of Employment (Special
Provisions) Act affectively removes that obstacle in so far as a workman had
first resorted to a legal remedy before the Commissioner.



**Case referred to:**

**_ _**

1. _Hendrick Appuhamy v. John Appuhamy_ 69 N.L.R.29

_ _

**APPEAL** to the Supreme Court from the judgment of the High Court of
Colombo.



_S. L. Gunasekera_ with _M. E Wickramasinghe_ for appellant.



S. Sinnathamby with P. H. Thenuwara for respondent.  


Cur. adv. vult.



**198**



July 09, 1997.  


**DHEERARATNE, J.**



# Facts



This is an appeal from an order of the High Court allowing an appeal of the
respondent and directing the Labour Tribunal to inquire into the merits of the
applications made on behalf of the workmen by the respondent. The appellant
employer Company (the appellant), on the 21st December 1990, wrote to the
Commissioner of Labour (the Commissioner) stating that it was unable to
continue its business operations or employ or pay its workmen any further, due
to recurring losses, lack of working capital etc. and requesting the
Commissioner to "be pleased to make such orders as may be necessary under the
Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special Provisions) Act No. 45 of 1971".
That letter also included a specimen of a letter addressed to its workmen and
the list of their names. The respondent Trade Union (the respondent) on behalf
of the workmen wrote to the Commissioner the letter A10/R12 titled "in the
inquiry under Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special Provisions) Act
No. 45 of 1971 ". That letter referred to the fact that the appellant had made
an application to the Commissioner and the respondent requested him to "make
an order on the employer to pay the wages with effect from the date of the
closure until disposal of the matter". This disposal of the "matter" is
obviously a reference to the inquiry initiated by the appellant. In the course
of the inquiry before the Commissioner, a representative of the respondent
orally claimed three years' salary for each workman. After the respondent
wrote letter A10/R12 claiming some interim relief, and after the oral
submission was made by the representative of the respondent at the inquiry
before the Commissioner claiming three years salary for each workman, the
respondent on behalf of the workmen, filed applications in the Labour Tribunal
in terms of subsection 31B(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act.



**Applicability of subsection 31 B (5) of the Industrial Disputes Act.**



It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the workmen were not entitled
to a remedy under subsection 31B (1) of the Industrial



**199**



Disputes Act, inasmuch as they have first resorted to some other legal remedy.
This argument commended itself to the learned President of the labour
tribunal, who dismissed the applications of the workmen on that score.
Subsection 31 B (5) reads as follows:



Where an application under subsection (1) is entertained by a labour tribunal
and proceedings thereon are taken and concluded, the workman to whom the
application relates shall not be entitled to any other legal remedy in respect
of the matter to which that application relates, and where he has first
resorted to any other legal remedy, he shall not thereafter be entitled to the
remedy under subsection (1).



Did the workmen first resort to any other legal remedy? In the context of the
sentence in which the word "resorted" appears, out of the several ordinary
meanings of that word, it would attract the meanings of "to have recourse" or
"to apply" (see Chambers 20th Century Dictionary). The Chambers 21st Century
Dictionary (1996) gives the second ordinary meaning of that word as "the
action of resorting to or having recoursed to someone or something for help".
Subsection 2(i) of the Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special
Provisions) Act No. 45 of 1971 enables the employer to apply to the
Commissioner for approval to terminate the services of workmen as was done in
this case. This application should obviously be made before termination of the
services of a workman. In the case of a workman, the provision specifically
enabling him to apply to the Commissioner against the termination was brought
in by subsection 68 (1) (see Amendment Act No. 51 of 1988). However, before
the amendment came into force, as a practice, the Commissioner did entertain
applications made by workmen for relief. In terms of that new subsection, such
applications should be made to the Commissioner within six months of
termination of services. It would appear that the application to the
Commissioner was made by the appellant and the respondent wrote the letter
A10/R12 and the submission setting out a claim was made by the respondent's
representatives purely in response to the appellant's application. In these
circumstances, I am of the view that the workmen had not first resorted to a
legal remedy within the meaning of subsection 31 B (5).

200



Applicability of Subsection 6B (2) of the Termination of Employment of Workmen
(Special Provisions) Act.



It was contended on behalf of the respondent that even if the workmen had
resorted to a legal remedy before the Commissioner in pursuance of their
rights under the Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special Provisions)
Act, yet, in terms of subsection 6B (2) of that Act, they could apply to the
labour tribunal for relief in respect of their termination. In other words,
that subsection 6B (2) has the effect of impliedly amending the second limb of
subsection 31 B (5) of the Industrial Disputes Act. On the other hand, Mr.
Gunasekera for the appellant submitted that subsection 6B (2) does not serve
to amend subsection 31B (5) of the Industrial Disputes Act. Subsection 6B (2)
reads:



Nothing in this Act shall be read and construed as effecting (sic) section 2
or section 5 of the Act or the rights of a workman whose employment has been
terminated to apply for any other legal remedy in respect of that termination
or as effecting (sic) the jurisdiction of any court, tribunal or institution
to grant relief in respect of such termination.



The word "effecting" appears to be an obvious error and it should read as
"affecting". It was Mr. Gunasekera's contention that for an implied amendment
to take place, when the legislature has not expressly amended subsection 31 B
(5) of the Industrial Disputes Act, there must be a clear and patent
incompatibility between subsection 31 B (5) of the Industrial Disputes Act
(the earlier Act) and subsection 6B (2) of the Termination of Employment of
Workmen (Special Provisions) Act (the later Act); he submitted that there is
no such incompatibility. Learned counsel contended that the two provisions can
co-exist; or if there is an interpretation that enables them to coexist, there
cannot be an amendment to subsection 31B (5) of the earlier Act intended by
the legislature in the absence of an express amendment; that (citing Hendrick
Appuhamy v. John Appuhamy)(1), where a statute creates a right and in plain
language gives a specific remedy or appoints a specific tribunal for its
enforcement, a party seeking to enforce the right must resort to that tribunal
and not to others; and that the purpose and object of the legislature in
enacting subsection 6B (2) of the later Act is to enable a workman to seek
relief from a District Court or a Labour Tribunal notwithstanding the

201



special remedy provided by the Act. Mr. Gunasekera's submission was that the
plain meaning of subsection 6B (2) of the later Act was that the availability
of the remedies provided by the Act does not deprive a workman of his rights
to other remedies.



I find it difficult to agree with the interpretation advanced by learned
counsel for the appellant. Words of subsection 31B (5) of the earlier Act,
material to this case are "where he (the workman) has first resorted to any
other legal remedy, he shall not thereafter be entitled to the remedy under
subsection (1)". The words material to this case in subsection 6B (2) of the
later Act are "nothing in this Act shall be read and construed as affecting
the rights of a workman whose employment has been terminated to apply for any
other legal remedy in respect of that termination **or as affecting the
jurisdiction of any court, tribunal or institution to grant relief in respect
of such termination ". **(Emphasis added). Had the subsection ended after the
word "termination" where it appears first, one may have agreed with the
construction sought to be placed by Mr. Gunasekera. But, if the words I have
emphasised are to be given any meaning, it makes it impossible for them to co-
exist with the words of subsection 31B (5) of the earlier Act; the effect of
the words of subsection 31 B (5) **is to affect the jurisdiction of the labour
tribunal,** where a workman has first resorted to any other legal remedy.
Subsection 6B (2) of the later Act effectively removes that obstacle to the
jurisdiction of the labour tribunal, in so far as a workman had first resorted
to a legal remedy before the Commissioner.



For the reasons stated above, the appeal is dismissed with costs of this Court
fixed at Rs. 10,000% payable to the respondent. The Registrar of this Court is
directed to send the records back to the Labour Tribunal as soon as possible.
We direct the Labour Tribunal to give precedence to these cases and to hear
and determine them as expeditiously as possible. It is unfortunate that the
workmen have not been able to obtain any relief so far, either from the
Commissioner or from the Tribunal on account of the termination of their
services.



**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

** **

**GUNAWARDENA, J.** \- I agree.



_Appeal Dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/44.html_  

