##  Weerasinghe v. Sepala and Another - SLR - 229, Vol 2 of 1996 [1996] LKSC
44; (1996) 2 Sri LR 229 (14 June 1996)

**229**

**WEERASINGHE  
****v** **.  
****SEPALA AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, C. J.  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.  
S. C. APPEAL NO. 72/95  
C. A. APPLICATION NO. 1324/86  
M.C. KEGALLE NO. 60857/85  
14th June, 1996.

_Primary Courts Procedure Act ‑ Right of a tenant cultivator to cultivate a
paddy land ‑ Right to possession of land ‑ sections 68, 69 of the Act._ __

An Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services ordered the Appellant
(Landlord) "to give possession" of a paddy land to the Respondent to cultivate
it as the lawful tenant cultivator. This order was not complied with;
whereupon the Respondent disturbed the possession of the land by the
Appellant. The Primary Court Judge, after inquiry, ordered the "restoration of
possession" to the Appellant.

**Held:**

The order of the Primary Court Judge should have been under section 69 and not
under Section 68 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act, as the dispute is not
the right to possession but the right to cultivate.

**Cases referred to:**

1\. _Loku Banda v. Ukku Banda (1982) 2 Sri L. R. 704._

2\. _Ramalingam v. Thangarajah (1982) 2 Sri L. R. 693._

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal **.**

_J.C. Weliamuna_ for Appellant.

Respondent absent and unrepresented.

Cur. Adv. vult

2nd August, 1996.

**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.**

**230**

This is an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal allowing the
application to revise the order of the Primary Court Judge and setting aside
the order of the Primary Court Judge and directing the learned Primary Court
Judge to hold a fresh inquiry on the dispute as to whether the Petitioner (now
Petitioner‑Respondent) is entitled to the right to cultivate the field as
tenant‑cultivator, if the parties so desire.

The facts relevant to this appeal are briefly as follows:

The Respondent to this appeal was served with an order of eviction from a
paddy land for non payment of rent in terms of section 18 of the Agrarian
Services Act. Consequent to the said order, on or about 14.10.83 **,** the
Appellant took over possession of the land and the Respondent was in fact
evicted. The Respondent instituted an application for a writ of Certiorari
seeking to quash the said order of eviction. By order dated 5‑7‑85, the Court
of Appeal quashed the said order of eviction and directed the Respondent to
deposit Rs. 2,598/­with the Asst. Commissioner of Agrarian Services Kegalle
within two weeks; and failure to comply with the said order would result in
eviction. This was complied with. Therefore the said Asst. Commissioner by his
letter dated 23.8.85 ordered the Appellant to give possession of the land to
the Respondent to cultivate the said field as the lawful tenant cultivator.
The Appellant did not comply with the said order. On 4.9.85 the Respondent
disturbed the possession of the land by the Appellant, when the Respondent
went to cultivate the said field. Hence the Police the
Complainant‑Respondent‑Respondent filed an action in the Primary Court and the
Primary Court Judge after inquiry ordered the restoration of possession to the
Appellant, which order was set aside by the Court of Appeal holding that the
order by the Primary Court Judge should have been under section 69 and not
under section 68 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act, as the dispute is not
the right to possession but the right to cultivate. The Court of appeal
therefore set aside the judgment of the learned Primary Court Judge and
directed a fresh inquiry as to the right to cultivalte and not as to the right
of posession, if parties desire.

In _Loku Banda v. Ukku Banda(_ 1) __ it was held that, "the right to cultivate
can vest in a person different from the person who has right to possession".
As the issue before Court was whether the Respondent

**231**

had the right to cultivate the said field the right to possession does not
arise and therefore the decision in _Ramalingam v. Thangarajah(_ 2) has no
application to the facts of this case, and the learned Primary Court Judge
misdirected himself in proceeding to inquiry in this case on the basis that it
is a claim to possession of the said paddy field. and the Court of Appeal
rightly set aside the judgment of the learned Primary Court Judge. However the
Court of Appeal granted leave to appeal to this Court.

For these reasons we dismiss the appeal. No costs.

**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.** ‑ I agree.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/44.html_  

