##  Janatha Estates Development Board v. Ceylon Estates Staffs Union and
Another - SLR - 176, Vol 2 of 1994 [1993] LKSC 44; (1994) 2 Sri LR 176 (2
December 1993)

**  176**

**  JANATHA ESTATES DEVELOPMENT BOARD**

**v.**

**CEYLON ESTATES STAFFS UNION**

**AND ANOTHER**  

SUPREME COURT.

G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 41/93.

C.A. NO. 111/84.

L.T CASE NO. 9/111 75/84.

NOVEMBER 24, 1993.  


Industrial Dispute ‑ Time bar in section 31 (D) (3) of Industrial Disputes
Act.



The 1st respondent on behalf of its member Shanmugaratnam, filed action
against the employer for wrongful termination. On the 2nd respondent
(Shanmugaratnam) desiring to conduct his own case, the Union stepped out of
the case. The President decided to treat the application as an individual
application but did not amend the caption. The Labour Tribunal on 29.09.83
dismissed the application stating that the employee had vacated his employment
and the application was time barred.

**  177**

**Held:**



(1) The workman is the principal and has the choice of deciding ‑  


(i) to appeal against the order of Tribunal,  
  
and (ii) who is to prosecute the appeal i.e. either himself or by a chosen
agent.  


(2) The workman was not fettered in pursuing an appeal in time by the failure
of the Labour Tribunal to amend the caption.



(3) Both the union and the 2nd respondent (operating from the same address)
were obviously aware of the order of the Tribunal by 7.10.83 and there was no
legal fetter against either of them appealing within time.



**Cases referred to:**



1.         _United_ _Plantation Workers Union v. Superintendent Craig Estate_ 74 NLR 499



2.         _Peiris v. Laksalite Roche Co._ 2 Sri Kantha's Law Reports 91.



3.         _Somapala v. The Superintendent New Valley Estate,_ _Norwood et al._ SC Appeal No. 13/89 SCM 03.04.92.



**APPEAL** on preliminary objection from order of Court of Appeal.



_S. M. Fernando P.C._ with _Miss H. Fernando_ for appellant.

_P. Valentine P.C._ with  _Varuna Senadheera_ and _P. Senanayake_ for 2nd
respondent.



1st respondent absent and unrepresented.

_Cur. adv vult._

December 02, 1993.

**KULATUNGA, J.**



This is an appeal against the judgment of the Court of Appeal overruling a
preliminary objection raised by the employer‑appellant that the appeal against
the order of the Labour Tribunal filed by the 1st respondent union (on behalf
of its member Shanmugaratnam, the 2nd  respondent) was time barred by section
31 (D) (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act.



The 1st respondent Union applied to the Labour Tribunal on behalf of the
workman (2nd respondent) for relief in respect of the alleged

**  178**

wrongful termination of his services by the employer‑appellant. The
employer‑appellant denied the allegation and pleaded that the 2nd respondent
had vacated his employment under the Emergency Regulations by participating in
a strike and that he had failed to submit a valid medical certificate for
reinstatement. At the inquiry on 04.05.83, the 2nd respondent desired to
conduct his case where­upon Mr. Somasunderam, Counsel for the 1st respondent
union withdrew. Thereafter, the president of the Labour Tribunal decided to
treat the application as an individual application. However, no amendment to
the caption was effected. On the same day, the evidence of the 2nd respondent
was led by Mr. Kadiravel Attorney‑at­-Law. The inquiry was concluded and the
order was reserved.



Although the 1st respondent union appears to have moved out of the case on
04.05.83, according to the proceedings dated 17.08.83 the 1st respondent union
had the case called before the Labour Tribunal on a motion to enable the union
to settle the dispute. On that day the parties were present and represented by
Counsel. However, as they were unable to reach a settlement, Mr. Kadiravel
moved to file written submissions of the 1st  respondent union. The Tribunal
allowed one month for written submissions. On 17.06.83, Mr. Kadiravel filed
written submissions "on behalf of S. M. Shanmugaratnam".



On 29.09.83, the Labour Tribunal made its order dismissing the application,
being of the view that the 2nd respondent had vacated his employment and that
the application to the Tribunal was itself out of time as it had not been
filed within 6 months from the date of the alleged termination of services.
That order was communicated to the 1st respondent union. The Court of Appeal
judgment states that the 2nd respondent came to know of the order only through
the union.



On 07.10.83 the 2nd respondent had given a proxy to Mr. Someskadirgaman
Attorney‑at‑Law authorising him to file an appeal in his name against the
order of the Labour Tribunal. However, Mr. Someskadirgaman prepared an appeal
dated 07.10.83 in the name of the 1st  respondent union (who was the applicant
on record). This appeal was filed on 27.02.84 together with the said proxy of
the 2nd respondent. The appeal was registered as the union's appeal and the
Court of Appeal Registry kept the 1st respondent union

**  179**

informed of the steps; and the appellant's brief was collected by an
authorised representative of the 1st respondent union. At the hearing before
the Court of Appeal Counsel who supported the appeal marked their appearance
as Counsel for the appellant union.



However, when the objection as to the time bar was taken against the appeal,
appellant's Counsel made the submission that after the 2nd  respondent had
been allowed to conduct his case before the Labour Tribunal treating it as an
individual application, the Tribunal had failed to amend the caption by
substituting the 2nd respondent and to communicate its order to the 2nd
respondent. Counsel conceded that the appeal was outside the statutory time
limit namely 14 days from the date of the order but submitted that the delay
should be excused in view of the principle that time will run only from the
date of the receipt of the order by the appellant. _United Plantation Workers
Union v. Superintendent Craig Estates_ (1). __ The Court of Appeal accepted
this submission and held that the delay can be excused and added that even if
the 2nd respondent was aware of the order against him as early as 07.10.83
(the date of his proxy) he could not legally prefer an appeal as the Labour
Tribunal had failed to amend the caption substituting him as the applicant.



There is no doubt that a workman is the principal in an application made by a
union on his behalf to the Labour Tribunal and is entitled to be substituted
in place of the Union and proceed with the application. _Peiris v. Laksalite
Roche Co._ (2). However, it is not clear whether in the instant case the 2nd
respondent intended to exercise this right or whether all that he desired was
to conduct the case though a Counsel reta'tned by him. Thus, even after the
Labour Tribunal reserved its order the 2nd respondent's interests were being
looked after by the 1st respondent union as is evident from the proceedings of
17.08.83 when the case was called for settlement by the union and Mr.
Kadiravel obtained leave to file written submissions on behalf of the Union.
It is true that written submissions were subsequently filed on behalf of the
2nd respondent. However, the next step viz. the appeal against the Labour
Tribunal order was taken by the 1st respondent union even though the 2nd
respondent's proxy shows that an appeal in his name was contemplated.

**  180**

This Court has held that a workman, on whose behalf a Trade Union has filed an
application before the Labour Tribunal, may appeal to the Court of Appeal **as
appellant** (the union not being designated as a party in the appeal) from the
order of the Tribunal. The workman is the principal and as such has the choice
of deciding ‑



(i)         to appeal against the order of the tribunal; and

(ii)        who is to prosecute his appeal i.e. either himself or by a

                        chosen agent.



_Somapala v. The Superintendent New Valley Estate, Norwood et al_ (3), In that
case the Labour Tribunal held on the application of the union that the
termination of the workman's services was justified. The union did not appeal,
instead the workman himself by his agent, an Attorney‑at‑Law who filed proxy
appealed to the Court of Appeal.



In the circumstances, I am unable to agree with the reasoning of the Court of
Appeal that the 2nd respondent was fettered in pursuing an appeal in time by
the failure of the Labour Tribunal to amend the caption of the case. As was
held in _Somapala's_ case, he had the right to file the appeal himself. The
fact that he gave his proxy dated 07.10.83 shows that he was aware of his
rights. However, the attorney‑at‑law filed an appeal in the name of the 1st
respondent union without a proxy. The absence of a proxy for the union appeal
was not raised at the hearing before us but I have found from the Court of
Appeal record that the 1st respondent union itself had not given a proxy. If
so, the appeal also may be bad for want of authorization. It is possibly in
view of this defect that Counsel for the appellant union in the Court below
has informed the Court that the 2nd respondent (who was not a party to the
appeal) will adopt the averments in the petition of appeal filed by the union
and on that basis obtained an order to proceed with the appeal as though it
was the 2nd respondent's appeal. This is confirmed by the fact that in this
Court no written submissions were filed on behalf of the 1st  respondent union
who was also absent and unrepresented.



Both the union and the 2nd respondent (operating from the same address) were
obviously aware of the order of the Tribunal by

**  181**

07.10.83 and there was no legal fetter against either of them filing the
appeal within time. The appeal filed on 27.02.84 is clearly out of time and
the delay cannot be excused. In overruling the preliminary objection the Court
of Appeal has misdirected itself on the facts and the law.



For the foregoing reasons, I allow the appeal, and set aside **** the judgment
of the Court of Appeal. The appeal to the Court of Appeal is dismissed on the
ground that it is time barred. No costs.



**G. P S. DE SILVA, CA.** ‑ I agree.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/44.html_  

