##  Ibrahim v. Nadarajah - SLR - 131, Vol 1 of 1991 [1991] LKSC 44; (1991) 1
Sri LR 131 (6 January 1991)

**131**

**IBRAHIM  
 V.  
 NADARAJAH**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J. &  
GOONEWARDENE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL : 46/86  
L.A, NO. : 58/86  
 CA. NO. : 440/79  
D.C. MT. LAVINIA: 1006/L  
 DECEMBER 12, 1990  
  
_Supreme Court Rules - Leave to appeal - Failure to comply with Rules 4 and 28
of the Supreme Court Rules 1978 - Naming of party respondent.  
_  
**Held:  
**  
A failure to comply with the requirements of Rules 4 and 28 of the Supreme
Court Rules 1978 is necessarily fatal.  
  
_Per_ Amerasinghe, J.  
  
"It has always, therefore, been the law that it is necessary for the proper
constitution of an appeal that all parties who may be adversely affected by
the result of the appeal should be made parties and, unless they are, the
petition of appeal should be rejected".  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
_1\. Ibrahim v. Beebee et al_ (1916) 19 NLR 289  
  
_2\. Ammal et al v. Mohideen et al_ (1933) 34 NLR 442  
  
_3\. Wickremasooriya v. Rajalias de Silva_ (1937) 8 CLW 29  
  
_4\. Seelananda v. Rajapaksa_ (1938) 11 CLW 36  
  
_5\. Sinnan Chettiar and others v. Mohideen_ (1939) 15 CLW 47  
  
_6\. Swarishamy v. Thelenis et al_ (1952) 54 NLR 282  
  
_7\. Tambiah v. Sangarajah_ (1937) 39 NLR 282  
  
_8\. Avichchy Chettiar v. Perera_ (1937) 40 NLR 65  
  
_9\. Ramasamy Chettiar v. Mohamadu Lebbe Marikar_ (1937) 7 CLW 64  
  
_10\. Francina Fernando v. Kaiya Fernando and others_ (1957) 7 CLW 133.

**132**

_S. Mahenthiran_ for the substituted defendant - respondent - appellant.  
  
_P.A.D. Samarasekera, P.C. with Keerthi Gunawardena_ for 1st substituted
plaintiff - appellant - respondent.

PRELIMINARY OBJECTION to appeal.

_Cur. adv. vult._

January 06, 1991.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.  
**  
When this case was taken up for argument Mr, Samarasekera, P.C. submitted that
since the appellant had failed to make the second substituted plaintiff-
appellant in the Court of Appeal a party respondent in the appeal to this
Court, there was a violation of Rules 4 and 28 of the Supreme Court Rules,
1978 and that the appeal ought therefore to be dismissed.  
  
Rule 4 states as follows:  
  
"Every application for Special Leave to Appeal shall name as respondent, ...
in the case of a civil cause or matter, the party or parties in whose favour
the judgment complained against has been delivered or adversely to whom the
application is preferred or whose interest may be adversely affected by the
success of the appeal and shall set out in full the address of such
respondents."  
  
Mr. Mahenthiran argued that since leave to appeal had already been granted, no
objection could be taken on account of the failure to name a respondent once
leave to appeal has been granted.  
  
The granting of leave to appeal only determines the question of access to
Court and does not confer any advantages or exemptions on the appellant except
this: Although ordinarily in terms of Rule 27 all appeals to the Supreme Court
must be upon a petition in that behalf lodged by the appellant, where leave to
appeal is granted, Rule 12 makes it unnecessary for the appellant to file a
fresh petition of appeal. The application for leave to appeal is deemed to be
the petition of appeal. A petition of appeal, whether actual or deemed,
however, must in terms of Rule 28 name as respondents all parties in whose
favour the judgment appealed against has been delivered and all parties whose
interests may be adversely affected by the success of the appeal together with
their full addresses.

**133**

Mr. Mahenthiran, however, submits that the Rules of the Supreme Court are
directory and not mandatory and that the failure to comply with them is not
necessarily fatal. It is not necessary for me in this case to consider so wide
a proposition. I am of the opinion, however, that a failure to comply with the
requirements of Rules 4 and 28 of the Supreme Court is necessarily fatal.
Those Rules are meant to ensure that all parties who may be prejudicially
affected by the result of an appeal should be made parties. How else could
justice between the parties be ensured? It has always, therefore, been the law
that it is necessary for the proper constitution of an appeal that all parties
who may be adversely affected by the result of the appeal should be made
parties and, unless they are, the petition of appeal should be rejected. (See
Ibrahim v. Beebee et al (1) Ammal et al v. Mohideen et al (2); Wickremasooriya
v. Rajalias de Silva (3); Seelananda v. Rajapakse (4); Sinnan Chettiar and
Others v. Mohideen (5) ; Swarishamy v. Thelenis et al (6) )  
  
Mr. Mahenthiran submits that the party who was not added in this case was the
minor daughter of the respondent who was named and that no prejudice will be
caused because the same Counsel might have appeared for the daughter had she
been made a party to the appeal and that in any event the decision against the
daughter will be the same as that against her mother. I am unable to agree
with this argument. The question is not whether the same Counsel might have
appeared for the party who was not added or that the fate of the mother and
daughter will be similar but whether the decision of this Court might
adversely affect the interests of a person who is not made a party.  
  
Finally, Mr. Mahenthiran submitted that if it appeared to the Court that any
person who was a party to the action in the Courts below and who had not been
made a party to the appeal, as interested in the result of the appeal, the
Court may adjourn the hearing to a future date and direct that such a person
be made a respondent.  
  
That was done by the Court in the exercise of its discretionary power in terms
of section 770 of the Civil Procedure Code when some good excuse was given for
non-joinder or when it was not very apparent that the parties not joined might
be affected by the appeal, or where the defect was not of an obvious character
which could not reasonably have been foreseen and avoided. (E.g. See Ibrahim
v.

**134**

Beebee et al. supra; Tambiah v. Sangarajah(7) Avichchy Chettiar v. Perera(8)
Ramasamy Chettiar v. Mohamadu Lebbe Marika(9) Francina Fernando v. Kaiya
Fernando and others(10).  
  
Mr. Samarasekera, P.C., however, submits that the Court no longer has that
discretion under the prevailing laws and rules and that in any event there are
no circumstances in this case warranting the granting of any indulgence. We
are in agreement with him.  
  
For the reasons stated the appeal is dismissed with costs.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J. - I agree  
  
GOONEWARDENE, J. - I agree  
**  
_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/44.html_  

