##  Sukumar v. Officer In Charge, Joseph Army Camp, Vavuniya and Others - SLR
- 399, Vol 1 of 2003 [2002] LKSC 44; (2003) 1 Sri LR 399 (24 January 2002)

**399**

**SUKUMAR** ****

**v** ****

**OFFICER-IN-CHARGE, JOSEPH ARMY CAMP, VAVUNIYA AND** ****

# OTHERS

  

SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

ISMAIL, J., AND

WIGNEWARAN, J.

SC (FR) NO. 8002

MINUTES OF COURT 24TH JANUARY, 2002



_ _

_Prevention of Terrorism Act - Remand of suspect until conclusion of trial -
Section 7(1) proviso - Duty to inform Attorney-General of fact of arrest and
detention._

400

**Court observed:**



It is a necessary implication of the proviso to section 7(1) of the Prevention
of Terrorism Act that the authorities responsible for the arrest and detention
of a sus足pect must inform the Attorney-General as soon as possible of the fact
of such arrest and detention to review the matter and determine whether he
should **** be fur足ther detained in custody.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_V. Yogeswaran_ for petitioner.

_Viveka Siriwardena.,_ State Counsel for respondents.

Hearing fixed for 15.03.2002

January 24, 2002



The respondents are granted time till 25.02.2002 to file objec足tions. The
petitioner is granted two weeks time thereafter to file his counter affidavit.
Hearing on 15.03.2002.

 The petitioner in this case was arrested on 19.05.2001 and was produced
before the Magistrate of Vavuniya on 02.07.2001 in case No. B419/2001.
Apparently the petitioner was remanded until the conclu足sion of the trial.
However, until leave was granted in this application, no steps were taken to
have the petitioner brought to trial, nor have steps been taken to ascertain
whether the Attorney-General consents to the release of the petitioner from
custody in terms of the proviso to section 7(i) of the Prevention of Terrorism
Act.

  
In court's view, it is a necessary implication of that proviso that the
authority responsible for the arrest or detention must inform the Attorney-
General as soon as possible of the fact of such arrest and detention in order
to enable the Attorney-General to review the matter and to determine whether
he should be further detained in custody.

  
Court thinks it is desirable that that procedure will be followed in all the
other cases.

_Guidelines regarding_

_ _

_Section 7(1) proviso Prevention of Terrorism Act set out._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/44.html_  

