##  The Board of Governors For Zahira College v. Naina Mohamed Alias Naina
Lebbe - SLR - 309, Vol 2 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 45; (1999) 2 Sri LR 309 (27 May
1999)

**309**

**THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR ZAHIRA COLLEGE  
v.  
NAINA MOHAMED ALIAS NAINA LEBBE**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
WEERASEKERA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 62/98  
L.T. NO. 13/673/92  
WITH S.C. APPEAL NO. 66/98  
APRIL 28, 1999

_Industrial dispute - Termination of services for misconduct - Payment of
compensation notwithstanding the fact that the termination of services was
justified._

A large number of students forcibly entered the office of the Principal,
Zahira College, during school hours. They behaved in an unruly and boisterous
manner and coerced the Principal to issue a letter withdrawing a letter issued
earlier by the Principal requiring certain teachers to vacate the hostel.
While all this was happening the applicant-respondent, a teacher at Zahira
College, was standing near the Principal. He did nothing to dissuade the
students from behaving in the way they did. He was found guilty of misconduct
and dismissed from service by the employer-appellant (the Board of Governors
of the College). The Labour Tribunal dismissed the application against the
termination of services.

**Held :**

1\. The applicant-respondent's presence and his inaction at the incident
between the Principal and students can be reasonably constrained as supportive
of the unruly behaviour of the students. Hence, he was guilty of misconduct.

2\. In the circumstances of the case before the Court, the applicant-
respondent was not entitled to compensation notwithstanding the fact that the
termination of his services was justified.

**Case referred to :**

1. _Saleem v. Hatton National Bank Ltd._ (1994) 3 Sri LR 409 distinguished.

**310**

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court.

_Shirly M. Fernando,_ PC with _J. K. Azoor_ and _B. D. V. Dias_ for employer-
appellant. (SC Appeal No. 66/98).

_R. E Thambiratnam_ with _N. Raviraj_ for applicant-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 27, 1999.  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.**

Naina Mohamed (the applicant-respondent in SC Appeal No. 62/98) was a teacher
at Zahira College, Colombo. His services were terminated by the employer-
appellant (the Board of Governors of Zahira College) with effect from 27.9.91.
He made an application to the Labour Tribunal stating, inter alia, that the
termination of his services was wrongful, unlawful and unjustified and sought
relief by way of reinstatement in service. The employer in its answer took up
the position that the applicant was found guilty of several acts of
indiscipline and/or misconduct as set out in the show cause letter P1, and
that, therefore, the termination of services was "perfectly lawful, just and
equitable". After inquiry, the Labour Tribunal dismissed the application. The
applicant preferred an appeal to the High Court which refused relief by way of
reinstatement, but ordered compensation in a sum of Rs. 250,000 in lieu of
reinstatement. Both parties have preferred appeals to this Court, the employer
seeking to quash the order for compensation (SC Appeal No. 62/98) and the
applicant seeking an order for reinstatement with back wages (SC Appeal No.
66/98).

The applicant who was a teacher at Zahira College was dismissed from service
consequent upon an incident that took place in the office of the Principal Of
the school on 19.9.91. The evidence led on behalf of the Board of Governors of
Zahira College established that about 75 to 100 students forcibly entered the
office of the Principal at about 10.00 am during school hours. The students
were behaving in an unruly and boisterous manner shouting at the Principal
asking him to issue a letter withdrawing the letter issued earlier by the
Principal requiring certain teachers to vacate the hostel. Some of the
students were seated on the chairs meant for visitors and some were having

311

magazines in their hands while shouting at the Principal. The applicant Naina
Mohamed was standing near the Principal's table while the students kept on
shouting at the Principal. Ultimately, the Principal was compelled to issue
the letter demanded by the students. The students, thereafter, left the office
of the Principal. These facts were spoken to by witnesses who were called on
behalf of the Board of Governors of the Zahira College. The testimony of these
witnesses was accepted by the Labour Tribunal.

The applicant Naina Mohamed gave evidence and took up the position that he was
nowhere near the Principal's office at the time of this incident; that he was
in fact conducting a class, for the "Ordinary level repeat students". The
Labour Tribunal, however, rejected the testimony of Naina Mohamed. The reason
given by the Labour Tribunal for rejecting the evidence of Naina Mohamed was
that if his position was that he was in fact engaged in teaching at the time
of the incident he should have so stated in his "letter of explanation" given
in response to "the show cause notice". The failure to mention this all-
important fact is a matter which undoubtedly affects his credibility and the
Labour Tribunal cannot be faulted for rejecting his testimony. A belated
affidavit given by the Vice-Principal in support of the applicant's position
that he was far away from the Principal's office at the material time is of
hardly any probative value. There is little doubt that the evidence led on
behalf of the employer clearly established the presence of Naina Mohamed
inside the office of the Principal (near the Principal' s table) while 75 to
100 students who had forcibly entered the office of the Principal were
behaving in a most unruly manner. Faced with this deplorable situation, Naina
Mohamed should have acted promptly in a manner that becomes a responsible
member of the teaching staff of the school. It was his clear duty to have
attempted to dissuade the students from behaving in the way they did. He made
no attempt to bring the situation under control by directing the students to
get back to their class-rooms. His silence and his inaction in the proved
circumstances of this case tell heavily against him. A teacher in a school has
a special responsibility to maintain discipline. The High Court has taken the
view that his mere presence cannot be construed as "a participating presence"
and therefore he was not guilty of misconduct. The proceedings before the
Labour Tribunal are not criminal proceedings and concepts relevant in the area
of the criminal law have been misapplied in the circumstances of this case. In
any event, his presence in the Principal's

312

office and his manifest inaction in a critical situation where a mob of 75 to
100 students have surrounded the Principal would suffice to make him totally
unfit to remain as a teacher in the school. A teacher, after all, occupies a
special position in maintaining order and discipline in a school. In my view,
his presence and his inaction can be reasonably construed as supportive of the
unruly behaviour of the students. I, accordingly, hold that the finding of the
Labour Tribunal that the charge of misconduct has been proved is in accord
with the evidence and is reasonable.

When the matter came up in appeal, the High Court proceeded to award a sum of
Rs. 250,000 as compensation to the applicant in lieu of reinstatement.
Although an award of Rs. 250,000 was made in favour of the applicant, it is
very relevant to note that there was no finding by the High Court that the
termination of the applicant's services was unjustified. In awarding
compensation to the applicant, the High Court relied heavily on the judgment
in _Saleem v. Hatton National Bank Ltd_.(1) in relying on Saleem's case for
the award of compensation to the applicant, it seems to me that the High Court
has completely misunderstood that judgment. That was a case where the Manager
of the Badulla Branch of the Hatton National Bank was dismissed from service
"on account of the loss of a sum of Rs. 100,000 of reserve money from the
vault of the bank". The Court of Appeal dismissed the workman's appeal and
this Court granted special leave to appeal on the following limited questions
: "Notwithstanding the finding of the Court of Appeal that the termination of
the appellant's services is justified, is the appellant in any event entitled
to the payment of compensation?". In awarding compensation Kulatunga, J. took
into account the special and exceptional circumstances of the case. The
appellant's services were not terminated for any act of dishonesty; he made a
prompt report of the loss to his superiors and made a complaint to the police;
he had an unblemished record of service from 1970 to 1985. after a very
careful consideration of the several decisions relating to the award of
compensation Kulatunga, J. expressed himself in the following terms:

"On the question whether the appellant deserves compensation I am of the view
that there are special circumstances which would

313

make it just and equitable to order such relief. Besides the considerations
which have been urged by counsel for the appellant it is relevant to note that
the employer has dismissed both the appellant and the second officer. This,
then is a case of shared responsibility even though, as the Manager of the
Bank, the appellant must accept primary responsibility for the loss. He was
negligent but as rightly submitted by counsel, no dishonesty has been alleged
against him and it is just one of those mistakes a human being is liable to
make in a life time. I hold that the appellant is entitled to the payment of
appropriate compensation in the circumstances of this case and having regard
to his unblemished record of service." at page 419. (emphasis added).

It is manifest that the judgment in Saleem's case (supra) cannot possibly form
the basis of an award of compensation to the applicant in the case before us.
The evidence clearly shows that the applicant's conduct was totally unworthy
of a member of the teaching staff in a school. His conduct was subversive of
discipline in the school.

For these reasons the appeal (SC No. 62/98) is allowed, the judgment of the
High Court dated 18.3.98 is set aside and the order of the Labour Tribunal
dated 21st April, 1997, is restored. The cross appeal No. 66/98 is dismissed.
I make no order as to costs.

At the hearing before us it was agreed by counsel for both parties that the
judgment in this appeal would be binding on the parties to the connected
appeals, SC Appeals No. 63/98, No. 64/98 and No. 65/98. 1 make order
accordingly.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

**WEERASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Employer-appellant's appeal allowed._

_Respondent-workman's appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/45.html_  

