##  Subasinghe v. Police Constable Sandun and Others - SLR - 23, Vol 2 of 1999
[1998] LKSC 45; (1999) 2 Sri LR 23 (16 December 1998)

**23**

**SUBASINGHE  
v.  
POLICE CONSTABLE SANDUN AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. (SPECIAL) NO. 235/96  
AUGUST 25, AND NOVEMBER 30, 1998

_Fundamental rights - Degrading treatment - Articles 11, 13 (1) and 13 (2) of
the Constitution._

On 26.11.1996 the petitioner made a complaint to the 3rd respondent (OIC,
Dankotuwa Police) regarding a commercial transaction. On the evening of that
day, the 1st respondent police constable met the petitioner at the Dankotuwa
Public Market and threatened to teach him a "good lesson'. The next day, the
1st respondent and another police officer (the 2nd respondent) arrested the
petitioner at the Dankotuwa Public Market and took him to the police station.
Thereafter the 1st respondent assaulted the petitioner with hands, kicked him
and also beat him with a belt. The petitioner was then handcuffed, taken to
the Dankotuwa junction in a private bus and paraded there and brought back to
the police station, where he was confined in a cell. The 1st respondent again
assaulted the petitioner. A Deputy Minister visited the police station
immediately and obtained the release of the petitioner. The 1st respondent's
defence was that he arrested the petitioner for riding a motor cycle without a
helmet, a driving licence and insurance and for obstructing the 1st respondent
in the performance of his official duties. Medical evidence disclosed injuries
on the petitioner caused by a blunt weapon.

**Held:**

The 1st respondent had violated the fundamental rights of the petitioner
guaranteed by Articles 11, 13 (1), and 13 (2) of the Constitution.

_Per_ Bandaranayake, J.

"the fact that the petitioner was taken handcuffed in a private vehicle to the
Dankotuwa town and 'exhibited" in the manner spoken to by the petitioner in my
view, is an affront to the petitioner's dignity as a human being and amounts
to 'degrading treatment' within the meaning of Article 11 ".

**11**

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Nimal Weerakody_ for the petitioner.

_L. C. M. Swarnadhipathy_ for 1st to 3rd respondents.  
_  
__S. Rajaratnarn_ SC for 4th and 5th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

December 16, 1998.  
**  
SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

The petitioner submitted that on 26.11.1996 he went to Dankotuwa Police
Station to meet the OIC of the Police Station. He had asked the 1st respondent
(Police Constable Sandun), who was seated at the Inquiry Desk, whether the OIC
was present, to which the 1st respondent had replied in the negative.
Thereafter the petitioner had inquired from the 1st respondent whether another
officer was present. While answering in the negative to this question, he had
asked the petitioner for the reason for inquiring about important officers
without informing him his problem. The petitioner had left the police station
at that stage as his need was to meet the 3rd respondent (the OIC). The next
morning the petitioner had met the 3rd respondent and had made a complaint
regarding a commercial transaction. On the same day around 9.30 am when the
petitioner was near the Dankotuwa Public Market, the 1st respondent, who was
not in his uniform, came up to the petitioner and told him that he will come
in his uniform to teach the petitioner "a good lesson".

On 27.11.1996 around 5.30 pm, when the petitioner was talking to a friend near
Dankotuwa Public Market, the 1st respondent and the 2nd respondent came and
held the petitioner by his shirt collar and took him to the Dankotuwa Police
Station. The 3rd respondent was present at the Police Station but he had
ignored the petitioner. Thereafter the 1st respondent had beaten the
petitioner with hands and legs and with the 1st respondent's belt in a brutal
manner for about 15 minutes. The 2nd respondent was looking on. The
petitioner's friends and relatives had heard about the incident and had
gathered

25

outside the Police Station and they were watching the assault. The 1st
respondent had tried to pour alcohol down his throat but the petitioner had
refused vehemently. Thereafter the 1st respondent had put handcuffs on the
petitioner and pulled him outside. The 1st respondent brought the petitioner
to the Dankotuwa junction in a private bus (P6). The petitioner submits that
at the Dankotuwa junction, he was made to walk with the handcuffs across the
Dankotuwa junction and was later put into another vehicle and was taken away
(P7, P8, P9, P10 and P11). He was then taken to the Dankotuwa District
Hospital and was brought back to the Dankotuwa Police Station. The petitioner
was put in the cell and beaten again with hands and legs by the 1st
respondent. His head was knocked very hard on the wall (P3 and P12). The
petitioner noticed that his gold chain which was worth about Rs. 20,000 was
missing. He was released on 27.11.1996 and entered the Negombo Base Hospital.
The petitioner alleges that his fundamental rights guaranteed under Article
11, 13 (1) and 13 (2) were violated by the actions of the respondents.

The Court granted leave to proceed in respect of the alleged infringement of
Articles 11,13 (1) and 13 (2).

The 1st respondent in his affidavit has averred that he and the 2nd respondent
were on duty at the Dankotuwa junction. Around 4.50 pm on 27.11.1996, he had
signalled the petitioner who was riding a motor cycle without a helmet to
stop. The petitioner had proceeded towards the market without heeding to his
signal to stop. The 1st respondent, with the 2nd respondent, had gone towards
the market and waited in front of the market for the petitioner to return.
When the petitioner returned, he had stopped the petitioner and asked him to
produce his driving licence and the insurance policy. As the petitioner failed
to produce them the 1st respondent had questioned him to find out his name and
address to serve him with a fine sheet for riding a motor cycle without a
helmet, driving licence and insurance. At that moment, the petitioner had
dragged the 1st respondent to him from his belt and threatened to transfer him
by informing the Deputy Minister Milroy Fernando if he issued him a fine
sheet. The 1st respondent therefore had arrested him for obstructing a police
officer in the discharge of his public functions and riding a motor cycle
without a

26

helmet, driving licence and insurance. The 1st respondent states that he had
to use minimum force to arrest the petitioner as the petitioner resisted the
arrest. The 1st respondent averred that due to the petitioner's action his
belt was damaged.

The 1st respondent had immediately brought the petitioner to the police
station and after making the necessary entries in the relevant books he had
left the police station at 5.20 pm with the petitioner to go to the hospital.
He had brought the petitioner back to the police station at 6.10 pm and had
handed him over to the reserve and left the police station at 6.20 pm for duty
at the Dankotuwa junction (1R3a, 1R3b and 1R3c). The 1st respondent had
further averred that Mr. Milroy Fernando, had come to the police station
immediately to meet the OIC of the police station to secure the release of the
petitioner on bail.

The petitioner was admitted to the Base Hospital, Negombo, on 27.11.1996 at
10.40 pm The Admission Form gives the following details:

assaulted by police  
  
chest pain  
  
headache

vomiting - blood

**. . . . . .**

no injury marks

swelling of the face

The Medico-Legal Examination Form indicates that the petitioner was examined
on 27.11.1996 at 10.40 pm and that he had a non-grievous contusion that would
have been caused by a blunt weapon.

27

The petitioner has produced 12 affidavits; the affirmants aver that they have
seen the petitioner being taken by 2 police officers and the police officers
assaulting him (P1 - P12). Two of the affirmants have seen the 1st respondent
assaulting the petitioner with his hands, feet and the belt (P1 and P3). The
driver of the bus which belongs to the Don Bosco church avers in his affidavit
that he brought the petitioner who was in handcuffs to the Dankotuwa Town at
the request of the police (P6). There are several affidavits wherein the
affirmants aver that they saw the petitioner in handcuffs around 6.20 pm at
the Dankotuwa Town on 27.11.1996 (P7, P8, P9, P10 and P11).

The fact that the petitioner was taken handcuffed in a private vehicle to the
Dankotuwa town and "exhibited" in the manner spoken to by the petitioner in my
view, is an affront to the petitioner's dignity as a human being and amounts
to "degrading treatment" within the meaning of Article 11.

The respondents' case is that the petitioner was arrested by the 1st and 2nd
respondents for riding a motor cycle without a helmet, driving license and
insurance and for obstructing a public officer while discharging his public
duties. He was arrested around 4.50 pm on 27.11.1996 and was released on bail
around 7.35 pm the same day. The position of the petitioner is that, while he
was talking to a friend of his, seated on a motor cycle parked near the
Dankotuwa market, the 1st and 2nd respondents brought him to the police
station. The petitioner has made a statement to the Dankotuwa Police Station
on 27.11.1996 at 7.10 pm to this effect (1R3).

A friend of the petitioner has filed an affidavit, which shows that the 2
police officers arrested the petitioner while he was talking to the petitioner
near the Dankotuwa market (P1). On the other hand, other than the respondents'
own notes (1R3b), there is no evidence to show that the petitioner was taken
into custody for riding a motor cycle without a helmet, driving licence and
insurance and for obstructing a public officer while discharging his duties.
The respondents' submission is that the petitioner had obstructed them while
they were performing their duty but this has been denied by the petitioner

28

in his statement made to the police on 27.11.1996 (1 R3). The notes 1 R3b
constitute no more than self-serving evidence- on which no reliance could be
placed.

On a consideration of the totality of the material placed before us, I reject
the version of the 1st respondent and I hold that the 1st respondent has
violated the fundamental rights of the petitioner guaranteed by Articles 11,
13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution.

I direct the State to pay Rs. 10,000 to the petitioner as compensation and Rs.
5,000 as costs. The 1st respondent is directed to pay Rs. 5,000 personally to
the petitioner as compensation. In all, the petitioner will be entitled to a
sum of Rs. 20,000 as compensation and costs. This amount must be paid within
three (3) months from today.

The Registrar of the Supreme Court is directed to send a copy of this judgment
to the Inspector-General of Police.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.** \- I agree.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/45.html_  

