##  Dr. I. Gunatilaka v. Vice Admiral Tissera, Commander of the Navy and
Others - SLR - 1, Vol 1 of 2003 [1996] LKSC 45; (2003) 1 Sri LR 1 (7 May 1996)

1

**DR. I. GUNATILAKA**

**v.**

**VICE-ADMIRAL TISSERA,  
 **

** ** **COMMANDER OF THE NAVY AND OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

GUNASEKERA, J., AND

WEERASURIYA, J. SC

APPEAL No. 76/2001 CA

APPLICATION No. 366/99

11TH NOVEMBER, 2002



_Writ of certiorari - Purported reduction of rank of Surgeon Lieutenant,_
_Navy-Navy Commander's competence to effect such reduction- Power of the court
to quash such order._

The petitioner-appellant (the petitioner), a Medical Graduate of a Russian
University obtained temporary registration as a Medical Officer under section
31 of the Medical Ordinance ('The Ordinance"). Section 31 provides that a
per­son who is not qualified to obtain "full registration" under section
29(1), is enti­tled, on production of a certificate from the Director of
Health Services that he is in employment of the Government as a Medical
Officer, to temporary regis­tration for the period of his employment under the
Government.



The petitioner responded to an advertisement by the Navy calling for
applica­tions for the post of Surgeon Lieutenant. The advertisement states,
_inter alia,_ that full registration at the SLMC (Sri Lanka Medical Council)
_viz._ under sec­tion 29(1) of the Ordinance, was a requirement. It also
states that "those who have temporary registration may also apply"



After interview, the petitioner was informed by a message on 16.01.1997 from
the Navy Headquarters that he had been recruited to the Navy as a
commis­sioned medical officer under the rank of Surgeon Lieutenant. He took
his oath of allegiance and office on 16.01.1997 and assumed office.
Thereafter, anoth­er message was sent dated 06.02.1997 to "correct" the
original message by specifying his rank as "Acting Surgeon Lieutenant". Five
days later a Navy identity card-was issued to the petitioner describing his
rank as "Surgeon Lieutenant"

2

In consequence of inquiries by the petitioner he received a copy of a letter
dated 03.09.1998 from the Commander stating that he was recruited in an
act­ing capacity as he could not be confirmed as "Surgeon Lieutenant" as he
had not passed the swimming proficiency test. When the petitioner's lawyers
threatened legal action, the Commander by a letter dated 09.03.1999 notified
that according to a memorandum dated 07.05.1996 issued by the Commander,
persons with temporary registration could only join as Acting Lieutenant and
those having full registration under section 29(1) of the Ordinance were
appointed Surgeon Lieutenant; and that a clerical mistake in the first message
had been corrected by the second.

** **

**Held :**

1.                     There is no rank of 'Acting Surgeon Lieutenant" in the Navy; consequently, the respondents were unable to produce commission appointing the petitioner to such rank.

2.                     Under section 161 (1 )(a) of the Navy Act, it is only the Minister who can make regulations in regard to appointments and promotions in the Navy. Accordingly the Commander's memorandum of 07.05.1996 had  
no binding force.

3.                     The advertisement invited doctors to join as "Surgeon Lieutenants" including those who may have "temporary registration". There was no indication that "temporary registration would be given lower priority or a lower rank or that full registration must be obtained later. Only a fur­ there "medical test" was stipulated.

4.                     The petitioner was entitled to a quashing of the impugned message of 09.02.1997, the decision dated 09.03.1999 and the Commander's memorandum of 09.05.1996.



_Per_ Fernando, J.

".... the principal relief sought by the petitioner was not to grant an
appointment or a commission but the quashing of the purported "cor­rection
(which would automatically "restore" his rank of Surgeon Lieutenant). The
Court of Appeal erred in refusing that relief on the ground that it had no
power to give appointments to the Armed Forces."

** **

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

** **

**Cases referred to :** ****

1.         _Dissanayake v Kaleel_ (1993) 2 Sri LR 135, 187-192

2.         _Weerasinghe v Gamage_ SC 681/2001 SCM 19.9.2002

_Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ for petitioner-appellant.

_Harsha Fernando,_ State Counsel for respondents.

_ _

_Cur. adv. vult_

3

December 9, 2002

**FERNANDO, J.**

This is an appeal against the judgment of the Court of Appeal refusing an
application for Certiorari by the Petitioner-Appellant ("the Petitioner") to
quash an order of the 1st Respondent-Respondent who was then the Commander of
the Navy ("the Commander"), which order, according to the Petitioner, effected
a reduction in his rank. The present Commander was later added as a
Respondent.



The Petitioner, having obtained a medical degree from a Russian University,
obtained "temporary registration" under section 31 of the Medical Ordinance
from the Sri Lanka Medical Council ("SLMC") in July 1996. In September 1996 he
responded to an advertisement by the Navy calling for applications for
recruitment as "Surgeon Lieutenant":



"If you are a MBBS or equally qualified Doctor, here's your chance to achieve
the highest recognition in this noblest professions. Come join us as a Surgeon
Lieutenant.

Vacancies for Medical Officers/Dental Officer

ELIGIBILITY OTHER FACILITIES

**a.............................................. a....**

b.............................................. b....

c............................................... c....

d. Full registration at the SLMC as a d

Medical/Dental practitioner e....

PAY Those who have

1.............................................. TEMPORARY REGIS-

2............................................... TRATION MAY ALSO

3............................................... APPLY

4............................................... Selected candidates will

5............................................... be required to pass a

6............................................... Medical Fitness Test to

7............................................... the satisfaction of the

8............................................... Commander of the Navy

Closing date.. "

The Petitioner was interviewed, and was thereafter informed by a message dated
16.1.97 from Navy Headquarters that he had

4

been recruited to the Navy as a commissioned medical officer and that his rank
was Surgeon Lieutenant. He took his Oaths of Allegiance and Office on 16.1.97
and assumed duties.



Shortly thereafter another message dated 6.2.97 purported to "correct' the
original message, by specifying his rank as _" Acting _Surgeon Lieutenant".



It had therefore to be assumed that a commission _had_ been issued in respect
of the Petitioner prior to 16.1.97. Indeed even in the written submissions
filed on behalf of the Respondents in this case it has been submitted that the
Commander did not interfere with the commission of the Petitioner; that there
has been no withdrawal of the commission nor an appointment to another rank;
and that the original message contained a typographical error which was
correct­ed within a month. The Petitioner's position is that no commission
could have issued in respect of an appointment to the rank of Acting Surgeon
Lieutenant, and the Respondents do not claim that any such commission had been
issued.



Despite the second message, four days later a Navy Identity Card was issued to
the Petitioner describing him as "Surgeon Lieutenant".



The Petitioner was not informed of the reason for this "correc­tion". He
claimed that he made inquiries orally from higher officers, but that no reason
was given for the move to reduce his rank. In May 1998 he wrote to the
Commander asking for the reason for the reduc­tion to "Acting Surgeon
Lieutenant'; he received no reply. He wrote again in July and August, adding
that he had been assured at the interview that he would be enlisted as a
Surgeon Lieutenant: again, there was no reply or denial. He then received a
copy of a letter dated 3.9.98 from the Commander stating that he had been
recruited as Acting Surgeon Lieutenant and that he could not be confirmed as
Surgeon Lieutenant as he had not passed the swimming proficiency test; by
letter dated 18.9.98 he protested that he had already been appointed to that
rank, and drew attention to his previous letter. That letter as well as letter
dated 31.12.98 from his attorneys-at-law received no response, and by letter
dated 3.2.99 his attorneys-at-law threatened legal action if there was no
response within ten days. It was only then that the Commander, by letter dated
9.3.99, disclosed

5

the reason: that he had only "temporary registration"; that according to a
memorandum dated 7.5.96 issued by the Commander he could only join as an
Acting Lieutenant; and that a clerical error in the first message had been
corrected by the second. According to that mem­orandum, the procedure for the
direct enlistment of medical officers was that those having "temporary
registration" could be enlisted as Acting Lieutenant, and those having "full
registration" as Surgeon Lieutenant. "Full registration" means registration
under section 29(1) of the Medical Ordinance.



The Petitioner applied for Certiorari to quash the decisions of 6.2.97 and
9.3.99 as well as the memorandum of 7.5.96, or in the alternative for Mandamus
to compel the Respondents to restore the Petitioner's rank of Surgeon
Lieutenant.

In its judgement delivered on 29.5.2001 the Court of Appeal

held:



The Petitioner in this case in response to an advertisement.... calling for
doctors to join the Navy as Surgeon Lieutenant applied and was given the
appointment. In terms of the advertisement the Petitioner was originally
appointed as a Surgeon Lieutenant by document marked P3. However, shortly
thereafter he had been informed that his rank had been changed to acting
Surgeon Lieutenant. The Petitioner has written several letters protesting and
demanded the reason....The Respondents have not even bothered to reply the
Petitioner until he wrote to them through his Attorneys Subsequently the Navy
Commander has written stating that the first appointment was given due to a
mistake and according to the regulation they could give only [an] acting
appointment. It is to be noted that the advertisement...nowhere stated that
the initial appointment would be only an acting appointment. In the
circumstances it is not fair to call pro­fessionals to take appointments and
to give them acting appointments and keep them in suspense. We are mindful of
the fact that _this Court has no power to give appointments to Armed Forces._
However.... we are of the view that _the Navy has acted unreasonably_ and that
this con­duct has forced the Petitioner to seek the intervention of this
Court. _For_ _the reason stated earlier we_ dismiss this application [but]
order the 1st Respondent to pay a sum of Rs. 10,000 to the Petitioner as
costs." [emphasis added]



I must straightaway observe that the principal relief sought by the Petitioner
was not the grant of an appointment or a commission, but the quashing of the
purported "correction" (which would auto-

6

-matically "restore" his rank of Surgeon Lieutenant). The Court of Appeal erred in refusing that relief on the ground that it had no power _to give appointments_ to the Armed Forces. But for that mis­take it is clear that relief would have been granted.



Learned Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that the impugned "correction"
was fatally flawed for several reasons:



(1)                          There was no _rank_ of _" Acting _Surgeon
Lieutenant" provided for in the Navy Act and the regulations made thereunder,
and the  
"correction" was therefore illegal and invalid, being an appointment to a non-
existent rank; no commission could have been issued on the basis of that
"correction", and if issued would patently be a nullity;

(2)                          Even if there had been such a rank, the
Petitioner's rank of "Surgeon Lieutenant" could not have been altered to his
detriment  
after he had assumed duties, without disclosing the reason for such change and
without first giving him an opportunity of being heard;

(3)                          The Petitioner had initially been given no
reason; and 18 months later the reason alleged was the lack of proficiency in
swim ming. It was only after two years that an entirely different reason the
need for "full registration" \- was given. That reason was unten­able because
it was based on the assumption that the memorandum of 7.5.96 was binding,
although it had no legal basis. Wider eligibility criteria had been lawfully
stipulated in the September advertisement; and

(4)                          'Temporary registration" under section 31 of the
Medical Ordinance entitled the Petitioner to practise medicine whilst in the
service of the Government - which included the Navy. Accordingly, it was both
lawful and proper to stipulate that as one of the criteria.

 Learned State Counsel on behalf of the Respondents was forced to concede that
the Navy Act and the regulations made there­under did not provide for the rank
of _" Acting _Surgeon Lieutenant". "Acting" appointments were authorized in
regard to the rank of Lieutenant-Commander and above, and to the rank of Sub-
Lieutenant, but not to the rank of Lieutenant. He argued, however, that the
Commander had in fact appointed the Petitioner to the rank of "Surgeon
Lieutenant" although on an acting basis pending "full registration". He
persisted in this submission although it was pointed

7

out to him in the impugned message it was clearly stated that the Petitioner's
(corrected) _rank_ was _" Acting _Surgeon Lieutenant'. The Commander's
affidavit, too, repeatedly referred to the Petitioner's rank in the same way.
It is because there is no such rank that the Respondents have been unable to
produce a commission appointing the Petitioner to that rank. The Commander has
ventured the expla­nation that there had been a clerical error. That implies
that a deci­sion had been taken to give the Petitioner an "acting"
appointment; that such decision was correctly recorded in one document or
anoth­er; but that in the commission there was an inadvertent omission of the
reference to "acting". Had there been any such error, that would have been
clear upon an examination of the original commission and the antecedent
correspondence leading up to the issue of that com­mission. The Respondents
have failed to produce those documents, and the inference is that they do not
disclose a clerical error.

Learned State Counsel concedes that the Petitioner had been denied natural
justice, but argued that since the "correction" had been made within a month
the Petitioner had not suffered any preju­dice; and that in any event his
remuneration was the same. The lack of a hearing would not be fatal if a
hearing would have been a use­less formality which could not possibly have
made a difference (see _Dissanayakev Kaleel (1)._ That is hardly the case
here: if given a hear­ing the Petitioner could have pointed out the legal
position, and could have relied on the representations which he said had been
made to him at the interview. In any event, pecuniary loss is not the sole
test of prejudice. The Petitioner had to choose between staying on in a lower
position and leaving; if he had left the Navy on account of the apparent
reduction in rank, any prospective employer would have asked him why he had
been reduced in rank, and would hardly have believed that the Navy had reduced
him in rank without reason, and might well have suspected that there had been
some shortcoming or non-disclosure on his part. A short period of employment
without a good reason is generally a blot on a _curriculum vitae._ As I had
occa­sion to point out in _Weerasinghe_ v _Gamage_ (2) an employer must
exercise his powers with due care and restraint, for just as it is implic­it
in every contract of service that the employee shall be loyal, shall treat his
superiors with due respect,

 and shall guard the reputation of the employer, so also it is implicit that
the employer in his treatment  

8

of employees shall have care for their dignity and reputation and shall not
cause them unnecessary personal distress and prejudice. Often distress and
prejudice cannot be avoided, but where it can be avoid­ed, it must be avoided.
The Petitioner was entitled in law to a full explanation, and as a matter of
courtesy to an expression of regret for the alleged error. The impugned
message was hardly the kind of signal which builds morale and inspires loyalty
and dedication, espe­cially in those called upon to risk their lives in the
course of duty; and the prolonged failure to disclose a reason would have
added to the Petitioner's stress and frustration, liable to result in poor
performance of duties to the detriment of the Navy.



Under section 16(1)(a) of the Navy Act, it is only the Minister who can make
regulations in regard to appointments and promotions in the Navy. Accordingly,
the Commander's memorandum of 7.5.96 had no binding force. But learned State
Counsel contended that the Navy was entitled to insist upon "full
registration", because, he argued, 'lull registration" was all that had been
specified under "Eligibility". The advertisement taken as a whole does not
bear out that submission: all medical doctors were invited to join as Surgeon
Lieutenants, including those who only had "temporary registration", and there
was nothing which even hinted at the possibility that "tem­porary
registration" would be given lower priority or might result in a lower rank or
position, or that "full registration" must be obtained even later. Only a
future _" Medical _Fitness Test" was stipulated. There was thus no ambiguity
in the advertisement. Had there been an ambigu­ity, that would have had to be
construed _contra proferentem,_ and in favour of the Petitioner. A notice
calling for applications for employ­ment must be a clear guide for the honest
applicant, and public insti­tutions and their advisers must not resort to
strained constructions in order to convert them into devious snares for the
unwary.

Finally, learned State Counsel submitted that medical officers with "temporary
registration" employed in the Department of Health come under the supervision
of the Director of Health Services, while those in the Navy do not, and that
accordingly the Navy was justified in taking such officers on an acting basis,
until they obtained "full reg­istration". Section 31 of the Medical Ordinance,
as amended by Act No. 30 of 1987, provides that a person who is not qualified
to obtain "full registration" under section 29(1), is entitled, on production
of a

9

certificate from the Director of Health Services that he is in the employment
of the Government as a medical officer, to 'temporary registration" for the
period of his employment under the Government. No condition or restriction is
stipulated. If the Navy wished to impose any condition, it should have done so
in the advertisement or at the state of appointment. Not having done so, it
could not lawfully do so under the guise of "correcting" an error.



I therefore allow the appeal and set aside the order of the Court of Appeal in
so far as it dismissed the Petitioner's application. I grant the Petitioner
Certiorari to quash the impugned message 9.2.97, the decision contained in the
letter dated 9.3.99, and the Commander's memorandum of 9.5.96. The Navy and
its Commander will accordingly treat the Petitioner, for all purposes, as
having been a commissioned medical officer holding the rank of Surgeon
Lieutenant from 16.1.97, and will furnish to the Petitioner within one month a
true copy of the commission referred to in the message of 16.1.97 and of the
Gazette in which it was published. The Petitioner will be entitled to costs in
this Court in a sum of Rs. 40,000 payable by the State.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** - I agree.

**WEERASURIYA, J.** - I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

_Writ of Certiorari granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/45.html_  

