##  Senaratne v. Punya De Silva and Others - SLR - 272, Vol 1 of 1995 [1995]
LKSC 45; (1995) 1 Sri LR 272 (9 October 1995)

**272**

**SENARATNE**  
  **v.  
PUNYA DE SILVA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J.

S. C. APPLICATION NO: 18/95.  
OCTOBER 9,1995.

_Fundamental Rights - Constitution, Articles 13(1), and 13(2), - Right to
freedom from arbitrary arrest \- Communicating reasons and grounds for arrest-
Detention Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979, Sections 2, 32, 36
and 37 - Cognizable offence -Compensation and costs._

The petitioner was the President of the Nidahas Sevake Sangamaya, a Registered
Trade Union. In November 1994, the Secretary of the Prima Bakery Rajagiriya
branch of the Sangamaya was interdicted as a result of which a protest
campaign was staged by the members of the Union at the Prima Bakery.

On 7th December 1994 some of the employees took two executives of Prima Ceylon
Limited as hostages and detained them, on the roof top, of the Bakery where
the water storage tanks were, Located. The works threatened to push the
hostages off the roof top if the police attempted to move into the Bakery.

The petitioner received a message from the S. P., Nugegoda about the above
incident and was requested to intervene in his capacity as the President of
the Sangamaya to secure the release of the hostages.

Thereafter the petitioner played a vital role in securing the release of the
hostages and signed an agreement in his capacity as President of the Trade
Union.

The petitioners was informed by the Director, C.I.D. to call over at the
department on 14.12.1994 to make a statement regarding the dispute at the
Prima Bakery. When the Petitioner arrived at the Department he was directed by
the 1st respondent to an A.S.P. who interrogated him from about 10.20.a.m.
till 6.15 p.m.

On 23rd December 1994 at about 9 a.m. the 1st respondent accompanied by other
police officers, went to the residence of the petitioner and the 1st
respondent informed the petitioner that he had come there to arrest him.

273

The petitioner's case it that

(1) His right to freedom from arbitrary arrest guaranteed to him Article 13(1)
of the Constitution was violated because the 1st Respondent had no reasonable
cause to arrest him

(2) His fundamental right to be informed of the reason for his arrest had been
violated because he had not been informed the reasons for his arrest.

(3) The 1st respondent by keeping the petitioner in illegal custody on
23.12.1994 violated the Petitioner's fundamental right to freedom from
arbitrary detention guaranteed to him by Articles 13(1) and/or 13(2) of the
Constitution.

**Held**

(1) Although the 1st respondent was not required to have proof of the
commission of the offences and could have made, the arrest on the basis of
suspicion, the suspicion must not have been of an uncertain and vague nature,
but of a positive and definite character providing reasonable grounds for
concluding, that the `petitioner was concerned in the commission of the
offences.

(2) The petitioner was not implicated in any cognizable offence. There was no
reasonable complaint or reasonable information that he had committed or had
conspired to commit or abetted the commission of such an offence. There were
no grounds for reasonable suspicion that he had been "concerned" in any of the
specified cognizable offences in a sense that he was one of the group of
persons responsible for the criminal activities committed at the Bakery on 7
December 1994\.

(3) The petitioner could not have been arrested in accordance with the
provisions of Section 32(1)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure and his
arrest was not in accordance with the applicable procedure established by law
and therefore the 1st respondent violated Article 13(1) of the Constitution.

(4) It is the person arrested and not others, even his wife or lawyer, who
must be given the reasons for the arrest.

(5) There had to be reasons for supposing him to be 'concerned' in the
relevant way in the commission of cognizable offences to enable the 1st'
respondent to arrest the petitioner and the petitioner had a right to be given
those reasons.

(6) The Constitutional right to be given the reasons for arrest is not
satisfied by giving any kind of explanation. A reason for depriving a person
of his

274

personal liberty within the meaning of Article 13(1) of the Constitution must
be a ground for arrest. There can be no such ground other than the violation
of the law or a reasonable suspicion of the violation of the law.

(7) A citizen has a right to resist an unlawful arrest, but he can exercise
that right if he is informed of the "grounds upon which he is to be arrested".

(8) The petitioner should have been informed of the offences of which he was
suspected. It would not have been possible otherwise for the petitioner to
have explained away the mistaken notions which the 1st respondent may have
held and thereby regained his liberty. The underlying purpose of giving the
reasons for the arrest was thwarted.

(9) A person who is detained in the custody of the Jaw beyond a specified
prescribed maximum permissible time or beyond a reasonable time cannot be said
to be a person arrested in accordance with procedure established by law and
such a detention 'for whatever the period may be', subject to the principal of
de minimis, would violate Article 13(1) of the Constitution.

(10) The delay-in producing the petitioner was in the circumstances
unnecessary and unreasonable and that his production at 2.45 p.m. was not in
compliance with the provisions of Sections 36 and 37 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. Admittedly he was detained only a few hours. Nevertheless such a
detention being unnecessary and unreasonable was not according to procedure
established by law and it was therefore a violation of the petitioner's
Fundamental Right guaranteed by Article 13(2) of the Constitution

(11) The award of compensation or costs is not-automatic but-a matter for the
Courts discretion

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Malinda Channa Pieris & others v.A. G.& Others. [1994] 1 Sri L.R. 1 _  
_2\. Elasinghe v. Wijewickreme [1993] 1 Sri L.R. 163._  
_3\. Kumara v. Rohan Fernando & Others SC App. 22/90 SC Min. 21 July 1994 _  
_4\. wijenayake v.Chandrasiri & Others SC Appl 380/93 SCM. 22 March 1995. _  
_5\. Dumbell v. Roberts [1994] 1 All ER 326._  
_6\. Mutthusamy v. Kannangara (1951) 52 N.L.R. 324._  
_7\. Faiz v A.-G. S.C. App 89/91 S.C.M. 8 Sept 1994_  
_8\. Faurdeen v. jayatilleke SC App 366/93,S.C.M.8 Sept 1994_  
_9\. Selvakumar v. Douglas Devananda SC. App 150/93 S.C. Min 13th July,1994_  
_10\. Gunasekera v. De Fonseka [1972] 75 N.L.R.246_  
_11\. Garusinghe v Kadurugamuwa SC App 133/87 SCM 1st June 1988_  
_12\. piyasiri v.Ferrrando [1988] 1 Sri LR. 173._  
_13\. Mahinda Rajapakse and Vasudeva Nanayakkara v. Chief lnspector
Karunaratne & Others SC App.2and 4/93 SCM 31.3.1994. _

_275_

_14\. Faiz v. A.G.SC App. 89/91 SCM 19th Nov. 1993._  
_15\. Wijeratne v. Vijitha Perera SC App 379/93 SCM 2 March 1994._  
_16\. Kumarasena v Shriyanatha & Others SC App 257/93 SCM 23 May 1994 - _  
_17\. Kumara v Rohan Fernando & Others SC App 22/90 SCM 21 July 1994.. _  
_18\. Nallanayagam v. Gunatilleke [1987] 1 Sri L. R. 293._

**APPLICATION** for infringement of Fundamental Rights.

_Tilak Marapana, P.C. with Dulinda Weerasuriya and Lakshman Ranasinghe for the
petitioner._  
  
_C.R. de Silva, D.S.G. with B. Aluvihare, S.C. for the respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 03, 1995  
**AMERASINGHE, J.**

**THE TAKING AND RELEASE OF HOSTAGES ON 7 DECEMBER 1994.**

The Nidahas Sevaka Sangamaya is a registered Trade Union. In November 1994,
the Secretary of the Prima Bakery, Rajagiriya, branch of the Sangamaya, was
interdicted. This led to a protest campaign by the members of his Trade Union
at the Bakery. On 7 December 1994 some of the employees took the General
Manager of the Bakery Mr. Lin (in some documents he is referred to as Lyn) Sin
Hui, and the Assistant Bakery Manager, Mr. Jayantha de Silva, as hostages and
detained them on the roof top, sixth floor level of the Bakery where the water
storage tanks were located.

The petitioner, who is a Member of Parliament and the President of the Nidahas
Sevaka Sangamaya, received a message from the Superintendent of Police,
Nugegoda, (conveyed through the officer in-charge of the Parliament Police
Post) that workers at the Bakery had taken two hostages and were threatening
to push them off the roof top where they were being held if the police
attempted to move into the Bakery. The petitioner was requested to intervene
in his capacity as the President of the Nidahas Sevaka Sangamaya to

276

secure the release of the hostages. The petitioner was unable to immediately
accede to the request, for he was scheduled to speak in Parliament. However,
after Parliament adjourned for the day, the petitioner spoke to the Minister
of Labour about the incident at the Bakery. The petitioner had a few days
prior to the incident, met the Minister of Labour regarding the dispute at the
Bakery. The petitioner informed the Minister that he was proceeding to the
Bakery with the Superintendent of Police, Nugegoda, and requested the Minister
to help him resolve the dispute. The Minister of Labour agreed and requested
the Petitioner to keep him informed of any developments.

The facts stated above, are based on the averments of the petitioner; There is
no contrary evidence at all except that the first respondent in paragraph 7 of
his affidavit states: "I only admit that a message was conveyed to the
Petitioner by the Superintendent of Police,: Mr. Navaratnam through the
officer-in-charge of the Parliament Police. By way of further answer, I state
that the investigations revealed that Mr. Navaratnam had taken the above step
as the workers, who were holding the executives of Prima Ceylon Limited as
hostages, had demanded that the petitioner be summoned to the scene." Are not
Police messages received and recorded in a prescribed manner` in prescribed
forms? They have been produced before this Court in other cases. ((E.g. see
the record in Reds v. A. G. (1) "), If what the petitioner said about the
appeal to him to intervene in his capacity as the President pf Nidahas Sevaka
Sangamaya to secure the release of the hostages was not true, why were the
copies of the Police messages not filed?

According to the petitioner, having arrived at the Bakery, the petitioner met
the Secretary of the Nidahas Sevaka Sangamaya, Mr. D. A Punchihetti and went.
to the place where Mr. Lin Sin Hui and Mr. Jayantha de Silva were being
detained and spoken to them and to the workers "with a view to setting the
dispute and the release of the two hostages. The petitioner, however, was
successful".

The First respondent however, states that "investigation revealed" that
"according to both Ms. Lin and Jayantha de Silva the petitioner

277

had made no attempt whatsoever to settle the dispute, but [on] the contrary
had demanded from Mr. Lyn that he acceded to the demands put forward by the
workers if they want themselves released." In support of this, the First
respondent filed the statements of Mr. Lin Sin Hui (1R1) and Mr. Jayantha de
Silva, (1R2) recorded by the Police.

What Mr. Lin Sin Hui said was as follows:- "Mr. Rajitha Senaratne told me if
you give (sic.) to their demands you will be released. Then I told (sic.) I do
not know what are their demands and I cannot just agree on their demands. In
response for my reply (sic.) he said that he cannot do anything to release
me... After about 30 to 40 minutes Dr. Rajitha Senaratne... and others... left
the roof top."

Mr. Lin Sin Hui had said in his statement that he did not understand the
Sinhala Language. His was, therefore, not in a position to understand the
discussion between the petitioner and the workers. Understandably, therefore,
there is nothing in Mr." Lin Sin Hui's statement suggesting that that the
petitioner "had made no attempt whatsoever to settle the dispute." Nor is
there anything in his statement to suggest that the petitioner "demanded" or
coerced him to accept the conditions laid down by the workers. All that the
petitioner did was to convey what he had gathered after his discussions with
the workers, namely that they would release him if he agreed to give into
their demands. Mr. Lin Sin Hui could not agree because he did not know what
the demands were. The petitioner at this stage could be of no further
assistance in the matter of securing the release of the hostages since the
workers were not prepared to release them unless their demands were granted,
and the petitioner so informed Mr. Lin Sin Hui.

Nor does the statement, of Mr. Jayantha de Silva support the First
respondent's averment that the petitioner "made no attempt whatsoever to
settle the dispute." or that he "demanded" anything from Mr. Lin Sin Hui. In
describing the events of the day Mr. de Silva states that certain workers told
him that they would have their necks cut if their demands were not granted.
When this was communicated to Mr. Lin Sin Hui, he had said that he did not
know what their

278

demands were. Then one Vijitha had said that Dr. Rajitha Senaratne
(petitioner) would be coming with their demands later in the day. At about
4.30 p.m. Dr. Senaratne accompanied by 20-30 people, including certain Members
of Parliament, arrived. Dr. Senaratne spoke to him and said "Take a decision."
However, Dr. Senaratne and those accompanying him did not inform him of the
demands of the workers. Dr. Senaratne spoke to Mr. Lin Sin Hui but Mr. de
Silva states that he is unable to say what Dr. Senaratne told him. How does
Mr. de Silva's statement support the First respondent's statement that the.
petitioner "demanded" certain things from Mr. Lin?

Having failed in his attempt to settle the dispute, the petitioner went down
and was about to get into his vehicle to leave the Bakery premises When Mr.
Wickrema Perera, Assistant Superintendent of Police, Nugegoda, and Inspector
Gunawardena, officer-in-charge of, the Welikada Police Station, spoke to the
petitioner and inquired, whether he would meet Mr. Amaradasa Gunawardene, the
Administrative Manager of Prima (Ceylon) Ltd., who was at the time in a police
vehicle nearby. The petitioner agreed and walked up to that vehicle and spoke
to Mr. Gunawardene. Mr. Gunawardene and the petitioner agreed to a suggestion
made by Mr. Wickrema Perera that they should discuss the matter at the
Welikada Police Station.

At the Welikada Police Station, Mr. A. Gunawardene had been unable to agree to
two of the demands of the workers. The petitioner then informed Mr. A.
Gunawardene and Mr. Lucien Wijekoon, Deputy. Inspect-General of Police, who
was present, that he was going back to the Bakery to discuss the matter with
the workers. Having spoken, to them and ascertained their minimum demands for
the release of the hostages, the petitioner returned to the Police Station
along with officers of the Trade Union and indicated what the demands were.
Mr. A. Gunawardene said that in respect of some of the matters in he needed
instructions from Mr. Primus who was in Singapore and hat he was unable to
contact him. The officials of the Trade Union stated that the Personnel
Manager, Mr. T. Samarasinghe and Accountant would be able to contact Mr.
Primus. The Police present there requested the Petitioner and the officials of
the

279

Trade Union to bring Mr. Samarasinghe and the Accountant from the Bakery. The
petitioner went to the Bakery and returned to the Police Station with Mr.
Samarasinghe and the Accountant. On his return; the petitioner found Mr. R.
Nash, Deputy High Commissioner of the British High Commission and two
Executives of a sister company of Prima (Ceylon) Ltd. Mr. A. Gunawardene, Mr.
Samarasinghe and the Accountant discussed the matter with the two Executives
of the sister company who then contacted Mr. Primus using a cellular
telephone. Mr. A. Gunawardene thereafter informed the petitioner that the
minimum demands of the workers were acceptable.

The First respondent in his affidavit (paragraph 12) stated "Mr. Amaradasa
Gunawardene had categorically stated that he granted the demands of the
workers put forward by the petitioner because of the danger to the lives of
the hostages." In his affidavit (paragraph 10) he states that Mr. A.
Gunawardene "had refused to accept 2 of the demands". He does not deny the
Petitioner's averment that Mr. Gunawardene had stated that on some of the
matters in issue he required instructions from Mr. Primus. The First
respondent admits in paragraph 17 of his affidavit that the Executives spoke
to Mr. Primus and that thereafter Mr. Gunawardene had agreed to the demands.
It was Mr. Primus, for whatever his reasons were there is no evidence with
regard to that who agreed to the demands. Mr. Gunawardene was his mouthpiece.
It is incorrect for the First respondent to state that it was Mr. Gunawardene
who granted the demands and that he had done so because of the danger to the
lives of the hostages. Where is Mr. Gunawardene's evidence on that matter? Had
he been in a position to agree to the demands because of the danger to the
lives of the hostages, he could and should have done so before Mr. Primus was
contacted. In any event it was not the First respondent's case that the
petitioner coerced Mr. Gunawardene.

When the Honourable Minister of Labour telephoned the petitioner at the Police
Station the petitioner informed him that the management had agreed to accept
the minimum demands of the workers and that the workers had assured him that
the hostages would be released if their minimum demands would be met. The
petitioner requested the

280

Honourable Minister to send the Commissioner of Labour to the Police Station.
These matters are not denied by the First respondent.

Mr. A. Gunawardene prepared a draft agreement which was typed by a Police
Constable. Obviously, this was the management's view of the matter. When it
was shown to the petitioner, who as we have observed was the President of the
Trade Union, and the officials of the Prima Bakery Branch of that Union, the
petitioner and the officials suggested that the agreement should include two
additional clauses: One of them was that those persons who were involved in
the hostage incident should not be subjected to victimisation or disciplinary
or legal action. The other was that the Bakery would resume normal functions
from 8 December 1994. These matters were added by the petitioner, as he
himself states in Paragraph 20 of his affidavit and confirmed by the First
respondent in paragraph 10 of his affidavit, in the handwriting of the
petitioner (see P1). They were agreed to by Mr. Gunawardene. Evidently, unlike
the two clauses on which he required directions, he had sufficient authority
to decide such matters without consulting anyone else The agreement was signed
on behalf of the workers by the petitioner in his capacity as President of the
Trade Union and by Mr.T. Samarasinghe on behalf of Prima Lanka Ltd. The
Commissioner of Labour, Mr. R. P. Wimalasena, and the Assistant Commissioner
of Labour, Mr. Mahinda Madihahewa, certified that the agreement was signed in
their presence. (see P1). The First respondent's averment that his
investigations revealed that "the arrival of the officials of the Department
of Labour had taken place only after the agreement was signed by the parties"
is contradicted by the agreement. (P1).

After the agreement was signed, the petitioner along with the Trade Union
officials and Mr. T. Samarasinghe, Mr. Nash, the Deputy High Commissioner, and
the two Executives went to the bakery where the petitioner handed over the
original of the agreement to the worker's who were on the ground floor and
proceeded to the fifth floor. The workers took the agreement to the sixth
floor. Some of them shouted down to the fifth floor for clarifications from
the petitioner and then brought Mc Lin and Mr. de Silva down to the fifth
floor, where they shook hands with the petitioner and thanked him. Thereafter
they all came down to the ground floor and the petitioner advised the workers
to leave the premises peacefully.

281

The First respondent in his affidavit states that his investigations revealed
that the release of the hostages "preceded the signing of the agreement
between the petitioner and Mr. T Samarasinghe". What are the investigations
that revealed that position? No evidence has been produced in support of that
position. The agreement would have been of little or no use if the hostages
had in fact been already released. In fact the statement of one of the
hostages, Mr. Jayantha de Silva, which was produced by the First respondent
(IR2), at folio 919682, supports the position that the petitioner returned
with the agreement at about 9.30 p.m. and that he and Mr. Lin were released
thereafter. The statement of the other hostage, Mr. Lin which was produced by
the First respondent (IR1 at p. 5) also supports the view that the hostages
were released after the signing of the agreement. Mr. Lin stated that at about
9.30 p.m. he heard something being read in Sinhala and he saw the workers
clapping their hands. Thereafter I with Mr. T. J. de Silva were unlocked and
brought to the 4th floor ..." where he says he met the Deputy High
Commissioner the petitioner and-others. Nor is the First respondent's denial
that the freed hostages thanked the petitioner and shook hands with him borne
out by any of the documents filed by him. Although as we have seen the First
respondent in several averments in his affidavit on the alleged basis that
"investigations revealed" it seeks to make out that the petitioner's role was
other than that of a peacemaker, he has failed to adduce evidence in support
of his position. The evidence available, including evidence furnished by him,
points in the opposite direction. One ought to assume that the evidence the
First respondent did choose to file, if he did have other evidence also, was
the best evidence he had. Or was the other evidence he had unfavourable to his
case in some way?

In a statement to the, Police (IR1) V N. Selvaratnam presumably an officer of
the Bakery, for he refers to "Mr. A. Gunawardene our Administrative Manager"
\- clearly acknowledges the petitioner's real role, namely that of a
peacemaker. He states "In the meantime negotiations were proceeding to obtain
the release [of the] officers locked, up inside [the] Prima premises with the
assistance of Dr. Rajitha Senaratne the Chairman of the Workers Union.

282

In discharging the petitioner on 27 December 1994, the Magistrate had found
that all that the petitioner had done was to have brought about a settlement
in his capacity as the president of the Trade Union. (See P3D and E). And that
is a finding that is justified by the evidence placed before this Court.

**THE INTERROGATION OF THE PETITIONER BY THE POLICE ON 13.12.94**

On 13 December 1994, the petitioner received a telephone call at his residence
from the Director of the Criminal Investigation Department, Mr. O. K.
Hemachandra, requesting him to call over at the Department on the next day to
make a statement regarding the dispute at the Prima Bakery. When the
petitioner arrived at the Department on 14 December 1994, he was directed by
the First respondent to Mr. Mahesh Perera, Assistant Superintendent of Police,
who interrogated him from about 10.20 a.m. till 6.15 p.m., about his family
background, his political career and about the dispute at the Prima Bakery and
the incidents of 7 December 1994. The statement recorded was filed in these
proceedings (1 R7) and will be referred to later in my judgment.

**THE ARREST OF THE PETITIONER**

On 23rd December 1994 at about 9 a.m. the First respondent, accompanied by
other Police Officers, went to the residence of the petitioner and the First
respondent informed the Petitioner that he had come there to arrest him. The
petitioner was arrested and taken to the C.I.D. Office where he was
interrogated about the dispute at the Bakery and the incidents of 7 December
1994. In his petition, the petitioner alleges that his arrest by the First
respondent on 23 December 1994 was "a violation of his fundamental right to
freedom from arbitrary arrest guaranteed to him by Article 13(1) of the
Constitution inasmuch as the 1st respondent had no reasonable cause to arrest
the petitioner." The petitioner prayed, inter alia, that the Court should
declare that his fundamental right guaranteed to him Article 13(1) of the
Constitution had been infringed.

283

**THE ALLEGED ABSENCE OF -REASONABLE CAUSE FOR ARREST BY THE FIRST
RESPONDENT**

The petitioner's case is that his right to freedom from arbitrary arrest
guaranteed to him by Article 13(1) of the Constitution was violated because
the First respondent had no reasonable cause to arrest him. Article 13(1)
neither refers to "arbitrary arrest" nor to absence of "reasonable cause" for
arrest. What it does say is that "no person shall be arrested except according
to procedure established by law ..." The First respondent in his affidavit
does not explain how or why the arrest should be regarded as being in
accordance with procedure established by law. Having admitted that he arrested
the petitioner on 23 December 1994, the First respondent states that "the
petitioner was arrested as the statements recorded in the course of the
investigations indicated that the-petitioner was involved in the commission of
offences" punishable under certain sections of the Penal Code. The sections
are section 140, (being a member of an unlawful assembly), 300 (attempt to
murder), 332 (wrongful restraint), 333. (wrongful confinement), 315
(voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means) 1,13(b)
(conspiracy for the commission or abetment of an offence) and 102(abetment).

Section 32(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that "Any peace
officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant arrest
any person" in the circumstances set out in that provision. It is provided in
section 32(1) (b) that a person may be arrested "who has been concerned in any
cognizable offence or against whom a reasonable complaint has been made or
credible information has been received or a reasonable suspicion exists of his
having been so concerned."

"Cognizable offence" is defined in section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
to mean an Offence for which a peace officer (which phrase includes a Police
Officer) may in accordance with the First Schedule arrest without a warrant.
In terms of the First Schedule, an arrest may be made without a warrant for
abetment (section 102) or conspiracy or abetment (section 113) of the Penal
Code "if arrest

284

for the offence abetted may be made without a warrant but not otherwise". The
Schedule provides that offences specified in this case, namely, those
punishable under sections 140, 300, 315, 332 and, 333 of the Renal Code, are
matters in respect of which an arrest may be made without a warrant. They are
therefore "cognizable" offences.

The question then is whether the petitioner was concerned in, or against whom
a reasonable complaint had been made or credible information had been received
or a reasonable suspicion existed of his having been concerned in, the
commission of the offences referred to. The First respondent alleged that the
petitioner was "involved" in, the commission of the specified offences. The
learned Deputy Solicitor General who represented him explained that the arrest
was made because the petitioner was a person "concerned". Were there
circumstances, objectively regarded the subjective satisfaction of the officer
making the arrest is not enough that should have induced the First respondent
to suspect that the petitioner was concerned in the commission of those
offences? (See _Malinda Channa Pieris and Others v. A. G. and Others_ (1);
_Elasinghe v. Wijewickreme_ (2); _Kumara v. Rohan Fernando and Others_ (3);
_Wijenayake v. Chandrasiri and Others_ (4)). In other words, although the
First respondent was not required to have proof of the commission of the
offences and could have made the arrest on the basis of suspicion, the
suspicion must not have been of an uncertain and vague nature, but of a
positive and definite character providing reasonable grounds for concluding
that the petitioner was concerned in the commission of the offences. As Scott
C.J. observed in Dumbell v. Roberts (5) (followed in Muttusamy v. Kannangara
(6); Faiz v. A. G. (7) and in Faurdeen v. Jayatilleke (8)). "The principle of
personal freedom that every man should, be presumed innocent until he is found
guilty applies also to the police function of arrest ... For that reason it is
of importance that no one should be arrested by the Police except on grounds
which the particular circumstances of the arrest justified entertainment of a
reasonable suspicion."

Although the First respondent states that the "statements" (the emphasis is
mine) "recorded in the course of investigations indicated

285

that the petitioner was involved in the commission" of the offences he
mentioned, there is only one statement referred to or filed by him, namely,
that of Mr. S. Wijeratne (1R5). At Folio 926373 of that statement Mr.
Wijeratne states that at a meeting held on 15 November 1994 Dr. Rajitha
Senaratne said: "Parliament would be sitting on December 7th and after that
let us go near the premises and carry out a protest demonstration." Dr.
Senaratne also said that on the 7th, Manages would be taken up to the top
floor near the water storage tanks. "We were so advised by Dr. Rajitha
Senaratne and by Mr. Punchihetti."

Learned Counsel for the First respondent submitted that Mr. Wijeratne was a
member of the Trade Union of which the petitioner was the President and that
an allegation of that nature would not have been lightly made. It is not
without significance that the First respondent himself did not state in his
affidavit that he considered the statement of Mr. Wijeratne to be credible
because of these reasons. Was it because it was supposed that the question why
Mr. D. A. Punchihetti, the Secretary of the Trade Union who was also said in
Mr. Wijeratne's statement to have advised the taking of the persons to the top
floor, was not arrested might have. been averted? That question was
nevertheless raised by the petitioner's Counsel. Would such an allegation be
lightly made against the Secretary of his Union? Not, a word of explanation
was offered by learned Counsel for the First respondent on the failure to deal
with Mr. Punchihetti in a similar manner. The petitioner in his affidavit
dated 7 September 1995 states that Mr. Wijeratne's statement was a fabricated,
statement". and filed an affidavit from Mr. Wijeratne to the effect that he
was made to sign the statement 1R5 under duress; and that the contents of the
statement were not read out to him. Mr. Wijeratne denies having said that
either the petitioner or Mr. Punchihetti advised them to take the Managers up
to the water tank area as hostages.

The First respondent did not have the benefit of reading either Mr.
Wijeratne's affidavit or that of the petitioner at the time of making the
arrest and what is relevant for our purposes are the circumstances at the time
of the arrest. At that time the First respondent did have access to the
statement of the petitioner

286

recorded on 14th December 1994. In paragraph 17A of his affidavit the First
respondent states that "on 14.12.1994 the petitioner was questioned in detail
about his involvement in the hostage crisis at the Prima Bakery, and in the
course of the statement his attention was drawn to the fact that the suspects
who were already in custody in connection with the said incident had stated
that he had advised the members of the Trade Union to wrongly confine the
executives of the Prima Bakery., (A copy of the statement of the petitioner
recorded on 14.12.94 is annexed hereto marked IR7 and the same is pleaded as
part and parcel of this affidavit)." In paragraph 23 of his affidavit the
First respondent admits he was "aware that a statement of the petitioner had
been recorded by Assistant Superintendent of Police Mr. Mahesh Perera." This
is to be expected, for as we have seen, when the petitioner went to the C.I.D.
office on 14 December, it was the First respondent who directed him to Mr.
Mahesh Perera for interrogation. Knowing that the petitioner's version was
available, what would a reasonable man have done? He would have perused the
statement or at least have asked Mr. Mahesh Perera what the petitioner had
said in order to make up his mind as to whether there were reasonable grounds.
However, the First respondent did neither of these things before he arrested
the petitioner. He considered the petitioner's version only after he had
arrested him and taken to the C.I.D. building in the Fort. The petitioner
states in paragraph 37 of his affidavit that at that place he was interrogated
by the First respondent about the dispute at the Bakery and the incidents of 7
December. The petitioner states "I stated that I had already answered the same
questions put to me by A.S.P. Mahesh Perera on 14.12.1994. The 1st respondent
asked A.S.P. Mahesh Perera whether it was so and A.S.P. Perera replied in the
affirmative. The 1st respondent then perused the statement made by me to
A.S.P. Perera. The 1st respondent questioned me further. My statement was
typed in my presence. I then signed the statement after having read it." (The
emphasis is mine).

In reply, the First respondent in paragraph 23 of his affidavit states that he
was "aware that a statement of the petitioner had been recorded by the
Assistant Superintendent of Police Mr. Mahesh Perera." By way of "further
answer" he states: "I did not question A.S.P. Mr. Mahesh Perera in regard to
the said statement recorded

287

from the petitioner." Whether he did question Mr. Mahesh Perera or not, it
seems to me that the First respondent was considering what the petitioner had
said earlier on 14 December for the first time after he had arrested the
petitioner.

The statement recorded by Mr. Mahesh Perera on 14 December 1994 was available
to the First respondent, but he did not inform himself of what had been stated
therein before he arrested the petitioner nine days later. Had he read that
statement, he would have been put on his guard and required to investigate the
matter further before coming to the conclusion that the statement of Mr.
Wijeratne was credible or that there were reasonable grounds for suspecting
the petitioner to have been concerned in the offences alleged.

Was there any evidence other than the statement of Mr. Wijeratne that could
reasonably have persuaded the First respondent to come to the conclusion that
the petitioner was concerned in the offences alleged? In Paragraph 17A of his
affidavit the First respondent states that when the petitioner was
interrogated on 14 December 1994 "his attention was drawn to the fact that the
suspects who were already in custody in connection with the said incident had
stated that he had advised the members of the Trade Union to wrongly confine
the executives of the Prima Bakery." The First respondent filed the statement
made by the petitioner to the Police in support of his averment that persons
in custody had said that he had advised them to confine the Executives of
Prima Bakery. That statement shows that the First respondent's averment is
factually incorrect. According to folio 929347 of that statement the
petitioner was asked whether (and not told that certain persons, whether in
custody or not had said so) he had advised the taking of the hostages and
holding them near the water storage tanks at a meeting held on 15 November
1994. The petitioner had denied attending any such meeting. Moreover, the
statement made by the petitioner on 14 December 1994 was supposed to have been
read by him only after the arrest. One begins to wonder whether he did in fact
read that statement on that occasion or whether he had read that statement
even by 18 March 1995 when he filed his affidavit in these proceedings. If
there were statements from persons other than Mr. Wijeratne, implicating the
petitioner, why

288

was the petitioner not questioned about them, and why have they not been
produced?

In paragraph 23 (b) of his affidavit the First respondent explains the need
for a "further statement of the petitioner" by reference to "the availability
of fresh material implicating the petitioner at the time of his arrest." What
is the "fresh material"? The First respondent has not filed any statements
from any person or persons supporting the view, that the petitioner was
concerned in the offences alleged. However, our attention was drawn to the
Police Report filed before the Magistrate (IR9) when the petitioner was
produced before him on 23 December 1994.

What does document IR9 contain? It contains a paraphrase of the statements of
Mr. P. Amaradasa Gunawardene and Mr. T. Samarasinghe (officials of Prima), and
Mr. Lucien Wijekoon and Mr. C. Navaratnam (Police Officers) stating that the
release of the hostages was obtained upon the signing of an agreement on
behalf of the workers by the petitioner. We have seen that the petitioner did
play a vital role in securing the release of the suspects and signed the
agreement in his capacity as President of the Trade Union. What was it that
transformed the peacemaker into a villain? One possible explanation is that
there was a failure to ascertain the facts. Another is that there was a
misinterpretation of the facts. There might also have been a misunderstanding
of the law on the part of the First respondent. (See also paragraph 20 of the
First respondent's affidavit read with paragraph 17 of the Petition which I
shall discuss later below under the caption "Were Reasons For Arrest Given?").

In paragraph 17 (a) of his affidavit the First respondent claims that he
arrested the petitioner because he was "involved" in the commission of certain
offences. He was, learned Counsel for the 1st respondent submitted, therefore
"concerned." Learned Counsel for the First respondent, over and over again
stressed the fact that the Petitioner was "concerned" and therefore arrested
in accordance with procedure prescribed by law. If "concerned" in section 32
of the Code of Criminal Procedure is to be given that meaning, some quite
extra-ordinary and unexpected consequences must follow. Every

289

"interested" person could have been arrested, including especially the
hostages for they Were more "involved" in that sense than any others. Every
Police Officer who investigated the matter, including the First respondent,
the Police Officers, the Commissioner of Labour, the Assistant Commissioner of
Labour and officials of the Bakery who, like the petitioner, attempted to
settle the matter, could have been arrested. The petitioner was "concerned",
as we have seen, in the sense that he, as the President of the Trade Union,
was instrumental in bringing about an end to the hostage crisis. He went to
the scene in response to an appeal from the Police to assist in the matter.
Having failed, he was about to leave when he acceded to the request of the
Police to play an intercessory role. He agreed because, admittedly, he was
"concerned" in the sense that he was troubled by the events and showed concern
in and was anxious to bring the crisis to an end. However, the fact that the
crisis was brought to an end by the petitioner's intervention did not entangle
him with and bring him into connection with the decisions of other persons to
take hostages and to deal with them in various reprehensible ways.

The petitioner was not implicated in any cognizable offence. There was no
reasonable complaint or credible information that he had committed or had
conspired to commit or abetted the commission of such an offence. There were
no grounds for reasonable suspicion that he had been "concerned" in any of the
specified cognizable offences in the sense that he was one of the group of
persons responsible for the criminal activities committed at the Bakery on 7
December 1994\. I therefore hold the petitioner could not have been arrested
in accordance with the provisions of Section 32(1) (b) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure and that his arrest was not in accordance with -the applicable
procedure established by law and therefore that the First respondent violated
Article 13(1) of the Constitution.

**WERE REASONS MR ARREST GIVEN?**

Article 13(1) of the Constitution provides that "Any person arrested, shall be
informed of the reason for his arrest." The petitioner

290

in paragraph 45 of his petition and paragraph 46 of his affidavit maintains
that his fundamental right to be informed of the reason for his arrest had
been violated because he had not been informed of the reasons for his arrest.

In paragraph 28 of his affidavit the petitioner states that the First
respondent informed him that he had come to arrest him. "I thereupon inquired
from the 1st respondent what the charges against me were. The 1st respondent
replied that I would be informed of the charges against me at the C.I.D. I
then inquired whether the Hon. Speaker's permission had been obtained for my
arrest and the 1st respondent replied that such permission was not necessary."
In paragraph 30 of his affidavit the petitioner states that he contacted Mr.
Paul Perera, President's Counsel, over the telephone and informed him of what
had happened. "Mr. Perera wanted me to find out from the 1st respondent what
the charges against me were. Mr. Perera also told me that it was my
constitutional right to be informed of the charges against me. Mr. Perera
advised me not to leave my house without being informed of the charges against
me. I requested Mr. Perera to hold the line and informed the 1st respondent of
what Mr. Perera had told me. The 1st respondent however informed me that the
charges would be made known to me at the C.I.D. Thereupon, I informed Mr.
Perera that the 1st respondent had told him that the charges would be made
known to him at the C.I.D. Mr. Perera then asked me to inquire whether the
Hon. Speaker's permission had been obtained. I informed Mr. Perera that the
1st respondent had told me that such permission was not necessary."

The petitioner's wife who had gone to work, had been informed by the
petitioner's surgery assistant the petitioner was a Dental Surgeon of what was
taking place. She returned home. In paragraph 33 of his affidavit the
petitioner states "My wife demanded from the 1st respondent to know why I was
to be taken away. The 1st respondent replied that my statement would be
recorded and that. I would be produced before the Magistrate without delay."
In paragraph 35 of his affidavit the petitioner states as follows: "... as I
was getting into the let respondent's vehicle, ... Mr. Lakshman

291

Ranasinghe, Attorney-at-Law, contacted me on my mobile telephone. ...I
informed Mr. Ranasinghe that I was being taken to the C.I.D. by the 1st
respondent. Mr. Ranasinghe then wished to speak to the 1st respondent and I
handed over the mobile telephone to the 1st respondent. The 1st respondent
spoke to Mr. Ranasinghe and stated that I would be produced before the
Magistrate after recording my statement." The averments contained in
paragraphs 33 and 35 are confirmed by the petitioner's wife, Dr. Suiatha
Senaratne, in her affidavit (P5).

The petitioner's statement was recorded at the C.I.D. However, despite the
assurances he and his wife were given, the petitioner states in paragraph 37
of his affidavit that he "was never informed by the 1st respondent or by any
other officer of the reason for my arrest."

With regard to the averments in paragraph 30 of the petitioner's affidavit
concerning his conversation with Mr. Paul Perera, President's Counsel, the
First respondent states in paragraph 18 (a) of his affidavit that he did not
listen to the conversation, In paragraph 17(c) of his affidavit the First
respondent states that he informed the petitioner that the Speaker's
permission was "not necessary, to arrest a Member of Parliament concerned in
the commission of a criminal offence." If when Mr. Paul Perera had inquired
whether the Speaker's permission had been obtained the petitioner straight
away informed him about what the First respondent had told him about the
matter, it is difficult to understand why, if as the First respondent states
in paragraph 23(c) of his affidavit that the petitioner had been also informed
of the reasons for the arrest prior to being placed under arrests the
petitioner did not tell Mr. Perera what the reasons were or that he had been
given reasons it seems more probable than not that because he had not been
given reasons for the arrest, the petitioner conveyed Mr. Perera's view that
reasons for the arrest must be given and that the First respondent said that
the charges would be made known to the petitioner at the C.I.D.

In paragraphs 20 and 21 of his affidavit the First respondent states as
follows:

292



"20\. With reference to the averments contained in paragraph 32 of the
affidavit of the petitioner I state that I informed the wife of the petitioner
the reasons for his arrest which are set out by paragraph 17 of the petition.
I requested her to accompany the petitioner to the C.I.D.

21\. With reference to the averments contained in paragraph 25 of the
affidavit of the petitioner, I only admit having spoken to Mr. Ranasinghe,
Attorney-at-Law over the cellular phone of the petitioner. By way of further
answer I state that I informed Mr. Ranasinghe the reasons for the arrest of
the petitioner and requested him to come to the C.I.D. if he wishes to meet
the petitioner."

The First respondent's position is not that he gave the Petitioner reasons for
arrest within a reasonable time thereafter for example, at the C.I.D., (which
in certain circumstances might have been justified) but that he did so prior
to him being placed under arrest." (See paragraph 23(1) of the First
respondent's affidavit). There was no dispute that the petitioner had been
arrested before the arrival of his wife and before the telephone conversation
with Mr. Ranasinghe. Giving them reasons for arrest in the presence of the
petitioner was of no avail. There is no evidence with regard to reasons for
arrest which the First respondent was supposed to have given the petitioner's
wife or his lawyer. I will assume that what he told the wife and Mr.
Ranasinghe were what he told the petitioner himself was too late. Moreover, it
is the person arrested and not others even his wife or lawyer who must be
given reasons for the arrest, but I will assume that what the petitioner
overheard was a sufficient communication.

The First respondent states as follows in paragraph 20 of his affidavit. "I
informed the wife of the petitioner the, reasons for his arrest which are set
out by para. 17 of the Petition, I requested her to accompany the petitioner
to the C.I.D." Paragraph 17 of the petition states as follows: "Thereafter,
Mr. Amaradasa Gunawardena informed the petitioner that the minimum demands of
the workers were

293

 acceptable to the management. Meanwhile, the Hon. Minister of Labour
telephoned the Police Station and inquired from the petitioner about the
situation. The petitioner informed the Hon. Minister of Labour that the
management was agreeable to the minimum demands of the workers. He also
informed the Hon. Minister that the workers had assured him that the hostages
would be released if their minimum demands were met. The petitioner requested
the Hon. Minister to send the Commissioner of Labour to the Police Station."

It will be observed that the First respondent did not suggest that on the
basis of Mr. Wijeratne's statement (IR5), the petitioner was implicated in the
events that took place at the Bakery as a conspirator or abettor. There was no
reason for the petitioner to suppose that he was being arrested as a
conspirator or abettor, for he had denied participation at the meeting
referred to by Mr. Wijeratne and had no reason to believe that that was the
may in which he had come to be implicated and arrested. All that he was told
was that he was "being taken into custody for offences committed during the
hostage crisis" on 7th December 1994 and not because of what he is supposed to
have said or done, according to Mr. Wijeratne, on 15th November 1994. The
conspiracy-abetment angle did not seem to have entered the, First respondent's
mind.

Assuming that it would have been sufficient for the purpose of Article 13 (1)
for the reasons to have been given soon after the arrest, and that the First
respondent stated everything in paragraph 17, were they "reasons" for arrest?
The events referred to in paragraph 17 recalled some of the steps taken by the
petitioner in his role as a facilitator in the process of bringing about the
peaceful settlement of an industrial dispute, which a group of persons had
attempted to resolve by criminal means. The First respondent at that time and
indeed as we have seen even at the time of the hearing of the matter before
us, seems to have been 76f the opinion that because the petitioner had played
an active role in the settlement of the dispute he was "involved" and liable
to arrest However, as we have seen there had to be reasons for supposing him
to be, "concerned" in the relevant way in the commission of cognizable
offences to enable the

294

First respondent to arrest the petitioner and the petitioner had a right to be
given those reasons. The so called "fresh material" he had gathered too, as we
have seen, related to the part played by the petitioner on 7 December, 1994
relating to the settlement of the hostage crisis and the industrial dispute
which was the underlying cause of the crisis. The constitutional right only to
be given the reasons for arrest is not satisfied by giving any kind of
explanation. A reason for depriving a person of his personal liberty within
the meaning of Article 13 (1) of the Constitution must be a ground for arrest.
There can be no such ground other than the violation of the law or a
reasonable suspicion of the violation of the law. (See _Pieris v. A.G. and
Others_ (8); _Selvakumar v. Douglas Devananda_ ) (9). In _Gunasekera v. De
Fonseka_ (10), H.N.G. Fernando, C.J. said that a citizen has a right to resist
an unlawful arrest, but he can exercise that right if he is informed of the
"grounds upon which he is being arrested." It is, the Chief Justice said, Only
if a person is informed of the ground for his arrest, or in other words, of
the offence of which he is suspected, that he will have the opportunity to
rebut the suspicion or to show that there was some mistake as to identity."

In paragraph 17 (b) of his affidavit the First respondent states as follows:
"I informed the petitioner that he was being taken into custody for offences
committed during the hostage crisis at the Prima Bakery and that the
petitioner was well aware at the time of arrest that he was being taken into
custody in connection with the unlawful confinement of Ms. Lin and Jayantha de
Silva who were held hostage at the Prima Bakery". (Notes of arrest are annexed
hereto marked X.)

The relevant part of the notes of arrest marked X are as follows: "Dr.
Senaratne is present and I explained the arrest. (sic.) He demanded for
detailed reasons for the arrest and said that he should contact his lawyer. I
explained to him that he is wanted for the crimes committed during the hostage
crisis at the Prima Bakery on 7.12.94. His lawyer Mr. Lakshman Ranasinghe too
spoke to me over the Cell Tel Telephone of Dr. Senaratne and he was informed
of the reasons for the arrest and also him (sic.) that the suspect would be
taken to the C.I.D. and thereafter will be produced in Court."

295

Even if the petitioner had been told that he was "wanted for the crimes
committed during the hostage crisis at the Prima e 7/12/94"; how was he know
the "grounds" upon which he was arrested? The petitioner may have known of
certain circumstances, relating to the crimes others may, have committed on
that occasion and may have been asked to assist as a witness, but how was he
to know that he was himself suspected of being an offender? The fact that he
was well aware at the time of arrest that he was being taken into custody in
connection with the unlawful confinement" of certain persons was not enough.
The petitioner should have been informed of the offences of which he was
suspected it would not have been possible otherwise for the petitioner to
have, explained away the mistaken notions which the First respondent may have
held and thereby regained his liberty. The underlying purpose of giving
reasons for the arrest was thwarted by his reticence.

The petitioner was not informed of reasons for his arrest and I therefore hold
that his fundamental right guaranteed by Article 13(1) of the Constitution in
that regard was violated by the First respondent.

**ALLEGED UNREASONABLE DETENTION PRIOR TO PRODUCTION:**

Paragraph 46 of his petition states as follows: "The petitioner states that
the 1st respondent, by keeping the petitioner in illegal custody on 23.02.1994
as aforesaid violated the petitioner's fundamental right to freedom from
arbitrary detention guaranteed to him by Articles 13(1) and/or 13(2) of the
Constitution."

"Merely describing an arrest or detention as being illegal does not, amount to
an allegation of an infringement of Article 13(1) or 13(2):" (Per Fernando J.
in Garusinghe v. Kadurugamuwa (11)).

However, a person who is detained in the custody of the law beyond a specified
prescribed maximum permissible time or beyond a reasonable time cannot be said
to be a person arrested in

296

accordance with procedure established by law and such a detention in the words
of H.A.G. de Silva, J. in _Piyasiri v. Fernando_ (12) "for whatever the period
may be" (See _Selvakumar v. Douglas Devananda and Others_ (9) following
_Pieris v. A.G._ (1)) subject to the principle of de minimis, would violate
Article 13(1) of the Constitution. In order to avoid repetition a decision on
the question whether Article 13(1) was violated by reason of detention beyond
a prescribed or reasonable time will be made after a consideration of the
averments in paragraph 46 of the petition in relation to Article 13(2) of the
Constitution.

As far as Article 13(2) of the Constitution too is concerned, the question of
the "legality" or "lawfulness" of the detention, which as Bandaranayake, J.
pointed out in Mahinda Rajapakse and Vasudewa Nanayakkara v. Chief Inspector
Karunaratne land Others (13) is "integral to the act of arrest", does not
enter into the picture. In _Faiz v. A.G_. (14) followed in _Pieris v. A.G_.
(1); (see also per Goonewardene, J. in _Wijeratne v. Vijitha Perera_ )(15)
Goonewardene, J. observed that it is not only "unnecessary" to characterize
any action, that does not conform to the provisions of Article 13(1) as an
"illegal arrest", it is perhaps hazardous to characterize a particular action
as n illegal detention, an expression which carries certain overtones which
may tend to colour, and confuse and carry one away from an objective appraisal
of a situation ... Upon a simple reading of its language uncomplicated by
reference to the concept of "illegal detention" what do the provisions of
Article 13(2) mandate or require to be one. It demands that any person held in
custody, detained or otherwise deprived of personal liberty shall be brought
before the judge of the nearest, competent" court according to procedure
established by law. When the period of time is exceeded before such person is
brought before judge, there would be a violation of Article 13(2), whereas if
such period has not been exceeded, there would be no such violation and
whether or not there has been an infringement of Article 13(1) is irrelevant.

In Mahinda Rajapakse and Vasudewa Nanayakkara v. Chief Inspector Karunaratne
and Others (supra) Bandaranayake J. said

297

that Art le 13(2) is not concerned with the, lawfulness of the arrest but with
the question of ensuring the "containment of executive power". His Lordship
said that in considering Article 13(2), "No distinction ought to be drawn
between lawful and unlawful custody, detention or deprivation of liberty in
considering this Article. The need for such an enquiry should not be read into
this Article. This Article is not concerned with this. The Article is plain
enough and provides that executive detention cannot extend beyond 24-hours
without judicial intervention."

The twenty-four hour period is he maximum period (exclusive of the time
necessary for the journey from place of arrest to the Magistrate) permitted by
section 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in the case of an arrest without
a warrant. It cannot, as Bandaranayake, J. said "extend beyond 24 hours
without judicial intervention." However, the fact that a person is in such a
case produced before a Magistrate within twenty-four hours does not
necessarily satisfy the constitutional requirement prescribed in Article
13(2). Article 13(2) of the Constitution provides, among other things, that
"Every person held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of personal
liberty shall be brought before the judge of the nearest competent court
according to procedure established by law..."

In the matter before us, the petitioner was arrested without a warrant. The
relevant procedure established by law was set out in sections 36 and 37 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure. Section 36 requires a police officer making an
arrest without a warrant to "without unnecessary delay and subject to the
provisions contained as to bail to lake or send the person arrested before a
Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case." It was agreed by learned Counsel
for the petitioner and respondents that once the arrest was made, the Police
could. not have released the petitioner on bail because the petitioner was
arrested in connection with "non bailable" offences. However, the requirement
that the First respondent should, without "unnecessary delay", have sent the
petitioner after his arrest before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the
case remained. Section 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that "Any
peace officer shall not

298

detain in custody or otherwise confine a person arrested without a warrant for
a longer period than under all the circumstances of the case is reasonable,
and such period shall not exceed twenty-four hours exclusive of the time
necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate."

The petitioner was arrested at about 9 a.m. on 23 December 1994. He was taken
to the C.I.D. He was produced before the Magistrate at about 2.45 p.m. and
released on bail. He was produced as a suspect against whom further
investigations were pending. It was not explained why the petitioner was not
produced soon after his arrest. The interrogation was one that could have
taken place after he was produced before the Magistrate. I am of the view that
the delay in producing the petitioner was in the circumstances unnecessary and
unreasonable And that his production at 2.45 p.m. was not in compliance with
the provisions of sections 36 and 37 of, the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Admittedly, he was detained for only a few hours. Nevertheless such a
detention being unnecessary and unreasonable was not-according to procedure
established by law and it was therefore in violation of the petitioner's
fundamental right guaranteed by Article 13(2) of the Constitution. (See per
Fernando J. Faiz v. A.-G. (supra); _Selvakumar v. Douglas Devananda_ (supra);
_Kumarasena v. Shriyantha and Others_ ) (16). In Kumara v. Rohan Fernando and
Others, (17) where, as in the matter before us there were no grounds for
arrest; Perera J. said that "the time for production was limited to the time
for travel between the home of the petitioner and the nearest Magistrate of
the nearest competent court."

Attention is drawn to Nallanayagam v. Gunatilleka (18). In that case Colin-
Thome, J observed that "Article 13(2) embodies a salutary principle
safeguarding the life and Iiberty of the subject and must be exactly complied
with by the executive. In our view this provision cannot be overlooked or
dismissed as of little consequence or as a minor matter. " In Selvakumar
(supra) Fernando J observed that ; "what is a reasonable time for production
fore a Magistrate must necessarily be given a strict interpretation.

299

**ORDER**

For the reasons set out in? my judgment , I declare that the First respondent
violated the fundamental Rights of the Petitioner guaranteed by Article 13(1)
and 13(2) of the Constitution.

The petitioner has claimed a sum of Rs. 5,000;000 as 4 compensation and costs.
Article 126 (4) of the Constitution empowers the Court to grant such relief or
make such directions as it may deem just and equitable in the circumstances in
respect of any petition for relief or redress relating to the infringement of
a fundamental right: The award of compensation or costs is not automatic but a
matter for the Court's discretion. I am of the view that no useful purpose
would be served by awarding compensation in this case. Since I am of the view
that it is not an appropriate case for holding the First respondent personally
liable, punitive considerations do not have to be met by the award of
compensation. As far as the expression of the disapproval of the Court is
concerned, this is implicit in the declaration I have made of the violation of
the petitioner's Constitutional rights. Nor is an award of any sum of money
necessary to rehabilitate the petitioner. The sum of Rs. 5,000,000/- no doubt
conveys the fact that the petitioner deemed the transgression of his
fundamental rights of personal liberty to be of a gross and outrageous nature,
but it should not be taken as an indication of a solatium that would assuage
his wounded feelings. My finding of the violations of Articles 13(1) and 13(2)
of the Constitution constitutes just satisfaction in that regard. However, I
do not perceive any circumstances to warrant a departure from the general
practice of this Court of recognizing claims in respect of costs incurred by a
successful applicant for relief or redress in matters of this nature. I order
the State to pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 15,00/- as costs.

**FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree

  
**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree  
  
_Relief ordered._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/45.html_  

