##  Sooriya Enterprises (International) Ltd. v. Michael White and Company Ltd.
- SLR - 371, Vol 3 of 2002 [1994] LKSC 45; (2002) 3 Sri LR 371 (27 July 1994)

**371**

**SOORIYA ENTERPRISES (INTERNATIONAL) LIMITED  
v.  
MICHAEL & COMPANY LIMITED**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
PERERA, J. AND WIJETUNGA, J.  
SC (SPECIAL) LA NO. 235/94  
CA (REV.) NO. 399/94  
DC COLOMBO NO. 4036/Spl  
JULY 27, 1994  
  
_Affidavit - Oaths Ordinance, sections 4 and 5 - Is It mandatory for non-
Christians to make an affirmation in an affidavit? - Effect of non-Christians
submitting an affidavit under oath.  
  
_**Held:  
**  
It is not imperative for non-Christians referred to in section 5 of the Oaths
Ordinance to make an affirmation in an affidavit.  
  
_Per_ Fernando, J.  
  
"The use of the word "may" in section 5 of the Oaths Ordinance of 1895,
instead of "shall" must be regarded as deliberate; with the consequence . . ,
that non-Christians who believed in God would have the option to swear or to
affirm."  
  
**Case referred to :  
**  
1\. _Rustomjee v. Khan -_ (1914) 18 NLR 120, 123.  
  
**PETITION** for leave to appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_S, Sivarsa, PC_ with _S. Mahenthiran, A. A. M. liliyas_ and _Sampath
Welgampaya_ for petitioner.  
  
_H. L. de Silva, PC_ with _Romesh de Silva, PC, Gomin Dayasiri, G. G.
Arulpragasam_ and _Dinal Phillips_ for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult_

**372**

**Editor's note:  
**  
_Vide Roshana Michael v. Saleh, OIC (Crimes), Police Station, Narahenpita and
Others -_ (2002) 1 Sri LR 345 at 355 for the same view.  
  
July 27, 1994  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
The petitioner seeks special leave to appeal upon the question whether in
making an affidavit a Muslim is imperatively required by law to make an
affirmation, with the consequence that if he makes an oath instead his
affidavit must be rejected. Mr. S. Sivarasa, PC, submits that the matter is
governed by the provisions of the Oaths Ordinance, No. 9 of 1895 (Cap. 17).
Section 4 of that Ordinance requires all persons to make an oath, and then
provides in section 5:  
  
"Where the person required by law to make an oath -  
  
(a) is a Buddhist, Hindu, or Muslim, or of some other religion according to
which oaths are not of binding force: or  
  
(b) has a conscientious objection to make an oath,  
  
he may, instead of making an oath, make an affirmation."  
  
Mr. Sivarasa contends that notwithstanding the use of the word "may", a
Muslim, being a person covered by section 5 (a), must make an affirmation. (He
says, however, that section 5 (b) confers an option to make an affirmation, on
anyone having a conscientious objection to making an oath.) He submits that
the invariable practice of Muslims is to affirm, and draws our attention to
the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act, No. 13 of 1952 (cap. 115) - sections 49
and 57 require an "oath", but the prescribed forms contain the usual form of
affirmation.  
  
I cannot accept this argument that section 5 (a) should be restrictively
interpreted in the light of later provisions and practice; rather, the meaning
of that section when originally enacted has to be ascertained.

**373**

That was done by Pereira, J. (de Sampayo, J. agreeing) in Rustomjee v. Khan
(1):  
  
"While the old Ordinance No. 3 of 1842, made it compulsory on witnesses who
were non-Christians to make affirmations, the new Ordinance (the Oaths
Ordinance, 1895) made it optional with them to do so. The primary provision of
the new Ordinance is that all witnesses shall make oaths. It then enacts that
a witness who, being a non-Christian, is a Buddhist, Hindu or Muhammadan, or
of some other religion according to which oaths are not of binding force,
"may", instead of making an oath, make an affirmation. To swear is no more
than to assert, calling God to witness, or invoking His help to the deponent
in the matter in connection with which the oath is taken, and it is open to
any person, be he Hindu, Muhammadan or Zoroastrian, who believes in God, to
claim to be sworn (rather than to affirm) ..."  
  
This view that "may" in section 5 is permissive, rather than mandatory, is
supported by sections 7 and 9 of the Ordinance, which manifest a legislative
intention to allow a witness or a deponent some choice as to whether he will
swear or affirm; so much so that the substitution of an oath for an
affirmation (or vice versa) will not invalidate proceedings or shut out
evidence. The fundamental obligation of a witness or deponent is to tell the
truth (section 10), and the purpose of an oath or affirmation is to reinforce
that obligation.  
  
The ratio decidendi of Rustomjee v. Khan,(1) that section 5 gave an option "to
any person, be he Hindu, Muhammadan or Zoroastrian, who believes in God, to
claim to be sworn (rather than to affirm)", has not been doubted for 80 years.
The Oaths Ordinance was twice amended thereafter: in 1915, and again in 1954
when section 5 (a) was amended. If the judicial interpretation of section 5
was erroneous, the legislature had the opportunity to correct it.  
  
Because "much inconvenience arises from peculiar forms of oath being required
to be administered to persons professing other than

**374**

the Christian Religion", Ordinance No. 6 of 1841 required that such persons
shall make an affirmation in the prescribed form. This provision was not
considered satisfactory, and by Ordinance No. 3 of 1842 it was provided that:  
  
"... every individual not professing the Christian faith, and every Quaker,
Moravian or Jew, shall, on all occasions whatsoever where an oath is required
. . . make a solemn affirmation ... in lieu thereof."  
  
The use of the word "may" in the Oaths Ordinance of 1895, instead of "shall",
must be regarded as deliberate; with the consequence, as Pereira, J. held,
that non-Christians who believed in God would have the option to swear or to
affirm.  
  
Mr. Sivarasa also submitted that the words "according to which oaths are not
of binding force" qualified not only "of some other religion", but also "a
Buddhist, Hindu, or Muslim"; and that the legislature thereby recognized that
Muslims do not accept the binding force of an oath, and therefore cannot
swear. As a matter of grammar, that clause cannot be read as qualifying the
phrase "a Buddhist, Hindu, or Muslim". Even assuming that the legislature
considered Muslims as not accepting the binding force of an oath, yet the
legislative history of section 5 is consistent with a legislative intention
(as held by Pereira, J.) to make an affirmation optional, and not mandatory.  
  
The question raised has been authoritatively determined 80 years ago, and
never doubted since, so that there is now no question of law or other matter
fit for review. Special leave to appeal is refused, without costs.  
  
**PERERA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Special leave to appeal refused.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/45.html_  

