##  Shanmugavadivu v. Kulathilake - SLR - 215, Vol 1 of 2003 [2002] LKSC 45;
(2003) 1 Sri LR 215 (25 October 2002)

**215**

**SHANMUGAVADIVU** ****

**v.** ****

**KULATHILAKE** ****

**   **



SUPREME COURT

BANDARANAYAKE, J.

EDUSSURIYA, J. AND

DE SILVA, J.

SC.APPEAL NO. 50/2002

C.A. NO. 1545/2000

DC BANDARAWELA NO. 676/L

25th OCTOBER, 2002



Revision - Supreme Court Rules, 1990, Rule 3 - Requirement to produce material
documents or to seek leave of court to produce the same latter -Consequence of
default of Rule 3.



The appellant ("the plaintiff") instituted action against the respondent ("the
defendant") and another person for a declaration that the plaintiff is the
tenant of the premises in suit and for an injunction against the 1st defendant
from demolishing the said premises. The 1st defendant pleaded that the
plaintiff was in illegal occupation of the premises as the same were burnt
during the 1983 riots and were currently vested in the REPIA. The District
Judge gave judgment for the 1st defendant. The plaintiff filed a revision
application in the Court of Appeal on 12.12.2000; supported it on 15.12.2000
and obtained a stay order and notice on the 1st defendant for 15.01.2001.



The plaintiff filed with his application 4 documents including the judgment of
the District Judge but failed to file all the material documents or to explain
the reason for the failure and seek leave of court to furnish the necessary
documents later, as required by Rule 3 (1)(b) read with Rule 3 (1) (a) of the
Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules, 1990. Instead the plaintiff
amended her petition without notice to the 1st defendant and without leave of
court. She filed one additional document with the amended petition and the
balance documents with her counter objections.



**Held :**



The requirements of Rules 3 (1)(a) and 3 (1) (b) are imperative. In the
circumstances of the case the Court of Appeal had no discretion to excuse the
failure of the plaintiff to comply with the Rules.

**216**

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court Appeal.

**Case referred to:**

(1) _Kiriwanthe and Another v Navaratne and Another_ (1990) 2 Sri LR 393
distinguished.

_K.M.P. Rajaratne_ with _B. Wickremasinghe_ for appellant.

_Navin Marapana_ with _Nishanthi Mendis_ for 1st defendant-respondent.

March 12,2003

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

This is an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 20.02.2002.
By that judgment, the Court of Appeal upheld the preliminary objections taken
by the 1st defendant-respondent-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the
respondent) that the plaintiff-appellant-appellant (hereinafter referred to as
the appel­lant) failed to file all the necessary documents along with the
peti­tion dated 12.02.2000, as required by Rule 3(1 )(b) of the Court of
Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules of 1990 and that the appellant had amended
her petition dated 12.02.2002, without notice to the respondent and without
seeking the permission of Court, and dis­missed the case.



Special leave to appeal was granted by this Court on the fol­lowing questions:

a. Did the Court of Appeal err in law in holding that Rule 3(1 )a and 3(1 )b
of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure)  
Rules were applicable?

b. Did the Court of Appeal err in law by failing to consider whether it should
exercise its discretion under Rule 3(1 )a  
and 3(1 )b of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules?



The facts of this case, albeit brief, are as follows:

The appellant instituted action against the respondent and another person for
a declaration that the appellant is the tenant of

217

the premises referred to in the plaint and for an injunction against the
respondent from demolishing the said premises. The respon­dent took up the
position that the appellant was in illegal occupa­tion as the premises in suit
were burnt during the July 1983 riots and that it was currently vested with
the REPIA. The District Court delivered its judgment in favour of the
respondent and the appellant came before the Court of Appeal with an
application for revision filed on 12.12.2000. This was supported on
15.12.2000. On that day, the respondent was noticed to appear on 15.01.2001
and a stay order was granted.



Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the appel­lant obtained her
stay order from the court of Appeal after support­ing her application _ex
parte_ on 15.12.2000. His position was that the appellant had not filed all
the relevant documents along with her petition, dated 12.12.2000 and for this
reason, the appellant's appli­cation should be dismissed _in limine._



The Court of Appeal brief indicated that the appellant had filed only the
documents marked P1 to P4 along with her petition and affidavit dated
14.12.2001. These 4 documents included the judgment of the District Court of
Bandarawela (P1), order of the learned District Judge dated 04.12.2002 (P2),
answer of the respondent (P3) and the evidence of the appellant (P4).



The appellant in her petition to the Supreme Court stated that after filing
the application for revision in the Court of Appeal on 12.12.2000 and
supporting on 15.12.2000 for a stay order she had filed an amended petition
dated 10.01.2001 with 5 documents marked P1 to P5. The documents marked P1 to
P4 were the doc­uments filed along with the initial application for revision,
dated 12.12.2000 and the document marked P5 was the order of the Rent Board
dated 07.04.1984. Thereafter she had filed counter objec­tions on 26.02.2001
along with the documents marked P6.to P6(d). These included the documents in
the case and inquiry (P6), amended plaint (P6(a)), answer of the respondents
(P6(b)), repli­cation (P6(c)), the judgment (P6(d)) and several other
documents.



According to Rule 3(1) (a) it is necessary for an application to be made by
way of petition together with an affidavit in support of the averments and
these should be accompanied by the originals

218



of documents material to such application. Rule 3(1 )(b) specifically refers
to the application made by way of revision or _restitutio in_ _integrum_ and
states that those too should be made in like manner referred to in Rule 3(1 )a
with copies of the relevant proceedings including pleadings and documents
produced in the Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution to
which such application relates.



Admittedly, in the instant case, the original application made by the
appellant to the Court of Appeal on 14.12.2001, did not accompany the
originals or certified copies of documents material to that application.
Moreover, the appellant had not stated the rea­sons for such inability and
sought leave of the Court to furnish such documents later. What the appellant
in effect did was to amend the petition without obtaining the approval of the
Court and file the rest of the documents along with his counter objections on
26.02.2001.



The appellant came before the Court of Appeal on a revision application to set
aside and vacate the order of the learned District Judge made on 04.12.2000
and to obtain a stay order to prevent the respondent from executing writ to
remove the appellant from the premises in question. Rules 3(1 )(a) and 3(1
)(b) are in Part II of the Rules of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure)
which deals with applications made under Articles 140,141 and 138 of the
Constitution. Rule 3(1 )(b) specifically refers to applications by way of
revision or _restitutio in integrum_ under Article 138 of the Constitution and
reads as follows:



"Every application by way of revision or _restitutio in integrum_ under
Article 138 of the Constitution _shall_ be made in like manner together with
copies of the relevant proceedings (including pleadings and documents
produced), in the Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution to
which such application relates."



In such circumstances, it is my view that both the Rules 3(1 )(a) and 3(1 )(b)
of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules were applicable in the
instant case.



Learned counsel for the appellant strenuously argued that the Court of Appeal
erred as they did not consider the decision in _Kiriwanthe and another
v.Navaratne and another (1)-_ His position

219



was that in _Kiriwanthe's_ case, it was clearly held that, although
requirements of Rule 46 must be complied with normally at the time of filing
the application, strict or absolute compliance is not essen­tial. Learned
counsel for the appellant drew our attention to the fol­lowing paragraph in
the judgment of _Kiriwanthe's_ case _(supra,_ at pg.401):



"....I am content to hold that the requirements of Rule 46 must be complied
with, but that strict or absolute compliance is not essential; it is
sufficient if there is compliance which is "substantial" \- this being judged
in the light of the object and purpose of the Rule. It is not to be
mechanically applied, as in the case now before us; the Court should first
have deter­mined whether the default had been satisfactorily explained, or
cured subsequently without unreasonable delay, and then have exercised a
judicial discretion either to excuse the non-compliance, or to impose a
sanction...."



Rule 46 of the Supreme Court Rules of 1978, which was in Part IV and dealt
with "Writs and Examination of Records," was in the following terms:



"Every application made to the Court of Appeal for the exer­cise of powers
vested in the Court of Appeal by Articles 140 and 141 of the Constitution
shall be by way of petition and affidavit in support of the averments set out
in the petition and shall be accompanied by originals of documents materi­al
to the case or duly certified copies thereof, in the form of exhibits.
Application by way of revision or _restitutio in inte-_ _grum_ under Article
138 of the Constitution shall be made in like manner and be accompanied by two
sets of copies of proceedings in the Court of First Instance, tribunal or
other institution."



It will be seen that Rule 46 laid down the procedure in the strictest sense
without giving a right or an opportunity for an appli­cant to purge his
default. The decision in _Kiriwanthe's_ case nullified the severity in Rule 46
by bringing in the judicial discretion either to exercise the non-compliance
or to impose a sanction. _Kiriwanthe's_ case was decided on 18.07.1990 and it
was only a few months later on 13.11.1990, the new Rule 3 of the Court of
Appeal (Appellate

220



Procedure) Rules 1990 came into effect. The contents of Rules 3(1 )(a) and
3(1) (b), referred to above, clearly show that they are different to Rule 46.
The new Rules indicate that the objectivity of exercising judicial discretion,
as intended in _Kiriwanthe's_ case has been incorporated as it enables an
applicant to submit to Court the relevant documents at a later stage.

According to Rule 3(1 )(a),



".... where a petitioner is unable to tender any such docu­ment, he shall
state the reason for such inability and seek the leave of the Court to furnish
such document later."

_ _

_Kiriwanthe's_ case was decided on the basis of Rule 46 of the Supreme Court
Rules 1978 and therefore admittedly has no appli­cation to the instant case.
As referred to earlier, in the instant case, the question in issue is with
regard to Rules 3(1 )(a) and 3(1 )(b) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate
Procedure) Rules 1990. Rules 3(1 )(a) and 3(1 )(b) unlike Rule 46 make
provision for an applicant to purge his default and cure the defect. As
pointed out clearly in _Kiriwanthe's_ case, in terms of Rule 46, there was no
provision for purging an applicant's default and the Court was of the view
that it should 'first determine whether the default has been satisfactorily
explained or cured subsequently without unreasonable delay.' The new Rules
permit an applicant to file documents later, if he has stat­ed his inability
in filing the relevant documents along with his appli­cation, and had taken
steps to seek the leave of the Court to fur­nish such documents. In such
circumstances, the only kind of dis­cretion that could be exercised by Court
is to see whether and how much time could be permitted for the filing of
papers in due course.



The appellant had made no such statements in her petition and the Court of
Appeal had rightly decided that in the absence of the relevant documents, the
Court is "unable to exercise its revisionary powers in respect of the order
sought to be revised" by the appellant.



On numerous occasions the Supreme Court as well as the Court of Appeal have
held that the compliance of the Supreme Court Rules and the Court of Appeal
Rules is imperative. In a situ­ation where an application was made to the
Court of Appeal with­out the relevant documents being annexed to the petition
and the

221

  
affidavit, but has stated the reason for such inability and sought the leave
of the Court to furnish such documents on a later date, the Court could have
exercised its discretion and allowed the petitioner to file the relevant
documents on a later date. However on this occasion, as pointed out earlier,
no such leave was sought by the appellant and in the circumstances, the Court
of Appeal could not have exercised its discretion in terms of Rules 3(1) (a)
and 3(1 )(b) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules.



For the foregoing reasons, the questions on which special leave to appeal was
granted by this Court, are answered in the fol­lowing terms:

a. the Court of Appeal did not err in law in holding that Rule 3(1 )(a) and
3(1 )(b) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules were applicable;
and

b. the Court of Appeal did not err in law by failing to consider whether it
should exercise its discretion under Rules 3(1 )(a)  
and 3(1 )(b) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules.

I accordingly dismiss the appeal and affirm the judgment of the Court of
Appeal. In all the circumstances of this case there will be no costs.

**EDUSSURIYA, J.** - I agree.

**DE SILVA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/45.html_  

