##  The Public Trustee v. Ratnayahe Banda - SLR - 99, Vol 1 of 2000 [1999]
LKSC 46; (2000) 1 Sri LR 99 (12 December 1999)

**99**

**THE PUBLIC TRUSTEE  
V  
RATNAYAKE BANDA**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
SC APPEAL 57/98  
31st AUGUST, 1999  
  
_Industrial dispute - Termination of services of a workman - Decision of the
Labour Tribunal-Decision of the High Court in appeal-Misdirection by the
Labour Tribunal in accepting the workman's defence - Wrong assessment of
evidence by the High Court -  
_  
Irahandayaya Estate consisting of 80 acres of coconut was managed by the
appellant (employer). The respondent (workman) was its Superintendent. It was
the respondent's duty to count and report the number of coconuts, both plucked
and fallen, at each pick. The selling of the nuts would thereafter be done by
appellant. The appellant dismissed the respondent as he was found guilty, at a
domestic inquiry of certain charges including charges of submitting false crop
figures. The respondent was found to have understated the crop by about 15,
181 nuts. The Labour Tribunal accepted the respondent's version and ordered
that he be re-instated subject to his transfer to another estate, and ordered
one year's back wages. On an appeal by the respondent, the High Court ordered
that he be re-instated with full back wages and other emolutions and
promotions due.  
  
**Held:**  
  
The President of the Labour Tribunal misdirected himself and wrongly accepted
the explanation of the respondent and made his order for reinstatement with
full back wages and other emolutions and promotions due.  
  
Per Wadugodapitiya, J.  
  
"It is my considered opinion that the order of the learned Judge of the High
Court is erronious and cannot be allowed to stand. Upon a proper

**100**

assessment of the evidence, it is patent that the explanation given by the
respondent is false and must be rejected."  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court.  
  
_Gomin Dayasiri with Kavinda Dias Abeysinghe_ for the appellant.  
  
_Manohara de Silva_ for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

December 12, 1999  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
**  
The Respondent (employee) made an application to the Labour Tribunal under
Section 31B of the Industrial Disputes Act alleging that the Appellant
(employer) had terminated his services unjustly. He sought re-instatement with
back wages.  
  
The Appellant countered this allegation. saying that the Respondent, who was
employed as the Officer-in-Charge (Superintendent) of the 80 Acre Irahandayawa
(coconut) Estate, Henagama in the Gampaha District, was dismissed as he was
found quality at a domestic inquiry of certain charges including the charges
of submitting false crop figures, failing to account for a number of coconuts
and wilfully disobeying lawful orders given to him by the Appellant.  
  
Before the Labour Tribunal, the Respondent did not call any witness, but was
content with his own evidence only. The Appellant however, called three
witnesses, S. Rajapakse, W.K.D.S. Premakumara and M. G. Perera, who were
officers of the Public Trustee's Department.  
  
At the conclusion of the inquiry the learned President of the Labour Tribunal
re-instated the Respondent subject to his transfer to another estate, and
ordered one year's back wages.

**101**

The Appellant thereupon appealed to the High Court, Western Province. The
Respondent also lodged an appeal seeking, inter alia, full back wages. Both
appeals were heard together; at the conclusion of which, the Appellant's
appeal was dismissed, whereas the Respondent was ordered to be reinstated with
full back wages and other emoluments and promotions due.  
  
The Appellant now appeals against the order of the Learned Judge of the High
Court.  
  
Irahandaya Estate consists of 80 Acres of coconut and is managed by the
Appellant. The income of the estate is meant for charity. The Respondent who
was employed as Superintendent in charge of the estate has, according to the
Appellant, cheated by giving false figures understating the pluck. Coconuts
are plucked every two months and, the December 1989 pluck was the 6th and last
one for the year 1989. It is the Respondent's function and duty to count and
report the number of coconuts, both plucked and fallen, at each pick. The
selling of the nuts would thereafter be done by the Appellant.  
  
After the 6th and last pick for the year 1989, the Respondent gave a crop
figure of 30,189 coconuts (R4). Thereafter as petitions were sent against the
Respondent, the Appellant had the coconuts re-counted by his officers in the
presence of the Respondent, and found a total count of 45,370 nuts (R1).
Thereafter the Respondent himself re-counted the nuts on his own and sent a
letter to the Appellant setting out his new figure of 35,211 nuts (R7). The
original counting by the Respondent was on 26.12.89 and the re-count by the
Respondent was on 10. 1.90. Thus, in the intervening space of about 14 days an
additional 5,022 coconuts suddenly appeared on the Respondent's own showing.
The difference between his count and the Appellant's count of 45,370 nuts is,
of course, enormous.

**102**

**The detailed crop figures are as follows**  
                                                                       

  |  Plucked coconuts | Fallen coconuts |  Total  
---|---|---|---  
(i) On the Respondents first report  dated 26.12.89 (marked R4) - |  25,550  |
4639 | 30,189  
(ii) On the counting done by the  Appellant's Officers on 9.1.90 and their
report (Marked R1)  
  
(It must be noted that this count was done in the presence of the Respondent
and that the Respondent has signed the Report R 1 against his own endorsement
"counted in my presence.")  
  |  37,124 |  8426 | 45,370  
(iii) On the Respondent's second report dated 10.1.90 (marked R7) which he had
done on his own, without notice to the Appellant and without the Appellant's
consent)  
  | \-  | - | 35,221  
  
  
The Respondent's explanation (A 11) is that the extra 5,022 nuts shown oh his
second count, were fallen coconuts belonging to the next pick, viz the 1st
pick for 1990: i. e. that they fell during the 14 days between 26.12.89 and
10. 1.90, immediately after the earlier 6th pick for 1989 was completed.  
  
The Learned President of the Labour Tribunal accepted without question, the
Respondent's version that the sudden and extraordinary increase of 5,022
coconuts in the very short period of about 14 days, as revealed in the
Respondent's own report R4 and R7, was due to fallen coconuts.

**103**

On appeal, the Learned High Court Judge in turn, having miscalculated the
period of time as being from 9.12.89 (not 26.12.89) to 10.1.90 (viz : one
whole month), took the view that, inasmuch as this was a very large estate, it
was possible for a large number of coconuts to have fallen during that whole
month. However, according to the Respondent's own report R4 (dated 26.12.89),.
the total number of fallen coconuts for that pick, which fallen coconuts were
included in his grand total of 30,189 coconuts for his self-same pick, was
only 4,639. It is indeed quite impossible that at the counting which was done
at the end of the 6th pick, the fallen nuts for the 2 - month period amounted
to 4639, whereas according to the Respondent, 5022 nuts fell by themselves
during a period of about 14 days immediately after the 6th pick.  
  
As Learned Counsel for the Appellant rightly pointed out, this simply could
not have happened.  
  
On the contrary, it must be remembered that the counting done by the
Appellant's officers in the presence of the Respondent revealed a figure of
45,370 coconuts which represents an enormous difference of 15,181 coconuts!  
  
Learned Counsel for the Respondent in reply submitted that the Respondent had
served about four or five years on this estate and that he had had a good
record, and that petitions were sent against him by persons with ulterior
motives because he looked after the estate well and did not allow thefts to
take place. He also urged that the count done by the Appellant as reflected in
R1 was upon a surprise check and was done after sun-down with the aid of the
headlights of the Public Trustee's jeeps. He said that the Appellant's figure
of 45,370 coconuts (RI) cannot be taken as correct.  
  
For the purposes of argument, I am prepared to ignore the Appellant's figure
of 45,370 coconuts. But, there still remains

**104**

the Respondent's own figure of 35,211 nuts on the second count that he himself
did. Even assuming (without accepting) that the Respondent's own figure of
35,211 nuts is the correct one, there still remains the difference of 5022
coconuts for which, the Respondent in my considered view, has given no
satisfactory or acceptable explanation.  
  
As set out above, the Learned President of the Labour Tribunal, having
misdirected himself and wrongly accepted the "fallen coconuts" explanation of
the Respondent, re instated the Respondent with one year's back wages, and
going further, the Learned Judge of the High Court having himself fallen into
error in the calculation of the time factor and himself wrongly accepting the
Respondent's "fallen coconuts" explanation without critical analysis of the
facts, re-instated the Respondent with full back wages, plus other emoluments
and promotions due.  
  
It is my considered opinion that the order of the Learned Judge of the High
Court is erroneous and cannot be allowed to stand. Upon a proper assessment of
the evidence, it is patent that the explanation given by the Respondent is
false and must be rejected. In fact, on the contrary, I see no reason for
disbelieving the accuracy of the count done by the officers of the Public
Trustee's Department, which yielded 45,370 coconuts. When one compares this
figure with the original figure given by the Respondent in his first Report
R4, (viz : 30,189 nuts) one cannot fail but see the enormity of the thievery
that has taken place, for, the Respondent has boldly understated the crop by
no less that 15,181 coconuts! At to-day's price of coconuts, this is a tidy
sum indeed!  
  
For the reasons set out above, I set aside the order of the Learned Judge of
the High Court marked A3. I also set aside the order of the Learned President
of the Labour Tribunal dated 14.12.95

**105**

I allow the appeal of the Appellant with costs fixed at Rs.10,000/.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed; orders of the High Court and the Labour Tribunal set aside._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/46.html_  

