##  Ratinasirirajapaksha v. Ratinasiriwickramanayake and Others - SLR - 384,
Vol 1 of 1997 [1997] LKSC 46; (1997) 1 Sri LR 384 (1 January 1997)

384 ** **

**RATNASIRI RAJAPAKSHA**

**v.**

## **RATNASIRI WICKRAMANAYAKE AND OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT.

DR. AMERASINGHE, J.

DHEERARATNE, J. AND

WIJETUNGA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 95/96.

C.A. APPLICATION NO. 350/94.

OCTOBER 15, 1996.



_Writ of Certiorari ‑ Removal of the Chief Executive Officer of a Local
Authority ‑Section 2, the Powers of Supervision of the Administration of Local
Authorities Statute, No. 4 of 1991 of the Western Provincial Council ‑ Section
2 of the Statute._



The petitioner who was the Mayor of the Colombo Municipal Council was removed
from his office by the 1st respondent who was the then Minister in charge of
the subject of Local Government in the Western Provincial Council. By a letter
dated 19.5.94 the 1st respondent informed the petitioner that in the report of
O. S. M. Seneviratne (5th respondent, a retired judicial officer) it is stated
that in respect of 3 matters, the petitioner had acted contrary to the
provisions of the Municipal Councils Ordinance. The 1st respondent added that
he was "compelled" in the exercise of his powers under the powers of
supervision of the Administration of Local Authorities Statute, No. 4 of 1991
of the Western Provincial Council to remove the petitioner from the office of
Mayor.



**Held:**



On a plain reading of the provisions of Section 2 of the Statute, the duty of
the Minister is to read the report of the retired judicial officer and with
the assistance of his findings of fact to proceed to be personally satisfied
that there were one or more acts or omissions specified in Section 2(1)(a)‑(d)
of the Statute. The Minister is also statutorily obliged to exercise his own
judgment as to whether in the circumstances of the case he ought to remove the
Mayor. He is not under any legal compulsion to remove the Mayor even if he was
satisfied that the Mayor was guilty of one or more of the acts or omissions
specified in Sections 2 (1)(a)‑(d).



**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_Romesh de Silva, P.C._ with _Palitha Kumarasinghe and Ms. S. Amarasekera_ for
petitioner.



_S. Sivarasa, P.C., with ,S. Mahenthiran_ for 2nd and 4th respondents.



_K. C. Kamalasabeyson, P.C., A. S. G._ with _N. Pulle S. C_ for 6th
respondent.



1st and 5th respondents unrepresented.



_Cur. adv. vult._



**385**

 February 25, 1997.  


**DHEERARATNE, J.**



The petitioner was the Mayor of the Municipal Council Colombo and the 1st
respondent was at the time material to this action, the Minister of Western
Province Provincial Council, to whom the subject of Local Government was
assigned. The 1st respondent appointed the 5th respondent to inquire into and
report on five charges made against the petitioner. The 5th respondent having
inquired into the allegations reported to the 1st respondent that there was
sufficient evidence to prove three of those charges. The 1st respondent then
wrote the letter dated 19.5.94 to the petitioner removing him from the office
of Mayor.  
  
An English rendering of the Material part of that letter which is in Sinhala
reads:-  
  
According to the material contained in the (report) of the O. S. M.
Seneviratne Commission, out of the 5 matters alleged against you it is stated
that in respect of 3 matters you have acted contrary to the provisions of The
Municipal Councils Ordinance.  
  
02\. I also Kindly inform you that in terms of powers vested in me in
accordance with the provisions of Powers of Supervision of the Administration
of Local Authorities Statue No. 4 of 1991 of the Western Province, I am
compelled to remove you from the office of Mayor, with effect from 20th of
this month.  
  
03\. For your information I am sending herewith a copy of the report of the O.
S. M. Seneviratne Commission.  
  
The petitioner was the Mayor of the Municipal Council Colombo and the 1st
respondent was at the time material to this action, the Minister of Western
Province Provincial Council, to whom the subject of Local Government was
assigned. The 1st respondent appointed the 5th respondent to inquire into and
report on five charges made against the petitioner. The 5th respondent having
inquired into the allegations reported to the 1st respondent that there was
sufficient evidence to prove three of those charges. The 1st respondent then
wrote the letter dated 19.5.94 to the petitioner removing him from the office
of Mayor.  
  
An English rendering of the Material part of that letter which is in Sinhala
reads:-  
  
According to the material contained in the (report) of the O. S. M.
Seneviratne Commission, out of the 5 matters alleged against you it is stated
that in respect of 3 matters you have acted contrary to the provisions of The
Municipal Councils Ordinance.  
  
02\. I also Kindly inform you that in terms of powers vested in me in
accordance with the provisions of Powers of Supervision of the Administration
of Local Authorities Statue No. 4 of 1991 of the Western Province, I am
compelled to remove you from the office of Mayor, with effect from 20th of
this month.  
  
03\. For your information I am sending herewith a copy of the report of the O.
S. M. Seneviratne Commission.  


The petitioner then moved the Court of Appeal by way of an application for a
Writ of Certiorari to get the order of the 1st respondent contained in the
letter referred to above quashed on several grounds. One of the grounds was
that the decision of the 1st respondent to remove the petitioner was taken
without satisfying himself of the matters referred to in the report of the 1st
respondent. The Court of Appeal dismissed the application for Writ on several
grounds namely:‑

386

  
(a) that the intention of the Statute was to delegate the function of deciding
whether the relevant authority was guilty or not of any of the acts set out in
section 2(i) (a) to the retired judicial officer;  
  
(b) that the existence of the report of the inquiry officer satisfied that
requirement of satisfaction of the Minister;  
  
(c) that the Minister was obliged to act on such report in the exercise of his
discretion under section 2(1) (i), and where he does act, the presumption is
that he did so on the facts revealed in the report;  
  
(d) that although the letter of the Minister does not expressly state that the
Minister was satisfied that the petitioner was guilty of the acts set out in
the report, it is implicit in that letter that he in fact considered the
report before arriving at the decision to remove the petitioner from office;
and  
  
(e) that the Minister was not in any event bound by the general rule requiring
him to direct his own mind to such matters but could act on the report of a
competent inquiry officer.  
  
The petitioner has appealed to this Court from the judgment of the Court of
Appeal and it is primarily contended on his behalf that the Court of Appeal
misconstrued the relevant provisions of the Provincial Council statute
regarding the function of the Minister vis-a-vis the report of the inquiry
officer. Let me set down in full at this stage subsections (1) and (2) of
section 2 of The Powers of Supervision of the Administration of Local
Authorities Statute No. 4 of 1991 of the Western Province Provincial Council:-  
  
2(1). If at any time the Minister of Board of Ministers of the Provincial
Council of the Western Province to whom the subject of Local Government has
been assigned is satisfied that there is sufficient proof of -  
  
(a) Incompetence and mismanagement; or  
  
(b) persistent default in performance of duties imposed by the relevant law,
statute or any other written law; or  


**387**

  
(c) persistent refusal or neglect to comply with any provisions of law or
statute; or  
  
(d) abuse of powers conferred by the relevant law statute or any other written
law; or  
  
(e) persistent refusal to hold or attend meetings or to vote or to transact
business at any meeting to be held.  
  
On the part of any Local Authority, or any of the members of any Local
Authority, or on the part of the Chief Executive Officer of any Local
Authority, the Minister may as the circumstances of each case may require by
order published in the Gazette:-  
  
(i) remove the Chief Executive officer of such Authority; or  
  
(ii) remove all or any of the members of such Authority from office; or  
  
(iii) dissolve such Local Authority;  
  
and such order shall as soon as may be convenient be laid before the
Provincial Council.  
  
(2) The Minister shall before making an Order under subsection (1) (i) or (ii)
or (iii) appoint for the purpose of satisfying himself in regard to matters
referred to in paragraph (sic) (i) a retired Judicial Officer to inquire into
and report upon such matter within a period of three months, and the person so
appointed shall in relation to such inquiry, have the powers of a Commission
of Inquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry Act.  


On a plain reading of those provisions, the Minister may make an order of
removal of the Mayor (the Chief Executive Officer), **if he is satisfied that
there is sufficient proof** of one or more acts of misdemeanour (a) to (e) on
the part of the Mayor, however the Minister shall before making the said order
of removal, **for the purpose of satisfying himself** in regard to those
matters (a) to (e),



**388**

  
appoint a retired judicial officer to inquire and report on such matters. The
process by which the Minister satisfies himself is the consideration of the
report of the inquiry officer. It was contended on behalf of the contesting
respondents that the Minister's decision being a political decision, it would
be improper for him either not to make an order of removal in accordance with
a report of an inquiry officer holding a Mayor guilty of any misdemeanour or
to make an order of removal disregarding a report of an inquiry officer
exonerating a Mayor of any misdemeanour.



I am unable to accept the contentions of learned counsel for the respondents
and the interpretation placed on section 2 of the Powers of Supervision of the
Administration of Local Authorities Statute No. 4 of 1991 of the Western
Provincial Council. The duty of the Minister is to read the report of the
retired Judicial Officer and with the assistance of his findings of fact to
proceed to be personally satisfied that there were one or more acts or
omissions specified in section 2(1) (a) ‑ (d). If the Minister, who is the 1st
respondent, was in fact satisfied after a perusal of the retired Judicial
Officer's report, he failed to refute the averment of the petitioner that he
did not satisfy himself that there were one or more acts or omissions
specified in section 2(1) (a) ‑ (d). Section 2 (2) does require the Minister
to appoint a retired Judicial Officer to inquire into and report to him on
**** the allegations specified in the terms of reference issued to the
inquiring officer. However section 2 (2) makes it abundantly clear that the
inquiry is for the purpose of assisting the Minister to make up his mind: the
words 'for the purpose of satisfying himself', in my view, places the meaning
of the provision beyond dispute.



Not only should the Minister have satisfied himself that the Mayor was guilty
of one or more acts or omissions falling within the scope of sections 2(1) (a)
‑ (d), he was statutorily obliged, in my view, to have exercised his own
judgment as to whether in the circumstances of the case he ought to remove the
Mayor. The Minister was, in my view, by no means under any legal compulsion to
remove the Mayor even if he was satisfied that the Mayor was guilty of any one
or more of the acts or omissions specified in section 2(1) (a) ‑ (d): section
2 provides that "the Minister may as the circumstances of each case



**389**

  
may require ... remove the Chief Executive Officer of such Authority". The
Minister and the Court of Appeal erroneously believed that where the inquiring
officer found the Mayor guilty of some of the acts and omissions specified in
the terms of reference, the Minister had no choice in the matter and that he
was bound to remove the Mayor. Learned Counsel for the respondents maintained
that the Minister's decision is a 'political decision'. If that be the case,
could it have been intended that the decision of a retired Judicial Officer
engaged for a limited fact‑finding purpose and not accountable to the electors
was to be vested with the virtual power of removal of the Mayor? I do not
think so.



For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the Court of Appeal is set aside
and order of Writ of Certiorari to issue quashing the order made by the 1st
respondent contained in his letter dated 19.5.94 removing the petitioner from
the office of Mayor. Parties will bear their own costs of litigation.



**DR.** **AMERASINGHE, J.** ‑ I agree.



**WIJETUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/46.html_  

