##  Balasunderam v. The Chairman, Janatha Estate Development Board and Others
- SLR - 83, Vol 1 of 1997 [1995] LKSC 46; (1997) 1 Sri LR 83 (8 December 1995)

83

BALASUNDERAM

v.

THE CHAIRMAN, JANATHA ESTATE DEVELOPMENT

BOARD AND OTHERS





SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J.,

S.C. APPEAL NO. 94/95

C.A. APPLICATION NO. 581/92

DECEMBER 8, 1995.



Writ of Certiorari - Recovery of Government Quarters - Government Quarters
(Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1969 as amended by Act No. 8 of 1981 -
Sections 3 and 9 of the Act - Persons subject to a quit notice - Applicability
of Section 9 as amended - Reasons for issue of a quit notice.  


By a Quit Notice served under Section 3 of the Government Quarters (Recovery
of Possession) Act, the appellant who was the Manager of the Dunsinane Estate
Co-operative Society Ltd., was required to vacate the estate Quarters provided
by the Janatha Estate Development Board (JEDB) on the ground of cessation of
his employment. The Dunsinane Estate was owned by the JEDB.



**Held:**

** **

(1) The power to issue a quit notice is not limited to a case where the person
in occupation is an employee of the estate. Quarters provided "to any person"
by a public Corporation can be recovered under the Act.



(2) A person who had been provided quarters prior to the date of Act. No. 8 of
1981, which extends the definition of "Government Quarters" in Section 9 of
the principal enactment to quarters provided by a public Corporation, would
also be subject to ejectment under the Act. The word 'Provided' in Section 9
should not be construed to mean "provided after the Act."

**84**



(3) In determining the validity of the reason for issuing the quit notice, the
reason referred to at paragraph Iv of 'Form 8' in Schedule 'E' to the Act
should not be read "ejusdem generis" with the reasons set out in paragraphs
(1) - (111). The question is whether the reason is adequate, which is a matter
that would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.



**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal  
  
_S. Mahenthiran_ for appellant.



1st and 2nd respondents absent and unrepresented.

_ _

_Romesh de Silva, P.C._ with _Palitha Kumarasinghe_ for 3rd respondents. __

_Cur adv vult._



January 23, 1995.  


**KULATUNGA J.**



The appellant has unsuccessfully sought to quash by way of Certiorari in the
Court of Appeal, a quit notice dated 02.06,92 served on him in terms of S.3 of
the Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1969 as amended.
The said notice was issued by the 1st respondent (Chairman, Janatha Estates
Development Board, Nuwara Eliya) who is a competent authority under S.9 of the
Act to issue such notice. The appellant appeals to this Court against the
judgment of the Court of Appeal.



By the aforesaid notice the appellant was required to vacate the estate
quarters on Dunsinane Estate, Pundaluoya which he was occupying. The said
estate is owned by the 2nd respondent (JEDB) and is presently leased to the
3rd respondent company.



The appellant had been employed as the Manager of the Dunsinane Estate
Labourers' Co-operative Society Ltd., which is managed by a committee of
Management of which the Superintendent of the estate is the ex-officio
President. By letter dated 06.05.87 the Society terminated the employment of
the appellant. However, pending an appeal by the appellant against his
dismissal to the Co-operative Employees Commission, which was dismissed on
06.03.92 he had continued to occupy the quarters. Shortly prior to the said
dismissal the Superintendent by his letter dated 18.02.92 requested the
appellant to hand over the quarters on or before 25.03.92, as he had ceased to
be an employee on the estate.

**85**



The appellant replied through an Attorney-at-Law who stated that the appellant
was in occupation of the Co-operative Manager's quarters of which he had been
placed in occupation by the Cooperative Society; that he had never been an
employee of the estate; hence the JEDB had no power to serve a quit notice on
him. The Superintendent replied stating that as the quarters belongs to the
estate the appellant should vacate the same. The Superintendent's position was
that the appellant's employment with the Co-operative Society did not affect
the rights of the JEDB. This was followed by the impugned quit notice.



S.3 of the Act empowers a competent authority to serve a quit notice "on the
occupier of any Government quarters". Under S.9 as amended by Act No. 8 of
1981 -



"Government Quarters" means any building, room or other accommodation occupied
for the use of residence which is provided by or on behalf of the Government
or any public corporation **to any person** and includes any land or premises
in which such building or room or other accommodation is situated, but does
not include any house provided by the Commissioner for National Housing to
which Part V of the National Housing Act applies".



It is thus clear that the power to serve a quit notice is not limited to a
case where the person in occupation is an employee of the estate. Quarters
provided "to any person" by a public corporation can be recovered under the
Act.



Mr. Mahenthiran for the appellant referred to the definition of "competent
authority" in S.9 of the Act as amended which provided inter alia, that in
relation to quarters **belonging to a public corporation** , it means the
Chairman of such corporation or any officer authorised by such Chairman to be
a Competent Authority for the purposes of the Act. Counsel submits that the
ownership of the premises is, therefore, a condition precedent to the right to
have recourse to the Act; but there is no proof that the premises in question
belongs to the JEDB.



In view of the fact that as regards quarters provided by the Government, there
is no reference to ownership, there is a doubt as to whether the right to
recover premises under the Act is limited to

**86**



premises that "belong" to the Government or a public corporation in the sense
that such premises are owned by the Government or a public corporation.
Assuming that ownership is a pre-requisite, I am of the opinion that in the
instant case, there is proof of ownership by the JEDB. Firstly, premises
situated on the estate must presumably be owned by the JEDB. Secondly, the
Superintendent of the Estate in his letter dated 26.02.92 specially claimed
the quarters as belonging to the estate. This has not been contradicted in the
reply sent to the Superintendent by an Attorney-at-Law on behalf of the
appellant. Appellant's position was that the quarters were provided by the
Cooperative Society and that he was not an employee of the JEDB. In the
proceedings before us, Counsel for the appellant has specially submitted that
the quarters were not provided by or on behalf of the JEDB.



On the available material, it has been established that the quarters belong to
the JEDB. If so, the same has to be provided by or on behalf of the JEDB and
not by the Co-operative Society. Even if the Committee of Management of the
Society had placed the appellant in physical occupation thereof, the appellant
cannot urge, for that reason, that the quarters were not provided by or on
behalf of the JEDB, within the meaning of S.9 of the Act.



I have no doubt that the provision of quarters was a facility provided by the
JEDB to the appellant who was the Manager of the Co-operative Society of which
the estate labourers were members. It was an amenity provided by the JEDB for
the benefit of estate labourers.



In his written submissions, Mr. Mahenthiran has urged two additional grounds
in support of the appellant's case. The first of these grounds is that as at
the date of Act No. 8 of 1981 which made the recovery provisions of the Act
applicable to public corporations, the appellant was already in occupation of
the quarters. The amendment not being retrospective, it cannot be used to
evict him. Counsel further submits that the appellant first occupied the
quarters in 1960. As such, the Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession)
Act No. 7 of 1969 itself has no application to him.



The rule against retrospectively is intended to protect vested rights. Maxwell
(Interpretation of Statutes) 12th Ed. 216 states:

**87**



"in the words of Craies on Statute Law (6th Ed. 386) a statute is
retrospective which takes away or impairs any vested right acquired under
existing laws, or creates a new obligation, or imposes a new duty, or attaches
a new disability in respect to transactions or considerations already past".



Act No. 7 of 1969 as amended does not seek to take away or impair any vested
right. It provides for a summary procedure for the recovery of Government
quarters provided by or on behalf of the Government or a public corporation. A
person who had been provided quarters prior to the date of the Act would also
be subject to be ejected under the Act. The word "provided" in S.9 should not
be construed to mean "provided after the Act".



A man who has been provided with Government quarters prior to the date of the
Act, cannot be said to have a vested right. If the appellant had been given
quarters prior to 1969, that was not a "transaction already past". His right
is a continuing right the exercise of which would become subject to the Act.



The second new point raised is that the impugned quit notice does not state
the reason for the issue of such notice. The reason stated in the said notice
is that the appellant's services have been terminated and hence he had no
authority to continue to occupy the quarters. Schedule 'E', Form 'A' to the
Act prescribes the Form of the quit notice but it does not specify the nature
of the reason which has to be stated. However, Counsel relies on Form 'B'
which is the Form to be used, for making an application to a Magistrate for
ejectment. The for the issue of the quit notice has to be set out in such
application. At the foot of the said Form there is reference to the nature of
the reason which has to be stated. Briefly, they are:



(i) period of occupation of quarters has expired;



(ii) a transfer of the occupier from the station which qualified him to occupy
Government quarters;



(iii) death of the occupier to whom the quarters was originally given;



(iv) any other reason which is considered adequate.



Counsel submits that the reason referred to at (iv) above should be read
"ejusdem generis" with the reason at (i) - (iii). I cannot agree with

**88**



this submission. The reasons set out in Form `B' are not exhaustive and are
merely by way of illustration; and the reasons contemplated at (iv) above need
not be "ejusdem generis". The relevant question is whether such reason is
adequate, which is a matter that would depend on the facts and circumstances
of each case.



In interpreting the Act, I have adopted the principle that words are to be
construed in accordance with the intention as expressed, having regard to the
object or policy of the legislation, which in the instant case is to
facilitate the speedy recovery of Government quarters.



For the foregoing reasons, I hold that the impugned quit notice is valid and
that there are no grounds for quashing it by way of certiorari. Accordingly, I
dismiss the appeal, but without costs.



**G. P. S. DE SILVA C.J.** \- I agree

** **

**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree



Appeal dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/46.html_  

