##  Florence Fernando v. Andrews Travel Service Ltd. - SLR - 287, Vol 3 of
2002 [1994] LKSC 46; (2002) 3 Sri LR 287 (7 July 1994)

**287**

**FLORENCE FERNANDO  
v.  
ANDREWS TRAVEL SERVICE LTD.**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
GOONEWARDENA, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 2/94  
HC (WP) APPEAL NO. 4/92  
WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL  
NO. C3/P/50/90 (2)  
JUNE 13, 1994  
  
_Workmen's Compensation - "Workman" \- Control by employer unnecessary
-Definition of "workman" under section 2 of Workmen's Compensation Ordinance
as amended by Act, No. 15 of 1990 - Workman may have more than one employer.  
  
_The deceased workman was a permanent employee of the Tyre Corporation. He was
also a licensed tour guide. The respondent (a travel agency) engaged his
services to conduct tourists to visit places of interest in Sri Lanka at the
rate of Rs. 275 per day. One such tour included a boat ride in the course of
which the deceased drowned. The Commissioner of Workmen's Compensation awarded
compensation to the appellant who was the widow of the deceased.  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1) Even if employer control is a requisite, the deceased was controlled by
the respondent by the detailed itinerary for each tour.  
  
(2) However, the deceased's status as "workman" had to be decided in terms of
the new definition of "workman" under section 2 of the Workmen's Compensation
Ordinance as amended by Act No. 15 of 1990. The definition now includes a
person who works "in any capacity". It is sufficient if it is a contract
"personally to execute any work or labour" and this would include the work of
guiding tourists.

**288**

(3)  The fact that the deceased had other permanent employment was irrelevant
because the law does not prohibit a man to serve two masters.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. _De Silva v. Premawathie -_ (1948) 50 NLR 306.  
  
2\. _S. W. Omnibus Co. v. James Silva -_ (1954) 56 NLR 330.  
  
3\. _Don Aslin v. Samarakoone Bros. -_ (1938) 39 NLR 390.  
  
4\. _Baby Nona v. Arthur Silva -_ (1952) 54 NLR 166.  
  
5\. _Senaratne v. Maggie Nona -_ (1953) 54 NLR 575.  
  
**APPEAL** against the judgment of the High Court.  
  
_R. K. W. Goonesekera_ with _L. C. M. Swamadhipathi_ and _Neville Abeyratne_
for appellant.  
  
_P. Somatilakam_ with _M. D. K. Kulatunga_ and _Leon Fernando_ for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

July 07, 1994  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
The appellant's deceased husband was a permanent employee of the Tyre
Corporation. He was also a licensed tour guide. On three or four occasions he
had been engaged by the respondent Company (a travel agency) to conduct groups
of tourists on short tours to various places of interest in Sri Lanka. He was
last engaged for such a tour. scheduled for 15 days, commencing on 29. 09.
1990; this included a boat ride on 10. 10. 1990, in the course of which the
deceased was drowned. He was paid at the rate of Rs. 275 per day. The
appellant applied to the Commissioner of Workmen's Compensation, who awarded
her compensation in a sum of Rs. 250,000 in respect  of the death of her
husband. The respondent has expressly conceded that if the deceased was a
"workman" within the meaning of the

**289**

Workmen's Compensation Ordinance, his death was in consequence of an accident
arising out of and in the course of his employment.  
  
That order was set aside on appeal. The learned High Court Judge took the view
that the issue for determination was "whether the deceased was employed by
(the respondent), or was a casual employee/ independent contractor". Having
referred to the four indicia of a contract of service - namely, the employer's
power of selection of the employee, the payment of remuneration by the
employer, the employer's right to control the method of doing the work, and
the employer's right to dismiss the employee - the learned High Court Judge
took the view that the respondent did not control the manner in which the work
was done. Despite the detailed itinerary for each day of the tour, the learned
High Court Judge held that the deceased had considerable freedom to determine
the precise time at which the group would visit a scheduled place of interest;
to lecture to them about such places as he thought best; to take the group to
visit other attractions and shops, and generally to entertain them; and to
decide whose boat he should hire for the boat trip. She held that the deceased
was  working under a contract for services, and was therefore not an employee
of the respondent.  
  
However, this view that the itinerary contained only some broad guidelines and
that the deceased had a large measure of discretion, is mistaken. An
examination of the itinerary shows that the deceased had to keep to a very
detailed schedule; every important aspect of the tour had been predetermined
(and was paid for) by the respondent, and could not be varied by the deceased;
in relation to the tour as a whole, the deceased had only a limited
discretion. It is true that the respondent did not attempt to control the
exercise of his skill as a guide - what precisely he would emphasise at each
place, and what he would say about it, etc. - but that is a discretion not at
all

**290**

inconsistent with the position of any employee whose work involves some degree
of skill. By no means was he an independent contractor, engaged to produce the
desired result of a successful tour, and having a wide discretion as to how he
would achieve that objective. On the contrary, specific directions were given
to him as to what he should do; having done what he was told to do, if the
tour was not a success, that was not his responsibility.  
  
In any event, the matter should have been determined by reference to the
definition of "workman" in the Workmen's Compensation Ordinance, as amended by
Act, No. 15 of 1990 :  
  
"... any person who has entered into or works under, a contract with an
employer for the purposes of his trade or business in any capacity, whether
the contract is expressed or implied, oral or in writing, and whether it is a
contract of service or of apprenticeship or a contract personally to execute
any work or labour, and whether the remuneration payable thereunder is
calculated by time, or by work done or otherwise, and whether such contract
was made before or after the coming into force of this definition ..."  
  
Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that a "workman" included only
persons engaged in work over which the employer had complete control. In reply
to a question from the Court, he said that a legal officer employed in a
company or corporation would not be included, because the employer had no
control over aspects of his professional work, such as making submissions to a
court and giving advice. This is untenable. The previous definition was
undoubtedly restrictive, because it included only persons employed in a
capacity specified in Schedule II; thus, a school teacher was excluded (De
Silva v. Premawathie (1). Although it is true that Gratiaen, J. observed in
that case that the definition only covered what is popularly described

**291**

as "the working classes" engaged in manual labour and earning "wages" as
distinct from "salaries", that was obiter. As pointed out by Pulle, J. in S.
W. Omnibus Co. v. James Silva (2), the ratio decidendi was that "an employee
could not qualify for any statutory benefit unless he came within one of the
occupations specified in Schedule. Hence, if Schedule II had been amended to
include the work of a lawyer, the definition would then have included a lawyer
even if his employer lacked control over his work. Thus, the term "workman"
was not, even then, restricted to those persons over whose work the  employer
had full control. And the new definition (which is similar in important
respects to that contained in the Industrial Disputes Act) removed the
reference to 'wages' as well as other pre-existing restrictions; it now
includes a person who works "in any capacity", provided (a) he had a contract,
howsoever arising, with the employer, and (b) his employment was for the
purpose of the employer's trade or business; it is sufficient if it is a
contract "personally to execute any work or labour", and this would include
the work of guiding tourists; and it does not matter how the "remuneration" is
calculated.  
  
Casual employees are not excluded from the definition. Even before the 1990
amendment, casual employees were included, unless they were employed otherwise
than for the purposes of the employer's trade or business (Don Aslin v.
Samarakone Bros (3), Baby Nona v. Arthur Silva,(4) and Senaratne v. Maggie
Nona.) (5) Although differently worded, the new definition made no change. The
fact that the deceased had other permanent employment was irrelevant because
the law does not provide that a man may not serve two masters. The deceased,
therefore, was a "workman" as defined.  
  
Learned counsel for the respondent further submitted that the Commissioner had
erred in computing compensation on the basis of  section 7 (1) (c), and argued
that it was section 7 (1) (b) which was applicable. Although this submission
was not made at the inquiry, section 7 (1) provides :

**292**

"(b) where the whole of the continuous period of service immediately preceding
the accident during which the workman was in the service of the employer who
is liable to pay the compensation was less than one month, the monthly wages
of the workman shall be deemed to be the average monthly amount which, during
the twelve months immediately preceding the accident, was being earned by a
workman employed on the same work by the same employer, or, if there was no
workman so employed, by a workman employed on similar work in the same
locality;  
  
(c) in other cases, the monthly wages shall be thirty times the total wages
earned in respect of the last continuous period of service immediately
preceding the accident from the employer who is liable to pay compensation,
divided by the number of days comprising such period."  
  
The General Manager of the respondent stated in evidence-in-chief that
salaries of tour guides were determined by the Tourist Board, and that the
deceased was paid Rs. 275 per day, thus implying that what the deceased was
receiving was the rate fixed by the Board. His evidence was that there was a
list of registered tour guides from which the respondent made its selection.
There was no evidence before the Commissioner as to the actual monthly
earnings of other tour guides employed by the respondent, or of tour guides in
the locality. Accordingly, it was not possible for the Commissioner to have
calculated the monthly wages of the deceased in terms of section 7 (1) (b),
and he fell back on the residual provision in section 7 (1) (c) on the basis
of which he assessed the monthly wages of the deceased at Rs. 8,250 (and the
appellant's entitlement under section 6 (1) (A) at Rs. 250,000). Counsel for
the respondent conceded that if the Court were now to attempt to apply section
7 (1) (b), despite the lack of evidence, it would not be unreasonable to
compute monthly

**293**

wages on the basis of 22 working days; the monthly wages of the deceased would
be Rs. 6,050 and the appellant's entitlement would be Rs. 249,498. In those
circumstances there was no reason to interfere with the Commissioner's
assessment of compensation.  
  
It was for these reasons that, at the conclusion of the hearing the appeal was
allowed, and the Commissioner's order restored, with costs in both Courts in a
sum of Rs. 15,000 payable by the respondent.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J. -** I agree.  
  
**GOONEWARDENE, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/46.html_  

