##  Millers Limited. v. Ceylon Mercantile Industrial and General Workers Union
(Cmu) - SLR - 179, Vol 1 of 1993 [1993] LKSC 46; (1993) 1 Sri LR 179 (16
February 1993)

**179**

**MILLERS LIMITED** **  
v.** **  
CEYLON MERCANTILE INDUSTRIAL  
AND GENERAL WORKERS UNION (CMU)**

SUPREME COURT.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.,

DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 38/92.  
HCA LT/LA SC 2/92.  
HCA/LT 46/91.  
LT CASE NO. 1/14/89.  
FEBRUARY 16, 1993.

_     Industrial Law - Unjust termination of workman's services - Misconduct -
Deprivation of back wages - Just and equitable order - Necessity to take into
account the interests of both parties._

Where the workman's conduct was deserving of censure but dismissal was
considered too severe a punishment and reinstatement without back wages was
ordered -

the fact that the workman concerned was a labourer and could well have been
gainfully employed as a manual labourer during the time he was out of work
with the appellant but placed no evidence that he remained unemployed despite
efforts to find work must be taken into account in considerating suitability
of awarding back wages. The deprivation of back wages would be justified if he
placed no evidence in this regard. It was also relevant to this question that
the workman had falsely and deliberately denied misbehaviour on his part which
resulted in disciplinary proceedings being taken against him.

Per Bandaranayake, J.

"The Order must be fair by all parties in the interests of discipline".

' When the Provincial High Court stresses ' the spirit of the order '.........
the Court introduces a dimension of vagueness and uncertainty into the
proceedings. The Tribunal's decision included both reinstatement and an order
not to award any back wages. It would appear that the High Court is laying too
much stress on the fact of reinstatement and therefore the interests only of
the workman, whilst not appreciating the reasons for the denial of back wages.

An award is just and equitable only if it takes into consideration the
interests of all the parties.

180

**Cases considered as per Judge's annex** :

_1\. SLTB v. Ceylon Transport Labour Union 1986 1 CALR 309.  
_  
_2\. Malik Dairy Farms v. Its Workers Union 1968 (2) LLJ 523 (Bombay).  
_  
_3\. 1978 SC Labour Law Journal : vol. 2, 474, 477.  
_  
_4\. 1985 labour Law Journal : vol. 2, 457.  
_  
_5\. CA 404/83 - CA Minute of 19.5.83.  
_  
_6\. United Engineering Workers Union V. Devanayagam (1967) 72 CLW 35.  
_  
_7\. Ceylon Tea Plantations Co. Ltd. v. Ceylon Estates Staff Union (S.C.
211/72; S.C.M. 15/5/74)._  
  
_8\. Ceylon Transport Board v. Ceylon Transport Board Workers Union (1969) 71
NLR 42.  
_  
_9\. Uplands Tea Estates Ltd. v. Ceylon Workers Congress (1970) 72 NLR 68.  
_  
_10\. Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. v. Jayasinghe [1982] 2 SLR 595._

**APPEAL** from order of the High Court in appeal.

_M. A. Bastiansz with Nigel Hatch for respondent-appellant._

  
_Shirley M. Fernando with Ms. H. Fernando for the applicant-respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult_

May 13, 1993.  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

Leave to appeal to the Supreme Court has been granted by the High Court of the
Western Province in terms of Act No. 19 of 1990.

The applicant-union on behalf of the workman sought relief from the Labour
Tribunal alleging that the workman's services had been unjustly terminated
with effect from 10.9.88 and prayed for reinstatement with back wages. The
respondent-employer resisted the application stating dismissal had been on
disciplinary grounds after a domestic enquiry and was justified.

The facts were that the workman who was a labourer and been in employment for
2 years with the appellant had sought to remove a large thick sheet of
hardboard belonging to the respondent-company without permission by placing
the article in a company vehicle which was about to take employees who had
worked overtime unloading containers back to their houses that night. On being
cautioned by the driver of the vehicle that he should obtain prior permission
to remove Company property, the workman had gone inside the office

181

and sought permission from the Manager to remove the hardboard but permission
was refused. The workman had then in a fit of temper kicked the hardboard and
broken it into two and thrown it out of the vehicle and banged the door of the
vehicle so hard that the lock was damaged; this was in the presence of several
other workmen. This was the misconduct complained of by the employer. The
workman had at first sought to deny that the hardboard belonged to the
employer Company; later whilst admitting that he sought permission to remove
the hardboard, denied damaging the door lock and also said that he kept the
hardboard outside the vehicle. The Tribunal has chosen not to believe the
workman and has accepted the employer's witnesses narration of events. This
rejection of the workman's version is important for the reason that the
workman by his evidence had sought to deny any misconduct which necessitated
disciplinary measures being taken against him. The tribunal accepted the
evidence led on behalf of the employer and held the workman guilty of the
behaviour alleged. The Tribunal however without dismissing the application
ordered reinstatement without break in service but without back wages.
Appellant's Counsel submitted that here was a case of an outburst of extreme
resentment against a decision of the employer in the presence of several other
workmen which if not censured could lead to chaos in the work place. Being
perhaps a borderline case, a case where the conduct of the workman may have
been regarded as reprehensible and intolerable warranting dismissal, the
Tribunal had taken a more lenient view and considering the circumstances where
previous bad behavior had not been satisfactorily proved though alleged,
decided that termination was too harsh a punishment for his behaviour and in
this sense unjustified and instead ordered reinstatement with effect from
5.3.91 without a break in service but without back wages. This order had been
complied with.

The applicant next took an appeal to the Provincial High Court seeking to have
the order of the Tribunal varied. The only ground urged in appeal by Counsel
had been that the President had erred in refusing back wages to the workman.
The loss in income of the workman from 10.9.88 to 5.3.91 was in excess of Rs.
34,000 which it was urged was inequitable.

182

The judgment of the High Court in appeal observed as follows:.....
"quote"......." The learned President has not considered whether it is
reasonable and/or equitable to deprive the applicant of the entirety of the
back wages particularly in the light of the amount and the period concerned.
No reason has been advanced for depriving the grant of back wages. This would
have been a relevant consideration in view of the finding.... that termination
of service was too harsh a punishment. In keeping with the spirit of the order
of the learned President it will not be in the interests of equity to deprive
the workman of the entirety of the back wages." The High; Court varied the
Tribunal's order to the extent of awarding back wages for 18 months at a
monthly wage of Rs. 1,187/50 = Rs. 21,375. Subject to this variation the
appeal was dismissed without costs.

This appeal is from that judgment. It was submitted on behalf of the employer
respondent-appellant that the Labour Court had indeed approached the evidence
placed before it correctly and considered all relevant matters in coming to
its decision. The Tribunal had upon a consideration of the evidence come to a
finding in the first instance that the workman was guilty of improper
behaviour when permission to remove the hardboard was refused. This finding
has not been canvassed in appeal. Thereafter the Tribunal had to decide
whether in the circumstances, dismissal was fair or justified. The Tribunal
has applied its mind to this question and decided that it was excessive and
therefore awarded reinstatement. This the Tribunal could do and the employer
has not appealed against that order. Thereafter the Tribunal had obviously
given its mind to the question of back wages when it decided against the award
of back wages and deliberately said so. Counsel submitted that this decision
was within the Tribunal's discretion in the situation where dismissal in the
first instance had been taken as a disciplinary measure. There can be no doubt
that the Tribunal felt that the interests of discipline required that some
form of disapproval of or punishment for the workman's misconduct be shown and
thus in fairness to the employer in the face of proved indiscipline decided
against the award of back wages. Furthermore the workman although he gave
evidence had not stated that he remained unemployed since 10.9.88. Thus it was
submitted that the Tribunal had abundant reason to make the order it did.
Counsel for the applicant-respondent submitted that the incident of 9.9.88 was
of a trivial nature and therefore termination was unjustified and consequently
the deprivation of Rs. 35,000 was unjustified and that the High Court
therefore restored some wages.

183

The question before us is whether the Labour Tribunal President was justified
in depriving the workman of back wages upon reinstatement. A Tribunal has to
determine this upon the facts and circumstances of each case. In this instance
upon the evidence the President could have concluded that the workman's
conduct was deserving of censure although dismissal was too severe.

The workman has given his age as 22 years when he testified before the
Tribunal in May 1990. Thus, he was 20 years of age when his services were
terminated in September 1988. His employment had been that of a manual
labourer. Thus it would appear that he could well have been gainfully employed
at least as manual labourer during the time he was out of work with the
appellant.

Although the workman testified he has placed no evidence that he remained
unemployed despite efforts to find work. A Tribunal is entitled to take his
failure to do so into account in deciding the question of back wages. There
was also the conduct of the workman before the Tribunal of falsely and
deliberately denying any misbehaviour on 9.9.88. We are of the opinion that
there was material before the Tribunal upon which the President, in the
exercise of his discretion in making an award which was just and fair to both
employee and employer, could have fairly refused to award any back wages to
this workman. The Order must be fair by all parties in the interests of
discipline. The finding of the High Court that the order of the Tribunal was
inequitable is unacceptable.

When the Provincial High Court stresses "the spirit of the order"......... the
Court introduces a dimension of vagueness and uncertainty into the
proceedings. The Tribunal's decision included both reinstatement and an order
not to award any back wages. It would appear that the High Court is laying too
much stress on the fact of reinstatement and therefore the interests only of
the workman whilst not appreciating the reasons for the denial of back wages.

An award is just and equitable only if it takes into consideration the
interests of all the parties.

The appeal is allowed.

184

The judgment of the Provincial High Court is set aside and the Order of the
Labour Tribunal is restored. No costs.

**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.

  
**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/46.html_  

