##  Kulatunga v. The Board of Directors, Co Operative Wholesale Establishment
(C.W.E.) - SLR - 372, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC 46; (1981) 1 Sri LR 372 (30
November 1981)

**372**

**KULATUNGA  
v.  
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS,  
 CO-OPERATIVE WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT (C.W.E.)**

**SUPREME COURT  
SAMARAKOON, C. J., WEERARATNE, J. AND  
WANASUNDERA, J.  
S. C. 7/81  
C. A, 251/81  
L. T. 1/ADDL. 716/75  
AUGUST 14, 1981  
**  
_Retirement- Premature retirement-Circular issued by Dept. of Public
Administration-Regulations 62 and 64 of C. W. E.  
_  
The Circular of the Department of Public Administration though marked in
evidence was not produced. Hence it is the Regulations which should apply.
These two regulations 62 and 64 of the C.W.E. give an employee the option to
retire when he reaches the age (if 55 years but do not give the employer a
reciprocal right to retire an employee on his reaching the age of 55 years. An
employer may however retire an employee on the employee reaching the age of 55
years on the ground of (a) retrenchment and (b) inefficiency. The age of
compulsory retirement is 60 years.  
  
**_APPEAL_ **from judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_H. L. de Silva for applicant-respondent-appellant.  
  
Mark Fernando with Q. Palliyaguru for employer-appellant-respondent._

_**Cur. adv. vult.**_

November 30, 1981.  
**WANASUNDERA, J.**  
  
This is an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal which has set aside
the order of a Labour Tribunal awarding the appellant a sum of Rs. 19,320/- as
compensation upon his being prematurely retired from employment by his
employer, the respondent. The appellant had been appointed as accountant in
the Co-operative Wholesale Establishment by the respondent in January 1963. In
1972 he was promoted to the post of Senior Accountant. The appellant was
retired from service with effect. from 28th January 1975 when he was 59 years
of age.  
  
The respondent has sought to justify this premature retirement by reference to
a circular of the establishment, based on Government policy, and those,
grounds have found favour with the Court

**373**

of Appeal. The respondent alleges that the appellant was, at all times,
subject to the rules, regulations and departmental orders of the C.W.E. and
that the retirement was effected in terms of a circular dated 23rd May 1974
issued on the instructions of the Ministry of Public Administration.  
  
This circular, it is alleged, had fixed the age of retirement at 55 years, but
an extension up to 58 years of age could be given by the Minister, and further
extension up to 60 could be given by the Cabinet of Ministers.  
  
As against this, the appellant relied on two regulations of the Co-operative
Wholesale Establishment and claimed a right to continue till he reached his
60th year. The Court of Appeal took the view that, since the circular reflects
Government policy and the respondent is a semi-governmental institution, the
circular which was later in date to the regulations would govern the rights of
the parties. It was obviously the intention of the respondent to produce this
circular in evidence and in fact he gave it a marking R 14. But this circular
however, which the Court chose to go by, "was not submitted and is not in
evidence," in the words of the Court of Appeal itself. The Court of Appeal
based its judgment not on the circular as such, but on certain oral statements
made by two witnesses who referred to this document. On the other hand, the
Labour Tribunal quite rightly ignored the circular, stating that the employer
had not led "sufficient evidence" on this matter, and based its order upon an
interpretation of the two regulations relied on by the appellant and held in
his favour.  
  
Those two regulations, namely regulations 62 and 64 of the Co-operative
Wholesale Establishment, were produced marked A2(a) and A2(b). They are worded
as follows:  
  
**" A2(a)  
RETIREMENT  
OPTIONAL  
**  
62 Permanent employees of the CWE will be permitted to retire if they so
desire, on reaching AT 55 YEARS the optional age of retirement (55 years).
They may not be permitted to continue in service after reaching this age when
it is possible to effect retrenchment by retiring an officer who has attained
the age of 55 or his efficiency is definitely below normal.  
  
An employee whom it is proposed to retire compulsorily for the reasons stated
above should not be allowed an extension on compassionate grounds.

**374**

**COMPULSORY  
RETIREMENT AT  
55 YEARS  
**  
An officer who is compulsorily retired from  service after reaching the age of
55 years should  . in ordinary circumstances, be given 3 months' notice of the
date of retirement."  
  
**A2(b)  
AUTOMATIC  
RETIREMENT  
AT 60 YEARS  
**  
(i) All employees shall be automatically retired on reaching the age of 60,
unless the sanction of the Board of Directors has been received beforehand to
retain their services after reaching the compulsory age of retirement."  
  
Mr. H. L. de Silva has submitted that these two regulations, while giving an
employee an option to retire when he reaches the age of 55, do not give the
employer a reciprocal right to retire an employee on reaching 55 years. The
employer however may retire an employee on the employee reaching the age of 55
years if the following two conditions are satisfied, namely, on the grounds of
(a) retrenchment, and (b) inefficiency. The compulsory age of retirement is
60. This means that an employee, unless retired on those two grounds, has the
right to go on till his 60th year. Mr. H. L. de Silva's submissions appear to
be supported by the wording of these two regulations. Mr. Fernando for the
respondent admitted that those two regulations were loosely worded and
unsatisfactory, but sought to throw light on their meaning by referring to
certain other regulations, which however have not been specifically marked in
evidence by either party. In any event, I do not think that those other
regulations he has in mind, can make much of a difference to this matter.  
  
As stated earlier, the Court of Appeal decided this case on the basis of the
alleged circular. The Court of Appeal took the view that the circular had an
overriding effect and superseded the regulations relied on by the appellant.
Referring to regulations 62 and 64, the court said :  
  
" . . . A change was thus effected by this Circular to the extent that the
workman was denied the prospect he earlier enjoyed of continuing in service
from his 55th till his 60th year unless retired on the special grounds set out
in Rule 62. At the time the Circular was issued the workman in this case had
already reached the age of 59 years. It is not the employer's case that the
workman was retired on the grounds set out in Rule 62, so that the workman
could have served till his 60th year."

**375**

In the absence of the proper proof of the circular, the Labour Tribunal was
right. in deciding this case on the basis of the regulations placed before it.
For these reasons, this appeal is allowed and the judgment of the Court of
Appeal is set aside.  
  
Before I part with this case, I like to observe that an order for the payment
of compensation against the respondent, which is a statutory corporation, will
in all probability harm the public interest either directly or indirectly. If
the respondent had intended that the legal position contended for by its
counsel before us ought to prevail, then it should have taken pains to see
that the regulations it relied on were drafted with care and that the relevant
material was duly produced at the trial so as to achieve that object. It is
vain to expect that this Court would grant special favours or dispense with
the legal requirements merely because a . party is a State corporation. In the
present state of affairs, this Court has no option but to make the order we
now make. As ordered by the Labour Tribunal, we direct the employer to deposit
the sum of Rs. 19,320/-, payable to the appellant, with the Assistant
Commissioner of Labour, Colombo South, on or before 30th November 1981. The
appellant will also be entitled to costs both here and in the Court of Appeal.  
  
**SAMARAKOON, C. J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WEERARATNE, J. - I** agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/46.html_  

