##  Ibrahim v. Faizer and Others - SLR - 133, Vol 1 of 2003 [2002] LKSC 46;
(2003) 1 Sri LR 133 (2 September 2002)

**133**

**IBRAHIM AND OTHERS** ****

**v.** ****

**FAIZER AND OTHERS** ****



SUPREME COURT

S.N. SILVA, CJ.

BANDARANAYAKE J., AND

ISMAIL, J.

SC APPEAL No. 93/97

CA APPEAL 609/82(F)

DC PUTTALAM No. T/66

2ND SEPTEMBER 2002

_Testamentary Action - Last will - Gift inter vivos or will - Intention of the
testa­tor_

The deceased Segu Mohideen was the owner and proprietor of a jewellery
business known as Mohideen Jewellery. He adopted the appellant as his son and
nominated him to look after his business and to keep the accounts.

The will of the deceased dated 19.12.1971 (P1) in its first part conveyed to
the appellant 1/2 the share of the wealth and income of the aforesaid
business. The second part of the will provided that the appellant was to hold
such right after the testator's death.

The District Judge held the Will as proved and issued probate to the
appellant.

**Held :** ****

(1)                 Although the first part of the will was in the form of
deed of gift, the intention of the second part was that it shall not take
effect until after the testator's death. Hence P1 was a valid will

(2)                 The true criterion in interpreting a will is the intention
of the testator to be gathered from the terms of the will and from surrounding
cir­cumstances.

**APPEAL** from the judgement of the Court of Appeal.

**134**

**Cases referred to :**

1.           Re _Anziani -_ (1930) 1 Ch, 407.424

2.           _Dias v Jansen_ \- (1913) 16 NLR 502

3.           _Vaitty v Jaccova -_ (1907) Appeal Court Reports 45

4.           _Fan Eyre v The Public Trustee -_ (1944) 46 NLR 59

5.           _Seneviratne v Kandappapullai -_ (1912) 16 NLR 151

_ _

_R.K.W. Goonesekera_ with _EC. Perera_ and _M.F. Miskin_ for appellant.

_Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ for 4th respondent.

# Cur. adv. vult

January 23,2003

**ISMAIL, J.** ****

The petitioner, Hameed Mohamed Salihu, annexing the last will dated 19th
December 1971 (P1) of his elder brother Hameed Segu Mohideen, applied to the
District Court, Puttalam in Testamentary case bearing No. T/66, by a petition
dated 9th January 1979, to have it proved and to obtain for himself the grant
of letters of administration. He averred that half the share of the income of
the business called "Mohideen Jewellery" carried on by the deceased at No. 30,
Main Street, Puttalam was devised to the 1st respondent. He disclosed that,
besides himself and his brother the 5th respondent, three sisters named as the
2nd, 3rd, and 4th respondents were the intestate heirs to the balance estate
of the deceased, the particulars of which were separately set out in a
Schedule. The testator died on 9th October 1978 without revoking his last will
and as no executor was named therein, the petitioner claimed to have letters
of administration issued to him.

The 1st respondent himself moved to have the will proved as being duly
executed and for probate to be issued to him in respect of

135

  
 half the share devised to him. The 4th and 5th respondents claimed in their
objections that the said will was a forged document and that it was neither a
will nor an instrument known to law. Subsequently the petitioner, contrary to
the averments in his origi­nal application, claimed by an affidavit dated 18th
January 1980 that his elder brother Hameed Segu Mohideen died without leaving
a valid last will and that the document annexed to his earlier appli­cation as
the will was not the act and deed of the deceased.



The District Judge by his judgment dated 26.03.1982 accept­ed the evidence
given by four of the five witnesses to the last will called by the 1st
respondent and held that the will was proved. He made order absolute issuing
probate to the 1st respondent in respect of the half share which formed the
subject matter of the will.



Thereafter, pursuant to a motion filed by all the intestate heirs consenting
to the grant of letters of administration to the petitioner and the 4th
respondent, an order was made accordingly on 14.5.1982 in respect of the
balance half share of the estate. The 4th respondent appealed to the Court of
Appeal on 24.5.1982 moving to set aside the judgment of the District Court
dated 26.3.1982 and sought a declaration that the last will which was a forged
document was not the act and deed of the deceased who died intestate.



However, counsel for the 4th respondent submitted for the first time to the
Court of Appeal as a proposition of law that the pur­ported disposition in the
impugned will was an irrevocable gift _inter_ _vivos_ taking effect
immediately without reference to or being condi­tional upon the death of the
testator Segu Mohideen. It is to be noted that as the sole challenge to the
will in the District Court was that it was a forgery and in the absence of a
specific issue there was no finding as to whether or not the said instrument
of disposi­tion was a valid will.



Admittedly, the deceased Segu Mohideen was the absolute owner and proprietor
of a jewellery business known as Mohideen Jewellery situated at No. 30, Main
Street, Puttalam. Having no chil­dren and being sick and of old age he adopted
the 1st respondent as his son and nominated him to look after his business and
to keep the accounts.

136

The will dated 19.12.1971 (P1) signed by five witnesses in the presence of the
testator and in the presence of one another was read over, translated and
explained to them. It was provided in the first part as follows:

** **

**" AND WHEREAS **in consideration of the affection and love I have on him I
do hereby assign and convey unto him to hold and enjoy 1/2 the share of wealth
income of the Mohideen Jewellery at No. 30, Main Street, Puttalam."



The Court of Appeal by its judgment dated 13.3.1997 found it unnecessary to
examine the question as to whether the docu­ment was a forgery or not, and
held that the impugned will (P1) is not a testamentary document. The judgment
of the District Court was set aside and the case was remitted back "for
necessary steps by way of testamentary proceedings".



The Court of Appeal upon an examination of the instrument found in it "ex
_facie_ evidence of a gift _inter vivotf1,_ that it was designed to confer an
immediate right which the deceased pos­sessed and that "the intention of the
donor was to convey an irrev­ocable gift in _praesenti_ rather than to convey
his estate conditioned upon his death".



The Court of Appeal finally held that P1 cannot be construed as a testamentary
document as there could be no testamentary intention when a person had "no
perception of death" in the near future and when the 1st respondent was
conducting business in the premises on behalf of the testator in the premises
in suit.



The 1st respondent-appellant was granted special leave to appeal on 19.6.97 on
the question whether the document P1 is a valid last will.



The Court of Appeal has apparently arrived at its findings by scrutinizing and
laying emphasis only on the first half of the will by which the testator has
assigned and conveyed to the 1st respon­dent-appellant half the share of the
income of the business of Mohideen Jewellery. It has not referred to the
further disposition therein that upon the death of the testator the appellant
has been assured additionally of an absolute right to half the share of the
premises itself and to occupy the same without fear of eviction. The second
part of the will is as follows:

**137**

**" AND WHEREAS **I do assure that after my death the said Shahul Hameed
Mohammed Ibrahim alias S.M. Ibrahim shall hold absolute right on the half
share of the "Mohideen Jewellery" at No. 30 Main Street, Puttalam including
the premises and enjoy, the benefits of same without any eviction or
interruption and the said S.M.Ibrahim shall and will at all times thereafter
my death enjoy same."

The second part of the will is clearly distinct from the first as stated in
_Theobald on Wills_ p.24 (14th ed). "if a deed is severable and in part
clearly testamentary, such part may take effect as a will, though other parts
are not testamentary". The author has in the foot­note referred to _Re
Anziani_ (1) in which it was held that a deed of appointment and assignment
which was expressed to be intended to operate as an assignment as well as a
will, could take effect as a conveyance _inter vivos_ of the immovable
property of the testatrix.  


It has been noted already that upon the death of the testator, the 1st
respondent-appellant was also assured of half the share of the premises
besides the income. The submission of counsel for the 4th respondent-appellant
that the reference in the will to the assurance of possession even after the
death of the testator is superfluous because the gift took effect immediately,
cannot be accepted because, as was held in _Dias v Jansen_ (2) "no words
expressed in a will should be treated as superfluous if they could be given a
meaning not inconsistent with the avowed intention of the testator". The words
in the second part of the will clearly express the intention of the testator
to bequeath half the share of the specified immovable property to take effect
after his death. Wood Renton, J. _in Vaitty vJaccova_ (3), relied on the
following pas­sage in _Williams on Executors vol._ 1 p.82 (10th ed.) in
interpreting an instrument, of disposition "It is undoubted law that whatever
may be the form of a duly executed instrument and not withstand­ing that it
may be in the form of a settlement or deed of gift, or a bond, if the person
executing it intends that it shall not take effect until after his death, and
it is dependent on his death for its vigour and effect, it is testamentary".



The 1st respondent-appellant called as witnesses in the District Court,
Eliathamby, Ismail, Malhamy and Selvaratnam, four

138

of the five witnesses to the will. Their evidence which was accept­ed by the
District Judge was that they were present together and affixed their
signatures to the document which was understood by them to be the last will
and its contents were explained to them, the true intention of the testator is
clear from the evidence and the sur­rounding circumstances. In _Fan Eyre v The
Public. Trustee_ (4), it was held that the paramount rule in the
interpretation of a will was to look for the intention of the testator as it
is expressed and clear­ly implied in the general terms of the will. When the
intention is found on satisfactory evidence, to that must be sacrificed
inconsis­tent clauses and words. As was also held in _Seneviratne v_
_Kandappapullaffl,_ "It is well settled that the general rules for the
interpretation for wills are unsafe guides and that the only true cri­terion
is the intention of the testator to be gathered from the terms of the will and
from surrounding circumstances".



The Court of Appeal has erred in arriving at the finding that the document P1
is not a "testamentary document with a testa­mentary intention" without
considering the last clause of the will which expressly states that the
further disposition was to take effect after the death of the testator. The
intention of the testator has been clearly expressed in the final clause of
the will and it is clear to me that the instrument depends "for its vigour and
effect" on the death of the testator.



For these I hold that the document P1 is a valid will. The judg­ment of the
Court of Appeal is therefore set aside.



The appeal is allowed with costs fixed at Rs.10,000/-.

**SILVA, CJ.** **** \- I agree.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** **** \- I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/46.html_  

