##  Sunil Sirilanka and Others v. Ceylon Steel Corporation Ltd. and Others -
SLR - 57, Vol 1 of 1999 [1998] LKSC 47; (1999) 1 Sri LR 57 (15 May 1998)

**57**

**SUNIL SIRILANKA AND OTHERS  
v.  
CEYLON STEEL CORPORATION LTD. AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
GUNAWARDENA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NOS. 283-295/97  
MAY 15, 1998

_Fundamental rights - Sale of a Government owned Company to a foreign company
- Compensation to employees who were unwilling to serve the new Management -
Discrimination in payment of compensation - Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution._

The Government entered into an agreement for the sale of 90% shares of the
Ceylon Steel Corporation Ltd. to the 4th respondent company. This was followed
by the offer by the Government through the 2nd respondent, Secretary to the
Ministry of Finance and Planning of a compensation package to the employees of
the company who did not wish to serve under the new management. The workmen
were not agreeable to this offer in view of its terms. Next, there was a
second offer. The closing date for its acceptance was 6. 1. 97. 727 employees,
but not the petitioners, applied by 6. 1\. 97. With the intervention of the
3rd respondent, the Commissioner of Labour negotiations continued and at a
discussion on 10. 1. 97 a third package was made "for workers who have opted
to retire"; it was twice more favourable than the second offer; and the trade
unions accepted it. But the 2nd respondent implemented it only in respect of
the aforesaid 727 plus another person who was included on humanitarian grounds
after his death. Consequently, 728 employees were paid in terms of the third
package and thereupon deemed to have retired. The petitioners were not offered
any compensation on the ground that they had failed to opt to retire before 6.
1. 97.

**Held:**

The 2nd respondent acting on behalf of the state infringed the petitioner's
fundamental rights under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution by the failure to
offer them compensation on the basis of the package which was implemented in
favour of 728 employees.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

58

_R. K S. Sureshchandra_ for the petitioner. _  
  
__H. Fernando SC_ for the 2nd, 3rd and 5th respondents.

_C. D. Bakmeewewa_ for the 6th added respondent. _  
  
_No appearance for the 1st and 4th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

June 04, 1998.  
**  
FERNANDO, J.**

These thirteen applications were taken up together as they involved the
identical question.

The facts are not in dispute. The 1st respondent company (the successor to the
Ceylon Steel Corporation) was wholly owned by the Government of Sri Lanka, the
shares being registered in the name of the Secretary to the Treasury, the 2nd
respondent. In 1996 the Government entered into an agreement to privatize that
company by selling and transferring 90% of the shares to the 4th respondent
company. such a change in the ownership of its shares would not have altered
the status of the company as a legal entity, or its continued corporate
existence, and the subsisting contracts of employment between the company and
its employees - about 1,350 in number - would have continued, unaffected by
that change of ownership and by any consequent change in management.

It does not seem that it was a condition of the sale agreement that the
transferee would exercise its powers as controlling shareholder so as to
ensure the retention in service of the entire workforce. Learned counsel for
the petitioners did not contend that the Government was the employer, or that
it was under any legal obligation either to impose such a condition or to
compensate employees who were not retained in service after privatization.
However, our decision in this case does not turn on whether the Government was
the employer, or whether there was any such condition or obligation, or
whether it was breached.

59

It is common ground that the Government, through the 2nd respondent, did offer
all employees who did not wish to continue in employment under the new
management a compensation package based on length of service. 728 such
employees were offered compensation on or about 26\. 2. 97. They were later
paid a total of Rs. 292,864,972.46, which works out to an average of about Rs.
402,000 each.

The petitioners' complaint is that the failure to offer and pay them
compensation on the same basis - although they too did not wish to continue in
service under the new management \- was in violation of their fundamental
rights under Article 12 (1).

It was out of the employees' objections to the privatization, the refusal of
the majority to work under the new management, and the fears of retrenchment
of others, that the compensation package evolved. On 6. 12. 96 the 2nd
respondent made the first offer; the details are not relevant, and it is
enough to say that it was related to length of service, and was subject both
to a minimum of ten months' salary as well as a maximum of Rs. 250,000; and
the closing date for applications was 20. 12. 96. Dissatisfaction among the
employees continued. On 16. 12. 96 the 2nd respondent made his second offer:

5 years or less |  : | 12 months' salary  
---|---|---  
5 to 9 years |  : | 25 months' salary  
9 to 13 years |  : | 35 months' salary  
13 to 17 years |  : | 45 months' salary  
Over 17 years |  : | 50 months' salary,  
subject to a maximum of Rs. 260,000. |   |  
  
The closing date for applications was the same. The General Manager of the 1st
respondent informed the workforce by a notice dated 17\. 12. 96.

Industrial unrest continued. The 3rd respondent, the Commissioner of Labour,
intervened in an attempt to bring about a settlement. The trade unions made a
counter-offer on 26. 12. 96, suggesting

60

compensation ranging from Rs. 100,000 (for less than one year's service) to
Rs. 600,000 (for over 15 years' service). That was not accepted.

On 27. 12. 96, the 3rd respondent wrote to the General Manager of the 1st
respondent calling for information before 6. 1. 97:

" **. . .** I understand that some employees would opt to retire with the
compensation package offered to them.  
  
I wish to know the names of those employees who opt to retire on account of
the change of management with their last drawn salary and the period of
service ... in order to ascertain the exact number of employees who will be
retiring".

That letter was copied to the trade unions, who pointed out on 30. 12. 96 that
the first sentence appeared to be connected to the second and gave rise to an
ambiguity. They asked that it be changed, so as to ascertain whether the
employees consented to accept compensation as agreed between the trade unions,
on the one hand, and the Minister and the 3rd respondent, on the other hand.
Accordingly, on 1. 1. 97, the 3rd respondent wrote again to the General
Manager, asking for the list of employees who, while being unwilling to work
under the new management after privatization, were willing to retire in terms
of the compensation scheme to be agreed upon after discussion by the Minister,
the 3rd respondent and the trade unions.

What is of vital importance is that 3rd respondent had wanted the names of all
those who wished to retire upon the change of management following
privatization, and not only the names of those who agreed to compensation in
terms of the second offer.

The respondents do not claim that a notice in terms of the 3rd respondent's
letter of 27. 12. 96 was issued to the employees. Further, the General Manager
of the 1st respondent issued another notice on 31. 12. 96. That reproduced a
letter from the 2nd respondent purporting to extend (to 6. 1. 97) the deadline
set out in the letter

61

of 16. 12. 96 (ie the second offer), and did not ask employees to exercise
their option to retire, in the manner stipulated by the 3rd respondent on 27.
12. 96. There is no evidence that the General Manager made any change even
after the 3rd respondent's letter of 1. 1. 97. 727 employees - but not the
petitioners - applied by 6. 1. 97.

Negotiations continued, and at a discussion on 10. 1. 97 about the
compensation package for "workers who have opted to retire" \- and not, let me
stress, just for those who had opted for the second offer - the 3rd respondent
suggested the following:

Under 5 years | : | 26 months' salary  
---|---|---  
5 to [9] years | : | 52 months' salary  
9 to 13 years | : | 78 months' salary  
13 to 17 years | : | 90 months' salary  
over 17 years | : | 100 months' salary,  
  
all subject to a maximum of Rs. 500,000, or the loss of salary up to the time
of retirement, whichever was less.

The trade unions accepted that offer. They did not accept on the basis that it
was only for those who had applied in response to the second offer; but, as is
clear from the 3rd respondent's letter dated 11. 2. 97 which I quote below, as
being applicable to the workers who opt to retire on or before 6. 1. 97. On
15. 1. 97 the trade unions informed the members of the 3rd respondent's offer.

After the deadline most of the petitioners appear to have applied for
compensation, giving various excuses for the delay. Those applications have
not been produced, but it must be presumed that it was for compensation in
terms of the 2nd respondent's second offer because there is no evidence that
they were asked to opt on any other basis. The fact that they applied, even
after the deadline, shows that they did not wish to continue in service under
the new management.

On the basis of information provided to the 3rd respondent on 29. 1. 97, he
wrote to the 2nd respondent on 11\. 2. 97 as follows:

62

" **. . .** The trade union representatives finally agreed to the following
package of compensation in the event the workers opt to retire on or before
6th January 1997 **. . .** "

Having repeated the terms of the package proposed on 10. 1. 97, he added:

"The option for retirement was opened till 6th January 1997 as (at) that date
727 (have) applied for compensation. One who has opted to retire had died
later and his name (is) also included (in) the schedule. Another person who
(is) said to have committed suicide is also (included) purely on humanitarian
grounds. Hence the total figure is 728."

It is clear, therefore, that the foundation of the package, when it was first
suggested and when it was agreed upon, was that it applied to those who had
opted to retire on or before 6\. 1. 97. The 3rd respondent's letter dated 11.
2. 97 makes reference to "727 (who have) applied for compensation": I think
that what he had in mind were those who had exercised "the option for
retirement". In any event, it was not open to him at that stage to alter the
basis which had been agreed upon earlier.

The employees were never given an opportunity to opt on the basis stipulated
by the 3rd respondent; and were forced, instead, to decide whether or not to
accept the second offer.

In my view, the 3rd respondent had been misled into thinking that the 727 who
applied for compensation in terms of the second offer were persons who had
been given, and exercised, the option he had stipulated on 27. 12. 96. It is
unfortunate that he does not seem to have realised this at least when he
submitted his affidavit in these proceedings.

On 26. 2. 97 the 2nd respondent sought to implement that package, but only in
relation to those 728 employees; they were paid and thereupon deemed to have
retired. The petitioners were not offered compensation on the same basis or
even on the basis of the second offer.

63

The principal basis on which learned State Counsel, appearing for the 2nd, 3rd
and 5 respondent, sought to justify the failure to pay compensation to the
petitioners was that they had not applied for compensation by the stipulated
deadline of 6. 1. 97, while the others had. He also submitted that the final
package was binding because it was a settlement negotiated by the Commissioner
of Labour.

Although learned counsel for the petitioners as well as learned State Counsel
argued this matter as if only employees who had opted for the second offer
were entitled to the benefit of the 3rd respondent's package, I hold that all
employees who had exercised their option to retire before 6. 1. 97 were
entitled, and that the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents had failed to ensure that
the petitioners were given the opportunity to exercise that option. The
evidence before us suggests that if they had been given that option, they
would have opted to retire. They must therefore be treated on that footing.

But I must add that the final package could not have been made conditional on
acceptance of the second offer by 6. 1. 97. On 26. 2. 97 the petitioners were
in the same class as the other 728, insofar as they did not wish to continue
in service under the new management. The fact that the petitioners had not
accepted the second offer was certainly a factor which differentiated them
from others; but not for all purposes. If the issue had been whether it was
proper to give the others, and to refuse only them, benefits on the basis of
the 2nd respondent's second offer, clearly the answer would have been in the
affirmative. If an offer is made to all of the same class, and some accept
while the rest do not, it is perfectly proper to treat those who accept
differently - ie by giving them the benefit of the offer which they accepted,
while refusing to the others that same benefit which they declined. But any
such acceptance or refusal is of no relevance to a subsequent, and indeed very
different, offer. One employee, who had long years of service, might well have
said "l will not leave for Rs. 260,000, but I will for Rs. 500,000", while
another might have agreed to leave for Rs. 260,000. That can never be a
rational basis for a refusal to pay the former Rs. 500,000, while paying the
latter Rs. 500,000, to his colleague who would have been quite satisfied with
Rs. 260,000.

64

I must also refer to the factual background. First, what was involved was the
cessation of employment, and not just a minor or incidental benefit;
employees, and particularly those within ten years of retirement, might have
foreseen difficulties in getting other employment; and the compensation
package might thus have had to provide for them and for their families for
some years. Second, they were given only a short time to take a decision of
such vital importance to them. Third, the final package was not just a
marginal amendment of the original, but was almost twice as good, and so it
cannot be treated as if it were just a mere variation of the original.

Further, if the option to accept the second offer is treated as the proper
basis of differentiation, the 728 employees received a windfall - twice what
they applied for - while the petitioners received nothing. Such a result makes
it seem as if it were a lottery or a game of chance that was taking place,
rather than a serious negotiation about matters of paramount importance to the
employees. The employees should have been told clearly, completely,
accurately, and in good faith, what they were being offered, and allowed
reasonable time for consideration. Here the 3rd respondent wanted them to
exercise an option, but putting their trust in the trade unions, the Minister,
and himself as to the financial terms - and even that has been denied to them.

Thus on any view of the matter. I hold that the petitioners' refusal to accept
the 2nd respondent's second offer (ie their failure to apply before the
deadline) did not afford a rational basis for refusing them the benefit of a
substantially different subsequent offer made to their colleagues.

As for learned State Counsel's second contention, the fact that the final
package was the result of intervention, conciliation or negotiation by the 3rd
respondent, as Commissioner of Labour makes no difference. If the terms of a
compensation package infringe Article 12 - as for instance by conferring
benefits on employees of one race (or religion or sex) which are denied to
employees of another race (or religion or sex) although they are otherwise
similarly circumstanced, the latter are entitled to relief under Article 126,
despite the sanction

65

of the Commissioner of Labour. Here the terms of the package deny equal
treatment to the petitioners, and therefore infringe Article 12 (1).

I must add that it was not contended that the 3rd respondent's intervention
resulted in an order, award or settlement binding on the employees under and
in terms of the Industrial Disputes Act, and so I do not have to decide
whether such an order, award or settlement would preclude relief under Article
126 - although it seems to me that that would make no difference. And what is
more, the package in question did not involve a matter between employer and
employee: because the 2nd respondent, acting on behalf of the Government, was
no more than a shareholder of the employer, and I doubt whether the 3rd
respondent's jurisdiction under that Act extends to persons other than
employers.

I therefore hold that the 2nd respondent, acting on behalf of the State, has
infringed he petitioners' fundamental rights under Article 12 (1). I direct
the state to pay each of the petitioners on or before 1. 7. 98 (a)
compensation in terms of the package set out in the 3rd respondent's letter
dated 11. 2. 97, together with interest at the rate of 12% p.a. from 1. 3. 97
up to the date of payment, upon the terms that the recipient will be deemed to
have retired on the date of such payment (as well as any other benefits due
under that package), and (b) a sum of Rs. 1,000 as costs.

I am constrained to comment on the pleadings in these cases.

The Ceylon Heavy Industries & Construction Company Ltd, the 6th (added)
respondent, filed a motion dated 5. 9. 97 alleging that :

"That 1st respondent, namely Ceylon Steel Corporation (sic) **. . .** is no
more in existence as 90% of its shares had been sold to HANJUNG COMPANY of
Korea. Consequent to the said Sales Agreement in place of Ceylon Steel
Corporation (sic) there now stands Ceylon Heavy Industries & Construction
Company Limited as a different entity. In view of above, petitioner may have
to effect substitution in the room of the Ceylon Steel Corporation (sic) as
same is non-existent."

66

It is not clear from the journal entry of 24. 9. 97 whether that company was
substituted in place of the 1st respondent, or added. It filed no statement of
objections or affidavit or documents, but only written submissions in which it
described itself as the 6th added respondent, and submitted that it was a
private company "owned by Hanjung Company of Korea". Neither the motion nor
the written submissions explain how or why the 1st respondent ceased to exist
when 90% of its shares were sold, or how or why the 6th respondent became its
successor; nor the relationship between the 4th respondent and the "Hanjung
Company of Korea"; nor how the latter company's alleged ownership of the 6th
respondent gives the latter any right or interest in this matter. Such vague,
disjointed and slipshod pleadings serve no purpose except to cloud the issues
and to delay the proceedings.

The petition in SC No. 283/97 contains an averment that the petitioner had
handed over his application in terms of the earlier package on 6. 1. 97; but
this is contradicted, by the very next averment that later he explained the
circumstances regarding his failure to hand it over on 6. 1. 97. Indeed, it
was admitted at the hearing, that none of the petitioners had handed over such
applications on or before 6. 1\. 97. Those averments have been blindly copied
in almost all the other petitions. I have not regarded this as vitiating the
petitioners' case because it is clearly a careless mistake. Further, in almost
all the cases, the supporting affidavit consists of a photocopy of the
petition; and on the third page of those affidavits - which page contains the
averments I have referred to \- there are over twenty handwritten
interpolations and alterations. Some of the affidavits, copying others, refer
to an annexed document, without actually annexing one. It is only because
these careless pleadings did not actually cause any prejudice to the other
parties, that I have refrained from depriving the petitioners of their costs.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.  

**GUNAWARDANA, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/47.html_  

