##  Ceylon Mercantile Union v. Ceylon Cold Stores Ltd. and Another - SLR -
261, Vol 1 of 1995 [1995] LKSC 47; (1995) 1 Sri LR 261 (5 September 1995)

**261**

**CEYLON MERCANTILE UNION** **  
v.  
CEYLON COLD STORES LTD. AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT.

AMARASINGHE, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 51/95  
C.A. NO. 941/84  
SEPTEMBER 5, 1995.

_Industrial Dispute - Termination of services of probationer within the
probationary period - Right to strike - Amendment to Section 2 of the
Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special Provisions) Act No. 45 of 1971
by Act W 51 of 1988_

The 'confirmed' and 'probationary' employees are obviously not similarly
circumstanced. Though both categories are workmen in the sphere of industrial
Law, their rights and privileges are not the same.

In the case of the probationer, the employer is not required to show good
cause in respect of termination during the period of probation, so long as he
acts bona fide. The grounds of termination can be examined only for the
limited purpose of ascertaining whether the employer has acted mala fide or
whether such termination amounts to victimisation or an unfair labour practice
.

A probationer has as much a right to strike as a confirmed workman and the
proper exercise of that right cannot ace he probationer in jeopardy insofar as
the employer's right to terminate his services during the period of probation
is concerned.

It is axiomatic that a probationer who joins a Trade Union should enjoy all
the rights and privileges that go with such membership and should not be
discriminated against on the basis of his rank and/or status a probationer.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Venkatachrya v. Mysore, Sugar Co. Ltd. A.I.R 1954 Mysore 175._  
_2\. State Distilleries Corporation v. Rupasinghe. SC 91/93 SCM 2.3 1994_  
_3\. Moosajee Ltd. v. Rasiah [1986]1 Sri L.R. 365_  
_4\. Ceylon Cement Corporation v. Fernando [1990] 1 Sri L.R.361_  
_5\. Elsteel Ltd. v. Jayasena SC 20/88 SCM 6.4.1990._  
_6\. Brown & Co. Ltd. v. Samarasekera SC 20/95 SCM 19.5.1995 _  
_7\. Tramp Shipping-Corporation v. Greenwich Manne Inc [1975] 2 A11 ER 989_

262

  
_8\. Assam Oil Co. Ltd. v. Its Workmen (1960)1 LLJ 587 (SC)_  
_9\. National Tobacco Co. of India Ltd. v. 4th Industrial Tribunal (1960) 11
LLJ 175 (Cal)._

**APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.

_Gomin Dayasri with Aravinda Aturupana for 2nd Respondent-Appellant._  
  

_S. C. Crossette Thambiah with A. Sivendran for Petitioner-Respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

October 25, 1995  
**WIJETUNGA, J.**

The 2nd respondent-appellant (appellant) is a Trade Union duly registered
under the Trade Unions Ordinance. The petitioner- respondent (1st respondent)
is a Company duly incorporated under the Companies Ordinance. The 1st
respondent-respondent (2nd respondent) was the Arbitrator appointed by the
Minister of Labour to whom an industrial dispute between the appellant and the
1 st respondent was referred for settlement by arbitration. The appellant and
the 1st respondent had entered into and were bound by a Valid Collective
Agreement No. 7 of 1981. The Minister made the reference to arbitration by his
order dated 5.4.83 under the powers vested in him by Section 4(1) of the
Industrial Disputes Act as amended, read with the Industrial Disputes (Special
Provisions) Act No. 37 of 1968.

The matters in dispute between the parties were whether the 1st respondent was
justified in -

(a) terminating the services of the workmen referred to in Schedule A who are
members of the Ceylon Mercantile Union by letters dated 15.11.82; and

(b) terminating the, probationary employment of the workmen referred to in
Schedule, B, who, are members of the Ceylon Mercantile Union by letters dated
19.11.82.

The workmen referred to in Schedule A numbering 8 were initially employed by
the 1st Respondent on a casual o temporary basis and

263

were thereafter given permanent employment With effect from 15.11.82, subject
to a period of 6 months probation on the terms and conditions set out in their
letters of appointment. One of the said terms was that they will be required
to register the times of arrival and departure by punching a Time Card
provided for the purpose by the 1st respondent. Each of the said workmen
signed and returned the duplicate copies of the letters of appointment, as
required by the 1st respondent, signifying their acceptance of the
appointments-on the terms and conditions stipulated therein.

On 15.11.82, seven of the said eight workmen reported for work but refused to
mark their attendance in the manner stipulated in their letters of
appointment. The 8th workman reported for work on the following day, but she
too refused to mark her attendance in he said manner. The 1st respondent's
Chief Executive called upon the said workmen to mark their attendance by
punching the Time Cards as stipulated and on their failure to do so the
services of the said workmen were terminated with immediate effect.

The appellant Union thereupon called a strike of Its members who were
employees of the 1st respondent and the said strike continued up to 10th
April, 1983.

The workmen referred to in Schedule B were 20 in number, who were also
probationary employees of the 1st respondent. The appellant states that they
too struck work as from 10.30 a.m. on 16.11.82 as indicated by the Union. The
1st respondent terminated their services by letters dated 19.11.82 (P.6), on
the ground that they kept away from work without the prior sanction and
approval of the management.

The inquiry, of the aforesaid arbitration commenced on 13.7.83 was concluded
on 21.3.84. The 2nd respondent delivered his Award dated 26.4.84 holding that
on the evidence led before him, the termination of services of the said
workmen in Schedules A and B was, unjustified and granting them the relief of
reinstatement with back wages.

264

The 1st respondent being aggrieved by the, said Award made an Application to
the Court of Appeal for A Writ of Certiorari (CA.941/84) to quash the same

The Court of Appeal by its judgment dated 27.1.95 hold that the Award was bad
in Law and granted a Writ of Certiorari quashing it.

The appellant sought **special leave** to appeal to this Court from the
judgment of, the Court of Appeal. This Court granted special leave to appeal
only in respect of the workmen referred to in Schedule B of the terms of
reference aforesaid, on the following **questions of law** as agreed Upon by
Counsel:-

(i) Was the termination of the 20 workmen referred to in Schedule B who are
probationers justifiable; when the respondent Company continued in employment
the other employees who participated in the same strike?

(ii) Can, persons holding, the status of probationer be victimized and/or
against in the event they participated in a Strike?

(iii) I the respondent Company, condones the employees who are not
probationers for any act for which a probationer is punished, would I amount
to victimization and/or discrimination?

The Court of appeal in holding the Award of the, 2nd respondent ant be bad in
law, made reference to the following matters which it considered to be errors:

(i) holding that even though the workmen were probationers, the management
should yet have asked for their explanation before the termination of their-
services,

(ii) The appellant considering matter on the basis of equity without resting
it on the evidence

265

(iii) failure to treat the matter on a **just and equitable** basis not only
from the point of view of the employees but also from that of the employer,

(iv) not taking note of the fact that it is settled law that the services of a
probationer can be terminated without any reasons being adduced unless the
action of the management was based on malice or mala fides.

Learned **Counsel for the appellant** agreed that the workmen in the 2nd
Schedule were on probation. He complained that all the workmen who went on
strike and returned to work after the strike, other than those on probation,
were permitted to continue in employment; but the services of the probationers
were terminated on the basis that they kept away from work from 17th November,
1982, without the prior sanction and approval of the management. He contended
that, under the statutes in the realm of Industrial Law, including the
Industrial Disputes Act and the Trade Unions Ordinance, all workmen are
treated equally and uniformly and are entitled to the same protection, whether
they be probationers or otherwise. As every workman has a legitimate right to
strike, the fact that he is a probationer does not deprive him of that right.
It was his submission that the 1st respondent had terminated the services of
those workmen who held the status of probationers purely because they held
that rank and/or status. He further submitted that the probationers are also
entitled to the benefits of the just and equitable rule enshrined in the
Industrial Disputes Act, in the event the termination was in consequence of a
mala fide reason, victimization or discrimination. He sought to base his claim
of alleged victimization and/or mala fides on the premise that the employer
failed to treat the probationers and the non-probationers on an equal footing
and that the probationers services have been terminated on the basis of their
rank and/or status. He argued that an employer who treats the employees on a
subjective basis is guilty of mala fides.

He also adverted to the constitutional right guaranteed to every citizen under
Article 14(1)(d) to join a Trade Union. Where, therefore,

266

 a workman has the right to join a Trade Union the question arose whether he
can be penalized for participating in Trade Union action. He submitted that a
probationer enjoyed no lesser rights in that regard than any other workman.
The Court of Appeal had proceeded merely on the basis that where a workman was
a probationer, his services can be terminated without a reason being adduced,
but had failed to examine the question of mala fides and victimization and
whether the reason for termination or the punishment meted out was
justifiable.

On the other hand, learned **Counsel for the 1st respondent** submitted that
the 20 probationers in Schedule B, who at that time were not members of the
appellant Union, had applied to join the Union shortly before the strike
commenced in order to participate in the strike and had kept away from work
without any intimation to the management as regards their absence. The
respondent thereupon served on them the letters of termination aforesaid on
the basis that they kept away from work during the probationary period without
the prior sanction and approval of the management. There was no victimization
or discrimination on the part of the management in arriving at this decision.
He submitted that it is settled law that if the employer in good faith is not
satisfied with the conduct of a probationer, he has the right to terminate his
services and the reasons for such termination cannot be objectively assessed.
The grounds of termination can be examined only for the limited purpose of
ascertaining whether the element of mala fides exists. The reason for
terminating the employment of the said 20 workmen, he submitted, cannot be
considered to be irrational, arbitrary, capricious or so unreasonable as could
lead to the inference that it had been exercised mala fide. This was a bona
fide exercise of the employer's right to be the sole judge of the
probationer's suitability for continued employment.

It is relevant to note that the 20 probationers were not members of the
petitioner Trade Union up to the time that the Union decided to call a strike
and that they had applied to the Union for membership with a view to
participating in the strike. Learned Counsel for the

**267**

appellant himself conceded that their names were not included for purposes of
check off as at the date of this strike, which meant that, there was no
intimation by these workmen to the employer that they were members of the
appellant Union. This fact assumes much significance in the light of the
letters of termination sent by the 1st respondent (P6) where it is stated
inter alia as follows:-

"You have during the period of probationary employment, kept away from work,
from 17th November, 1982, without the prior sanction and approval of the
management. We have to date not received any intimation from you as to the
reason for your absence.

We, therefore, write to advise you that your probationary employment has been
terminated with effect from 17th November, 1982."

The learned Arbitrator, in the course of his award states that "the only
intimation that the management gets of an employee of their joining the Union
is through the authorisation by such a member for the deduction of Union dues
(dues check-off) from his salary" and "it was evident from their affidavits
that practically all the workmen in Schedule B had handed over their
applications for membership of the Union by 15th November, 1982".

Although where the Branch Union is concerned, their acceptance of the
workman's application may be the acceptance of his membership, it does not
follow that the employer thereby has notice of such workman's membership of
the Union.

The Arbitrator then goes on to state that "if the management found the absence
of the 20 workmen in Schedule B from work inexplicable, seeing that, according
to their books, these workmen were not members of the Union and a strike by
Union members was on, the recognised course of action for the management was
to have called for explanation of their absence from the concerned workmen,
without resorting to the drastic course of action of summary dismissal; the
fact that the workmen were on probation did not place them outside the
coverage of this course of action."

268

I am unable to agree with this proposition. There was no duty cast on the
employer to Call for explanation of their absence from these workmen, who
admittedly were probationers.

As was stated in _Venkatacharya v. Mysore Sugar Co. Ltd_., (1) "obviously a
probationer is not in the same position as others in service. He is in a state
of suspense... prima facie his rights and claims against the employer are less
than those of others. The period denotes the time up to which he will be on
trial and not an assured duration of service."

In _State Distilleries Corporation v. Rupasinghe_ (2), Fernando, J. dealing
with the two categories of confirmed and probationary workmen states as
follows: "What then is the principal difference between confirmed and
probationary employment? In the former, the burden lies on the employer to
justify termination and this he must do by reference to objective standards.
In the latter, upon proof that termination took place during probation, the
burden is on the employee to establish unjustifiable termination and the
employee must establish at least a prima facie case of mala fides, before the
employer is called upon to adduce evidence as to his reasons for dismissal;
and the employer does not have to show that the, dismissal was objectively
justified."

The 'confirmed' and 'probationary' employees are obviously not similarly
circumstanced. Though both categories are 'workmen' in the sphere of
industrial Law, their rights and privileges are not the same. The cause for
termination of services of a confirmed workman Would mostly fail within the
ambit of misconduct or on disciplinary grounds. A tribunal is thus competent
to examine not merely whether such termination is unlawful but also whether it
is unjust. The burden is on the employer to justify the termination viewed,
objectively.

But, in the case of the probationer, the employers not required to show good
cause in respect of termination during the period of probation so long as he
acts bona fide. The grounds of termination can be examined only for the
limited purpose of ascertaining whether the employer has acted mala fide or
whether such termination amounts to victimization or an unfair labour practice
-

_Moosajee Ltd. v. Rasiah_ (3), _Ceylon Cement Corporation v. Fernando_ (4),
_Elsteel Ltd v. jayasena_ (5) _Brown & Co .Ltd. v. Samarasekera _(6).

Malhotra in the Law of Industrial Disputes (1968 edition) states At pages
479-481: "it is, however, for the party alleging mala fides to lead reliable
evidence in support of the said plea. A finding the management has not acted
bona fide will ordinarily not be reached if the materials are such that a
reasonable- man could have come to conclusion which the management has
reached... In taking disciplinary action an employer would be considered to be
acting not bona fide if he is promoted or motivated by unfair labour practice
or 'victimization'.. The line of demarcation between the cases of unfair
labour practices' and 'victimization' is very slender and quite often
invisible. The concepts it not synonymous at least considerably overlap".

Relying on the amendment to Section 2 of the Termination Â of Employment of
Workmen (Special Provisions) Act, No. 45 of 1971 by Act No.51 of 1988 the
**appellant submitted** that in terms thereof , it becomes imperative even in
the case of, probationer for the employer to notify such workmen the reasons
for termination in writing. The amending Act has no application to the instant
case, as the termination took place in November, 1982. In any event the reason
for termination bas been set out in the letters dated 19.11.82 (P.6).

The position of the employer is that the workmen concerned kept away from work
from 17.11.82 without the prior sanction and approval of the management and no
intimation had been received a6 at 10. 11.82 indicating the reason for their
absence. The appellant on the other hand states that these workmen were on
strike, the right to which is a legitimate weapon in the armory of every
employee, whether he be a probationer or otherwise.

There is no dispute that the right of strike is one of the most fundamental
rights enjoyed by employees and their Unions and is an integral part of their
right to defend their collective, economic and social interests" \- S. R. de.
Silva. The Legal Framework of industrial Relations in Ceylon, at page 117.

270

Under the Trade Unions Ordinance, a strike 'means the cessation of work by a
body of persons employed in any trade or industry acting in combination, or a
concerted refusal, or a refusal under a common understanding of any number of
persons who are, or have been, so employed, to continue to work or to accept
employment'. It has the same meaning under the Industrial Disputes Act too.

In the words of Lord Denning, 'A strike is a concerted stoppage of work by men
done with a view to improving their wages or conditions; or to give vent to a
grievance or make a protest about something or other, or supporting or
sympathizing with other workmen in such endeavours' - _Tramp Shipping
Corporation v. Greenwich -Marine Inc_.,(7).

I have no hesitation in holding that a probationer has as much a right to
strike as a confirmed workman and the proper exercise of that right cannot
place the probationer in jeopardy insofar as the employer's right to terminate
his services during the period of probation is concerned. For, as Malhotra
(ibid) states at pages 480 481; citing _Assam Oil Co Ltd. v. its workmen_ (8)
and _National Tobacco .. Co of India Ltd. v Fourth Industrial Tribunal_ (9)
"It is not open to an employer to punish or dismiss his employee solely or
principally for the reason that he had joined a trade union. Where, therefore,
the circumstance that an employee had joined a trade union had at least
partially weighed with the employer, it would be an act of victimization; and
the punishment inflicted on the workman on this consideration would be
unjustified". It is axiomatic then that a probationer who joins a Trade Union
should enjoy all the rights and privileges that go with such membership and
should not be discriminated against on the basis of his rank and/or status as
a probationer.

But I cannot agree with the learned Arbitrator that if the management found
the absence of the 20 workmen in Schedule B from work inexplicable, seeing
that, according to their books, those members were on, the recognised course
of action for the management was to have called for explanation of their
absence from the concerned workmen, without resorting to the drastic course Of
action of summary dismissal.

271

There is no such duty cast on the employer; nor do I know of such a
'recognised course of action'. To accept such a proposition would be to place
an un ed burden on the employer vis a vis a probationer and is contrary to the
well settled law as expressed in the numerous decisions of our courts, as well
as those of other jurisdictions.

In my view, the petitioner has failed to discharge the burden placed upon it
to establish unjustifiable termination of the probationary workmen, based on
the alleged male fides of the employer. The Union's failure to duly inform the
employer that the 20 workmen concerned were its members and were in fact
participating m the strike, cannot be blamed on the employer when the 1st
Respondent legitimately terminated their services on the ground that they kept
away from work without the prior sanction and approval of the management. That
cannot amount to a male fide act. It is well to remember that trade union
action is a double edged weapon.

Not being similarly circumstanced with the confirmed workmen, the probationers
do not stand comparison with their counterparts. Consequently, the question of
unlawful discrimination as between these two distinct categories of workmen
does not arise. Nor has the appellant been able to satisfy the Court, as
indicated above, that the probationers have been victimized and/or
discriminated against on the ground of their participation in the strike. In
that background, the applicability of the just and equitable rule as regards
probationers, contended for by learned Counsel for the petitioner, needs no
consideration. I must, however, state that an employer who treats the case of
a probationer on a subjective basis cannot be said to be guilty of mala fides,
as such a proposition is against the weight of authority on the subject, as
well as the very concept of probation.

For the reasons aforesaid, I dismiss this appeal,: but make no order as
regards costs.

**AMERASINGHE, J.** I agree.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J.** I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/47.html_  

