##  Ratnapala v. Sri Lanka Co Operative Industries Union Ltd. and Another -
SLR - 334, Vol 3 of 2002 [1994] LKSC 47; (2002) 3 Sri LR 334 (29 July 1994)

**334**

**RATNAPALA  
v.  
SRI LANKA CO OPERATIVE INDUSTRIES UNION LTD. AND  
ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
AMERASINGHE, J. AND  
GOONEWARDENA, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 37/94  
HCAWC NO. 3/92  
CASE NO. WC - C30/714/90 CR  
JULY 29, 1994  
  
_Workmen's Compensation - Section 6C of the Workmen's Compensation Ordinance,
Schedule I as amended by Act, No. 15 of 1990 - Whether injuries to wrist, knee
and rib qualify for compensation.  
_  
The Commissioner of Workmen's Compensation (the 2nd respondent) awarded the
appellant compensation for permanent / partial disablement resulting from
injuries and fractures (to the wrist, knee and rib) sustained in the course of
his employment under the 1st respondent.  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1) The injuries sustained by the appellant constitute "loss of any member or
part thereof ..." referred to in the last item of Schedule I to section 6C of
the Workmen's Compensation Ordinance, as amended by Act, No. 15 of 1990. There
is no reason to give a restrictive interpretation to the word "member" so as
to exclude "a part or an organ of the body". The injuries in issue qualify for
compensation under Schedule I as being a loss of any "member" or part of the
body.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court.  
  
_D. R. P. Goonetilake_ with _S. A. D. S. Suraweera_ for appellant.  
  
_P. Palihawadana_ for respondent.

**335**

July 29, 1994  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
The Commissioner of Workmen's Compensation awarded the appellant a sum of Rs.
75,000 as compensation for permanent partial disablement resulting from
injuries and fractures (to the wrist, knee and rib), sustained in the course
of his employment under the respondent.  
  
On appeal, the learned High Court Judge held that the injuries suffered by the
appellant were not covered by any of the items specifically enumerated in
Schedule I to the Workmen's Compensation Ordinance, or by the last item
thereof. He came to the conclusion that "member" did not include the wrist,
knee or rib, because in the last item of that Schedule the statute itself had
given illustrations of  what was meant by "member" as "nose, breast, ear,
etc.". He, therefore, held that "member" in the context meant an organ, and
allowed the appeal.  
  
Section 6C of the Ordinance provides for the amount of compensation where
permanent partial disablement results:  
  
"(i) in the case of an injury specified in Schedule I, such percentage of the
compensation which would have been payable in the case of permanent total
disablement as is specified therein as being the percentage of the loss of
earning capacity caused by that injury."  
  
The last item of Schedule I, as amended by Act, No. 15 of 1990,  provides for
compensation, in the case of "loss of any member or part thereof not mentioned
above (eg. nose, breast, ear, etc.) to be assessed by a medical officer "upto
a maximum of 50% of the loss of earning capacity. The Commissioner accepted
the medical

**336**

assessment that there was permanent partial disablement, and that the
appellant had suffered a 30% loss of earning capacity; he also acted on a
certificate of earnings furnished by the respondent, according to which the
appellant's average monthly earnings during the twelve months preceding the
accident was Rs. 6,284. Corresponding to those earnings, the sum due for
permanent total disablement, according to Schedule IV, introduced by Act, No.
15 of 1990, was Rs. 250,000; and the Commissioner awarded 30% of that, namely
Rs. 75,000.  
  
The word "member" is not defined in the Ordinance. The object of the Ordinance
is to provide compensation for disability resulting from personal injury
caused by accidents arising out of and in the course of employment; and there
is no reason to give a restrictive interpretation to the word "member", the
ordinary meaning of which is "a part or an organ of the body". The wrist, the
knee and the rib are all parts of the body. I hold that the injuries sustained
by the appellant were covered by the last item of Schedule I.  
  
The appeal is allowed, the order of the High Court is set aside, and the order
of the Commissioner is restored, with costs in a sum of Rs. 5,000.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J. -** I agree.  
  
**GOONEWARDENE, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/47.html_  

