##  Moosajees Limited v. Arthur And Others - SLR - 65, Vol 1 of 2006 [2002]
LKSC 47; (2006) 1 Sri LR 65 (5 December 2002)

**

65

MOOSAJEES LIMITED

VS

ARTHUR AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
WIGNESWARAN, J. AND  
WEERASOORIYA, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 58/2001  
CA APPLICATION NO. 1354/98  
SEPTEMBER 16, 2002  
  
_Writ of Certiorari - Ceiling on Housing Property Law, No. 1 of
1973-Application under section 13 - Decision of Commissioner - Appeal under
section 39(1) Â­Board of Review - Finality clause, section 39(3) - Application
of section 22 of Interpretation Ordinance - Whether Court of Appeal varied a
decision which was ex facie not within the power of the Board of Review -
Wrong application of section 47 of the Law - Definition of house - Burden of
proof - Evidence Ordinance, sections 101 and 102 - Effect of Article 140 of
Constitution on section 22 of Interpretation Ordinance._

**66**

The 1st respondent tenant applied to the 2nd respondent (Commissioner for
National Housing) under section 13 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law,
NO.1 of 1973 ("CHP Law") to purchase the house in dispute owned by the
appellant. On 25.01.1984 the Commissioner refused the application holding the
premises were business premises under section 47 of the CHP Law. On appeal to
the Board of Review under section 39(1) of the Law, the Board held that it was
a house as it had been used for residence from 1943. The Court of Appeal
refused an application by the appellant to quash the decision of the Board by
certiorari. The Court held that in view of section 22 of the Interpretation
Ordinance, read with section 39(3) of the CHP Law, the court's jurisdiction
.was ousted as the decision of the Board using the test of user was not ex
facie outside the Board's jurisdiction and by its order dated 09.02.2001,
refused the application for a writ.  
  
**Held;  
  
**1\. In terms of section 47 (definition of 'house') the premises had been
originally constructed as an eating house and assessed as such, but not
originally constructed for residential purpose, although since 1943, it had
been used for residence and assessed as such in 1980.  
  
2\. The Court of Appeal wrongly placed the burden of proof on the appellant to
prove that the building was originally constructed for residential purposes
when in terms of sections 101 and 102 of the Evidence Ordinance, the burden of
proving the original purpose of the building was on the 1st respondent.  
  
3\. In the above circumstances, the decision of the Board of Review was ultra
vires and a nullity-outside its jurisdiction and the appellant was entitled to
a writ of certiorari notwithstanding section 39(3) of the CHP Law. Further,
Article 140 of the Constitution prevailed over section 22 of the
Interpretation Ordinance. For that reason also, section 39(3) of the CHP Law
had no application.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
  
**1\. _Abeysekera v Wijetunga_ (1982) 2 SLR 737 at p. 739  
  
2\. _Mohammed Ismail v Hussain_ (1993) 2 SLR 380  
  
3\. _Anderson v Ahamed Husny Appellate Law Recorder_ Vol 2 March 2001 p. 13  
  
4\. _Withanarachiv Gunawardena_ (1996) (1) SLR 253 at p. 257

**67**

5\. _Sitamparanathan v Premaratne_ (1996) 2 SLR 202  
  
6. _Rex v Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal_ (1952) 1 All ER 122  
  
7\. _Anisminic Ltd v_ Foreisn Compensation Commission (1969) 2 AC- 147  
  
8\. _O' Reilly v Mackman_ (1983) 2 AC 237 at p. 278  
  
9\. _R v Hult University Visitor_ (1993 A.C.) 682 at p 701  
  
10\. _Maradane Masque Trustesv Mahamud_ (1967) 1 AC 13  
  
11\. _Atapattuv People's Bank_ (1907) 1 SLR 208 at p 221  
  
12. _Sirisena Cooray v Tissa Bandaranayake_ (1999) 1 SLR 1 at p.14  
  
13\. _Wljepala Mendis v PRP Perera_ (1999) 2 SLR 110 at p 119  
  
**APPEAL** against the judgment of the Court of Appeal reported in (2001) 2
SLR 101 (Overruled)  
  
_Dr. J. de Almeida Gunaratne with Parakrama Agalawatta and Kishali Pinto
Jayawardena_ for appellant.  
  
_Rohana Jayawardena_ for 1st respondent.  
  
_Uditha Egalahewa,_ State Counsel for 2nd respondent.

_Cur.adv. vult_

December, 5, 2002  
**WEERASOORIYA, J.  
**  
The 1st respondent-respondent ("the 1st respondent") made an application under
Section 13 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law, NO.1 of 1973 "(the C. H. P.
Law") to the Commissioner of National Housing ("the Commissioner") to purchase
the premises bearing No. 17, Hunupitiya Road, Colombo 2, and the Commissioner
by his order dated 25.01.1984, dismissed the application holding that the
premises were business premises. The 1st respondent appealed against that
order to the Ceiling on Housing Property Board of Review ("the Board") under
Section 39(1) of the C. H. P. Law, and the Board reversed the Commissioner's
finding and allowed the appeal on the basis that the premises in question were
residential and therefore a house. The petitioner-appellant ("the petitioner")
thereafter invoked the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal seeking to quash

**68**

the said order of the Board by way of a writ of certiorari. The Court of
Appeal by its judgment dated 09.02.2001, dismissed the petitioner's
application. Thereafter the petitioner obtained special leave to appeal from
this Court upon the following questions.  
  
(1) Whether the Board of Review and the Court of Appeal erred in law in
applying the test of user of premises instead of considering the purpose of
construction in determining whether the premises constituted a 'house' as
defined under Section 47 of the C. H. P. Law?  
  
(2) Whether the Board of Review and the Court of Appeal erred in law in
placing the burden of proof on the petitioner to establish that the premises
is not a house as so defined?  
  
(3) Whether the Court of Appeal lacked jurisdiction to review the order of the
Board of Review in view of the clause contained in Section 39 (3) ?  
  
**(1) Test of User  
**  
It is not in dispute that the 1st respondent as tenant of the petitioner made
an application in terms of Section 13 of the C. H. P. Law to purchase the
premises. Upon such application being made, the Law requires the Commissioner
to hold an inquiry into such application and upon being satisfied on the
requirements laid down in Section 17 (1) (a), (b), and (c) to make a
recommendation to the Minister whether such premises should be vested. The
issue whether a tenant could maintain such an application depends on whether
the premises fall within the meaning of a 'house' as defined in Section 47 of
the C. H. P. Law:  
  
_" House" means an independent living unit, whether assessed or not for the
purpose of levying rates, constructed mainly or solely for  
residential purposes, and having a separate access, and through which unit
access cannot be had to any living accommodation, and includes a flat or
tenement, but shall not include-  
_  
(1) sub divisions of, or extensions to a house which was first occupied as a
single unit of residence; and  
  
(2) a house used mainly or solely for a purpose other than a residential
purpose for an uninterrupted period of ten years prior to March, 1st, 1972;"

**69**

This definition postulates the following criteria to be satisfied by the
applicant.  
  
(a) It must be an independent living unit whether assessed or not for the
purpose of levying rates.  
  
(b) It must have been constructed mainly or solely for residential purposes;
and  
  
(c) It must have a separate access and through which unit access can not be
had to any other living accommodation.  
  
The Commissioner by his order dated 25.01.1984 (P1a) held that the premises
were business premises. However, on appeal, the Board reversed the finding of
the Commissioner and held that the said premises had been used mainly or
solely for residential purposes.  
  
Learned Counsel for the petitioner contended that the Board applied the wrong
test by misconstruing Section 47 of the C. P. H. Law.  
  
It is to be observed that the Board without asking itself the question as to
whether the premises had been constructed mainly or solely for residential
purposes as laid down in the definition of a house in Section 47 asked the
question "........................ whether the said premises is a business
premises or not" and thereafter applied exception (2) to the definition of a
house contained in the section. In fact, the said exception is meant to take
even a building which was constructed mainly or solely for residential
purposes, outside the definition of a 'house' if such building was used mainly
or solely for a purpose other than a residential purpose for an uninterrupted
period of 10 years prior to March 1st, 1972.  
  
The Court of Appeal disagreed with the contention of learned Counsel for the
petitioner that the Board formulated the wrong question and held that implicit
in this question was the proposition whether the premises in question were
residential or business.  
  
The petitioner had presented his case on the basis that the premises at the
inception had been assessed for the purpose of levying rates as an "eating
house" indicating that the original purpose of construction was for

**70**

business. Therefore, the petitioner's case was that though used by the 1st
respondent as residential premises, the premises had been originally
constructed for business purposes.  
  
It would be manifest that there was no dispute that from 1943, since the 1st
respondent came into occupation of the premises, that the premises were used
for residential purposes. But to enable the 1st respondent to purchase it, it
must be shown that the premises were constructed mainly or solely for
residential purposes. It was open to the 1st respondent to state that premises
had been continuously used as a residence thereby entitling him to the
protection of the Rent Act. However, it would be a different situation when
the (1st respondent) tenant makes an application under Section 13 of the C. H.
P. law to purchase it, where different criteria are spelt out under Section 47
of the C. H. P. Law.  
  
In the circumstances, the Board misdirected itself in addressing the question
whether the said premises were business premises or not. This misdirection was
the outcome of failing to appreciate the provisions of Section 47 of the C. H.
P. Law. The Court of Appeal has taken the mistaken view that implicit in the
question was whether the premises in question were residential or business.  
  
The misconstruction of Section 47 of C. H. P. Law was reflected in the
application of the test of user of premises to determine the question whether
the premises was a house. The primary test postulated by that section is the
test as to whether the premises were constructed for residential purposes. It
is to be noted that this section does not permit a choice between two primary
tests. The effect of the reasoning of the Board and the Court of Appeal was to
impose a burden on the owner to prove that it was constructed for business
purposes which is contrary to what is envisaged in Section 47.  
  
It is necessary to consider the decisions of this Court, on the definition of
a house as given in Section 47 of C. H. P. Law.  
  
The case of Abeysekera vs. 'Wijetunga(1) laid down the rule that the test to
be applied to determine what a house is, for the purposes of C. H. P. Law,
must be an objective test and not a subjective one and that its initial
construction and the purpose of construction is what matters.

**71**

"In _Mohamed Ismail vs. Hussair_ (2) Court applied the criterion of user
mainly because of the lack of direct evidence relating to the initial purpose
of construction. However, it was disclosed that the premises had been
originally assessed as a house. Therefore, it would be clear that, there was
no occasion to consider the original purpose of construction of the premises
and the question of devolution of the burden of proof in the context of
Section 47 of the C. H. P. Law did not arise for consideration.  
  
On the foregoing material, I hold that the Board and the Court of Appeal erred
in applying the test of user of premises instead of considering the purpose of
construction in determining whether the premises constituted a house within
the meaning of Section 47 of C. H. P. Law.  
  
**(2) Burden of Proof  
**  
Section 101 of the Evidence Ordinance provides:  
  
_" Whoever desires any Court to give judgment as to any legal right or
liability dependent on the existence of facts which he asserts, must prove
those facts exist. When a person is bound to prove the existence of any fact,
it is said that burden of proof lies on that person".  
_  
This section is concerned with the duty to prove one's case as a whole and is
distinguishable from Section 103 which explains the burden of proof as to a
particular fact. This section reads as follows  
  
_" The burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on that person who
wishes the Court to believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any law
that the proof of that fact shall lie on any particular person".  
_  
The difference in scope could be seen from illustration (A) to Section 101
which states as follows.  
  
_" A desires a Court to give judgment that B shall be punished for a crime
which A says B has committed. A must prove that B has committed the crime."  
_  
But however, where B concedes that he committed the act alleged but pleads
that it does not entail criminal liability since the general exception
'relating to exercise of the right to private defence or any special exception

**72**

contained in the Penal Code is applicable, B is bound to establish facts to
bring him within that exception. (Vide Section 105).  
  
Section 102 provides for the devolution of the burden of proof in the
following terms.  
  
_" The burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies on that person who would
fail if no evidence at all were given on either side".  
  
_The question as to which party should begin to lead evidence before the
Labour Tribunal came up for consideration before the Supreme Court in the case
of _David J. Anderson vs. Ahamad Husny_ (3)The Court held that although the
Labour Tribunal is not bound by the Evidence Ordinance, the principle
enshrined in Section 102, that the person on whom the burden of proof lies
would fail if no evidence at all were given on either side, is a common sense
principle, departure from which would not be justified if the circumstances do
not warrant such a departure.  
  
In the present case, the primary test postulated by Section 47 of C. H. P. Law
is whether the premises were constructed for residential purposes. If no
evidence is given by either side, it is the 1st respondent who would  fail
before the Commissioner. The 1st respondent had failed to lead any evidence to
establish that the premises were constructed for residential purposes. The
petitioner had produced assessment extracts (P43-P53) which showed the
premises were originally assessed as an eating house though used as a
residential house. There was no reason to deviate from the rule set out in
Section 102 of the Evidence Ordinance at the inquiry before the Board of
Review.  
  
Accordingly, I hold that the burden of proof that the premises were
constructed for residential purposes lay with the 1st respondent, and has not
been discharged.  
  
**(3) Ouster Clause  
  
**Learned Counsel for the 1st respondent contended that the order of the Board
is final and conclusive and cannot be impeached on the material submitted by
the petitioner. This contention is based on Section 39(3) of the C. H. P. Law
read with Section 22 of the Interpretation Ordinance as amended by Act, No. 18
of 1972.

**73**

Section 39(3) of the C. H. P. Law provides:  
  
_" The determination of the Board on any appeal made under sub section (I)
shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court".  
_  
The material parts of Section 22 of the Interpretation Ordinance (as amended)
read as follows.  
  
" _Where there appears in any enactment.................. the expression
"shall not be called in question in any Court"............. in relation to any
order, decision,..................... which any person, authority or tribunal
is empowered to make or issue under such enactment, no court shall, in any
proceedings and upon any ground whatsoever, have jurisdiction to pronounce
upon the validity or legality of such order, decision
........................made or issued in the exercise or the apparent
exercise of the power conferred on such person, authority or tribunal.  
  
 Provided however, that the preceding provisions of this Section shall not
apply to the Supreme Court or the Court of Appeal as the case may be
.................in respect of the following matters only, that is to say-  
  
(a) Where such order, decision ...............is ex facie not within the power
conferred on such person, authority or tribunal making or issuing such order,
decision ....; and_  
  
(b).....................".  
  
Learned Counsel for the petitioner contended that the Board had the power ex
facie to make the order it did, namely to hold whether the premises in
question were either residential or business premises. He contended that
nevertheless that power of the Board did not confer jurisdiction to the Board:  
  
(a) to formulate the wrong question.  
  
(b) to misconstrue the provisions of Section 47 of the C. H. P. Law and apply
the wrong test; and  
  
(c) to take into account irrelevant considerations.

**74**

The ouster clause in Section 39(3) of the C. H. P. Law read with Section 22 of
Interpretation Ordinance came up for consideration in _Withanaratchi vs.
Gunawardena_ (4) where the Court held that on a consideration of the entirety
of the facts and circumstances it could not conclude that the decision of the
Board was unreasonable and unsupported by the evidence on record. The Court
observed that at most the alleged error lay in the evaluation and the
assessment of the oral and documentary evidence and therefore the error if at
all was one made within the area of jurisdiction of the Board of Review.  
  
Thus, the two grounds enumerated namely; (a) where a decision is unreasonable
or (b) where it is unsupported by evidence are obviously grounds that would
affect the jurisdiction of the Board.  
  
The decision in the case of _Sitamparanathan vs. Premaratna_ (5) is
significant in that it held that Section 39(3) of the C. H. P. law did not
protect a decision which patently lacked jurisdiction to decide.  
  
 At this point it is useful to examine this question in the light of the
English precedents.  
  
In _R. vs._ Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal(6) the Court of Appeal
held that certiorari to quash the decision of a Statutory Tribunal lay, not
only where the tribunal had exceeded its jurisdiction but also where an error
of law appeared on the face of the record. This case turned upon the amount of
compensation payable to the clerk to a hospital board in Northumberland who
has lost his employment consequent upon the introduction of the National
Health Service. Upon a misconstruction of the regulations, the Compensation
Appeal Tribunal refused to allow him his full period of service on the basis
that there were two periods of service and that only the second period of
service should be counted which appeared to be a manifest error of law.  
  
This case is significant in that it revived the power of review for mere error
of law on the face of the record and marked the beginning of the process
towards bringing all decisions on questions of law within judicial review.  
  
The application of the doctrine of ultra vires was made wider for the purpose
of minimising the effect of ouster clauses by the House of Lords

**75**

in the celebrated _case of Anisminic Ltd. vs. Foreign Compensation Commission_
(7)  
  
In this case, the Foreign Compensation Commission rejected a claim for
compensation for a property already sold to a foreign buyer on the erroneous
ground that the Statutory Order in Council required that the successor in
title should have been of British Nationality at a certain date. Upon
Anisminic challenging the Commission's decision on the ground that the
Commission had misconstrued the relevant 1962 order from which the Commission
derived jurisdiction, in that the 1962 order did not require both the
applicant and his successor in title to be British to qualify for
compensation, the House of Lords held that:  
  
(a) the ouster clause did not protect a determination which was outside
jurisdiction; and  
  
(b) (by a majority) the misconstruction of the Order in Council which the
Commission had to apply involved an excess of jurisdiction since they based
their decision on a ground which they had no right to take into account and
sought to impose another condition not warranted by the order.  
  
The principle deducible from the Anisminic case is that every error of law by
a tribunal must necessarily be jurisdictional. This case became the leading
example of jurisdictional error by a tribunal in the course of its
proceedings.  
  
The majority view of the House of Lords was that the error destroyed the
Commission's jurisdiction and rendered the decision a nullity, since on a true
view of the law, the Commission had no jurisdiction to take the nationality of
the successor in title into account. Therefore, by asking the wrong question
and by imposing a requirement which the Commission had no authority to impose,
it had overstepped its power. (Vide Administrative Law - Wade and Forsyth 8th
Edition - page 270)  
  
Thus, a tribunal has in effect no power to decide any question of law
incorrectly; any error of law would render its decision liable to be quashed
as ultra vires.

**76**

This categorical pronouncement of the law was upheld and confirmed in two
subsequent cases namely _O'Reilly vs. Mackman_ (8) and R. VS. Hull University
Visitor(9)  
  
_In Reillyvs. Mackman_ (supra) Lord Diplock stated that:  
  
_" The breakthrough that the Anisminic case made was the recognition by the
majority of this House that if a tribunal whose jurisdiction was limited by
statute or subordinate legislation mistook the law applicable to the facts as
it had found them, it must have asked itself the wrong question, i.e., one
into which it was not empowered to inquire and so had no jurisdiction to
determine. Its purported "determination" not being a "determination" within
the meaning of the empowering legislation, was accordingly a nullity".  
_  
In _R. vs. Hull University Visitor_ (supra ; ) Lord Browne Wilkinson stated
that:  
  
_" the decision in Anisminic Ltd. vs. Foreign Compensation Commission (19692
AC 147) rendered obsolete the distinction between errors of law on the face of
the record and other errors of law by extending the doctrine of ultra vires.
Thenceforward it was to be taken that Parliament had only conferred the
decision making power on the basis that it was to be exercised on the correct
legal basis; a misdirection in law in making the decision therefore rendered
the decision ultra vires".  
  
_Lack of jurisdiction may arise in many ways as enumerated below which would
cause a tribunal to step outside its jurisdiction.  
  
(a) the absence of formalities or conditions precedent to the tribunal to
clothe itself with jurisdiction to embark on a inquiry ;  
  
(b) where at the end of an inquiry tribunal makes an order that it has no
jurisdiction to make;  
  
(c) where in the course of proceedings tribunal departs from rules of natural
justice, and asks itself the wrong question or takes into account matters
which it was not directed to take into account. (Vide Anisminic Ltd. vs.
Foreign Compensation Commission at page 195).

**77**

In _Maradana Mosque Trustees VS. Mahamud_ (10) an appeal from the judgment of
the Supreme Court, the Privy Council held that where statutory authority was
given to a Minister to act if he was satisfied that a school is being
administered in a certain way, he was not given authority to act, because he
was satisfied that the school had been administered in that way. It was held
that the Minister had asked himself the wrong question and never brought
himself within the area of his jurisdiction and therefore, acted without or in
excess of jurisdiction.  
  
In the light of the above decisions, the question that arises for
consideration in the present case is whether the Board went outside its
designated area and out stepped the confines of the territory of its inquiry.  
  
Undoubtedly, the Board asked itself the wrong question to wit; whether the
premises were business premises or not. It would be obvious that the proper
question to have asked was whether the premises was a 'house' within the
meaning of Section 47 of the C. H. P. Law. In failing to ask the proper
question the Board went out of bounds and wandered outside its designated
area. Further, the Board erroneously laid the burden of proof on the
petitioner to prove that the premises were business premises. This initial
misdirection caused the Board to apply the wrong test of user.  
  
It is also evident that the misconstruction of the provisions of Section 47 of
the C. H. P. Law, led the Board to rely on irrelevant considerations namely;  
  
(a) that the tenant had continued to be in uninterrupted occupation for a long
period; and  
  
(b) that the premises had been assessed as a house in 1980.  
  
On a careful examination of the above material, it is manifest that the Board
had digressed away from its allotted task and out stepped the confines of the
territory of its inquiry and thereby exceeded its jurisdiction.  
  
Learned Counsel for the petitioner contended that in any event ouster clause
in Section 39(3) of the C. H. P. Law read with Section 22 of the
Interpretation Ordinance (as amended) is inoperative in view of the
constitutional implications flowing from Article 140 of the Constitution.

**78**

Article 140 of the Constitution provides:  
  
_" Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the Court of Appeal shall
have full power and authority to inspect and examine the records of any Court
of First Instance or tribunal or other institution, and grant and issue,
according to law, orders in the nature of writs of certiorari, prohibition,
procedendo, mandamus and quo warranto against the Judge of any Court of First
Instance or tribunal or other institution or any other person:  
  
    ............................"  
_  
Article 168(1) of the Constitution permits the continued operation of
legislation in force immediately before the commencement of the Constitution:  
  
_" Unless Parliament otherwise provides, all laws, written laws and unwritten
laws, in force immediately before the commencement of the Constitution shall
mutatis mutandis, and except as otherwise expressly provided in the
Constitution, continue in force".  
_  
The Supreme Court in _Atapattu vs. People's Bank (11)_ in interpreting Article
168(1) expressed the view that ouster clause would be operative only "except
as otherwise expressly provided" in Article 140 and held that language used in
Article 140 is broad enough to give the Court of Appeal authority to review
even on grounds excluded by ouster clause. This case held further that
constitutional provisions being the higher norm will prevail over the ordinary
statutory provisions.  
  
In _Sirisena Cooray vs. Tissa Bandaranayake_ (12)the Supreme Court upheld and
confirmed the view expressed in Atapattu vs. People's Bank. This view was
reiterated in _Wijepala Mendis vs. P. R. P. Perera._ (13)Thus, the aforesaid
decisions firmly establish the view that the ouster clause does not operate to
exclude the jurisdiction conferred on the Court of Appeal by Article 140 of
the Constitution.  
  
In the circumstances, the impress of finality set out in Section 39(3) of the
C. H. P. Law read with Section 22 of the Interpretation Ordinance has no
application to the impugned decision of the Board. Accordingly, I hold that
the Court of Appeal had jurisdiction to review the decision of the Board and a
writ of certiorari would lie to quash it.

**79**

For the above reasons, I set aside the decision of the Board dated 23.10.1998
and the Order of the Court of Appeal dated 09.02.2001 and allow this appeal
with costs fixed at Rs. 5,000/= payable by the 1st respondent to the
petitioner.  
  
**FERNANDO J**.-I agree.  
  
**WIGNESWARAN J**.-I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/47.html_  

