##  Jayasinghe v. Somaratne - SLR - 346, Vol 1 of 1997 [1997] LKSC 48; (1997)
1 Sri LR 346 (1 January 1997)

**  346**



**JAYASINGHE**

**v.**

## **SOMARATNE**



SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

RAMANATHAN, J. AND

DR. SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.

S.C. APPEAL N0.13/96

C.A. NO. 740/92

D. C. KALUTARA NO. 363/RE

JANUARY 27, 1997.



_Landlord and Tenant ‑ Ejectment of tenant on the ground of reasonable
requirement ‑ Rent Act ‑ Section 22(1)(b) of the Act._



The plaintiff sought to eject the defendant his tenant from the premises in
suit under section 22(1)(b) of the Rent Act on the ground that the premises
were reasonably required for occupation as a residence for the plaintiff and
the members of her family. The District Judge entered judgment for the
plaintiff-­respondent.



**Held:**



1\. The reasonableness of the Landlord's demand to be restored to possession
must be proved to exist at the date of the institution of the action and to
continue to exist at the time of the trial.



2\. In reversing the findings of the District Court in favour of the
plaintiff, the Court of Appeal misdirected itself on the primary facts, a
misdirection which resulted in a miscarriage of justice.



**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_S. Ediriweera_ for appellant.



_Ranjan Gunaratne_ for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult_.





February 13, 1997.

**G. P S. DE SILVA, C. J.**



This is a tenancy action. The plaintiff instituted these proceedings on
11.12.89 seeking to eject the defendant, his tenant, from the premises in
suit. The ground of ejectment relied on was section 22(1)(b) of the Rent Act.
At the trial, the crucial issue was whether the premises were reasonably
required for occupation as a residence for

**347  
 **

the plaintiff and the members of his family. Upon a careful consideration of
the evidence placed before the Court, the District Judge entered judgment for
the plaintiff.



The defendant appealed to the Court of Appeal; the findings of the District
Court were reversed and the plaintiff's action was dismissed. Hence the
present appeal by the plaintiff to this Court.



The analysis, of the evidence of the plaintiff by the Court of Appeal is in
the following terms. "In evidence the plaintiff stated that he required the
house in question for his residence as his son had to attend tuition classes
and his wife had to attend classes at the Nurses Training School. However, in
cross examination he stated that in 1989, that is on the date of the
institution of the action he had taken steps to sell this house in order to
purchase another house. He has stated that on the date on which he was giving
evidence, the value of one perch of land in the area in which the house is
situated was Rs. 12,000/‑ so that it clearly shows that he wanted to sell this
house and in re‑examination he has confirmed this by stating that his
requirement was to sell this house to purchase another house."



The evidence the plaintiff gave on this point in cross examination and in
re‑examination reads thus:



348  


  
  
I have examined the record and I find that no document dated 19.12.89 has been
marked in evidence on behalf of the defendant. The letters produced in
evidence are ......... 1(dated 17.12.81) ............. 2 (dated 23.12.87) and
.................. 3 (dated 8.12.81). Clearly no document of 1989 has been
produced by the defendant. It is thus manifest that the reference to the year
1989 in the proceedings is a typographical error. It is also very relevant to
note that in the last question in cross-­examination the plaintiff denied the
suggestion made to him that this action was filed with the intention of
selling the house for an enhanced price.



What is more, on a reading of the judgment of the District Court it is clear
that the evidence of the plaintiff was that it was in 1987 that he had the
intention of selling the house. This is what the District Judge says on this
vital aspect of the evidence.  




"The reasonableness of the landlord's demand to be restored to possession for
the purposes of his business must be proved to exist

**349  
 **

at the date of institution of the action and to continue to exist at the time
of the trial."



On a consideration of the oral evidence of the plaintiff the documents marked
in evidence and the findings of the District Court it seems to me that the
Court of Appeal has misdirected itself on the primary facts, a misdirection
which has resulted in a miscarriage of justice.



For these reasons I allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the Court of
Appeal, and restore the judgment of the District Court. The plaintiff is
entitled to a sum of Rs. 525/‑ as costs of appeal.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.



**DR.** **SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/48.html_  

