##  Sarath Kumara Perera v. Winifred Keerthiwansa and Others - SLR - 274, Vol
2 of 1993 [1993] LKSC 48; (1993) 2 Sri LR 274 (24 November 1993)

**274**

**SARATH KUMARA PERERA,  
v. **  
**WINIFRED KEERTHIWANSA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, CA.,

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 66/92.

C.A. NO. 37/82 (F).  
D.C. GAMPAHA NO. 21936/M.

_     Negligence - Death of passenger - Vicarious liability of master for
negligence of servant. _

The defendant had hired his car and driver Sally to Baur & Co. Ltd., through a
company called Cosmos Travels & Tours to transport some tourists from the
Katunayake Air Port to Trincomalee. It was Sally's duty to bring back the
defendant's car to Colombo. Having dropped the tourists at Trincomalee, Sally
came alone in the car up to Kurunegala. At Polwatte close to Kurunegala he
picked up one Hettiarachchi and he next drove up to the Kurunegala bus stand
when he picked up the deceased Keerthiwansa and another passenger, a woman.
Neither Hettiarachchi nor the other passengers knew Sally. The car had a red
number plate and was driven at a very high speed when at Kalagedihena the car
struck a post. Keerthiwansa was seriously injured and later succumbed to his
injuries. Sally had been orally instructed by his master, the defendant not to
give lifts to passengers. Keerthiwansa's widow and children sued the
defendant.

**Held :** (Ramanathan J. dissenting)

1\. In every case where it is sought to make the master liable for the conduct
of his servant, the first question is to see whether the servant was liable.
If the answer is 'Yes', the second question is to see whether the employer
must shoulder the servant's liability.

2\. The liability of the servant, Sally was not challenged. The question then
was whether the defendant was vicariously liable for the act of Sally in
giving a "lift" to the deceased.

3\. The question whether the servant was acting within the scope of his
authority is in every case a question of fact. The dividing line which
separates the acts which fall within the scope of the servant's authority from
those which fall outside is never rigid ; it is flexible and has to be decided
having regard to all the facts and circumstances of each case.

4\. The fact that the car carried a red number plate is a crucial undisputed
fact. It is a representation that it was a car authorised to carry passengers
for a fee. The secret instructions given by the defendant to Sally were
unknown to the public.'

275

5\. There is a difference between implied authority and ostensible authority.
The Servant's act may be an authorised act for the purposes of vicarious
liability even if it is done solely for his own purposes if in the
circumstances the permission of the master can be implied. Ostensible
authority is different ; it may be held to exist if, whatever the true state
of affairs, the stranger has been misled by appearances.

6\. Sally was returning to Colombo on an authorised journey and there was no
deviation from the authorised route. He had not abandoned his master's work.
The vehicle had a red number plate and at the time of the accident there were
3 passengers in the car none known personally to Sally. Sally was not giving a
lift to a friend. The passengers, it may be reasonably be informed, were
willing to pay for the journey and they travelled in the car with the
permission and consent of Sally. The defendant had known Sally for only a year
and used to employ him whenever the need arose. The act of taking Keerthiwansa
in the car was within the ostensible authority of Sally and was not an
unauthorised act. Therefore Sally was acting within the scope of his
employment in taking the deceased as a passenger and the defendant is thus
vicariously liable.

**Cases referred to**

_1\. Young v. Edward Box & Co. Ltd., (1951) 1 TLR 789, 793. _  
_  
2\. Limpus v London General Omnibus Co. 1 H & C 526, 539. _  
_  
3\. Marsh v. Moores (1949) 2 KB 208, 215._  
_  
4\. Priestly v. Dumeyer (1898) 15 SC 393._  
_  
5\. Beard v. London General Omnibus Co. (1900) 2 OB 530._  
_  
6\. llkiw v. Samuels (1963) 1 WLR 991._  
_  
7\. Estate Van Der Byl v. Swanepoel (1927) AD 141, 151._  
_  
8\. Rossouw v. Central News Agency Ltd., (1948) 2 SA (WLD) 267._  
_  
9\. Twine v. Beans Express Ltd., (1946) 1 All RE 202, (1946) 175 LT 131 CA._  
_  
10\. South African Railways and Harbours v. Marais (1950) 4 SA (AD) 610._  
_  
11\. Conway v. Wimpey Co. Ltd., (1951) 2 KB 266._  
_  
12\. Rose v. Plenty (1976) 1 WLR 141._

**APPEAL** from Judgement of the Court of Appeal.

_R. C. Gooneratne for defendant Appellant.  
_  
_S. Sivarasa, P. C. with Shammi Perera and Sampath Walgampaya for plaintiff-
respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult._

276

November 24, 1993.  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,**

The plaintiffs filed this action against the defendant claiming damages in a
sum of Rs. 283,000. Admittedly, the defendant was the owner of the motor car
bearing distinctive No. 6 Sri 5728. It was not disputed that A. M. Sally was
the driver employed by him on the date when the car met with an accident,
namely on 21st July 1975, at Kalagedihena on the Colombo-Kandy Road. It was
the case for the plaintiffs that G. W. Keerthiwansa who was a passenger in the
car at the time of the accident died as a result of the negligent driving of
Sally. The first plaintiff is the widow of G. W. Keerthiwansa and the 2nd,
3rd, 4th and 5th plaintiffs were the dependent children of the deceased. The
accident was admitted by the defendant but it was the defendant's case that
his servant Sally was acting outside the scope of his employment at the time
of the accident and therefore he was not liable in damages. After trial, the
District Judge held with the plaintiffs and awarded a sum of Rs. 150,000 as
damages to the plaintiffs and a further sum of Rs. 33,123 as expenditure
incurred by the 1st plaintiff. The defendant unsuccessfully appealed against
the judgment of the District Court to the Court of Appeal. The defendant has
now preferred an appeal to this court.

The defendant has hired his car and the driver to Baur & Co. Ltd., through a
company known as Cosmos Travels & Tours to transport some tourists from the
Katunayake Air Port to Trincomalee. It was Sally's duty to bring back the
defendant's car to Colombo. Having dropped the tourists at Trincomalee, Sally
came back alone in the car up to Kurunegala. At the Polwatte junction close to
the Kurunegala town, he stopped the car at the point where witness
Hettiarachchi was, and offered him a lift. Hettiarachchi got into the car and
Sally drove the car and stopped it in front of the bus stand at the Kurunegala
town. At the bus stand the deceased Keerthiwansa and another woman were picked
up. According to Hettiarachchi, he had not known Sally previously.
Hettiarachchi knew the deceased and with the permission and consent of Sally
the deceased also got into the car. At that stage, a women also got into the
car. Sally continued on his journey to Colombo. At Kalagedihena he met with
this accident at about 5.30 a.m. According to Hettiarachchi, the car was
driven very fast (60 M.P.H). The car moved in a zig zag manner and struck
against a post by the side of the road ; the car overturned.

277

G. W. Keerthiwansa had to be lifted out of the car. The medical evidence
revealed that he had sustained serious injuries which had resulted in
paralysing him below his neck. He was hospitalised and he ultimately succumbed
to his injuries on 14th October 1977.

Mr. Gooneratne for the defendant appellant strenuously contended that Sally
had no authority to give a lift to the deceased Keerthiwansa. The principal
defence was set out in issue (10) which reads as follows

" Did Abdul Majeed Sally have any authority to carry persons other than
foreigners for hire at the time of this accident." (The answer to this issue
by the District Judge was " Not proved ").

As stated by Lord Denning MR in Young v. Edward Box & Co. Ltd., (1), " In
every case where it is sought to make the master liable for the conduct of his
servant, the first question is to see whether the servant was liable. If the
answer is 'Yes', the second question is to see whether the employer must
shoulder the servant's liability."

At the hearing before us, the liability of the servant Salty was not
challenged. The question then is whether the defendant is vicariously liable
for the act of Sally in giving a " lift " to the deceased in the defendant's
car on the return journey from Trincomalee to Colombo. At this point it is
relevant to state that the finding of the Court of Appeal is that the
defendant had verbally instructed Sally not to take any passengers in the car
on his return trip to Colombo from Trincomalee. Although this finding is
contrary to the finding of the District Judge, I will proceed on the basis
that Sally had been orally instructed not to take any passengers on his return
trip. However as observed by Willes J., " The law is not so futile as to allow
a master, by giving secret instructions to his servant, to discharge himself
from liability." (per _Willes J., in Limpus v. London General Omnibus Co._
(2).

In this connection the Court of Appeal has rightly stated ; " In the instant
case there were no written instructions. There was no way how a third party
would have known that the driver had been given instructions not to carry
passengers on his return trip. On the other hand, the driver had conducted
himself in such a way as if he ostensibly had such authority."

278

The question whether a servant was acting within the scope of his authority is
in every case a question of fact (Marsh v. Moores (3). In Priestly v. Dumeyer
(4) the defendant's servant who was employed to drive a cab plying for hire
allowed a friend to drive it. The court held that the defendant was liable in
respect of an accident caused by the negligence of his servant's friend. On
the other hand, in the case of Beard v. London General Omnibus Co., (5) the
defendant Company was held to be not liable for the accident caused by the
negligence of the conductor of the omnibus who drove the bus in the temporary
absence of the driver. In llkiw v. Samuels (6), it was held that a servant who
is authorised to drive a motor vehicle and who permits an unauthorised person
to drive in his place may yet be acting within the scope of his employment.
The dividing line which separates the acts which fall within the scope of the
servant's authority from those which fall outside is never rigid ; it is
flexible and has to be decided having regard to all the facts and
circumstances of each case.

What then are the facts which are relevant to the issue whether Sally was
acting within the scope of his authority in taking Keerthiwansa as a passenger
in the car?. On the evidence on record the facts and circumstances established
may conveniently be enumerated as follows

i) Sally was returning to Colombo having dropped the tourists at Trincomalee.
He was on an authorised journey.

ii) There was no deviation whatever from the authorised route.

iii) It cannot be said that he had abandoned his master's work for he had at
all times material retained the custody and control of his master's vehicle.

iv) The vehicle had a red number plate. This was a clear representation to the
public that the vehicle was authorised to carry passengers for a fee, whatever
may have been the secret instructions, unknown to others, that were given by
the master to his servant.

279

v) At the time of the accident there were no less than 3 passengers in the car
including the deceased. None of the passengers were personally known to Sally.
This certainly was not a case of a servant giving a lift in his master's car
to a friend.

vi) It is not unreasonable to infer, having regard to the normal course of
conduct, that a person who travels as a passenger in a car, with a red number
plate, is ready and willing to pay for his journey.

vii) The 3 persons who travelled in the car (including the deceased) did so
with the permission and consent of Sally.

viii) The defendant had known Sally only for about a year prior to the
accident. Sally was only a casual employee called on to drive the car whenever
the need arises. The defendant knew nothing of Sally's antecedents. The
defendant had failed to exercise the degree of care expected of a prudent
employer in selecting the person whom he employs. The defendant was content to
give mere oral instructions to such an employee.

The prohibition against taking passengers on the return journey, very strongly
relied on by Mr. Gooneratne, has to be considered in the context of the facts
set out above and in the light of the legal position succinctly stated by
Wessels J., in Estate Van Der Byl v. Swanepoel(7).

"It is within the master's power to select trustworthy servants who will
exercise due care towards the public and carry out his instructions. The third
party ;has no choice in the matter and if the injury done to the third party
by the servant is a natural or likely result from the employment of the
servant then it is the master who must suffer rather than the third party. The
master ought not to be allowed to set up as a defence secret instructions
given to the servant where the latter is left, as far as the public is
concerned, with all the insignia of a general authority to carry on the kind
of business for which he is employed ' (The emphasis is mine).

280

 The fact that the car carried a red number plate is a crucial, undisputed
fact in this case. The red number plate constituted a representation that it
was a car authorised to carry passengers for a fee. The secret instructions
given by the defendant to Sally were unknown to the public. There was no
notice inside the car prohibiting the presence of unauthorised passengers. It
is significant that Sally stopped the car in front of the bus stand at
Kurunegala and it was there that the deceased got into the car with the
consent of Sally. He was carrying 3 passengers picked up at different places.
Referring to the distinction between implied and ostensible authority Salmond
States :

" There is a difference between implied authority and ostensible authority.
The servant's act may be an authorised act for the purposes of vicarious
liability even if it is done solely for his own purposes if in the
circumstances the permission of the master can be implied. Ostensible
authority is different ; it may be held to exist if, whatever the true state
of affairs, the stranger had been misled by appearances." (Salmond Law of
Torts 19th Edition page 524).

Having regard to the facts and circumstances relevant to the instant case
enumerated above, in particular the matters set out as (iv), (v), (vi) and
(vii), I am of the view that the act of taking Keerthiwansa in the car was
within the ostensible authority of Sally and was not an unauthorised act. I
accordingly hold that Sally was acting within the scope of his employment in
taking the deceased as a passenger in the car and that the defendant is thus
vicariously liable.

Bearing in mind that the answer to the question whether the master is
vicariously liable for the act of his servant depends on the facts and
circumstances of each case, I now pass on to consider some of the decisions on
which strong reliance was placed by Mr. Gooneratne for the defendant-
appellant.

a) Rossouw v. Central News Agency Ltd., (8) This was a case where Ashburner
(the servant) while driving his employer's car gave a lift to a person whom he
saw walking along the road. The car met with an accident and the passenger was
seriously injured. Admittedly, at the time of the accident Ashburner was on "
the business of his employers ". The question before the court was whether in
picking up the passenger, Ashburner was acting within

281

the scope of his employment. The court answered this question in the negative.
It is to be noted that there are significant facts which distinguish this case
from the case in appeal before us

i) the car " was an ordinary private car indistinguishable in its outward
appearance from any other car on. the road ". (at page 269).

ii) the conveyance of passengers was no part of the business of the employers
;

iii) "...........the giving of a lift to a stranger was something completely.
foreign to the scope of Ashburner's duties, it was neither necessary " nor
incidental to them ". (at p. 271).

b) Twine v. Beans Express Ltd., (9). Here the driver of the defendant's van
was authorised to carry certain classes of passengers but strictly forbidden
to cant' any other class of passengers. The plaintiff's husband who was not in
the permitted category accepted a lift in the van. An accident occurred and he
was killed. The court held that the defendants were not liable. An important
fact in this case was that there was a notice on the dash board of the van
which read as follows :- " No unauthorised person is allowed on this vehicle.
By Order Beans Express Ltd., " Thus the passenger in the van had been clearly
informed that he was in the position of a trespasser. There is no question
here of secret oral instructions being given by the master to his servant.

c) South African Railways and Harbours v. Marais (10), this was a case where
the respondent's husband Marais was killed while travelling on the engine of a
train as a result of the derailment of the train. It was not disputed that
Marais was issued with a ticket which entitled him to travel in a compartment
in the guard's coach at the tail end of the train. The evidence was that had
he remained in that compartment he would not have been killed ; but what he
did was that sometime before the derailment he left the compartment and
boarded the engine. Watermeyer C.J. stated :

" It was not the work of the administration to transport passengers on the
engine and if the driver chose to do so he was acting outside the scope of his
employment. It cannot be said that transporting a passenger on the engine was
a negligent

282

manner of driving the engine ; it had nothing to do with engine was in my
opinion entirely the driver's own act."

Thus it is clear that the decision turned on the proved facts and
circumstances in each case.

For these reasons, I affirm the award of the sum of Rs. 183,123 to the
plaintiffs by the District Court and I further order that the defendant must
pay legal interest on the aforesaid sum from the date of the decree in the
District Court till payment in full. Subject to this variation, namely the
payment of interest, the appeal is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs. 2000.

**Kulatunga, J.**

I have perused in draft, the judgments of my Lord The Chief Justice and my
brother Ramanathan. I agree with the judgment of my Lord The Chief Justice. My
brother Ramanathan has relied on the decision in Conway v. Wimpey Co. Ltd.
(11). With great respect, the facts of that case are different from those in
the case before us.

**RAMANATHAN, J.**

This is an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal which has affirmed
the award of damages made by the District Court for causing the death of the
deceased by one Abdul Majeed Sally the servant of the defendant-appellant-
appellant by his negligent act. The deceased was the husband of the 1st
plaintiff and the father of the 2nd to the 6th plaintiffs-respondents-
respondents.

The defendant-appellant-appellant was the owner of the vehicle and master of
the driver Abdul Majeed Sally his servant. The vehicle had been hired by
Cosmos a travel agency who in turn had hired the vehicle to Baur & Co., to
transport specified tourists from Katunayake Airport to Club Oceanic Hotel in
Trincomalee.

At the trial the defendant led evidence to establish that the servant was
given specific oral instructions not to give lifts to anyone. The driver had
acted contrary to these instructions.

283

The learned District Judge in his judgment has on the question of the
prohibition by the master not to carry passengers on the return journey,
concluded that no such instructions had been in fact given. He based his
conclusions on the presumption that if there had been such instructions they
would have been in a written form and the failure to have such written
instructions indicates that no such instructions whatever had been given.

I find it difficult to accept the reasoning adopted by the learned District
Judge which had led him to this conclusion. The mere fact that there were no
written instructions is no basis, in my opinion, for saying that there were no
instructions whatever written or oral.

The Court of Appeal has taken a different view on this aspect and proceeded on
the basis that verbal instructions had been given to the driver not to take
passengers on the return journey and given reasons for why they chose to do
so. I accept the findings of the Court of Appeal that verbal instructions had
been given. However I am not in agreement with the Court of Appeals
determination on the law with regard to the vicarious liability of a master
for the prohibited acts of his servant.

In the general run of cases, the duty of both master and servant is the same,
but this is a coincidence and not a rule of law. For a master to be liable he
must owe a duty of care to the injured.

It was decided in Twine v. Beans Express Ltd., (9) for a master to be liable
for the negligence of his servant the injured must come within a class of
persons to whom a duty to take care was owed by the master. In this case the
driver of a vehicle had given a lift to the plaintiff, contrary to the
defendants instructions. The plaintiff was injured due to the negligence of
the driver. The employer was not liable to the plaintiff as the servants act
was wholly outside the course of the servants employment and not an improper
means of carrying it out.

This principle of law was followed in Conway v. Wimpey Co., Ltd., (11). A
number of contractors were employed in work at the Heathrow Airport. The
defendant company had instituted a bus service for their own employees and the
driver was prohibited by the defendant company from giving lifts to anyone
other than their own

284

employees. A non employee of the company had travelled in the bus and due to
the negligence of the driver had been injured. Asquith, LJ held that the act
of the driver in giving a lift to the plaintiff was outside the scope of his
employment. It was not merely a wrongful mode of performing an act of the
class which the driver was employed to perform but was the performance of an
act which he was not employed to perform.

In Rose v. Plenty (12) a milk roundsman had contrary to the instructions of
his employer made use of the services of a boy for the purpose of assisting
his delivering of milk in the milk float. The boy was injured due to the
negligent driving of the vehicle by the roundsman. The Court of Appeal by a
majority held that the employer was vicariously liable for the negligence.

Lord Denning, MR in his reasoning has established that the decisive point was
that it was not done by the servant for his own purpose but for his master's
business.

On an analysis of the cases it would appear that the principles on which a
master's liability are determined fall into three categories.

A. Â Â Â Â Â Â Â where the prohibited act relates to the mode of performing an
act of the class which the servant was employed to perform the employer will
be vicariously liable.

B. Â Â Â Â Â Â Â where the prohibition relates to an act of a class which he
was not employed to perform at all the employer is not liable. The prohibition
mark the limits of the scope of employment. Therefore for any act done outside
that scope, the employer will not be liable.

C. Â Â Â Â Â Â Â where the injury has been caused in the course of performing
an act, which the servant was not employed at all to perform, the master will
nevertheless be liable where the prohibited act was committed in the
furtherance of the master's business.

The facts of the present case briefly are as follows :

**285**

The defendant-appellant-appellant had hired his car and driver to Baur & Co.,
through Cosmos Travels to transport specified tourists from Katunayake Airport
to Club Oceanic Hotel in Trincomalee. The document V2 shows Baurs had paid for
both its outward and the inward journey. There was a prohibition not to take
passengers on the return journey.

The driver having dropped the tourists on his return journey via Katunayake
had offered a lift to one Hettiarachi who was on the road. From the Kurunegala
bus stand the driver picked up the deceased and another passenger. The car was
driven fast and due to the negligence of the driver the car over-turned and
injured the deceased, who subsequently succumed to his injuries.

The evidence disclosed that the driver was given oral instructions not to
carry any person on their return journey. The driver had acted contrary to the
prohibition and was performing an act which he was not employed to perform. It
cannot be said that the deceased was furthering the master's business or
interest as was in the case of Rose v. Plenty (12) where the boy was assisting
the milk roundsman in his work.

For the reasons stated I hold that the appellant was not vicariously liable
for the negligence of his servant. In the circumstances, the plaintiffs'
action fails and I set aside the judgments of both Courts below. I allow the
appeal. There will be no costs.

I very much regret that I have to dissent from the judgment of my Lord the
Chief Justice.

_Judgment of the District Judge affirmed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/48.html_  

