##  Societe Des Produits Nestle, S.A. v. Multitech Lanka (Pvt) Limited. - SLR
- 298, Vol 2 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 48; (1999) 2 Sri LR 298 (2 June 1999)

**298**

**SOCIETE DES PRODUITS NESTLE S.A.  
v.  
MULTITECH LANKA (PVT) LIMITED**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 21/98  
H.C. OF THE WESTERN PROVINCE  
H.C. (CIVIL) NO. 26/97/ (3)  
APRIL 26 AND 27, 1999

_Intellectual property - Infringement of rights of registered owner of a mark
- Unfair competition - Sections 117 and 142 of the Code of Intellectual
Property Act No. 52 of 1979 - Plaintiffs right to an interim injunction._

The plaintiff company had been selling its chocolate beans in Sri Lanka under
the registered trade mark of 'Smarties' in a gaily-coloured cylindrical
container or tube. Its rival, the defendant company, very recently started
importing similar chocolate beans from Australia and packing and selling them
as "sweeties' (an unregistered trade mark) in a no less gaily-coloured oblong
box. The plaintiff instituted action in the High Court of the Western Province
alleging that the defendant's get-up was confusingly similar to that of the
plaintiff and that it was likely to mislead the purchasing public thus
violating the plaintiffs rights under section 117 of the Code of Intellectual
Property Act, No. 52 of 1979 and that the use of the defendant's get-up was
also an act of unfair competition under section 142 of the Act. The trial
Judge refused to grant an interim injunction on the ground that the plaintiff
was guilty of attempting to mislead the Court, there was a failure to disclose
a fact and that in any event the marks in dispute were not similar.

**Held :**

1\. The plaintiff had not attemped to mislead the Court by holding out that
its product was packed in a container of the same shape as the defendant's,
particularly in view of the fact that the containers had been produced and
were available for examination by the trial Judge. There was a failure by the
plaintiff to disclose the fact that it also sold 'Smarties' under a different
get-up but that was not a material fact.

299

2\. the case cannot be decided by simply totting up and weighing resemblances
and dissimilarities upon a side by side comparison of the marks: the issue is
whether a person who sees one in the absence of the other and who has in his
mind's eye only a recollection of that other would think the two were the
same.

3\. The evidence established, prima facie, at least an act of. unfair
competition which entitled the plaintiff to the issue of an interim
injunction.

_Per_ Fernando, J.

" **. . .** this was eminently a case in which the interim injunction inquiry
and trial should have been taken up together."

**Cases referred to :**

1. _Thiagarajah v. Majeed_ \- (1935) 4 CLW 41, 42.  
  
2. _Sumeet Research and Holdings Ltd. v. Elite Radio & Engineering Co., Ltd. _\- (1997) 2 Sri LR 393, 402-3.  
  
3. _Murugesu v. Northern Divisional Agricultural Producers' Co-operative Union Ltd._ \- (1952) 54 NLR 517.  
  
4. _Perera v. Perera_ \- (1963) 67 NLR 445, 449.

**APPEAL** from the Order of the High Court of the Western Province.

_K. Kanag-Iswaran,_ PC with _Nigel Bartholomeusz, Miss Dilshani Wijayawardana_
and _Miss Vindya Weerasekera_ for the plaintiff-appellant.

_S. A. Parathalingam,_ PC with _Faiser Musthapha_ for the defendant-
respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

June 2, 1999.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.**

This appeal is about competition in selling multi-coloured chocolate beans, so
popular with children.

The plaintiff-appellant company (the plaintiff) had been selling its chocolate
beans in Sri Lanka, under the registered trade mark of

300

"smarties", in a gaily-coloured cylindrical container or tube. Its rival, the
defendant-respondent company (the defendant) very recently started importing
similar chocolate beans in bulk from Australia, and packing and selling them
as "sweeties" (an unregistered mark) in a no less gaily-coloured oblong box.

It is not disputed that the trade mark "smarties' was first registered in Sri
Lanka for chocolate beans almost 50 years ago; and that from about 1990 the
rights in respect of that trade mark belonged to the plaintiff. The plaintiff
says that throughout that period chocolate beans had been imported into Sri
Lanka, and sold in such containers and under that mark.

The plaintiff instituted this action in the High Court of the Western Province
on 30.9.97, pleading two causes of action: that the defendant was using the
mark "sweeties" so nearly resembling "smarties" (both visually and
phonetically) as to be likely to mislead the purchasing public, thus violating
the plaintiffs rights under section 117 of the Code of Intellectual Property
Act, No. 52 of 1979 (the Act); and that the sale of chocolate beans as
"sweeties" in a get-up similar to that used by the plaintiff was an act
contrary to honest practices in commercial matters, constituting an act of
unfair competition within the meaning of section 142 of the Act. It obtained
an ex parte enjoining order, and notice of interim injunction; the defendant
filed objections; and by order dated 3.4.98 the learned High Court Judge
refused to grant the interim injunction sought by the plaintiff. It is against
that order that the plaintiff now appeals to this Court with leave.

With its plaint the plaintiff produced a sample of its container as "A5", and
of the allegedly infringing container as "A7", and I must now examine the
significant features of the rival containers.

(1) The word "smarties" is not in a standard font; the letters are in lower-
case, and are gently curved and somewhat stylized; and the letters are in
white. For "sweeties", the defendant has

301

used letters which are, in those respects, absolutely identical to "smarties"
(except, of course, for the letters "m", "a", and "r").

(2) In both, the letters have been placed in a chocolate brown surround (which
emphasises the white letters), virtually indentical in shape, colour and
proportions, though not in size; and the edges of that surround are outlined
by a series of curves or ,. scallops, which are more or less parallel to the
white letters.

(3) Both "smarties" and "sweeties" (with their respective surrounds) appear on
very similar chocolate brown backgrounds on which chocolate beans of many
bright colours are randomly scattered.

(4) There are, however, some differences. Thus, just above the centre of
"smarties" (and its surround) appears "Nestle" in small white letters, while
above "sweeties" (and its surround) - but more to the left - there appears
"Aussie" in similar white letters. In addition, below "sweeties" there appears
"Product of Australia" in tiny white letters.

(5) There is also on the "smarties" container a chocolate coloured strip,
running the full length of the tube, containing information in tiny letters
(within two boxes, outlined in white) about its manufacture tin Malayasia) and
ingredients. On two sides of the "sweeties" container there are two boxes,
also outlined in white, with similar information.

(6) The containers are quite dissimilar in shape: the former is a cylindrical
tube whose length is roughly 1.5 times its circumference, while the latter is
a rectangular box whose length is more than double its width, and whose width
is more than double its depth.

It seems to me, prima facie, that the similarities mentioned at (1) and (2)
above are such as to lead almost irresistibly to the conclusion

302

that "sweeties" and its surround must have been designed by a person who had
seen, if not scrutinized, the "smarties" tube; and such a person could not
have helped noticing the striking background pattern of randomly scattered
multi-coloured chocolate beans, however common that might otherwise have been
in itself. I must recall, too, that a case of this sort cannot be decided by
simply totting up and weighing resemblances and dissimilarities, upon a side-
by-side comparison :the issue is whether a person who sees one, in the absence
of the other, and who has in his mind's eye only a recollection of that other,
would think the two were the same ( _Thiagarajah v. Majeed_ (1)).

The plaintiff pleaded that :

"B **. . .** the labelling and packaging of the carton with the trade mark
"smarties" across it has a distinctive colour scheme, trade dress and get-up.
The plaintiff and its predecessors in title have consistently and continuously
used a standard trade dress and have not altered the essential character of
the carton any manner whatsoever. The continuity of the said multi-coloured
carton has been maintained in such a way as to preserve the absolute
identification of the plaintiffs product in the minds of consumers with the
plaintiff alone and has an established reputation and goodwill in Sri Lanka
since 1950 **. . .** A cylindrical carton of the plaintiff's product is
annexed hereto marked "A5" **. . .**

12 **. . .** the defendant was distributing and. marketing a brand of
chocolate beans/buttons, enclosed in a carton identical and/or confusingly
similar to that of the plaintiff's carton, with the word "sweeties" written
across it **. . .** The plaintiff annexes hereto a carton of (the defendant's)
product **. . .** marked A7 **. . .** " (emphasis added).

In its objections, the defendant pleaded that the plaintiff had obtained the
enjoining order by wilful suppression, misrepresentation, and/or misstatement
of material facts, and that an interim injunction

303

should therefore be refused. The first point was that "smarties" are sold in
Sri Lanka only in cartons in the shape of a tube in two different sizes (20
gms and 36.5 gms for Rs. 18 and Rs. 29, respectively), while "sweeties" are
sold in boxes in three different sizes (20 gms, 36 gms and 60 gms, for Rs. 15,
Rs. 25 and Rs. 35, respectively); and that the plaintiff failed to state to
Court that it does not sell its "smarties" in boxes. The second point was that
"the plaintiff has falsely stated to Court that its trade get-up **. . .** has
been maintained in a manner to preserve the absolute identification of the
plaintiffs product in the eyes of the consumer", because in fact "smarties"
were being sold, particularly in the Duty Free shop at Katunayake, in a tube
with a different get-up (and one such tube was produced as "Z6").

The learned High Court Judge upheld these two contentions, observing that the
plaintiff when applying for an interim injunction against the defendant using
the box with the trade mark "Aussie Sweeties" had made some attempt to mislead
the Court by holding out that its product was also packed in a cardboard box;
and, further, that the tube "Z6" indicated that the plaintiff's averment as to
the consistent and continuous use of a standard trade dress, without
alteration, so as to preserve the absolute identification of the plaintiffs
product with the plaintiff, was "far from the truth", and was made in order to
mislead the Court.

It is necessary to determine whether there was, in either instance, a
misrepresentation or suppression of fact; and, if so, whether it was material.

Did the plaintiff suppress a fact by failing to state either that its product
was not sold in boxes or that it was sold only in tubes and thereby lead the
Court to believe that both were sold in containers of the same shape? The
plaintiff averred that "smarties" were sold in a "cardboard pettiya" (in the
Sinhala plaint), and in a "carton" (in the English translation). "pettiya" and
"carton" are synonyms for "box"

304

or "container". They are not descriptive of shape (or size or colour or
material). Thus, one can quite properly speak of a wig-box, or a hat-box, or
an ice-cream or yoghurt or margarine carton, even if they are all cylindrical
in shape. The fallacy of the defendant's contention is the assumption that a
"carton" or a "box" is necessarily oblong {or rectangular) in shape: on the
contrary, it may be cylindrical (or round), triangular, semi-circular, or even
spherical. But, even if I were to assume that a "carton" or a "box" or a
"pettiya" is generally oblong, yet in paragraph 8 it was "a cylindrical carton
(and in Sinhala, cylindarakara nalayak, ie tube) of the plaintiffs product"
which the plaintiff annexed. So, there was no room for anyone to think that
the plaintiffs product was being sold in oblong boxes. Apart from all that,
the fact remains that the containers themselves had been produced. The essence
of the plaintiff's case - and the vital issue for consideration, even at the
enjoining order stage - was the question of confusing visual (and phonetic)
similarity. That question could not have been determined, even prima facie,
upon a reading of a verbal description. An examination of the containers was
necessary. Indeed, the nature of the claim was such that if the containers had
not been produced, the learned trial Judge should probably have said that he
was not satisfied that a prima facie case had been made out. Since the
containers were available, whether or not the attention of the learned trial
Judge was specifically drawn to them by counsel, it was his duty to have
examined them, whereupon it would have been immediately obvious that one
container was cylindrical and the other oblong. Taken together - as indeed
they must be - the plaint and the annexes more than adequately disclosed that
the containers were quite different in shape.

I hold, therefore, that the learned trial Judge was in error in concluding
that the plaintiff had attempted to mislead the Court by holding out that its
product was packed in a container of the same shape as the defendant's.

**305**

Was the plaintiffs averment that it consistently and continuously used (etc)
the get-up depicted in "A5" either a misrepresentation of facts (in that it
implied that "smarties" were sold only in that get-up), or a suppression of
facts (in that it failed to disclose that "smarties" were also sold in the
get-up depicted in "Z6")? Mr. Parathalingam, PC, for the defendant sought to
interpret paragraph 8 of the plaint as if it implied that the plaintiff had
only used the get-up in "A5". Paragraph 8 contains neither the word "only" nor
anything equivalent; nor can it be construed as implying anything of the sort.
A manufacturer may use more than one get-up for the same product : one may be
"absolutely identified" with that product, while the other(s) may or may not
be. The assertion that one get-up has been consistently and continuously used,
and absolutely identified, etc., does not imply, in law or logic, that no
other get-up has been used. In essence, the plaintiffs claim - right or wrong
- was that it had certain rights in respect of the get-up "A5". It asserted -
rightly or wrongly - in support of that claim that it had consistently and
continuously used (etc) that get-up. It then alleged that the get-up "A7", is
confusingly similar, and that by using that get-up the defendant had
contravened sections 117 and 142 of the Act, and had infringed the plaintiff's
rights. It is not contended, on behalf of the defendant, that - if the pleaded
facts are established - that is not a valid claim. However, it is unnecessary
to express an opinion on that question. What is relevant at this stage is to
consider whether the maintainability of that claim would be affected by that
fact that "smarties" are also sold in the get-up "Z6". The learned trial Judge
did not cite any authority - nor did Mr. Parathalingam - suggesting that the
plaintiffs rights in respect of the get-up "A5" would be extinguished because
it also used the get-up "Z6". To put it another way, if the plaintiff had
pleaded in paragraph 8 that it also sold "smarties" under another get-up,
would its rights in respect of "A5" have been extinguished, or even
diminished? No authority has been cited to that effect, and I am not
satisfied, prima facie, that the plaintiff's cause of action would have been
affected; certainly, the learned trial Judge did not think so. Such a view
would result

306

in absurdity: it would amount to holding that if a manufacturer uses only one
get-up for his product, no rival may imitate it; but if he uses two, any
competitor may imitate one get-up with impunity; and, further, two
competitors, between them, may imitate both. Thus, while I express no opinion
as to the merits of the plaintiffs claim, the use of the get-up "Z6" was not
material either to that claim or to the defendant's defence. It is true that
the use of "Z6" was not disclosed, but that was not a material fact.

I hold that the learned trial Judge erred in holding that "Z6" was
inconsistent with the truth of any portion of paragraph 8 of the plaint, or
that the non-disclosure of "Z6" was intended to mislead the Court.

Not only did the learned trial Judge misdirect himself on both points, but he
also made certain other observations which suggest that he failed to take into
consideration the relevant factors. He said, for instance, that the plaintiff
admitted that chocolate beans bearing the trade mark "smarties" had been
imported into and sold in Sri Lanka by several traders besides the plaintiff,
and that although the plaintiff has no objection to chocolate beans bearing
the trade mark "smarties" being imported into and sold in Sri Lanka by others,
it was taking objection to the defendant importing and selling by using the
trade mark "smarties". That was irrelevant to the issue. The fact that the
plaintiff did not object to the sale of chocolate beans to which the trade
mark "smarties" had presumably lawfully - been applied is not at all
inconsistent with its objecting to the use of an - allegedly \- unlawfully
confusing mark or get-up.

Further, the learned trial Judge observed that when 'A5" and "A7" are compared
they can be identified as being distinct although there were certain
similarities. He proceeded to identify these in detail. In effect, he did a
"side-by-side" comparison, quite forgetting that a customer buying goods will
not have the opportunity of comparing them in that way, but would depend on
his recollection \- so that it would

307

be the "outstanding characteristics" that are relevant. He brushed aside the
similarities, which have been outlined earlier in this judgment; and treating
the dissimilarities as being fundamental, he concluded that "A5" and "A7" were
not, prima facie, identical or confusingly similar. He thus failed to apply
the proper test, referred to in _Thiagarajah v. Majeed_ (1). Further, he
failed to consider whether the available evidence showed, prima facie, that
the defendant had taken features of the, plaintiffs get-up "A5" "contrary to
honest practices in industrial or commercial matters" within the meaning of
section 142 of the Act. I referred to the ambit of that phrase in _Sumeet
Research and Holdings Ltd v. Elite Radio & Engineering Co. Ltd_.(2) and need
say only that the learned trial Judge failed to give due consideration to
distinctive features of the get-up in "A5". The white letters of smarties as
well as their chocolate-brown surround were distinctive: even if he might
conceivably have assumed that it was more than a coincidence that the
defendant had incorporated one of these features in "A7", he should certainly
have considered whether the use of both (and that, too, in a very similar and
distinctive background) was, prima facie, a deliberate "taking" of the idea or
concept of the plaintiffs get-up; and, if so, he should have gone on to
consider whether in using the plaintiffs get-up as a model, as it were, there
was inequitable conduct, or "something underhand or sharp", on the part of the
defendant.

At the conclusion of the hearing, for the reasons now stated, we . were of the
opinion that the evidence before the learned trial Judge established, prima
facie, at least an act of unfair competition, and that he had erred in law in
refusing to issue an interim injunction. We, accordingly, set aside the order
dated 3.4.98, and granted an interim injunction pending the final hearing and
determination of the action.

In regard to costs, I cannot overlook the fact that this was eminently a case
in which the interim injunction inquiry and the trial should have been taken
up together (see _Murugesu v. Northern Divisional Agricultural Producers' Co-
operative Union Ltd_.(3) and _Perera v. Perera_.(4)) Expense and delay might
have been avoided if the plaintiff had invited

308

the learned trial Judge to do so. At the same time, the defendant's objections
were not only technical but tenuous as well. I, therefore, order the defendant
to pay the plaintiff a sum of Rs.15,000 towards its costs.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Order of the High Court set aside;_

_Interim injunction granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/48.html_  

