##  Karuppiah and Others v. The Director General of Customs - SLR - 256, Vol 2
of 1998 [1998] LKSC 49; (1998) 2 Sri LR 256 (25 September 1998)

**256**

**KARUPPIAH AND OTHERS  
v.  
THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF CUSTOMS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
SC APPEALS NOS. 108/96  
AND 109/96  
CA APPLICATIONS NOS. 387/92  
AND 403/92  
JULY 15, 1998.  
  
_Writ of Mandamus - Customs Ordinance - Surcharge on customs duty - Order
under s. 10A of the Ordinance - Applicability of the surcharge to goods coming
within the preview of the surcharge in consequence of a waiver of customs
duty._

**257**

The appellants imported two consignments of yeast in June and December, 1990,
respectively. The rate of customs duty for yeast was 35% of which 30% had been
waived by the respondent, the Director-General of Customs in 1988.
Consequently, both consignments were cleared on payment of 5% duty. In March,
1989, the Minister of Finance acting under s. 10A of the Customs Ordinance
made an Order (A4) levying a surcharge of 5% 'on all imported goods (other
than five specified items) on which the rate of customs duty is five per
centum' with effect from 15.3.89 for a period of two years. Long after the
consignments in question had been released the respondent decided that the
surcharge was payable on them as well and demanded payment. S. 10A reads:  
  
"In addition to any duties leviable under this Ordinance, the Minister may,
with the approval of the Cabinet of Ministers, by Order published in the
Gazette, levy a surcharge on the customs duty payable on such imported goods
as are specified in such order, if he deems it expedient in the interest of
the national economy to do so'.  
  
It was argued for the respondent that the Order A4 should be read as if it
read 'goods on which the rate of customs duty payable is five per centum".  
  
**Held  
**  
The Order A4 referred to the goods on which the rate of duty (duly prescribed
by statute or subordinate legislation) was 5%. The language used in the Order
does not suggest that it was the Minister's intention to recover the surcharge
only in respect of goods on which the duty actually paid was 5%.  
  
Per Fernando, J.  
  
"While 'payable' would, in certain contexts have a different meaning to
'leviable', in s. 10A 'payable' does not mean anything more, or less, than
'leviable' . . . The customs duties which are 'leviable' (or levied') by the
State are thus identicle - in rate and amount - to what is 'payable' (or
'paid') by the importer'.  
**  
APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_S. Sivarasa PC with C. Vivekananthan_ for the appellants in both appeals.  
  
_K.  Sripavan _DSG for the respondent in both appeals.

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 25, 1998  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
I have had the advantage of reading the draft judgment of Bandaranayake, J. in
which the relevant facts, statutory provisions,

**258**

and submissions have been set out. While agreeing with her conclusion and
order, I wish to state my reasons more fully on the question of interpretation
which arises.  
  
The facts are not in dispute. The first appeal relates to two consignments of
yeast imported in July and August, 1990, and the second to two consignments
imported in June and December, 1990. The rate of customs duty on yeast
according to the Sri Lanka Customs Import Tariff Guide in 1987 was 35%, and
that was the same rate set out in Gazette No. 564/7 of 30.6.89. By letter
dated 25.5.88 the Director of Fiscal Policy (of the Ministry of Finance)
authorized the respondent, the Director-General of Customs, to grant a partial
waiver of duty (of between 5% and 30%) on yeast. That was what both counsel
termed an "administrative arrangement"; it was not sanctioned either by
section 19 of the Customs Ordinance, or by any other statutory provision which
was brought to our notice; and the appeals were argued on the assumption that
such waiver was lawful. Accordingly, the respondent granted a 30% waiver, and
duty was recovered at 5% on the consignments imported by the appellants.  
  
Section 10A of the Customs Ordinance provides:  
  
"in addition to any duties leviable under this Ordinance, the Minister may,
with the approval of the Cabinet of Ministers, by Order published in the
Gazette, levy a surcharge on the customs duty payable on such imported goods
as are specified in such Order, at such rates and for such periods as are
specified in such Order, if he deems it expedient in the interest of the
national economy to do so."  
  
In March, 1989, acting under that provision, the Minister of Finance had made
an Order (A4) levying a surcharge of 5% "on all imported goods (other than
five specified items) on which the rate of customs duty is five per centum",
with effect from 15.3.89 for a period of two years. Long after the
consignments in question had been cleared, the respondent decided that the
surcharge was payable on them as well, and demanded payment - threatening
that, otherwise, he would refuse to pass future consignments of other goods
imported by the appellants.

**259**

The question is whether yeast fell within the category of "imported goods on
which the rate of customs duty is five per centum", within the meaning of the
Order A4.  
  
There are several reasons why I cannot accept Mr. Sripavan's interpretation of
the Order A4.  
  
First, section 10A required the Minister to specify the imported goods on
which he wished to impose the surcharge. He could have specified them
individually, laboriously describing each and every item which he had in mind,
together with its Customs Tariff number. Instead, he described the entire
class of goods collectively, i.e goods (subject to five exceptions) "on which
the rate of customs duty is five percentum". That, in my view, referred to the
goods on which the rate of duty (duly prescribed by statute or subordinate
legislation) was 5%. The language used in the Order does not suggest that it
was the Minister's intention to recover the surcharge only in respect of goods
on which the duty actually paid was 5%. Perhaps he could have done so, but in
that event he should have said so plainly. At all material times, the rate of
customs duty on yeast was 35%.  
  
Second, Mr. Sripavan tried to get over that difficulty, by arguing that
"payable" in section 10A of the Customs Ordinance means something different to
"leviable". He argued that whatever may be the statutory rate of duty
"leviable" on imported goods, what was "payable" by the importer could be
different; in the present case, it was the reduced rate of 5% applicable after
the waiver. Therefore, he contended, since section 10A authorised the Minister
to impose a surcharge on the customs duty "payable", his order must be
interpreted with the word "payable" interpolated; as if it read "goods on
which the rate of customs duty payable is five percentum".  
  
While "payable" would, in some contexts, have a different meaning to
"leviable", in section 10A "payable" does not mean anything more, or less,
than "leviable". Those two expressions refer to one and the same concept, but
from two different points of view: that of the state and that of the importer.
Correlative to the State's power to impose or levy customs duties is the
importer's liability to pay those duties. The customs duties which are
"leviable" (or 'levied") by the state are thus identical - in rate and amount
- to what is "payable" (or "paid") by the importer. Indeed, that is implicit
in section 10, which refers

**260**

to the "several duties of customs", set forth in the schedule, which "shall be
levied and paid " upon all goods imported into or exported from Sri Lanka; the
schedule refers to a preferential rate and a general rate, and draws no
distinction between rates to be "levied" and rates to be "paid". What is
levied, and what has to be paid, are therefore one and the same.  
  
Finally, to allow such a distinction to be made would permit an unacceptable
degree of uncertainty, and even speculation, as to the rates and amounts
"payable". While in this case we are concerned with low rates (5%) of duty and
surcharge, the same principles must govern a surcharge of, say, 50% on goods
for which the rate of duty was, say, 35%. Looking at the relevant statutes and
the published subordinate legislation, how would a prospective importer know
what he would be required to pay upon importation? And even if he knew of the
"administrative arrangement", how would he know whether or not the Director-
General of Customs would choose to exercise his discretion? If that officer
did not, it would be 35% duty and 50% surcharge; and if he did, it would be 5%
duty and no surcharge. From the point of view of the state, section 10A
empowers the Minister to make an order for the purpose of increasing revenue,
"in the interest of the national economy". He can do so only with the approval
of the Cabinet, and his order has also to be placed before Parliament. On the
day the order A4 came into force, if the question had been asked, "Does it
apply to yeast?", the answer would have been in the negative - because the
rate of duty on yeast was then 35%. If the subsequent waiver of duty by the
respondent made the order applicable to yeast, that was a result which the
order did not contemplate. In the absence of express provision authorising
such a result, I do not think that the applicability of the order A4 - despite
Cabinet and Parliamentary approval - can be made to depend on the decision
(not sanctioned by any statutory provision) of the Director-General of customs
to grant or to refuse a waiver.  
  
I therefore agree that in each case the judgment of the Court of Appeal be set
aside, and that Mandamus do issue to the respondent directing him to accept
and pass bills of entry correctly framed by the appellants under section 47 of
the Customs Ordinance in respect of goods imported by the appellants without
requiring them first to frame and pass additional bills of entry, and/or to
pay a surcharge of 5%, in respect of the aforesaid consignments of yeast
imported

**261**

by them (in July and August, 1990, and in June and December, 1990,
respectively). In each case, the respondent will pay the appellants a sum of
Rs. 20,000 as costs in both courts.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. - I agree.  
**  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
**  
When SC (Appeal) No. 108/96 was taken up for hearing the counsel for
petitioners and respondent in SC (Appeal) No. 109/96 informed us that the
subject matter in both the cases are similar and that they have no objection
to both matters being taken up for hearing together. Accordingly both appeals
were so heard.  
  
The 1st and 2nd petitioners are husband and wife and carry on business in
partnership dealing with the import of foodstuffs and raw materials for the
hotel and bakery trade under the name, style and firm of S. P. Shahul Hameed
and Brothers. They are importers of yeast, which, for the purpose of customs
duty, was classified as natural yeast (active or inactive) in the customs
tariff. The general rate of duty payable for natural yeast was 35% per kg
(At). In or about March or April, 1988, a waiver of duty between 5% and 35%
per kg. on yeast was granted by the Director of Policy Planning and Revenue of
the Ministry of Finance and Planning. According to the petitioners, all the
importers of yeast, claimed this concession and submitted their entries to the
office of the Director, Fiscal Policy and Revenue setting out the rate of duty
at 35%, whereupon, the Director, Fiscal Policy and Revenue in a letter
addressed to the respondent, authorised the waiver of 30% of the duty payable.
The customs authorities accordingly noted the waiver of 30% in the Bill of
Entry and duly collected the balance 5% duty on yeast (A2).  
  
Thereafter by letter dated 25.05.1988, the Director, Fiscal Policy and Revenue
of the Ministry of Finance and Planning authorised the Principal Collector of
Customs himself to grant a partial waiver of duty between 5% and 35% per kg of
yeast until further notice (A3).  
  
By order made under section 10A of the Customs Ordinance and published in the
Government Gazette Extraordinary No. 549/13 of 15.03.1989, the Minister of
Finance, imposed a levy on all imported goods (other than certain exempted
goods) on which the rate of

**262**

customs duty was 5%, a surcharge of percentage points on such rates of duty
with effect from midnight of 15116th March, 1989, for a period of 2 years
(A4). Thereupon, the Director-General of Customs issued to all officers of the
Customs a circular dated 15.03.1989 incorporating the above order (A5).  
  
According to the petitioners after the publication of the order marked A4 and
the issue of the circular marked A5:  
  
(a) natural yeast (active or inactive) was again classified in Government
Gazette No. 564/7 of 30.06.1989 under Tariff item No. 21.02 with the same
general import rate of duty of 35% per kg (A6).  
  
(b) upon framing the Bills of Entry at 35% by the petitioners and other
importers of yeast such being the rate of duty leviable according to the said
classification, the customs recovered from the petitioners and others 5% duty
being the balance duty payable after granting a waiver and the petitioners and
other importers of natural yeast were not required to pay the surcharge of 5%.  
  
However, from February, 1991, one month prior to the expiration of the period
of validity of the order marked A4, the customs authorities demanded that a
surcharge of 5% should be paid on future imports of natural yeast. The
petitioners submitted that notwithstanding the protests made by the
petitioners and other importers of yeast, they were required to pay the
surcharge of 5% on the yeast imported by them.  
  
In October, 1991, the Deputy Collector of Customs, by his letter dated
21.10.1991 stating that the petitioners had failed to pay the additional 5%
surcharge on Red Star Dry Yeast imported on 16.08.1990, called upon the
petitioners to pass an additional entry for the surcharge (the duty short
paid) within two weeks of that date (A7). Also by his letter dated 21.10.1991,
the Deputy Collector of Customs, stating that the petitioners have failed to
pay the surcharge 5% duty on Red Star Bakery Dry Yeast imported on 30.07.1990
called upon the petitioners to pass an additional entry for the duty short
paid within two weeks of that date (A7A). Thereafter by his letters dated
31.10.1991 (A7B), 12.11.1991 (A7C), 14.01.1992 (A7D), 21.02.1992 (A7E) and
21.02.1992 (A7F), the Deputy Collector of Customs required the petitioners to
pay the said surcharge of 5% duty on yeast imported and cleared from

**263**

the customs warehouses by the petitioners before February, 1991 and stated
that in the event of failure to pay the same, action would be taken under the
provisions of the Customs Ordinance.  
  
The petitioners, by their letter dated 30.11.1991 to the respondent protested
against the said additional surcharge (A8).  
  
Consequent to this letter, the respondent sent a letter dated 05.02.1992 (A9)
addressed to the petitioners stating that the Treasury has directed that the
surcharge of 5% would apply when the duty rate is reduced to 5% through a
partial waiver of duty. The petitioners submit that this letter is in general
terms and no specific mention is made to the case of import of yeast. The
petitioners and other importers of the yeast on which the surcharge of 5% was
demanded sent several letters to the authorities concerned and the respondent
thereupon forwarded two letters, both dated 30.04.1992, to the petitioners
stating that they were final reminders and that if an additional entry is not
passed for duty short period within 2 weeks from date of those letters, he
would be compelled to refuse to pass goods consigned to the petitioners (A10
and A11) under section 18 (3) of the Customs Ordinance. The petitioners
invoked the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal by way of an application for a
Writ of Mandamus on the respondent to accept and pass Bills of Entry correctly
framed by the petitioners without stipulating and enforcing that additional
entries should be framed and passed and the surcharge on goods referred to in
the letters marked Al 0 and All should be paid. The Court of Appeal refused to
grant the Writ of Mandamus on the respondents. The petitioners appealed to the
Supreme Court. Special leave to appeal was allowed on the following question:  
  
Did the surcharge imposed by A4 apply to importation of yeast in respect of
which the customs rate of duty was 35%?  
  
Learned President's Counsel, for the petitioners submitted that the surcharge
is applicable only to goods carrying, an import duty of 5%. His position was
that the surcharge of 5% is not applicable to the commodity of yeast as the
correct duty applicable according to BTM No. 21.06(1) (Al) is 35% with a
partial and special waiver of 30% which the respondent was authorized to grant
(A3). The petitioners were granted this special waiver for each consignment
when papers for each such consignment were submitted to the respondent, for
that

**264**

purpose. The position of learned President's Counsel for the petitioners was
that the duty levied for yeast is 35% and not 5% in so far as the
interpretation of the circular A5 was concerned. He further submitted that
even after the publication of the order A4 and the issue of the circular A5,
natural yeast (active or inactive) was again classified in Government Gazette
No. 564/7 of 30.06.1989 (A6) under tariff item No. 21.02 with the same general
import rate duty of 35% per kg.  
  
The position of learned Deputy Solicitor-General for respondent was that Part
II of the Customs Ordinance, deals with 'levying of customs duties' and
section 10 of the Customs Ordinance contemplates the manner in which duties
shall be levied and paid upon all goods, wares and merchandise imported into
and exported from Sri Lanka. Learned DSG submitted that section 10A empowered
the Minister to levy a surcharge on the customs duty payable on such imported
goods as are specified in such order and since A4 was made under section 10A,
the Minister imposed a surcharge of 5% on goods where the customs duty payable
is 5 percentum.  
  
Learned DSG further submitted that the Customs Ordinance deals with 2 types of
situations. One is categorised as duties 'leviable on goods' and other is the
duty actually payable on 'imported goods'. His position is that the order made
under the Revenue Protection Act, No. 19 of 1962 (A6) levies customs duty at
the rate of 35% on natural yeast and therefore the duty leviable on yeast is
35%; the duty actually payable on the said yeast after the waiver is 5%
thereby attracting a surcharge of 5% as evidenced by A4.  
  
I am unable to agree with the submission of the learned Deputy Solicitor-
General for the following reasons. The Government notification dated
15.03.1989 (A4) stated as follows:

The Customs Ordinance (Chapter 235) Order under section 10A

By virtue of the powers vested in me under section 10A of the Customs
Ordinance (Chapter 235) as amended by Act No. 83 of 1988, 1, Dingiri Banda
Wijetunga, Minister of Finance, with the approval of the Cabinet of Ministers,
do by this order levy on all imported goods other than -

**265**

i. Unground Rock Phosphate - Tariff Heading No. 25 10A (i)  
  
ii. Ground Rock Phosphate - Tariff Heading No. 25 10B (i)  
  
iii. Cement Clinker - Tariff Heading No. 25 23 (ii)  
  
iv. Pharmaceuticals Products - Tariff Heading Nos. 30.01, 30.02 and 30.03  
  
v. Fertilisers - Tariff Heading Nos. 31.01, 31.02 31.03, 31.04 and 31.05  
  
on which the rate of customs duty is five percentum, a surcharge of five
percentage points on such rates of duty with effect from midnight of 15th/16th
March, 1989, for a period of two years.  
  
According to the Government notification dated 30.06.1989 (A6), the import
duty on yeast (active or inactive) at the relevant time was 35%.  
  
The Director, Fiscal Policy and Revenue of the Ministry of Finance and
Planning by his letter dated 25.05.1988 (A3) had authorised the Principal
Collector of Customs to grant a partial waiver of duty on import of yeast
until further orders. Based on this authorisation, a 30% duty waiver was
granted and 5% duty was collected from the petitioners on the importation of
yeast.  
  
The circular on 'levy of a surcharge on import duty' dated 15th March, 1989
(A5) states that the Minister of Finance has issued an order to levy a
surcharge of five percentage points on all imported goods having an import
duty rate of five percent other than the following:  
  
a. unground rock phosphate;  
  
b. ground rock phosphate;  
  
c. cement clinker;  
  
d. pharmaceutical products;  
  
e. fertilisers.  
  
According to the Sri Lanka Customs Import Tariff Guide, 1987 (Al)
(subsequently amended as HS Code 21.02 (10) (A2), the rate of duty for natural
yeasts (active or inactive) was 35%. By the letter dated 25.05.1988 (A3), the
Director/Fiscal Policy and Revenue authorised the Principal Collect& of
Customs to grant a partial waiver of duty to yeast importers until further
orders were given. This special waiver

**266**

was granted to the importers for each consignment when papers for each such
consignment were submitted to the respondent for that purpose. The Gazette
notification (A4) and the issue of the circular (A5) on levy of a surcharge on
import duty were dated 15.03.1989. Three months later on 30.06.1989, natural
yeast (active or inactive) was again classified in Government Gazette No.
564/7 (A6) under tariff item No. 21.02 with the same general rate of duty of
35% per kg.  
  
On a plain reading, it is clear that the intention of the Gazette notification
A4 and the circular A5 was to levy a surcharge of '5 percentage points on all
imported goods having an import duty rate of five percent'. In construing the
meaning of ambiguous words or words which are capable of giving two
interpretations, N. S. Bindra on Interpretation of Statutes, made the
following observation:  
  
An authority to impose a tax or to levy fees cannot be deduced from provisions
of doubtful import and when the words used in a statute are capable of two
interpretations, one in favour of the taxing authority and the other in favour
of the subject, the latter interpretation must hold the field. The reason for
these rules is that it is opposed to the well-recognised conceptions governing
a progressive state of society to permit statutory bodies to assume by
inference from the words of an enactment the authority to impose taxes or to
levy fees, as nothing is more liable to abuse than such supposed authority
(Mewa Ram v. Mattra Municipal Board, LR 1939 All 770 : AIR 1939 All 466, 471
(FB) (taxes on stands for motor cars, lorries and hackney carriages); Central
India, etc., Co., Ltd. v. Municipal Committee, Wardha AIR 1958 SC 341, 344).
Hence, if there be any doubt or if there be two alternative interpretations
possible, taxing statute must be interpreted in favour of the assessee and
against the revenue authority (p. 792).  
  
Accordingly in my view, the 5% surcharge that should be levied on imported
goods under the notification A4 will not be applicable to the importation of
yeast.  
  
For the aforesaid reasons, in each case the judgment of the Court of Appeal is
set aside and I direct that Mandamus be issued to the respondent directing him
to accept and pass Bills of Entry correctly framed by the petitioners under
section 47 of the Customs Ordinance

**267**

in respect of goods imported by the petitioner, without stipulating and
enforcing that additional entries should first be framed and passed and the
surcharge on goods referred to in A13 and A14 should be paid.  
  
I make order that in each case the respondent will pay the appellants a sum of
Rs. 20,000 as costs in both Courts.  
  
_**Appeals allowed.  
**_  
_**Order made directing Writs of Mandamus to issue.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/49.html_  

