##  Saheed v. Gaiyoom and Others - SLR - 144, Vol 1 of 1998 [1997] LKSC 49;
(1998) 1 Sri LR 144 (17 December 1997)

**144**

**SAHEED  
v.  
GAIYOOM AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
GUNAWARDANA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 92/95  
CA. APPEAL NO. 464/89 (F)  
D.C. COLOMBO NO. 5137/ZL  
OCTOBER 6TH. 1997  
NOVEMBER 11TH, 1997.  
  
_Vindicatory action - 'Affected property' under REPIA Regulations 1983
-Termination of tenancy over affected property - Title of the owner to have
the tenant ejected.  
_  
The plaintiffs sued the defendant for a declaration of title to the premises
in suit and ejectment of the defendant on the ground that the tenancy of the
defendant terminated by the destruction of the building let to him during the
civil riots in 1983. The District Judge held that the building had been
completely destroyed. In terms of Regulation 9 (1) of the Rehabilitation of
Affected Property or Business or Industries Regulations, 1983, such premises,
being "affected property" within the ambit of Regulation 19, vested absolutely
in the State. However, in order to enable the plaintiffs to assist rebuilding
the premises, REPIA, the body empowered to rehabilitate affected properties,
acting under Regulation 9 (2) declared the premises to be not "an affected
property". Issue 7 at the trial was whether that declaration restored the
premises to the plaintiffs.

**145**

**Held:**  
  
Upon the destruction of the premises, the contract of tenancy came to an end,
irrespective of the question whether it also came to an end by reason of the
premises being automatically vested in the State as an 'affected property".
The declaration of REPIA under Regulation 9 (2) of the Regulations restored
the premises to the plaintiffs.  
  
**Cases referred to:**  
  
1\. _Giffry v. De Silva_ (1965) 69 NLR 281.  
2\. _P. T. Samuel v. M. M. Mohideen_ (1968) 71 NLR 451.  
3\. _Muzamil v. REPIA_ (1985) S.C. 2 Sri LR at 310, 322.  
4\. _Rupasinghe v. Madatti_ (1994) 2 Sri LR 161.  
5\. _Muzamil v. REPIA_ (1984) CA. 2 Sri LR 197.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_A. K. Premadasa, PC with Ikram Mohamed and C. E. de Silva_ for the defendant-
appellant.  
  
_R. K. W. Goonesekera with Luxman de Alwis and M. H. A. Raheem_ for the
plaintiffs-respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

December 17, 1997.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.  
**  
The plaintiffs (the respondents in the matter before me, hereinafter referred
to as the 'respondents') instituted action in the District Court of Colombo on
the 17th of December, 1985, for a declaration of title in their favour to
premises No. 44, 2nd Cross Street, Colombo 11 (hereinafter referred to as the
'premises'), and for ejectment of the defendant (the appellant in the matter
before me, hereinafter referred to as the 'appellant'), on the ground that the
tenancy of the appellant had been terminated by the complete destruction of
the building by fire during the Civil riots in July, 1983.

**146**

The appellant, inter alia, pleaded that he was the lawful tenant of the
premises, which were governed by the provisions of the Rent Act, and that,
although the premises had been slightly damaged, he had continued to do
business on the premises uninterruptedly, having effected repairs in 1983.  
  
However, the respondents maintained that the premises were com­pletely
destroyed and that, in the circumstances, the tenancy came to an end by
operation of law. According to the respondents, and this is borne out by the
document PI, on 22nd August 1993, they made a declaration to the
Rehabilitation of Property and Industries Authority (REPIA) - a body
established by the President by Regu­lations made under section 5 of the
Public Security Ordinance and published in Gazette Extraordinary No. 257/3 of
August 07, 1983 -stating that the premises had been "completely burnt down"
and that they proposed to rebuild the property out of their own resources. In
response to that declaration, REPIA by its letter dated 1 st September 1983
(P2) declared the premises to be not "an affected property" for the purposes
of the Regulations, but required the plaintiffs to "obtain the prior approval
of the Urban Development Authority and/or the Local Authority before
commencing any development activities or repairs".  
  
The learned District Judge granted the reliefs prayed for by the respondents.
With regard to the issue (Issue 7) whether the declaration by REPIA on 1st
September 1983 had restored the premises to the respondents, the learned
District Judge found that the declaration did have that effect. In the Court
of Appeal, the appellant submitted that the learned District Judge had erred
in arriving at the conclusion that the premises were so destroyed that they
were not available for the appellant to carry on his business at that place.
In support of that submission, it was pointed out that the learned District
Judge had placed reliance on the inspection report of an officer of the Urban
Development Authority who had visited the premises and had stated that the
premises were completely destroyed. However, the report refers to Nos. 44 and
46, Main Street, Colombo, whereas the premises in suit was No. 44, 2nd Cross
Street, Colombo. The Court of Appeal, considered this a matter of "grave
importance", but did not accept the submission that "the learned District
Judge's rejection of the [appellant's] evidence was coloured by [the
officer's] evidence. "The Court of Appeal found other evidence in the record
to sustain the

**147**

finding of the learned District Judge that the premises had been completely
destroyed, and accordingly dismissed the appeal.  
  
Special leave to appeal from that decision was granted by the Supreme Court on
the following questions:  
  
Was issue No. 7 raised in the course of the proceedings of 18.6.86 answered
correctly by the learned District Judge?  
  
Are the regulations, namely the Rehabilitation of Affected Property or
Business or Industries Regulations published in the Government Gazette
Extraordinary 257/3 dated 7.7.1983 and the provisions of Act No. 29 of 1987
relevant to these proceedings?  
  
Mr. Premadasa submitted that issue No. 7 was not correctly answered by the
learned District Judge. His position was as follows: When premises were
"affected property" within the meaning of the regulations, then, in terms of
regulation 9 (1) such premises vested automatically in the State. The premises
in suit were "affected prop­erty", since regulation 19 defines "affected
property" to mean "any immovable property damaged or destroyed on or after
July 24, 1983, by riot or civil commotion and includes any immovable property
used for the purposes of an affected business or industry". The premises in
suit were damaged and they, therefore, vested in the State. If they were to be
divested, then, in terms of regulation 14 (1), REPIA should have divested the
premises by Order published in the Gazette. There is no such Order. The letter
issued by REPIA on 1 September 1983 could not have restored the premises to
the plaintiffs, and therefore the answer to issue 7, should have been in the
negative; consequently, the learned District Judge's finding that the
declaration by REPIA on 1 September 1983 had the effect of restoring the
premises to the respondents was erroneous. And so, the respondents' claim for
a declaration of title should have been rejected.  
  
Mr. Goonesekere submitted that issue No. 7 was correctly answered by the
learned District Judge. His position was as follows: REPIA was established to
assist in the rehabilitation of damaged property. Admittedly, in order to
facilitate their task, 'affected property' was vested in the State by law.
Entrusting the task of rehabilitation to REPIA however, did not mean that the
Government or REPIA took

**148**

on the entire responsibility for doing everything necessary to achieve that
end: where, as in this case, a person who was the owner of premises but for
the vesting of such premises by operation of law, indicated that he or she was
willing to undertake the task of rebuilding affected premises, REPIA welcomed
the offer, and permitted rebuilding, subject to the person conforming with the
requirements of the Urban Development Authority or the Local Authority.
However, since affected premises vest in the State, in order to enable a
person authorized to assist REPIA to perform its functions, the property could
be restored to such person either by a divesting order made under regulation
14; or by a declaration, as was made in this case, by REPIA that the premises
were not "affected premises". The effect of such a declaration would be that
although by operation of law the premises might otherwise have been regarded
as vested in the State, yet in view of the declaration by REPIA, the premises
in effect are restored to the former owner. That was the finding of the
learned District Judge with regard to "issue 7" and it is a finding that was
correct.  
  
Mr. Premadasa referred to section 11 (1) (a) of the Act of 1987 which states:
"Where any affected property consists of premises to which the Rent Act No. 7
of 1972 . . . applies, then any person who was the tenant of such premises on
the day immediately preceding the relevant date shall be entitled to enter
upon and occupy such premises and it shall be the duty of the landlord to
permit such tenant to enter upon and occupy such premises". I am inclined to
agree with Mr. Premadasa's submission that section 11 (1) (a) was intended to
ensure that landlords would not be in a position to eject tenants merely
because there was any damage whatsoever, however slight, to the premises.
However, in my view, the protection afforded by section 11 (1) (a) assumes
that the tenancy agreement was in force: Where premises are destroyed without
the fault of the landlord or the tenant, as in the matter before us, the
contract comes to an end, whether the tenancy was one that fell within the
operation of the Rent Act or otherwise: Giffry v. De Silva (1) total
destruction is unnecessary; for the test is whether the premises are so
damaged that they cannot be used for the purposes for which they were leased:
P. 7". Samuel v. M. M. Mohideen (2). Although the appellant said that the
premises were only 'slightly damaged' and that the premises continued to be
used, yet the learned District Judge and the Court of Appeal found that the
premises had been rendered uninhabitable by the damage they had suffered.
There are no reasons why I should not accept

**149**

the correctness of the conclusion reached by the two Courts. In the
circumstances, in my view, the contract came to an end, irrespective of the
question whether it also came to an end by reason of the premises being
automatically vested in the State as an 'affected property'.  
  
There is no dispute that the premises were damaged: the dispute is with regard
to the extent of the damage. In the circumstances, the premises were, in my
view, "affected property" within the meaning of regulation 19. As such, the
premises automatically vested in the State, for regulation 9 (1) states:
"Every affected property . . . shall . . . vest absolutely in the State free
from all encumbrances". Consequently, the tenancy agreement would have been
automatically extinguished: Muzamil v. REPIA (3) at 322.  
  
The tenancy agreement could have been revived by a divesting order published
in the Gazette, for regulation 14 (2) (b) states that where there is such an
order it "shall have the effect of reviving any arrangement, agreement or
other notarially executed instrument in and over that property . . .
subsisting on the date on which such property . . . vested in the State".
However, there is no divesting order in the matter before me. The tenancy was
at an end and, since the appellant, nevertheless, insisted on remaining on the
premises, steps were taken in the District Court to eject him from the
premises. In my view, the appellant had no business to be on the premises
after his tenancy agreement had come to an end, and so, order was, in my view,
rightly made by the District Court that the appellant should be ejected from
the premises. Indeed, section 10 (1) of the Rehabilitation of Persons,
Properties and Industries Authority Act, No. 29 of 1987 states: "Any person
who without lawful authority, proof whereof shall be on such person, enters or
occupies any affected property . . . shall be guilty of an offence . . ."  
  
The steps to eject the appellant were taken by the persons who had, prior to
the vesting of the premises in the State under and in terms of regulation 9
(1), been the owners of the premises. It was not suggested in the District
Court, the Court of Appeal, or in the Supreme Court, that owners whose
properties were vested in REPIA, under and in terms of regulation 9 (1), were
stripped of their ownership for all time, unconditionally: And, in my view,
rightly so; for the vesting process was manifestly for the limited purpose of
facilitating

**150**

rehabilitation: Surely, it was not an underhand device for the State acquiring
properties? Why should owners of property be penalized because their
properties had been damaged by criminals? Civilized societies attempt, within
their means, to compensate victims of crime, and assist to rehabilitate them -
and this was manifestly the intention of the Executive, as expressed in the
Emergency (Rehabilitation of Affected Property, Business or Industries)
Regulations No. 1 of 1983, and that of the legislature, as expressed in the
Rehabilitation of Persons, Properties and Industries Authority Act, No. 29 of
1987. There was no intention to confiscate the properties of owners whose
properties were destroyed and to place them in the tragic position of the
well-known character who fell off a tree, only to be gored by an unsympathetic
bull. They remained owners, except that for facilitating the process of
rehabilitation, ownership was vested in the State.  
  
In my view, in carrying out its function of repairing and restoring affected
properties, REPIA is not restricted in any way to using only the resources
made available by the Government for the achievement of its objectives. Indeed
regulation 6 (b) contemplates financial assistance for the work of REPIA from
"any source whatever, whether in or outside Sri Lanka". When a person who
owned a property, but was by law divested of it, because it was "affected
property", under­takes to assist REPIA by rebuilding the damaged property, I
am of the view that REPIA may make reasonable decisions with regard to such an
offer and enter into reasonable arrangements, and adopt reasonable procedures
it deems appropriate for giving effect to its decisions. In my view, it may,
as it did in this case, issue a declaration under regulation 9 (2) that the
premises are not "affected premises", not because the premises were in fact
undamaged, but deemed to be undamaged, in order to restore the property to the
de facto owner to enable the de facto owner to rebuild a damaged building.
Such a declaration does not result in divesting: Rupasinghe v. Madatti (4) at
170. However, REPIA is not, in my view, obliged to first divest the property
and make the person who offers to rebuild the premises, technically the de
jure owner, before it does these things: cf. Muzamil v. REPIA {supra), at p.
324 affirming the decision of the Court of Appeal Muzamil v. REPIA (5).  
  
REPIA knew what the position was, namely, that legally the premises were
"affected property". The respondents' position was set out in the declaration
to REPIA made by Mohamed Salihu Ahamed Abdul Gaiyoom

**151**

(the 1st plaintiff-respondent) on the 22nd of August 1983: "13\. Do you
propose to repair the affected property out of your own resources?: Yes. The
property has been completely burnt down and we have to rebuild the property at
our own expense." Having accepted the offer of the de facto owners to rebuild
the premises, REPIA restored the premises to the respondents so as to enable
them to assist it in the discharge of its functions. And, in my view, the
learned District Judge was quite right in answering issue 7 by holding that
the declaration of REPIA on the 1st of September, 1983, restored the destroyed
premises to the [respondents]. With regard to the second ground on which leave
to appeal was granted, although learned counsel for the appellant did say:
"Forget the regulations", as we have seen, both the Emergency (Rehabilitation
of Affected Property, Business or Industries) Regulations No. 1 of 1983 and
the Rehabilitation of Persons, Properties and Industries Authority Act, No. 29
of 1987 are "relevant to these proceedings".  
  
For the reasons stated in my judgment, I dismiss the appeal with costs.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J. - I agree.  
  
GUNAWARDANA, J. - I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/49.html_  

