##  All Ceylon Commercial & Industrial Workers Union v. Ceylon Petroleum
Corporation and Another - SLR - 295, Vol 2 of 1995 [1995] LKSC 49; (1995) 2
Sri LR 295 (24 August 1995)

**295**

**ALL CEYLON COMMERCIAL & INDUSTRIAL WORKERS UNION  
v.  
CEYLON PETROLEUM CORPORATION AND ANOTHER **

SUPREME COURT  
G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J,

KULATUNGA, J.,

RAMANATHAN, J.,  
S.C. 21/95  
C.A. 702/93

_     Revisionary jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to review its Judgments -
Inherent Powers of the Superior Courts \- Decisions made per incuriam _

An application in Revision was made to revise a Judgment entered by the
Supreme Court. it was contended that, the finding is likely to lead to a
situation in which the Wages Board Ordinance would be violated in the future;
as the Judgment does not indicate that in the determination of the matter
court has taken into consideration very material facts.

**Held:**

(1) Supreme Court has inherent powers to correct its errors which are
demonstrably and manifestly wrong and where it is necessary in the interest of
justice;

(2) Decisions made per incuriam can be corrected. However a decision per
incuriam is one given when a case or a statute has not been brought to the
attention of Court and it has given the decision in ignorance or forgetfulness
of the existence of that case or statute.

The inherent powers to correct its errors are adjuncts to existing
jurisdiction to remedy injustice - they cannot be made the source of New
jurisdiction to revise a judgment rendered by that court.

(3) The application made in the instant case does not fall within the
principles set out, in the relevant decisions of this court and other
jurisdictions.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Hettiarachchi v. Seneviratne S.C. Appln. 127/94 - SCM 04.07.94._  
_2\. Senarath v. Chandraratne, Commissioner of Excise S.C. Appln. 231/95 - SCM
24.8.95_  
_3\. Ganeshananthan v Goonewardene 1984 1 Sri LR 321_  
_4\. Alasupillai v. Yapetipillai - 39 CLW 107_  
_5\. Huddersfield Police Authority v Watson - 1947 2 AER 193_

_296_

**APPLICATION** in Revision.

_Batty Weerakoon with Ramani Muttetuwegama for Petitioner._

_Cur. adv. vult._

August 29, 1995\.  
**KULATUNGA, J.**

This is an application seeking to revise the judgment of this Court delivered
on 27.07.95 whereby the appeal of the appellant was allowed. The present
application which has been filed on 14.08.95 is itself described as an
"application in revision". Paragraph 6 of the petition states, by way of
submission, that the judgment of this Court does not indicate that in the
determination of the matter the Court has taken into consideration the very
material fact namely, that the Special Security Force/Unit (established at
Sapugaskanda) had been constituted of persons who had already been in the
employ of the appellant as persons in the Security Service Trade and that in
that capacity these persons were admittedly governed by the Wages Board
Regulations for the Security Service Trade. The petition proceeds to contend
that in the circumstances, the finding in this case is likely to lead to a
situation in which the Wages Board Ordinance would be flagrantly violated in
the future.

Next, paragraph 11 of the petition states, by way of further submission, that
the failure to take into consideration the matters adverted to is a matter of
error which should be rectified by this Court, acting in revision. Paragraph
12 emphasizes the relief sought and states that the matters urged in the
petition warrant the review of the judgment of this Court acting in revision.

We are satisfied that this Court has not been vested with revisionary
jurisdiction to review its judgments, in the manner urged in the petition
presented to this Court. The extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court to
correct its own errors and revise or modify its judgments has been set out in
numerous reported judgments and referred to in two recent judgments namely,
Hettiarachchi v. Seneviratne (1) and _Senarath v. Chandraratne, Commissioner
of Excise_ (2).

297

_In Ganeshananthan v. Goonewardena_ (3) (a Bench of 7 Judges) it was held that
as a Superior Court of Record, the Supreme Court has inherent powers to
correct its errors which are demonstrably and manifestly wrong and where it is
necessary in the interest of justice. Decisions made per incuriam can be
corrected. These powers are adjuncts to existing jurisdiction to remedy
injustice - they cannot be made the source of new jurisdictions to revise a
judgment rendered by that Court.

In regard to the submission made by the learned Counsel at the hearing before
us that we should consider whether our judgment was per incuriam, it has been
held in _Alasupillai v. Yapetipillai_ (4), per Bassnayake J. following the
case of Huddersfield Police Authority v. Watson (5) "A decision per incuriam
is one given when a case or a statute has not been brought to the attention of
the Court and it has given the decision in ignorance or forgetfulness of the
existence of that case or statute".

We are of the view that the application made in the instant case does not fall
within the principles set out in the relevant decisions of this Court and
other jurisdictions. In the circumstances, we are unable to accede to the
prayer for review of the judgment of this Court, by way of revision. We
accordingly refuse notice and reject the application.

For completeness sake we would add that the point raised by learned Counsel
has received the attention of this Court; hence there is no injustice which
calls for the exercise of the inherent powers of this court.

**G. P S. DE SILVA C.J. -** I agree.  
  
**RAMANATHAN J. -** I agree.  
  
_Application refused._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/49.html_  

