##  Haji Omar v. Wickremasinghe and Another - SLR - 82, Vol 1 of 1999 [1999]
LKSC 49; (1999) 1 Sri LR 82 (16 February 1999)

**82**

**HAJI OMAR  
v.  
WICKREMASINGHE AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
PERERA, J. AND  
WEERASEKERA, J.  
S.C. H.C. NO. 28/98  
FEBRUARY 8, 1999

_An action for invalidation of a sale of property by the Seylan Bank - Interim
injunction - Basis and scope of interim relief - an interim injunction to
prevent the issue of the certificate of sale was refused by the trial court -
whereupon the plaintiff filed a petition seeking an order on the purchaser and
the Bank inter alia, restraining them from demolishing or alienating the
property \- The court issued an interim injunction to that effect._

**Held:**

The basis of injunctive relief should be the plaint and the prayers contained
therein; it is not designed to prevent other activities of the parties to an
action.

**APPEAL** from the order of the Commercial High Court.

_K. N. Choksy PC,_ with _Harsha Soza, G. G. Arulapragasam_ and _Ms. K.
wijetunga_ for the appellant.  
  
_Ikram Mohamed PC,_ with _T. Wijeyagunawardana_ and _Ms. A. T. Shyama
Fernando_ for plaintiff-petitioner-respondent.  
  
_Romesh de Silva PC,_ with _Palitha Kumarasinghe_ for 1st defendant-
respondent-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult.  
  
_**83**

February 16, 1999.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.**

The plaintiff-petitioner-respondent Mr. Wickremasighe, was a debtor of the 1st
defendant-respondent-respondent, the Seylan Bank Ltd. Pursuant to a resolution
passed by the Board of Directors of the Bank on the 20th of September, 1996,
steps were taken by the Bank in terms of the Recovery of Loans by Banks
(Special Provisions) Act, No. 4 of 1990, to sell by auction the debtor's
property mortgaged as security for the payment of the debt. At the auction
sale on the 7th of November, 1997, the appellant, Mr. Mohammed Haji Omar, the
successful bidder, paid a deposit of 10% of the purchase price and
subsequently, on the 8th of December, 1997, paid the balance due. On the 12th
of December, 1997, the Bank issued a Certificate of Sale in terms of section
15 of the Bank (Special provisions) Act. The Purchaser took possession of the
land.

On the 17th of December, 1997, Mr. Wickremasinghe instituted an action in the
District Court of Colombo praying that the resolution of the Bank and the sale
be invalidated and for the prevention of the issue of the certificate of sale
and for an injunction restraining the issue of the certificate of sale. The
injunction prayed for was not granted. The certificate has been granted before
the institution of the action and in my view an application for an injunction
restraining the issue of the certificate was misconceived. On the 19th of
March, 1998, Mr. Wickremasinghe, by way of petition and affidavit, sought an
order to restrain the purchaser and the Bank and their servants and agents
from demolishing or damaging the buildings on the land and from alienating,
mortgaging, leasing or otherwise encumbering the property. The learned
District Judge took no action on the petition and affidavit but instead,
having regard to the value of the subject-matter of the action, directed that
it be tried by the Commercial High Court. On the 3rd of April, 1998, the
learned Judge of the High Court issued an enjoining order operative till the
17th of April, 1998, as prayed for in the petition dated the 19th of March,
1988. After inquiry, the learned Judge of the High Court in his order dated
the 2nd of June,

84

1998 issued the interim injunction prayed for in the petition dated the 19th
of March,1998.

I am of the view that the learned Judge of the High Court erred in making his
order, for the basis of injunctive relief was not, as it should have been, the
plaint dated the 17th of December, 1997 and the prayers contained therein.
Interim relief is designed to prevent the frustration of the court's order if
the reliefs prayed for in the plaint are eventually granted; it is not
designed to prevent other activities of the parties to an action. Moreover;
the petition dated the 19th of March, 1998 in response to which the injunction
was granted had not been formally accepted by either the District Court or by
the High Court and could not have been the legal basis for any remedy or
relief.

The appeal is therefore allowed with costs and the order of the learned Judge
of the High Court dated the 2nd of June is set aside.

**PERERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WEERASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/49.html_  

