##  Seylan Bank Ltd. v. Samdo Macky Sp - SLR - 96, Vol 1 of 2008 [2008] LKSC
5; (2008) 1 Sri LR 96 (26 June 2008)

**96**

**SEYLAN BANK LTD  
V  
SAMDO MACKY SPORTSWEAR (PVT.) LTD. AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SUVA, C. J.  
TILAKAWARDANE, J.  
SOMAWANSA, J.  
SC 44/2007  
SC 45/2007  
SC (HC| LA 25/07  
SC (HC) LA 26/07  
HC {CIVIL} 239/04(1), 207/02(1)  
NOVEMBER 19, 2007  
MARCH 4, 2008

_Stamp Duty Act, No. 43 of 1982 -section 51, section 69, section 71 -
Regulations : - Gazette 224/3 of 20.12.1982 and 948/15 of 6.11.1996 -
Guarantee Bond-Is it liable for the payment of stamp duty - What is a bond? -
Deed? - Document? -Is the guarantee bond a bond attracting stamp duty?_

**97**

**Held**

(1) Stamp Duty Act imposes a pecuniar/ burden on persons, and it has to be
subject to strict consideration. There is no room for intention, construction
or equity about duties or taxation.

(2) A bond in the context of the Stamp Duty Act is an instrument where the
primary or principal covenant is to create an obligation to pay money,
defeasible on the happening of the specified event and binds his property, as
security for the debt.

In case of the guarantee bond, the term providing for guarantor liability is
not the principal convenant between the parties, but merely a condition
subsequent to a primary obligation.

The obligation to pay is in the form of a penalty that comes into operation,
if and only if the proposed obligation of the principal debtor is violated.
The arrangement contemplated by the guarantee bond is merely a transaction
where the obligation to pay money arises as a consequence of the commission of
breach of the principal debtor obligation.

(3) Inherent in the monetary obligation of a bond' contemplated by section 7
(a) is that such obligation is for an ascertained sum of money. Such a
requirement is a necessity given that the value of the stamp duty to be paid
depends upon the slab of the amount or value secured. Given the inherently
indeterminate nature of the guarantors respective payment obligations under
the guarantee bond, such an instrument cannot be construed as the type of bond
referred to in section 7(a). As such the guarantee bond does not warrant stamp
duty as a bond under the Stamp Duty Regulations.

Per Shirani Tilakawardane, J.

"The Ceylease case is distinguishable as the finance company in that case had
entered into a bond with the security of the property - a vehicle - that was
mortgaged and which could be considered movable property. No such arrangements
exist in the current action that suggests their inclusion under section 7 of
the regulations.

**APPEAL** from an order of the Commercial High Court, with leave being
granted.

**Cases referred to:**

(1) Tisserav Tissera-2 NLR 238.

(2) Ceylease Financial Services Ltd. v Sriyalatha and another- 2006 - 2 Sri LR
169 (distinguished)

Romesh de Siiva PC with Maitri Wickremasinghe, Shanaka de Silva, Shanaka
Cooray for plaintiff-petitioner-appellant.

**98**

Chandima Liyanapatabendi with Rangika Piiapitiya for defendant-respondent-
respondent.

Sanjay Rajaratnam DSG as amicus.

June 26, 2008

**SHIRANI TILAKAWARDANE, J.**

Leave to Appeal from the Order of the Commercial High Court of Colombo
(defined herein) dated 26th July 2007 with respect to Case No. CHC (Civil)
239/04 (1) and Case No. CHC (Civil) 207/02 (1) (hereinafter referred to as the
"Commercial High Court Order") was granted by the Supreme Court by its order
dated 15th December 2007 and it was agreed by the parties that the only issue
to be determined was whether stamp duty was payable on the Guarantee Bond
dated 25th of August 1999.

In response to the default of two loans it had granted, the plaintiff-
petitioner-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the "appellant") instituted
two actions in the High Court of the Western Province exercising jurisdiction
pursuant to the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No.10 of
1996 (hereinafter referred to as the "Commercial High Court of Colombo"). The
appellant's first action was dated 13th September 2002 and was for the
recovery of a sum of Rs.662,500/= together with interest thereon at 30% per
annum and Business Turnover Tax on Rs.2,500,000/= from 1st July 2002 till date
of decree. Appellant's second action was dated 26th October 2004 and was for
the recovery of a sum of $781,842/- together with interest thereon at 9% till
26th October 2004 and at 21% per annum thereafter till payment in full. Such
actions were initiated because neither the "Principal Debtors" nor their
respective guarantors (also defendant-respondents-respondents to the
respective actions and herein referred to collectively as the "guarantors"),
paid the outstanding loan amounts when demand for repayment was made on them
consequent to the Principle Debtors' defaults on the loans.

The matter to be determined in this case arises out of an appeal against the
Commercial High Court Order, which held, in response to an attempt by the
appellant to submit a Guarantee Bond into evidence in each action, that (i)
the Guarantee Bond (marked 'P9' in the

**99**

appellant's affidavits for the actions, dated 18th January 2006 and 24th May
2006, respectively, and hereinafter referred to as "Document P9") was not
sufficiently stamped and (ii) the petitioner would be afforded a final
opportunity of stamping the said documents by 20th September 2007.

Being aggrieved by the said Commercial High Court Order, the appellant has
this filed application for a determination whether Document P9 is liable to be
stamped under section 7 of the regulations made by the Minister in terms of
section 69 of the Stamp Duty Act, No.43 of 1982 (referred to herein as the
"Stamp Duty Regulations"). These Stamp Duty Regulations were published in
Gazette Extraordinary No.224/3 of 20th December 1982 as amended by the Order
published by the Minister of Finance under the said section in Gazette No.
948/15 dated 6th November 1996.

It is common ground that the only matter to be decided is whether the Document
P9 is liable for the payment of stamp duty under section 7 of the amended
regulations which, by subsection 7(a), mandates the payment of stamp duty on
"a Bond, pledge, Bill of Sale or Mortgage for any definite and certain sum of
money affecting any property other than any aircraft registered under the Air
Navigation Act, (Chapter 365) ..." As it is clearly not within the meaning of
"pledge", "bill of sale" or "mortgage" the only matter to be admittedly
determined is whether it is a "Bond".

The lengthy arguments and submissions of the learned President's Counsel for
the appellant averring that (1) there is no comma between the word "Bond" and
"pledge" in the regulations, and (2) therefore, that the reference to a "Bond
pledge" is what was intended, is without basis as the Sinhalese edition of the
Gazette clearly evidences a separation between the words through the use of a
comma, though the written submission incorrectly states that a comma between
the two operative words is missing from both the English and Sinhalese version
of the Gazette.

Section 2 of the Stamp Duty Act No 43 of 1982 provides that stamp duty shall
be charged on every instrument which is executed, drawn or presented in Sri
Lanka, to be prescribed at a certain rate depending upon the class or category
in which an instrument falls, unless such instrument is (i) exempted from
stamp duty by virtue of its inclusion

**100**

within section 5 of the Stamp Duty Act, as amended, or (ii) not contemplated
by the Stamp Act altogether.

The type of "document" for which stamps must be affixed is defined in section
71 of the aforementioned Act and includes a Bond, and the question arises as
to whether a Guarantee Bond is also included as a "Bond" which has been
referred to by the aforesaid regulations prescribed by the Minister of Finance
and referred to in subsection 7(a).

Needless to say, as the Stamp Duty Act imposes a pecuniary burden on persons,
it has be subject to strict construction. There is no room for intention,
construction or equity about duites or taxations. The explicit language of the
Statute must be the yard stick which guides the imposition of the stamp duty,
and assumption and presumptions must be strictly excluded. If the imposition
of duty upon a particular instrument is not expressly contemplated by the
simple reading of the language of the statute then the benefit of the
exclusion must necessarily be afforded.

The simple meaning of subsection 7(a), finds clarity in both the English
version referred to above, and more so in the Sinhalese edition of the Gazette
which reads as follows:

Clearly the "Bond" contemplatd by the language above has to be one where the
money obtained is secured by, and correlated to property. Document P9 did not,
at the time of the creation of the principal covenant, seek to secure or refer
to any property in other words it was not a bond that bound property for the
payment of the money.

A bond conditioned for the payment of money such as referred to in section 6
of the Prescription Ordinance 22 of 1871, has also been defined in Tissera v
7/sseraC) where the meaning of a Bond was defined as "a document executed in
triplicate before a Notary and two witnesses, whereby the person executing it
acknowledges to have borrowed and received from the person in whose favor it
is

**101**

executed a certain sum of money and promises to pay the latter the same with
interest on demand and binds all his property generally as security for the
debt..."

"Bond" is defined in Stroud's Judicial Dictionary of Words and Phrases as "an
obligation by deed." (3rd edition, Volume III, at p. 318)

In the case of a deed it is essential that a deed must be necessarily be under
seal. A "deed" is defined in Wharton's Law Lexicon to mean "a formal document
on paper or parchment duly signed, sealed and delivered" (14th Edition, at p.
308). Adocument which is not under seal cannot be a deed.

A bond in the context of the Stamp Duty Act is an instrument where the primary
or principal covenant is to create an obligation to pay money, defeasible on
the happening of the specified event and binds his property, as security for
the debt. In the case of Document P9, the terms providing for guarantor
liability are not the principal covenant between the parties, but merely a
"condition subsequent" to a primary obligation. In other words, the obligation
to pay is in the form of a penalty that comes into operation if, and only if,
the principal obligation of the Principal Debtor is violated. Had the
Principal Debtors complied with the principal convenant to pay, then the
Guarantors' obligations to pay would never have arisen. The arrangement
contemplated by Document P9 is merely a transaction where the obligation to
pay money arises as a consequence of the commission of breach of the Principal
Debtor's obligation.

Inherent in the monetary obligation of a "bond" contemplated by subsection
7(a) is that such obligation is for an ascertained sum of money. Such a
requirement is a necessity, given that the value of the stamp duty to be paid
depends upon the slab of the amount or value secured. However, when Document
P9 was executed, no fixed amount of money could be said to have been agreed as
payable, as the Guarantors' respective obligations to pay in connection with
the loans, in fact, only arose upon the breach of the respective principal
convenants to pay, with the owed amounts necessarily determined only after the
respective breaches actually occurred. Given the inherently indeterminate
nature of the

**102**

Guarantors' respective payment obligations under Document P9, such instrument
cannot be construed as the type of Bond referred to in subsection 7(a).

In construing the meaning of the word Bond in the context of subsection 7(a),
the accrual of the obligation to pay money should precede the performance or
non-performance of the specified act of payment. This is an essential
distinction as even though the performance or non-performance of the specified
act is incumbent upon the obligor, the obligation to pay does not precede the
performance or non performance of the Act. Document P9 in this context is just
an agreement to pay and cannot be considered as a bond as envisaged in terms
of subsection 7(a) referred to above. Document P9 is merely an agreement to
pay with consequences for default, with no attestation and no obligation by
Deed. As such, Document P9 does not warrant stamp duty as a Bond under the
Stamp Duty Regulations.

The Learned High Court Judge arrived at his determination, it appears, solely
on the finding that he was bound by the decision in the case of Ceylease
Financial Services Limited v Sriyalatha and another^2) (hereinafter referred
to as the "Ceylease Case"). In that case Justice Bandaranaike considered
section 7 of the Stamp Duty Regulations in the context of a document entitled
Guarantee and Indemnity and executed in connection with a lease agreement, and
held the document to be one contemplated by section 7. The aforementioned case
was used as legal authority by the Learned Judge of the Commercial High Court,
in order to substantiate the fact that Document P9 would also come within
section 7 of the regulations of the Stamp duty Act, as amended.

However, the decision in the Ceylease Case is inappliable to, and therefore
not determinative of, the present matter at hand as the facts of the Ceylease
Case are clearly distinguishable in a very material and relevant manner from
the facts of the present actions before this Court . The Ceylease Case is
distinguishable as the finance company in that case had entered into a bond
with the security of the property - more particularly, a vehicle - that was
mortgaged and which could be considered movable properly. No such arrangements
exist in the current actions that suggest their

**103**

inclusion within section 7 of the Stamp Duty Regulations.

Accordingly this Court sets aside the said Commercial High Court Order dated
26th July 2007 appeal is allowed no costs.

**S. N. SILVA, C. J.** -I agree.

**SOMAWANSA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2008/5.html_  

