##  Farook v. Raymond and Others - SLR - 217, Vol 1 of 1996 [1996] LKSC 5;
(1996) 1 Sri LR 217 (2 August 1996)

**217**

**FAROOK  
****v** **.  
RAYMOND AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
G. P S. DE SILVA C.J.,  
AMERASINGHE J. AND  
RAMANATHAN J.  
S. C. APPLICATION No. 156/95.  
20 JUNE, 1996.

_Fundamental Rights ‑ Constitution, Article 13 (1) & (2) ‑ Has the Court
jurisdiction to entertain a petition alleging violation of fundamental rights
arising from the order of a judicial officer? Can Magistrate order detention
under the Customs Ordinance? Customs Ordinance, sections 126, 127
‑Confiscation of passport ‑ Arrest and detention other than as authorized by
law._

Five matters arose for consideration:

(1) Were the 1st and 2nd respondents ‑ Police Officers ‑ acting in accordance
with procedure prescribed by taw?

(2) Was the detention of the petitioner, after he was produced before the
Magistrate, "upon and in terms of the order of such judge made in accordance
with procedure established by law?"

(3) If the petitioner was held in custody upon and in terms of the order of a
judge that was not made in accordance with procedure established by law, is
there a violation of any fundamental right recognized and declared by the
Constitution?

(4) If there was a violation, what may the Court legitimately do?

(5) What is the appropriate order to be made?

The 2nd Respondent stopped a motor vehicle at a road block and suspecting that
the goods in the car were stolen or smuggled took the driver of the car and
its two passengers to the Minuwangoda Police Station. When it transpired that
the goods belonged to the petitioner, the 1st respondent requested him to
report at the Police Station and when he did, treated him roughly, put him in
the cell and after two hours directed Inspector Pathirana to record his
statement. When the petitioner tried to explain matters to the

**218**

1st Respondent he abused him. The 1st Respondent also took into his custody
the Petitioner's passport. After the Petitioner's statement was recorded he
was put back into the cell. The 1st Respondent's allegation against the
Petitioner was that an offence against the Customs Ordinance had been
committed.

The 2nd Respondent produced the Petitioner and the two passengers of the
vehicle who were Petitioner's employees and the driver of the vehicle which
had been hired before the Magistrate of Minuwangoda at his residence alleging
that the Petitioner and his employees had committed an offence under the
Customs Ordinance and requesting that the Petitioner and his two employees be
detained at the Minuwangoda Police Station pending further investigations. The
driver of the vehicle was released on bail, but the petitioner and his two
employees who were the passengers in the vehicle, were ordered by the
Magistrate to be detained at the Minuwangoda Police Station.

They were released on 17 April and the goods were ordered to be handed to the
District Secretary.

**Held:**

1\. The actions of the Police can be referable only to section 126(1) of the
Customs Ordinance. The subsequent steps to be taken are prescribed in section
127. Imprisoning the Petitioner and confiscating his passport, and bringing
the Petitioner before a Magistrate and requesting the Magistrate to order the
further detention of the Petitioner in police custody, were things the 1st
Respondent was neither required nor authorized by law to do. And by not
producing the petitioner 'with all convenient despatch' before the nearest
Director‑General of Customs or other Customs officer, he failed to act
according to procedure established by law viz. section 127 of the Customs
Ordinance. The 1st Respondent acted in constravention of the petitioner's
fundamental right guaranteed by Article 13(1) of the Constitution­ of freedom
from arrest except according to procedure established by law.

2\. The learned Magistrate had in his order of detention, stated that he is
acting under the provisions of the Customs Ordinance and section 124 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure Act. The provisions of the Customs Ordinance do not
authorize a Magistrate to order the detention of suspects in police custody.

Section 124 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act require the Magistrate to
assist an investigation by making appropriate orders etc. but the provisions
do not enable the Magistrate to make an order of detention.

**219**

The detention of the Petitioner after he was produced before the Magistrate
was not "upon and in terms of the order of such judge made in accordance with
procedure established by law".

**Quaere** **: _per_ Amerasinghe J:**

The order of the Magistrate appears immediately below the second page (the
first page is missing) of a report filed by the 1st Respondent in which the
1st  Respondent requests the detention of the Petitioner and his two employees
for four days at the Minuwangoda Police Station. Where is the first page? How
authentic is the record submitted by the Magistrate?"

**3. _Per_ Amerasinghe J:**

"The object of Article 13(2) of the Constitution is to afford a person who has
been deprived of his personal liberty by executive action, to have the benefit
of placing his case before a neutral person ‑ a judge ‑ so that a judicial
mind may be applied to the circumstances and an impartial determination made
in accordance with the applicable law. The provision is designed to eliminate
arbitrariness in depriving a person of his liberty, and this extends to the
exclusion of arbitrariness on the part of a judge who orders that a person
brought before him be further held in custody, detained or deprived of
personal liberty. If in depriving a person of his liberty a judge does not act
according to procedure established by law, there is a contravention of the
guarantee enshrined in Article 13(2) of the Constitution".

4\. The Judiciary is one of the three limbs of the state and a judicial
officer may be involved in the violation of a fundamental right in the
exercise of his duties. The present case is an example. However judicial power
can only be exercised if the Court, tribunal or institution has jurisdiction.
Article 126 (1) however limits the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to an
infringement or imminent infringement by executive or administrative action.

**Semble** **: _Per_ Amerasinghe J:**

"..... Where a judge has abdicated his authority, for example by complying
with or acceding to or acquiesing in proposals made by police officers and
acting in concert with them, consenting rather than assenting, he would not,
in my opinion, be acting judicially: it may be the act of an officer appointed
to perform judicial duties and functions, but it would not be a judicial act.

5\. Although it has been contended that the learned Magistrate had acted
'mechanically' and complied with the proposal made by the police, there is
insufficient evidence adduced to arrive at such a conclusion.

**220**

6\. The 1st Respondent has violated the fundamental rights of the Petitioner
guaranteed by Article 13(1) of the Constitution.

**Cases referred to:**

1 ** _._** _Naresh_ _Mirajkar v. Maharashtra _A1 R 1967 SC 1

2. _Budan_ _Choudhary v. Bihar AIR _1955 SC 191.

3. _Snowden v. Hughes_ (1944) 321 US1.

4. _Perera_ _v. University Grants Commission_ 1 FRD 103.

5. _velmurugu_ _v. A. G._ 1 FRD 180, 223.

6. _Goonewardena_ _v. Perera_ 2 FRD 246.

7. _Saman_ _v. Leeladasa_ [1989] 1 Sri LR 1.

8. _Huddart_ _, Parker Pty, Ltd. v. Moorehead_ (1908 ‑ 1909) 8 CLR 330, 357.

9. _Shell Co. of Australia Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation_ (1931) AC 275, 295.

10 _. Labour Relations Board of Saskatchewan v. John East Iron Works Ltd
**.**_ (1949) AC 134, 149.

11 _._ _Kumarasinghe v. A. G. S. C. Application ****_ 52/82 S.C. Minutes of 06
September, 1982.

12  _Siriwardena_ _v. Liyanage _(1983) 2 FRD 310, 342 ‑ 343.

13\. _Dayananda_ _v. Weerasinghe _(1983) 2 FRD 292, 297.

14\. _Leo Fernando v. A. G._ [1985] 2 Sri LR 341.

15\. _Jayasinghe_ _v. Mahendran and Others _[1987] 1 Sri LR 206.

16\. _Dharmatilleke_ _v. Abeynaike S. C. Application_ 156/86 S. C. Minutes of
15 February, 1988.

17\. _Cannosa_ _Investments Ltd. v. Ernest Perera and Others ****_ (1991) 2
Sri L. R. 214.

18\. _Siriyawathie_ _v. Pasupathi and Jansz S. C. Application ****_ 112/86 S.
C. Minutes of 28 April, 1987.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_R. K. W. Goonesekera_ with _N. M. Saheed ****_ for Petitioner.

_Kolitha_ ** __**_Dharmawardena_ _D.S.G._ for Respondents.

_Cur. **** adv. vult._

August 02, 1996.

**AMERASINGHE, J.**

The Petitioner complains that his rights guaranteed by Article 13 of the
Constitution were violated. The submissions of learned counsel on the 20th of
June, 1996 were principally concerned with the circum-

**221**

stances in which the Petitioner was taken into custody by the Respond­ents and
detained by them on the order of a Magistrate. The Court took time to consider
the submissions of learned counsel, and during that time it was felt that the
assistance of learned counsel should be sought on the question whether the
Court had jurisdiction to entertain a petition alleging the violation of
fundamental rights arising from the order of a judicial officer. The Court
therefore called for written submissions on that matter to be filed by the
25th of July 1996.The Court acknowledges its indebted­ness to learned counsel
for their assistance.

There are five matters for consideration: (1) Were the first and second
Respondents ‑ the police officers ‑ acting in accordance with procedure
prescribed by law? (2) Was the detention of the Petitioner, after he was
produced before the Magistrate, "upon and in terms of the order of such judge
made in accordance with procedure established by law"?: (3) If the Petitioner
was held in custody upon and in terms of the order of a judge that was not
made in accordance with procedure es­tablished by law, is there a violation of
any fundamental right recog­nized and declared by the Constitution? : (4) If
there was a violation, what may the Court legitimately do?: (5) What is the
appropriate order to be made?

_Were the first and second Respondents ‑the police officers ‑ act­ing in
accordance with procedure prescribed by law?_

According to an entry made by the 2nd Respondent in the Grave Crimes record of
the Minuwangoda Police Station, dated 12th April **** 1995, upon information
received that smuggled goods were being trans­ported in a Morris Minor bearing
registration No. 23 Sri 2044, a road block was set up, and the vehicle was
stopped by the 2nd Respondent **** and a police constable. 75 dozen ties,
ladies' handbags, children's shoes, school bags and baby napkins were found in
two bags. Under the front seats were two boxes, each containing 1000
wristwatch 'cir­cuits'. One of the passengers had a Customs receipt issued to
M. T. A. Farook dated 11.4.1995 (1 R2) which stated that a sum of Rs.
21571/-had been paid as duty, made up as follows:

"Duty 9725  
TT.10080  
D. L. 7771 "

**222**

The receipt did not contain any other information.

The 2nd Respondent in his affidavit states that since he found it difficult to
decipher the contents of the receipt ‑ he states that it was "illegible" ‑ and
since the receipt "did not bear an immediate explana­tion to the goods in the
car", and since the receipt was in the name of a person who was not in the
car, he "entertained a reasonable suspi­cion that the goods found in the
vehicle were either stolen or smuggled goods", and therefore arrested the
driver and the two passengers and took them to the Minuwangoda police station
for further investigation. When it transpired that the goods belonged to
M.T.A. Farook, the Peti­tioner in these proceedings, the 1st Respondent on the
13th of April 1995 requested the Petitioner to report to the Police Station at
Minuwangoda. The Petitioner went to the police station.

In paragraph 7 (a) of his affidavit, the 1st Respondent states that "on the
material which was then available as a result of the investiga­tions, (he)
questioned the Petitioner and thereafter explained to the Petitioner that he
had committed an offence under the Customs Ordinance and arrested him" In
paragraph 7 (b) of his affidavit the 1st Respondent states that he "took
charge of the passport of the peti­tioner for the purpose of investigating
whether there was any truth in the assertion made by the Petitioner.
Thereafter the Petitioner made a statement to the police:'

What was the "assertion made by the Petitioner" before his state­ment was
recorded that made it necessary for the 1st Respondent to take over the
Petitioner's passport? The passport was not returned until the Supreme Court
on the 22nd of March 1996 ordered its return. Under what provision of law was
the petitioner deprived of his pass­port? Even if a law enforcement officer is
empowered to deprive a person of his personal liberty, he must do so strictly
in accordance with procedures prescribed by law: on the one hand if there are
provi­sions of law regulating matters that are incidental to the arrest and
detention of a person, those provisions must be strictly complied with: On the
other hand a law enforcement officer cannot arrogate to himself powers that
the law does not expressly confer on him.

In his first statement to the police (1 R4) on 13th April 1995, the

**223**

Petitioner said that he was a trader who frequently travels abroad to purchase
various goods. After one such journey to Hong Kong, he arrived at the airport
at Katunayake on the night of the 11th of April 1995\. He stated that he had
on that occasion brought 75 dozen ties, 2000 "watch machines" and various
other goods.

Mr. Dharmawardene drew our attention to the fact that when the Petitioner was
questioned on the 17th of April 1995 about the docu­ment 1R12 ‑ the Customs
Declaration form he had filled on the night of 11th April in which the items
declared were ‑

"Personal clothing  
Tie (s) 80 doz.  
Batteries 30 pkts.  
Children's wear (sic.) 10 pcs.",

‑ the Petitioner in a second statement to the police (which has been filed of
record in these proceedings) stated that he had sold the batteries on the 12th
morning and that he had purchased 2000 watch machines in Colombo which he
entrusted to his employees for delivery to a customer.

According to the 1st Respondent, the Petitioner arrived at the po­lice station
at 1.30 p.m. According to the police record (1R4) the Peti­tioner's statement
was recorded at 2.10 p.m.; and according to the 1st Respondent in paragraph 7
(c) of his affidavit and paragraph 8 of the affidavit of the 2nd  Respondent,
the Petitioner was produced before the Magistrate of Minuwangoda at 3.50 p.m.

The Petitioner's version is different. According to paragraph 14 of his
affidavit, on the 13th of April 1995 certain police officers had vis­ited his
residence in Colombo and left a message for him to report at the Minuwangoda
Police Station. He went there at about 10.30 a.m. The 1st  Respondent arrived
at the station at about **** noon and ques­tioned him as to how he came to
possess the goods **.** Before he could explain, the 1st  Respondent directed
a police officer to put him in a cell. After about two hours the 1st
Respondent called **** the Petitioner to his office and handed him over to
Inspector Pathirana to have his state­ment recorded. The Petitioner states
that when he tried to explain to

**224**

the  1st Respondent how he had brought the neck‑ties from Hong Kong and to
produce the receipt issued by Customs for the payment of duty, the 1st
Respondent abused him and directed the Sub‑Inspector to record his statement
and hand him over thereafter to the Customs authori­ties. After his statement
was recorded, the 2nd Respondent put him back in the police cell. In paragraph
17 of his affidavit the Petitioner states that the 2nd Respondent produced the
Petitioner, the two pas­sengers of the vehicle, who were his employees, and
the driver of the hired vehicle, before the Magistrate of Minuwangoda at his
residence alleging that the Petitioner and his employees had committed an
of­fence under the Customs Ordinance and requesting that the Petitioner and
his two employees be detained at the Minuwangoda Police Station pending
further investigations. The driver of the vehicle was released on bail, but
the Petitioner and his two employees who were the pas­sengers in the vehicle,
were ordered by the Magistrate to be detained at the Minuwangoda police
station.

There is no specific denial by the 1st or 2nd Respondents that the Petitioner
was placed in a cell. The statement of the Petitioner accord­ing to the police
records was made at 2.10 p.m. This was, as the Petitioner states, about two
hours after the arrival of the 1st Respond­ent. The Magistrate's order
indicates that it was made at his residence at 6 p.m. On a consideration of
the evidence, I am inclined to believe the Petitioner's narration of the
events of the 13th of April 1995.

Unlike the 2nd Respondent who states that he had supposed the goods might have
been stolen or smuggled, the 1st Respondent had no doubt in his mind: the
goods were brought into the country in con­travention of the Customs
Ordinance. In paragraph 7 (a) of his affidavit the 1st Respondent states that
he "explained to the Petitioner that he had committed an offence under the
Customs Ordinance and arrested him:'

That being the case, did the 1st Respondent who took over matters after the
2nd Respondent had made the arrest, act in accordance with procedure
established by law? Mr. Goonesekere submitted that, assum­ing the police were
acting within their lawful powers, their actions can be referable only to
section 126 (1) of the Customs Ordinance. The subse­quent steps to be taken
are prescribed in section 127. Imprisoning the

**225**

Petitioner and confiscating his passport, and bringing the petitioner before a
Magistrate and requesting the magistrate to order the further detention of the
Petitioner in police custody, were things the 1st Respondent was neither
required nor authorized by law to do. And by not producing the Petitioner'
with all convenient despatch' before the nearest Director‑General of Customs
or other Customs officer, he failed to act according to procedure established
by law, viz. section 127 of the Customs Ordinance. I find myself in agreement
with Mr. Goonesekere's submissions. I have no hesitation in declaring that the
1st Respondent acted in contravention of the Petitioner's fundamental right
guaranteed by Article 13 (1) of the Constitution of freedom from arrest except
according to procedure established by law.

**Was the detention of the petitioner after he was produced be­fore the
magistrate, "upon and in terms of the order of such judge made in accordance
with procedure established by law?**

The order of the magistrate appears immediately below the second page (the
first page is missing) of a report filed by the 1st respondent in which the
1st respondent requests the detention of the Petitioner and his two employees
for four days at the Minuwangoda police sta­tion. Where is the first page? How
authentic is the record submitted by the magistrate? (See the observations of
the Court comprising G.P.S. de Silva, C.J., Kulatunga and Ramanathan, JJ.
dated 04.08.95 and the observations of Kulatunga, J. on 23.08.95 and 24.08.95
in the record of this case). The learned magistrate acceded to the request of
the 1st respondent and ordered that the petitioner and his two employees be
kept in the custody of the police at the Minuwangoda police station. They were
released on bail on the 17th of April and the magistrate made order that the
goods be handed over to the District Secretary for further action to be taken
under the Customs Ordinance.

The learned Deputy Solicitor‑General in his further written submis­sions made
at the request of the Court states as follows:

"1\. It is respectfully submitted that the learned magistrate has in his order
of detention, stated that he is acting under the provisions of the Customs
Ordinance and section 124 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. It is
respectfully submitted that the provisions of

**226**

the Customs Ordinance do not authorize a magistrate to order the detention of
suspects in police custody. It is further submitted that even though the
provisions of section 124 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act require the
magistrate to assist an investigation by making appropriate orders etc., the
provisions do not enable the magistrate to make an order of detention.
Therefore, it is submitted that the order of detention made by the learned
magistrate is not in accordance with procedures established by law."

I find myself in agreement with the submissions of Mr. Dharmawardene and
commend his exemplary fairness.

I am of the view that the detention of the Petitioner after he was produced
before the magistrate was not "upon and in terms of the or­der of such judge
made in accordance with procedure established by law".

**If the petitioner was held in custody upon and In terms of the order of a
judge that was not made in accordance with procedure established by law, is**
**there a violation of any fundamental right recognized and declared by the
Constitution?**

Article 13 (2) provides as follows: "Every person held in custody, detained or
otherwise deprived of personal liberty shall be brought be­fore the judge of
the nearest competent court according to procedure established by law, and
shall not be further held in custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty
except upon and in terms of the order of such judge **made in accordance with
procedure established by law.** (The emphasis is mine). The object of Article
13 (2) of the Constitution is to afford a person who has been deprived of his
personal liberty by executive action, to have the benefit of placing his case
before a neu­tral person ‑ a judge ‑ so that a judicial mind may be applied to
the circumstances and an impartial determination made in accordance with the
applicable law. The provision is designed to eliminate arbitrariness in
depriving a person of his liberty, and this extends to the exclusion of
arbitrariness on the part of a judge who orders that a person brought before
him be further held in custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty. If
in depriving a person of his liberty a judge does not act ac­cording to
procedure established by law, there is a contravention of the guarantee
enshrined in Article 13 (2) of the Constitution.

227

_If there was a violation what may the Court legitimately do?_

Mr. Goonesekere in his further written submissions, referring to H. M.
Seervai, Constitutional Law of India, 3rd Ed. (1983) Vol. 1 pp. 225­236;
_Naresh_ _Mirajkar v. Maharashtra ,_(1) __ per _Das, J. in Budan Choudhry v.
Bihar _ (2) following Frankfurter, J. in _Snowden v. Hughes,_ (3)  maintained
that in India and in the United States, it had been held that, judges could be
involved in the violation of fundamental rights. The liability for violations
of fundamental rights was the liability of the State: _Perera_ _v. University
Grants Commission,_ (4) _Velmurugu v. A. ‑G.,_(5) _Goonewardene v.   Perera,
_(6) _Saman v. Leeladasa_ (7) _._ The judiciary was one of the three `limbs'
of the `State', the other two being the legislature and the execu­tive. A
transgression by a judge made the State liable.

I have no hesitation in accepting the position that the judiciary is one of
the three limbs of the State and that a judicial officer may be involved in
the violation of a fundamental right in the exercise of his duties. The case
before us is an example. However, when we consider the decisions in other
jurisdictions, it is important to consider the rel­evant Constitutional
provisions under which they have been made. Although our Constitution has many
provisions that are based on the Constitution of India, there are others that
significantly differ. Unlike the American and Indian Constitutions, the
Constitution of Sri Lanka expressly confines the justiciability of fundamental
rights. Article 17 provides that "Every person shall be entitled to apply to
the Supreme Court, as provided by Article 126, in respect of the infringement
or imminent infringement, by executive or administrative action, of a
fun­damental right to which such person is entitled under the provisions of
this Chapter". (The emphasis is mine). "This Chapter" refers to the Chapter on
Fundamental Rights. Article 126(1) provides that the Su­preme Court shall have
sole and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine any question relating to
the infringement or imminent in­fringement by executive or administrative
action of any fundamental right ..... declared and recognized by Chapter III .
. :'. (The emphasis is mine). Article 126 (2) provides that "Where any person
alleges that any such fundamental right ..... relating to such person has been
in­fringed by executive or administrative action, he may himself or by an
attorney‑at‑law on his behalf... apply to the Supreme Court...... pray­ing for
relief or redress in respect of such infringement." (The emphasis is mine).

**228**

Article 3 of the Constitution states that Sovereignty is in the Peo­ple.
Article 4 prescribes the manner in which the Sovereignty of the People shall
be exercised. Article 4 (c) states that "the judicial power of the People
shall be exercised by Parliament through courts, tribu­nals and institutions
created and established or recognized, by the Constitution..... " The exercise
of judicial power does not begin until some court, tribunal or institution
created and established or recog­nized by the Constitution which has capacity
to give a binding and authoritative decision (whether subject to appeal or
not) is called upon to take action: Cf. per Griffith, CJ. in _Huddart_ _,
Parker Pty. Ltd. v. Moorehead,_ (8) approved __ by the _Privy Council in Shell
Co. of Australia_ _Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation_ ,(9) and in
_Labour Relations_ _Board of Saskatchewan v. John East Iron_ Works Ltd.,(10).
Judicial power can only be exercised if the court, tribunal or institution has
jurisdic­tion. Jurisdiction is the authority which a court, tribunal or
institution has "to decide matters that are litigated before it or to take
cognizance of matters presented in a formal way for its decision: The limits
of this authority are imposed by the statute under which the court, tribunal
or institution is constituted, and may be extended or restricted by the like
means: Cf. Halsbury, 3rd Ed. Vol. 9 pp. 350‑351\. The Supreme Court was
created by Article 105 of the Constitution. Article 126 (1) of the
Constitution provides that the Supreme Court has sole and exclusive
jurisdiction to hear and determine any question relating to the infringe­ment
or imminent infringement of any fundamental right declared and recognized by
the Constitution, but it expressly limits the jurisdiction of the Court to an
infringement or imminent infringement by executive or administrative action.

As Mr. Dharmawardene pointed out in his further written submis­sions, the
Supreme Court has consistently taken the view that viola­tions of fundamental
rights by a judge acting judicially or by someone executing his orders, will
not attract the provisions of Article 126 of the Constitution, although the
judge's decision be erroneous or consti­tutes a wrong exercise of judicial
discretion even if such decision or wrongful exercise of discretion is based
on false or misleading mate­rial furnished to him maliciously: _Velmurugu_
_v._ _A. ‑G_.(5) _Kumarasinghe_ _v. A. ‑G_.,(11) _Siriwardene_ _v_ _Liyanage_
(12) _Dayananda v. Weerasinghe_ ,(13) _Leo Fernando v. A. ‑G_.,(14)
_Jayasinghe_ _v. Mahendran and Others_ ,(15) _Dharmatilleke_ _v. Abeynaike,_
(16) _Saman_ _v. Leeladasa,_ (7) _Cannosa Investments_ _Ltd. v. Ernest Perera
and Others._ (17)

**229**

In _Siriyawathie_ _v. Pasupathi_ _and Jansz,_ (18) __ the Court ordered the
petitioner to be produced before the magistrate for release, and it or­dered
the payment of compensation by the State. The petitioner had been ordered to
be detained _sine die_ although the magistrate was em­powered by law to detain
the petitioner for 15 days. The petitioner had been in prison for seven years.
There is no reference in the judgment to the effect of Article 126 read with
Article 17. The Court expressed the view that there had been a failure on the
part of the executive authorities to rectify the matter.

Mr. Goonesekere expressed the opinion that the decisions of the Supreme Court
"far from securing and advancing fundamental rights as required by Article 4
(d) have allowed gross violations of fundamen­tal rights to go unpunished
owing to a misreading of the doctrine of judicial immunity in the context of a
fundamental rights jurisdiction." As an 'organ of government', the judiciary
is obliged to respect, secure and advance the fundamental rights which are
declared and recog­nized by the Constitution. It does so every day. The
numerous deci­sions of this Court upholding the fundamental rights of
citizens, in­cluding this decision, demonstrates the unique and important role
played by this Court in advancing fundamental rights. However, the Court acts
in accordance with the law. Whatever the reasons may be that lead the framers
of the Constitution so to do, the Constitution limits the jurisdiction of the
Court to violations of fundamental rights by executive or administrative
action.

In the cases that have come before the Court, the infringements resulted from
acts of judges acting judicially, albeit erroneously. On the other hand if the
person making the order was not fulfilling the functions and duties proper to
an officer appointed to administer the law, viz. to form and pronounce an
independent opinion on a matter placed before him, he cannot be said to be
acting 'judicially'. If he has been deprived by the law of the power of
deciding and acting according to his own judgment, he cannot act ‘judicially':
discretion is an at­tribute, an inherent and essential characteristic, of
judicial office: where discretion is ousted by law, the duties, functions and
powers appurte­nant to judicial office are also taken away. (Cf. per de Alwis,
J. in _Joseph Perera v. The Attorney‑General._(19) __ Similarly, __ where a
judge has abdicated his authority, for example by complying with or acceding
to

**230**

or acquiescing in proposals made by police officers and acting in con­cert
with them, consenting rather than assenting, he would not, in my opinion, be
acting judicially: it may be the act of an officer appointed to perform
judicial duties and functions, but it would not be a 'judicial act'. Although
learned counsel for the petitioner did submit that the learned magistrate had
acted ‘mechanically' and complied with the proposal made by the police, there
is insufficient evidence adduced before us to arrive at such a conclusion.

However, I direct that a copy of this judgment together with the record in S.
C. Application 156/95 be submitted by the Registrar of the Supreme Court to
the Judicial Service Commission for such action as it may deem to be
appropriate.

**Order**

For the reasons set out in my judgment, I declare that the 1st  respondent
violated the fundamental rights of the Petitioner guaranteed by Article 13 (1)
of the Constitution.

The 2nd Respondent had no part in the arrest or detention of the petitioner
and I therefore hold that he is not guilty of any transgression.

The Petitioner was imprisoned from 13th April 1995 to 17th April 1995 in
violation of Article 13 (2) of the Constitution, but his depriva­tion of
personal liberty during that period was, on the evidence placed before us, the
consequence of a judicial as distinguished from an ex­ecutive or
administrative action and I therefore hold that this Court has no jurisdiction
to entertain any complaint relating to that imprisonment.

The State shall pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 7,500/‑ as costs.

**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.** ‑ I agree.

**RAMANATHAN** , **J.** ‑ I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/5.html_  

