##  Piyasena and Another v. The Peopled Bank and Others - SLR - 65, Vol 2 of
1994 [1993] LKSC 5; (1994) 2 Sri LR 65 (22 May 1993)

**  65**

  **PIYASENA AND ANOTHER**

**v.**

**THE PEOPLE'S BANK AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J.

AMERASINGHE, J. AND

GOONEWARDENA, J.

S.C. APPLICATION NO. 359/93

JULY 20TH AND 21ST , 1994.



Fundamental Rights - Criteria for selection for promotion - Need for publicity
to be given for criteria - Seniority - Marking Scheme \- Violation of the
fundamental right of equality guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution.



By means of individual letters the 1st respondent (People's Bank) invited its
officers in Grade I to apply for an unspecified number of vacancies in its
cadre of Assistant General Managers. Each applicant was asked to submit a
short presentation regarding his achievements in his present post together
with strategies he would recommend to the Bank for its further development if
promoted. Nothing else was stated about the criteria for selection. There were
32 applicants: the two petitioners, the 4th  to 11th respondents and 22
others. The Board of Directors interviewed the applicants. The 11th
respondent, himself an applicant, was the Secretary to the Board and though
interviewed was not assessed as he was functioning as Secretary. On the basis
of a Board paper he also was promoted. The marking assessment scheme was
formulated by the Interview Board under the heads of Academic qualification (5
marks), Professional qualifications in Banking (10 marks), Performance in the
Present Grade (50 marks), Performance at the Interview (25 marks), Seniority
(5 marks), Additional qualifications/Achievements (5 marks).



Held:



(1)        It is very desirable, though perhaps not imperative, that all the
criteria relevant to promotion should be publicised so that all candidates
have equal opportunities of advancing their claims; and the more complex the
scheme, the greater the need for such publicity. Where some special skill or
quality is required a fair selection process demands that it be made known in
advance. The letters sent to the candidates would naturally have led them to
believe that their presentations were important, and would be taken into
consideration; such presentations were indeed relevant, and quite appropriate,
to determine suitability for promotion to top management posts; and it is one
of the many unsatisfactory features of the selection process that no attempt
was made to assess the accuracy and quality of the achievements claimed, and
the feasibility and usefulness of the 'strategies' suggested by them.
Consequently, candidates were misled.

**  66**

             (2)        In the scheme of assessment the attitude to seniority was unsatisfactory in two respects. Seniority is an objective factor, while assessment of performance, whether in service or at an interview, is quite subjective. Giving seniority only 5 marks out of 100 amounted, in the circumstances, to ignoring seniority unlike in the past.



(3)        The Bank was undoubtedly entitled to change the basis of promotion,
and minor changes probably required no prior disclosure. However, a drastic
change, whereby the subjective factor almost completely superseded the
objective factor, required adequate disclosure. To hold otherwise would permit
a scheme of promotion to be secretly varied, from year to year, by successive
interview boards to the detriment of employee morale and performance. This was
another unsatisfactory feature of the selection process.



(4)        While the Court should not set aside a scheme of marking merely
because it entertains a different opinion as to the relative weight due (a)
for academic as against professional qualifications or (b) for qualifications
in one discipline as compared to another, here the scheme is seriously flawed
because it did not allow relevant qualifications to be considered at all.



(5)        Regarding the interview performance, time taken for each interview
namely 10 to 15 minutes is not inadequate. There is no suggestion that the
questioning displayed any bias or other flaw.



(6)        If the marks allocated for interview performance are relatively low
the lack of guidelines may not cause serious concern and review of a _bona
fide_ exercise of discretion may be well ‑ nigh impossible.



(7)        In this case selection depended mainly on the interview (which
carried 75% a of the marks), for there is nothing to suggest that past
performance (in the grade) was separately assessed, either before or after the
interviews. It was impossible to ensure that marks were allocated by each
interviewer with some degree of uniformity, and fairness, unless there had
been some indication, at least in a general way, of the factors relevant to
each criterion. This is not to say that a strict allocation of marks for each
such factor was necessary; especially at this level of management that would
unduly constrict a fruitful selection process. A proper selection need not
necessarily incorporate a marking scheme; but if the selection is to be on the
basis of marks, then the scheme must be clear, fair and uniform.



(8)        That these deficiencies could cause serious and unexplained
anomalies is clear from the marks obtained by the 9th and 10th respondents as
against the 1st petitioner. These two respondents had, only the G.C.E. 0/L (no
marks) and part Banking qualifications (5 marks) while the 1st petitioner had
a B.Com. upper second degree (5 marks) and part Banking qualifications (7
marks). That advantage of 7 marks was negatived by the assessment of past
performance.

**  67**

While for seniority and qualifications the marking was generally in multiples
of five. In the absence of proper guidelines, one cannot overlook the
possibility that the 1st petitioner was not duly assessed. The position
becomes even more unsatisfactory when we find that out of only six candidates
who were apparently assessed with greater precision, three were selected. It
becomes impossible to give the interview board the benefit of the doubt when
the statistical possibilities are considered.



(9)        The cumulative effect of all these defects is that the whole
interview and selection process was fatally flawed and infringed Article
12(1).



**Cases referred to:**



1\.         _Perera v. Ranatunga_ S.C. 121/91 ‑ S.C. Minutes of 27.05.92.

2\.         _Perera v. Monetary Board_ S.C. 246/93 ‑ S.C. Minutes of 01.11.94.



Application for relief for violation of the Fundamental Right of equality
guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution.



_R. K. W. Goonesekera_ with _R. K. S. Suresh Chandra_ for the Petitioner. __

_Asoka de Silva DSG_ with _E. Egalahewa_ S.C. for 1st , 2nd  and 3rd
Respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

 November 04 1994.

**FERNANDO, J.**



This application was heard together with S.C. Application No. 291/93 as
similar questions of law and fact were involved; judgment in that application
was delivered on 14.10.94.



By means of individual letters dated 15.3.93, the 1st Respondent Bank invited
its Officers in Grade 1 to apply for an unspecified number of vacancies in its
cadre of Assistant General Managers. Each applicant was asked to submit a
"short presentation in regard to (his) achievements (in his present post)
together with strategies (he) would recommend to the Bank for its further
development" if promoted.



Nothing else was stated about the criteria for selection. There were
thirty‑two applicants: the two Petitioners, the 4th to 11th Respondents, and
22 others. The applicants were interviewed on

**  68**



22.5.93, by the Board of Directors of the Bank (including the 2nd Respondent,
the Chairman of the Board), and the 3rd Respondent (the General Manager). The
4th to 10th Respondents were appointed immediately. The 11th Respondent is the
Secretary to the Board, and though interviewed like the others was not
assessed as he was functioning as Secretary; on the basis of a subsequent
Board paper, the Board decided on 8.7.93 to promote him too. The Petitioners
filed this application on 5.8.93, complaining that these appointments were in
violation of their fundamental right to equality under Article 12(1).



**INFRINGEMENT OF ARTICLE 12(1)**



It is admitted that the criteria for selection had not been disclosed in
advance. The Petitioners complain that even now it is not clear what those
criteria were, and how they were actually applied. It is very desirable,
though perhaps not imperative, that all the criteria relevant to promotion
should be publicised so that all candidates have equal opportunities of
advancing their claims; and the more complex the scheme, the greater the need
for such publicity ( _Perera v. Ranatunga_ (1); _Perera v. Monetary Board_
(2)). __ However, where some special skill or quality is required, a fair
selection process demands that this be made known in advance. Here the letters
sent to the candidates would naturally have led them to believe that their
presentations were important, and would be taken into consideration; such
presentations were indeed relevant, and quite appropriate, to determine
suitability for promotion to top management posts; and it is one of the many
unsatisfactory features of the selection process that no attempt was made to
assess the accuracy and quality of the "achievements" claimed, and the
feasibility and usefulness of the "strategies" suggested, by them.
Consequently, candidates were misled.



Further, Mr. Goonasekera submitted that although seniority had always been an
important, and even a predominant factor in the past, it had been given
grossly inadequate consideration on this occasion. In his affidavit, the 2nd
Respondent averred that seniority was never the sole criterion for promotion
to corporate management positions.



**  69**

_             _The marking scheme for these promotions was as follows:



                                                                                                                                             

It was the interview board which formulated a "scheme of assessment"; its
attitude to seniority is unsatisfactory in two respects. Seniority is an
entirely objective factor, while assessment of performance, whether in service
or at an interview, is quite subjective. Giving seniority only five marks out
of 100 amounted, in the circumstances, to ignoring seniority ( _Perera v.
Ranatunga_ (1)). __ The Bank was undoubtedly entitled to change the basis of
promotion, and minor changes probably required no prior disclosure. However, a
drastic change, whereby subjective factors almost completely superseded this
objective factor, required adequate disclosure. To hold otherwise would permit
a scheme of promotion to be secretly varied, from year to year, by successive
interview boards, to the

**  70**

detriment of employee morale and performance. This was another unsatisfactory
feature of the selection process.



The 2nd Respondent produced the interview schedule, prepared before the
interviews. This contained the service record and the academic and
professional qualifications of each candidate, as well as a column indicating
whether he had participated in a "Management Development Programme"; it did
not make reference to any other criteria. The Respondents' pleadings,
documents and submissions do not indicate what importance was attached to
participation in the Management Development Programme, for which no marks
appear to have been allocated. The Respondents did not produce the individual
marking sheets which members of the interview board had entered
contemporaneously during the interviews. So we do not know whether each member
followed this scheme of assessment; and if he did, how many marks he gave each
candidate in respect of each criterion. They produced only the final results
sheet (2R4), setting out the marks (presumably the average) scored by each
candidate in respect of each criterion, and a summary (2R4A) giving the
candidates and their aggregate scores in order of merit. This summary showed
that the 9th Respondent had scored 76 marks, the 4th to 8th  and 10th
Respondents had scored 75 marks, and the 1st  Petitioner 74 marks.



It transpired in S.C. Application No. 291/93 that more marks (25%) were given
for educational and professional qualifications, in the promotions to Deputy
General Manager, than the 15% given in these promotions. One would have
expected the converse: the higher one goes up the ladder, the less the
weightage for such qualifications. Further, regarding professional
qualifications, it is not easy to understand how the Banking qualifications
(Part I) were assessed at 5 marks, while relevant academic qualifications
(such as a first class degree in Law, or Economics, perhaps with Banking as a
special subject) were considered to be worth only 5 marks; and why other
relevant (and even full) professional qualifications, in relevant disciplines
such as Accountancy and Law, were excluded from consideration. That exclusion
becomes inexplicable since a first degree in quite unrelated fields, could
earn 3 to 5 marks. I

**  71**

acknowledge, unreservedly, that this Court should not set aside a scheme of
marking merely because it entertains a different opinion as to the relative
weight due (a) for academic as against professional qualifications, or (b) for
qualifications in one discipline as compared to another. But here the scheme
is seriously flawed because it did not allow relevant qualifications to be
considered at all.



I must turn now to "interview performance." According to the Petitioners, the
time taken for each interview ranged from ten to fifteen minutes, which I do
not consider inadequate. It appears that the presentations were used as the
basis of questioning at the interviews. The Petitioners have produced
summaries of some of the questions and answers. There is no suggestion that
the questioning displayed any bias or other flaw.



However the assessment of performance was flawed. Neither in the affidavits
nor in the submissions was there any clarification, even by reference to broad
guidelines, as to how the 75 marks for performance (25 for the interview, and
50 for performance in the grade) were to be allotted. Undoubtedly, assessment
of interview performance is necessarily very subjective: thus it may happen
that a candidate who is favourably assessed by one interviewer as "having good
communication skills" may be dismissed by another as "nothing more than a glib
talker." If the marks allocated for "interview performance" are relatively low
(e.g. 15% or 20% of the total), the lack of guidelines may not cause serious
concern, and review of a _bona fide_ exercise of discretion may be well‑nigh
impossible. However, in this case, selection depended mainly on the interview
(which carried 75% of the marks), for there is nothing to suggest that past
performance (in the grade) was separately assessed, either before or after the
interviews. It was impossible to ensure that marks were allocated by each
interviewer with some degree of uniformity, and fairness, unless there had
been some indication, at least in a general way, of the factors relevant to
each criterion. I must not be understood as suggesting that a strict
allocation of marks for each such factor was necessary; especially at this
level of management that would unduly constrict a fruitful selection process.
For example, one or two extraordinarily innovative strategies for development
might

**  72**



win one candidate full marks for interview performance, just as a serious
deficiency in management capabilities may lead to the conclusion that any
further promotion of another candidate would be detrimental to the
institution. I am also not of the view that a proper selection process must
necessarily incorporate a marking scheme; but if selection is to be on the
basis of marks, then the scheme must be clear, fair, and uniform.



That these deficiencies could cause serious and unexplained anomalies is clear
from the disparity in the marks obtained by the 9th and 10th Respondents as
against the 1st Petitioner. Those two Respondents had only the G.C.E. "O"
Level (no marks) and part Banking qualifications (5 marks) while the 1st
Petitioner had a B. Com upper second degree (5 marks) and part Banking
qualifications (7 marks). That advantage of 7 marks was negatived by the
assessment of "performance." The 9th  Respondent scored 45 and 20, and the
10th Respondent scored 45 and 23, for performance, while the 1st Petitioner
scored only 35 and 20. This may have been ignored, but for one curious
feature. While for seniority and qualifications the marking was fine tuned to
within one or two marks, when it came to performance, marking was generally in
multiples of five; for all candidates except the 4th and 6th Respondents and
one other candidate (in regard to performance in the grade), and all except
the 4th, 6th, and 9th Respondents, and three others (in regard to interview
performance). Had the 1st Petitioner managed to score one or two marks more
for performance, or if the successful candidates had scored one or two marks
less, the 1st Petitioner would have been selected. In the absence of proper
guidelines, one cannot overlook the possibility that the 1st Petitioner was
not duly assessed. The position becomes even more unsatisfactory when we find
that out of only six candidates who were apparently assessed with greater
precision, three were selected. It becomes impossible to give the interview
board the benefit of the doubt when the statistical possibilities are
considered. If the eight members of the interview board had individually
assessed the performance of each candidate, and thereafter the results sheet
2R4 had been prepared to reflect the average scores, it is impossible for 50
scores out of 60 to have been not merely whole numbers, but multiples of five
‑ because the



**  73**

averages would have been multiples of five, only if the aggregates had been
multiples of forty. On the other hand it is neither suggested, nor credible,
that 2R4 represented a joint assessment by all eight members.



The 11th Respondent was called for the interviews along with the others; there
was no valid reason for not assessing him by reference to the criteria applied
to the others. The fact that members of the Board knew him much better than
the other candidates was not a reason for dispensing with an assessment.



The cumulative effect of all these defects is that the whole interview and
selection process was fatally flawed, and infringed Article 12(1).



I hold that the fundamental right of the Petitioners under Article 12(1) has
been infringed by the 1st Respondent Bank. The Bank is directed to hold fresh
interviews, after calling for fresh applications if it thinks fit, on the
basis of a published scheme of promotion. Although the Petitioners have not
proved that they have suffered actual pecuniary loss, because there was no
certainty of their promotion, yet they are entitled to compensation for the
infringement of their fundamental right to equality, by reason of the
defective selection process. I therefore direct the 1st Respondent Bank to pay
each of the Petitioners a sum of Rs. 10,000 as compensation and Rs. 5,000 as
costs.



**AMERASINGHE, J.** ‑ I agree.



**GOONEWARDENA, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/5.html_  

