##  Martin v. Suduhamy - SLR - 279, Vol 2 of 1991 [1991] LKSC 5; (1991) 2 Sri
LR 279 (28 January 1991)

##  279



## MARTIN

**v.**

**SUDUHAMY**

** **

SUPREME COURT.

BANDARANAYAKE, J., FERNANDO, J. AND KULATUNGA, J.

S. C. APPEAL NO. 33/90.

S. C. (SP. L. A.) NO. 85/90.

C. A. APPEAL NO. 661/83(F).

D. C. HAMBANTOTA NO. L/542.

OCTOBER 26, 1990.



Appeal ‑ Hypothecation of security ‑ Material prejudice ‑ Discretion of court
‑ Sections 757(1) and 759(2) of the Civil Procedure Code ‑ Failure to comply
with requirements of S. 757 (1).



            The District Court gave its judgment on 18.10.83. Notice of appeal was presented to the District Court on 28.10.83 accompanied by the required security (a sum of Rs. 750/‑) in terms of S. 755 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code. A petition of appeal was subsequently filed on 16.12.83 in terms of S. 755(4). The security deposited was not hypothecated by bond as security for the costs of appeal as provided for by S. 757(1) of the Code. When objection to the hearing was taken on this ground the appellant took a postponement but took no meaningful steps to rectify the omission. Instead at the hearing he argued that he need not comply with this requirement where security is in cash. What is therefore suggested by the failure to hypothecate is that the omission to hypothecate was not a mere mistake or oversight but inten­tional.



**Held:**

**  **

If non‑compliance with the relevant provisions did cause material preju­dice
to the respondent both before and after 1977 (when the provisions relat­ing to
appeal were amended) the appeal had to be dismissed. If such non­compliance
did not cause , material prejudice, prior to 1977 there was prohibition on the
rejection of the appeal; and the Court was required to give the appellant an
opportunity of putting matters right before rejecting the appeal. After the
amendments of 1977 there is no such prohibition. Instead the Court has a
discretion either to grant relief, or to reject the appeal. Two questions thus
arise ‑Does the Court of Appeal have jurisdiction



##  280



to grant relief in respect of any mistake, omission or defect in complying
with the relevant provisions? If it has jurisdiction, do the circumstances
war­rant the exercise of its discretion to grant relief?



The continuance of litigation cannot be treated, as the Court of Appeal did,
as material prejudice because that will be true of every case. What is
contemplated is prejudice caused by or in consequence of the non­compliance.
While relief will more readily be granted if the non‑compliance is trivial, or
where an excuse or explanation is offered, relief can still be granted even in
respect of total or substantial non‑compliance and even if no excuse is
forthcoming but not where the non‑compliance is, as here, deliber­ate. The
discretion under section 759(3) is a judicial discretion. It was incumbent on
the appellant to place the necessary material before the Court and to invite
the Court to exercise that discretion. This the appellant failed to do. The
appeal should therefore have been rejected in the exercise of the discretion
vested in the Court of Appeal.



Per Kulatunge J:



Under S. 759(2) of the Civil Procedure Code "what is required to bar relief is
not any prejudice but material prejudice i.e. detriment of the kind which the
respondent cannot reasonably be called upon to suffer. If there is such
prejudice it is no argument for the appellant to contend as a matter of right
that it can be mitigated by appropriate terms such as the payment of costs".



**Cases referred to:**



1\.         _Abdul Cader v. Sittinisa_ (1951) 52 NLR 536  


2\.         _Sameen v. Abeyewickrema_ (1963) 64 NLR 553, 560, 561, 562, 563 PC  
  
3\.   _Pathinayake v. Kannangara_ (1958) 60 NLR 188  


4\.         _De Silva v. Seenathumma_ 41 NLR 241, 245, 247

  
5\.         _Dona Cecitiana v. Kamala Piyaseeli_ [1990] 1 Sri LR 226, 234  


6\.         _Wood v. Riley_ [ 1867] LR 3 CP 26, 27  


7\.         _Silva v. Goonesekera_ 31 NLR 184  


8\.         _Ramalingam v. Velupillai_ 38 NLR 255  


9\.         _Zahira Umma v. Abeysinghe_ 39 NLR 84  


6.                  _Careem v. Uvais_ ‑ 57 NLR 72   


7.                  _Noris Appuhamy v. Udaris Appu_ 58 NLR 441   


8.                  _Chelliah v. Selvanayagam_ 59 NLR 119   


9.                  _Ratnayake v. Bandara_ [1990] 1 Sri LR 156, 158, 162   


10.              _Arulanpalam v. Daisy Fernando_ [1956] 1 CALR 651   


11.              _Careem v. Amerasinghe_ 1 Sriskantha's L. Rep. 25   


12.              _Silva v. Cumaratunga_ 40 NLR 139, 140.

  

##  281





13.              _Kiri Banda v. Ukku Banda_ [1986] 2 CALR 191, 194   


14.              _Vithana v. Weerasinghe_ [1981] 1 Sri LR 52, 57



**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_P. Nanayakkara_ with _Edward Rodrigo_ and _Sarath Upul Fernando_ for
defendant ‑appellant.



_M. S. A. Hassan_ with _M.I. Waffa_ for respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._



January 28, 1991.



**BANDARANAYAKE, J.**



I have had the advantage of reading the judgments in draft of my brothers
Kulatunga, J. and Fernando, J.



The question that arises for consideration is whether an appeal presented to
the original Court but which has not been perfected by the hypothecation of
security in violation of S. 755 (2) read with S. 757 (1) can be cured by the
provisions of S. 759 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code.



The facts are as follows: The District Court gave its judg­ment on 18.10.83.
Notice of Appeal was presented to the Dis­trict Court on 28.10.83 accompanied
by the required security (a sum of Rs. 750/‑) in terms of S.755 (2) of the
Code. A peti­tion of appeal was subsequently filed on 16.12.83 in terms of S.
755 (4). The security deposited was not however hypothe­cated by bond as
security for the costs of appeal as provided for by S. 757 (1) of the Code.



##  282



The former Civil Procedure Code provided for the deposit of security and
hypothecation by bond in terms of S. 757 of that Code. The Administration of
Justice Law which replaced that earlier Code provided for the deposit of cash
in a Bank in terms of the Rules made under S. 15 thereof. There was no need
for hypothecation. However, under the present law the Civil Procedure Code ‑
Law No. 19 of 1977 ‑ there is express provision for hypothecation in terms of
s. 757 (1). Early case law has treated the necessity for hypothecation as
being peremptory, affecting the validity of an appeal. Vide ‑ _Careem v.
Uvais_ (10), _Nonis Appuhamy v. Udaris Appu_ (11) _Chelhah v. Selvanayagam_
(12). _The Privy Council in_ _Sameen v. Abey­wickrema_ (2) took a more liberal
approach to which I am attracted. In more recent times the Court of Appeal in
_Don Ceciliyana v. Kamala Piyaseeli_ (5) has held that failure to hypothecate
is fatal as it is the act of execution of the bond that provides the security
required by the Code.



In the instant case the Court of Appeal held that hypothe­cation was integral
to a valid appeal and rejected the appeal. It is True that there has been no
compliance with the requirement of hypothecation but the relief available
under S. 759 (2) is for non‑compliance with ..........  " any of the preceding
provisions of Chapter LVII "which therefore should include relief for
non‑compliance with the requirement of hypothecation con­tained in S. 757 (1),
provided the Court forms the opinion that the respondent will not be
materially prejudiced if relief is granted. This means the Court can grant
relief but need not. The opinion of the Court could be either 



(i)         that it will prejudice the respondent if relief is granted, or,  


(ii)        that it will not.



The Court can form an opinion only upon a consideration of all circumstances
relevant to the appellant's failure to



##  283



comply with the requirement for hypothecation. I am in agreement with the
views expressed by Fernando, J on this matter.



Thus on the question as to why the appellant failed to comply with the need
for hypothecation we have the fact that when the objection to the hearing of
the appeal was taken on this ground the appellant took a postponement but took
no meaningful step thereafter to rectify the omission. The appel­lant merely
argues before us that he need not comply with the requirement. His conduct and
his failure to offer an explana­tion suggest that his failure to hypothecate
was not by a mere mistake or oversight but probably intentional. Such conduct
in my view shoud be regarded as materially prejudicial to the respondent and
not a trivial inconvenience. The appeal should therefore be rejected. The
appeal is dismissed with costs.



**FERNANDO, J.**



I have had the advantage of reading the judgment, in draft, of my brother
Kulatunga, and while I am in agreement with his conclusion that this appeal
should be dismissed. I wish to set out my reasons briefly.



The Civil Procedure Code requires that a "notice of appeal shall be
accompanied by...............security for the respondent's costs of appeal
**in such amount and nature** as is prescribed in the rules made under section
15 of the Administration of Jus­tice Law, No. 44 of 1973" (section 755(2)
(a)), and that "the security to be required from a party appellant shall be by
bond [with sureties]............., mortgage of immovable property, or deposit
and hypothecation by bond of a sum of money suffi­cient to cover the cost of
the appeal and to no greater amount" (section 757 (1)). When these two
sections and the rules are considered together, there is no ambiguity or
incon­sistency: where cash is offered as security, the rules prescribe the
amount (Rs. 750/‑), and section 757(1) requires that this sum be deposited and
hypothecated by bond. Section 755



##  284



(2)(a) does not make the rules applicable in their entirety, but only that
part of the rules which relates to the nature and amount (in this instance
cash in a sum of Rs. 750/‑). Neither section 755(2)(a) nor the rules make any
provision as to the manner and form in which this sum is to be "secured" to
meet the successful respondent's costs of appeal. It is section 757(1), which
specifies the manner (i.e. deposit) and the form (i.e. hypothecation by bond).
I therefore agree with my brother Kulatunga that the Appellant's first
contention ‑ that hypoth­ecation is not required ‑ fails; the fact that this
contention was throughout placed in the forefront of the Appellant's case
strongly suggests that the failure to comply with section 757(1) was
deliberate.



What then are the consequences of the Appellant's failure to comply with the
requirements of section 757(1)? The law prior to 1960 was strict. Section
756(2) then provided that where the appellant "has failed to give the security
and to make the deposit.......... the petition of appeal shall be held to have
abated". The power granted by section 756(3), to give relief in respect "of

any mistake, omission or defect..........in complying with the provisions of
this section" (i.e. section 756 only) was narrowly construed. Our law reports
of the 1950's are full of instances where non‑compliance in respect of
security and other matters resulted in the rejection of appeals. However,
there were judi­cial pleas for legislative relaxation. Thus in _Abdul Cader v.
Sittinisa_ , (1) only Rs. 20/‑ (instead of Rs. 25/‑) had been dep­osited as
fees for typewritten copies; although the appeal was declared to have abated,
the Court acted in revision and granted relief to the appellant. Gratiaen, J.,
observed 



"until the present rule is relaxed I see no reason why the revisionary powers
of this Court should not be exercised in appropriate cases".



Pulle, J., considered it 



"unfortunate that whereas the Legislature has made express provision in
section 756(3)  to relieve an



##  285



appellant from mistakes, omissions or defects in comply­ing with section
756(1) there is no corresponding rule to enable the Court to grant relief in
respect of mistakes or omissions in applying for typewritten copies. The
fre­quency with which objections based on non‑compliance with the rules are
taken, and the extremely harsh manner in which they operate in certain cases
are grounds which call for an urgent amendment of the rules".



The Supreme Court Appeals (Special Provisions) Act, No. 4 of 1960, provided
that, where an appeal has been presented within the prescribed time, "the
Supreme Court shall not exer­cise the powers vested in such Court by any
written law to reject or dismiss that appeal on the ground only of any error,
omission or default on the part of the appellant in complying with the
provisions of any written law............unless material prejudice has been
caused thereby to the respondent" [section 4(1)]; and in the case of an appeal
which is not rejected or dismissed "shall  direct the appellant to comply with
such directions as the Court may deem necessary for the pur­pose of
rectifying, supplying or making good any error, omission or
default.........within such time and upon such conditions as may be
specified.........." (section 4(2)). This legislative change was supplemented
by a more liberal judicial approach reflected in _Sameen v. Abeyewickrema_ ,
(2) P.C., to which no further reference is necessary in view of the full
discussion in my brother Kulatunga's judgment.



This prohibition on the rejection of appeals for mere "technicalities", not
causing material prejudice, was continued by the Administration of Justice Law
(sections 353(2) and (3)) but not in the Civil Procedure Code as reenacted in
1977. However, two changes made in 1977 are significant: the former section
756(2) was omitted, and while section 759(3) was sub­stantially a re‑enactment
of the old section 756(3), it is wider as it is applicable to non‑compliance
with the provisions of

** **

##  286



"the foregoing sections", (and not merely one section). Such re‑enactment can
be taken to be a legislative confirmation of the more liberal interpretation
adopted by the Privy Council in _Sameen v. Abeyewickrema_.



            The resulting position is that if non‑compliance with rele­vant provisions did cause material prejudice to the respondent, both before and after 1977 the appeal had to be dismissed. If such non‑compliance did _not_ cause material prejudice, prior to 1977 there was a prohibition on the rejection of the appeal; and the Court was required to give the appellant an opportun­ity of putting matters right before rejecting the appeal. Now, however, there is no such prohibition. Instead, the Court has a discretion either to grant relief, or to reject the appeal. Two questions thus arise ‑ Does the Court of Appeal have _jurisdic­tion_ to grant relief in respect of any mistake, omission or defect in complying with the relevant provisions? If it has jurisdiction, do the circumstances warrant the exercise of its _discretion_ to grant relief?



If the Court of Appeal is of opinion that the respondent has not been
materially prejudiced, by non‑compliance with relevant provisions, it has
jurisdiction to grant relief. In the present case, the Court of Appeal was
clearly in error in hold­ing that "the very continuance of litigation would
itself amount to material prejudice": if that be correct, that would be true
of every case (including _Sameen v. Abeyewickrema_ ) in which relief is sought
under section 759(3), and every applica­tion for relief would have to be
refused on that ground. Such an interpretation must be resisted, unless
compelled by clear words. What is contemplated is prejudice caused by or in
con­sequence of the non‑compliance. Since the judgment under appeal sets out
no other basis or ground for holding that material prejudice had been caused
to the Respondent, it is unecessary to consider this aspect any further. It
must, how­ever, be pointed out that the view taken by the Court of Appeal is
contrary to _Sameen v. Abeyewickrema_ , and is also inconsistent with
_Pathinayake v. Kannangara_ , (3) where a



##  287





bond was furnished by the appellant,which did not contain a clause
hypothecating the money deposited as security. The **prejudice** to the
respondent is the same, whether there is no bond, or whether there is a bond
which lacks a vital clause, namely, it gives rise to the possibility that the
sum deposited as costs might not be available to the successful respondent.
But is this prejudice "material"? In the context of prevailing costs of
litigation in the appellate Courts, I find it difficult to regard the
prejudice caused by the possible non‑availability of a sum of Rs. 750/‑ as
"material" or "substantial", in a case where the respondent has obtained
judgment in a sum of Rs. 26,000 with interest from 1978, as well as damages at
the rate of Rs. 13,000 per annum from 1978.  


It then becomes necessary to consider whether the Court of Appeal ought to
have exercised its discretion to grant relief. While relief will more readily
be granted if the non‑compliance is trivial, or where an excuse or explanation
is offered, I am in respectful agreement with Lord Chancellor in Sameen v.
Abeyewickrema that relief can be granted even in respect of total or
substantial non‑compliance, and even if no excuse is forthcoming. But while
the Appellant's non‑compliance was by no means substantial, the material
before us suggests that the Appellant deliberately did not comply with section
757(1); obtained a postponement of the hearing when the objection was taken,
but refrained from taking any steps to cure his default; and made no
application for relief to the Court of Appeal. The discretion under section
759(3) is a judicial discre­tion; it was incumbent on the Appellant to place
the necessary material before the Court and to invite the Court to exercise
that discretion. This the Appellant failed to do, and the appeal should have
been rejected in the exercise of the discretion vested in the Court of Appeal.
I therefore agree that the appeal must be dismissed with costs.



##  288



**KULATUNGA, J.:**



This is an appeal against a judgment of the Court of Appeal rejecting ah
appeal made to that Court by the defendant‑appellant from a judgment of the
District Court of Hambantota. The plaintiff respondent took a preliminary
objection that the appeal is invalid for the reason that the sum of Rs. 750/‑
deposited as security for the respondent's costs of appeal had not been
hypothecated by bond, as required by S. 755 (2)(a) read with S. 757(1) of the
Civil Procedure Code. The Court held that the failure of hypothecation is
fatal and hence cannot be cured by recourse to S. 759 (2) of the Code. The
Court was also of the opinion that (in any event) material prejudice has been
caused to the respondent by such failure and hence no relief can be granted
under 5.759 (2); in the result it upheld the preliminary objection and
rejected the appeal. This Court granted special leave to appeal from that
judgment as the case involves the interpretation of s.759 (2) of the Code in
regard to which there now appear to be conflicting decisions.



In the year 1940 a Bench of five Judges in _de Silva v. Seenathumma_ (4)
endeavoured to resolve what Soertsz J. des­cribed therein as the "deplorable"
misapprehension and uncer­tainty as to the meaning of S. 756 of the then Code.
Sub­section 3 of that section corresponds to S. 759(2) of the present Code.
However, it was only after the lapse of more than two decades thereafter that
the matter was finally decided by the Privy Council in _Sameen v.
Abeywickrema_ (2). Despite that decision, the same or similar controversy has
again arisen on the interpretation of the relevant provisions of the new Code
possibly for the reason that the Court of Appeal has not thought it necessary
in deciding cases before it to make a general survey of the previous decisions
for ascertaining the principles which may be adopted in interpreting the
provisions presently in force. I consider this an appropriate case to
undertake such survey. The facts of this case are as follows:



**289**



On 18.10.83 the District Judge gave judgment declaring the
plaintiff‑respondent to be the owner of a paddy land and for the ejectment and
damages against the defendant‑appellant who was in possession thereof in the
purported exercise of the rights of a tenant cultivator. The notice of appeal
against the said judgment was filed on 28.10.83 and was accompanied by
security for the respondent's costs of appeal in a sum of Rs. 750/‑ in terms
of S. 755 (2) (a) of the Code. The petition of appeal in terms of S. 755(3)
was filed on 16.12.83 and on the same day the District Judge ordered that the
appeal and other papers be forwarded to the Court of Appeal as required by S.
755(4).



It is common ground that the security deposited as above had not been
hypothecated by bond as required by S. 757(1) of the Code and this point was
taken as a preliminary objection to the appeal when it came up for hearing on
11.05.90. After a postponement which was applied for and obtained by the
respondent in view of the preliminary objection the matter was argued on
05.06.90 at which the appellant's Counsel submitted __



(a)        that hypothecation of security by bond under S.757(1) is not a step
necessary to lodge a valid appeal but is only a limitation placed on the right
of a respondent to demand security, which is seen by the last five words of
that sec­tion;



(b)        In any event the respondent has not been materially prejudiced by
such omission or mistake and therefore the appeal should not be rejected.



As a matter of fact, the appellant gave no explanation for the failure to
hypothecate the security by bond and the ques­tion of prejudice was not
considered by the Court in depth apart from a statement in the judgment that
the very continu­ance of litigation would itself amount to material prejudice.



In its judgment given immediately after the arguments the Court upheld the
preliminary objection and rejected the



##  290



appeal, applying a previous decision of that Court in _Dona Ceciliana v.
Kamala Piyaseeli_ (5) which, inter alia, held that the failure to hypothecate
by bond the sum deposited as secur­ity for respondent's costs of appeal is
fatal. As stated above the Court also took the view that there has been
material prej­udice to the respondent.



This appeal was argued before us on very much the same grounds as were urged
before the Court of Appeal. The learned Counsel for the appellant first
submitted that upon a proper construction of the provisions of S.755(2)(a)
read with S.757 (1) and the relevant rules, hypothecation by bond of the sum
deposited as security for the respondent's costs of appeal is no longer
required although such hypothecation was required under S.756(1) read with
S.757 of the C.P.C. which were in force until the enactment of the
Administration of Jus­tice Law No. 44 of 1973. He argues that under the old
Code, upon the receipt of the petition of appeal security for respond­ent's
costs of appeal tendered by the appellant was determined by the Court after
considering the respondent's objections, if any, and where the security
tendered is money it had to be by deposit and hypothecation by bond of a sum
sufficient to cover the cost of appeal **and to no greater amount** (S. 757).
S. 318 of the Administration of Justice Law requires a "notice of appeal"
instead of a petition of appeal and S.321 requires such notice to be
accompanied by security for the respondent's costs of appeal in such amount
and nature as is prescribed by the rules of Court unless the same is waived by
the respondent or his registered Attorney. In terms of rules made under S.15
of the A.J.L. security may be in cash or mortgage of immova­ble property or
bond with surety or sureties at the prescribed rate or value, as the case may
be. Where the security selected is cash all that was required by S.322(1) of
the A.J.L. was the deposit of the same to the credit of the case in a bank.
When the old C.P.C. was brought back by Law No. 19 of 1977, with amendments
effected by Law No. 20 of 1977, S.754(3) retained the provision for lodging an
appeal by a notice of appeal and





##  291



S.757(2)(a) retained the provisions for giving security for the respondent's
costs of appeal in such amount and nature as is prescribed in the rules made
under S.15 of the Administration of Justice Law.



On the basis of the above developments learned Counsel contends that
S.755(2)(a) read with the rules is exhaustive as regards the giving of
security for the respondent's costs of appeal; that where the security
selected is cash all that is required is the deposit of the sum to the credit
of the Court; that the requirement in S.757(1) providing for hypothecation by
bond of such sum is repugnant to S.755(2)(a); and that as indicated by the
words "and to no greater amount" in S.757(1) the said requirement has keen
introduced as a result of verba­tim reproduction of S.757 of the old Code
without consider­ing the fact that after 1973 the entire procedure of lodging
an appeal had been changed and is hence superfluous. As such, Counsel submits
that we should hold that the deposit of the sum of Rs. 750/‑ is adequate for
the validity of the appeal and hypothecation of that sum by bond is
unnecessary.



I am of the view that although the changes in the appeal procedure and the
words appearing towards the end of S.757(1) enable learned Counsel to raise
the point it would not be possible for this Court to interpret S.755(2)(a) as
being exhaustive and to disregard the provision for hypothecation in S.757(1)
on the ground that it is repugnant to S.755(2)(a) or is superfluous.
S.755(2)(a) requires the amount and nature of security to be as prescribed by
rules. Where the nature of security chosen by the appellant is cash, the
amount is pres­cribed which in this case is Rs. 750/‑. Section 322 of the
A.J.L. contained further provision in such a case for the dep­osit of the
prescribed sum of money to the credit of the Court in a bank. Under the
present Code such further provision is to be found in S.757(1) which requires
hypothecation by bond of such sum of money. This provision supplements
S.755(2)(b); the legislature has expressly provided for hypothecation and
there is no repugnancy between the two sections.



##  292





Even if there is any repugnancy, S.757(1) cannot be disre­garded for as stated
in Maxwell, Interpretation of Statutes 12th Ed. 187:



"If two sections of the same statute are repugnant, the known rule is that
the last must prevail" ( _Wood v. Riley_ ) (6).



Where there is repugnancy the Court will endeavour to construe the language of
the legislation in such a way as to avoid having to apply the rule **'leges
posteriores priores contra­rias abrogant'** on the general principle that an
author must be supposed not to have intended to contradict himself. But there
is no real contradiction between the two sections which we have to interpret
since the latter only supplements the former and hence it is unnecessary to
endeavour a reconciliation.



The last two sentences of S.757(1) might have been better drafted; but the
failure to do so would not empower this Court to strike out the provision for
hypothecation required by that section. I see no merit in the first submission
of the learned Counsel for the appellant.



The resulting position is that hypothecation of security by bond is
peremptory; and the failure of hypothecation would affect the validity of the
appeal. The question then is whether such failure is fatal to the appeal or
curable under S.759(2) of the Code. If it is curable what are the principles
applicable in that regard? Appellant's Counsel contends that if hypothecation
is a necessary step, it is a technical step. The money is already deposited
and lying to the credit of the respondent; no mate­rial prejudice has been
caused to him and the Court should have granted relief under S.759(2). The
respondent's Counsel contends that the non‑compliance is fatal to the appeal
and that in any event relief should not be granted in the absence of a
reasonable ground of excuse for such non‑compliance which it is incumbent on
the respondent to furnish in the case before us. Counsel submits that the
respondent has failed to furnish



**239   **

** **

any such ground of excuse and hence the Court should not exercise its
discretion in his favour.



_An_ examination of the relevant decisions would provide the answers to the
questions posed by me in the preceeding para­graph. The bulk of the case law
on the subject consists of the decisions of the former Supreme Court in which
S.756 of the old Code came in for interpretation. Several such decisions were
reviewed by the Privy Council in _Sameen v. Abeywick­rema_ ( supra). There are
also three recent decisions of the Court of Appeal and one decision of this
Court which I shall examine.



_Silva v. Goonesekera_ (7) (Fisher CJ ‑ Drieberg J) ‑ the peti­tion of appeal
was filed on 14.11.28 and the record remained in the Court until 27.05.29; but
the security bond had not been signed by any of the appellants and notice of
appeal had not been given to any of the respondents, as required by S.756(1).
It was held that the appellants were not entitled to relief under S.756(3)
(corresponding to S.759(2) of the present Code), as there was substantial
non‑compliance with the provisions of 5.756(1). Fisher CJ. considering
S.756(3) said (p.185) 



"In my opinion it applies to more or less trivial omissions where it may be
said that although the strict letter of the law has not been complied with the
party seeking relief has been reasonably prompt and exact in taking the
necessary steps.".



_Ramalingam v. Velupillai_ (8) (Akbar J.) ‑ objection was taken to the notice
of security for respondent's costs on the ground that the appellant had failed
to give such notice forthwith' within the meaning of S.756. The petition of
appeal was filed on 31.03.36; notice of security was given only on 03.04.36.
Held that the appellant may be given relief under S.756 (3) there being no
material prejudice to the respondent in giving such relief.



#### 294





_Zahira Umma v. Abeysinghe_ (9) (Abraham CJ; Maartensz and Soertsz J.) the
petitioner failed to give notice to the respondent that she would give
security but produced security by way of mortgage at the proper time. There
was no inquiry as to whether that security was satisfactory. She said that she
was unable at the time when she ought to have given notice of security to say
what form the security was going to take but as she had produced an adequate
security within the proper time and no material prejudice has been caused to
the respondent she ought to receive relief under S.756(3). On these facts,
Abraham CJ. was not prepared to give relief, stating that "the petitioner says
she did everything she could, but has not given any excuse for not doing what
she should". In refusing relief lie also expressed the view that in the
circumstances, the absence of material prejudice cannot be regarded as an
excuse for non‑compliance with an essential term of S.756.



Abraham CJ proceeded to specify two situations in which the Court "ought not
to give relief " for a breach of S.756.



(a)        Whether material prejudice is caused or not non­compliance is made
without an excuse;



(b)        even where rion‑compliance with an essential term is trivial
material prejudice has been caused.



In _De Silva v. Seenathumrna_ (4) a Divisional Bench of five Judges assembled
for the purpose of resolving "uncertainty" as to the meaning of S.756 of the
Code, Soertsz J. held that the Supreme Court has no power to grant relief
where there has been a failure to comply with an essential requirement of
S.756 regardless of the question of prejudice. The essential requirements of
the section are:



(a)        notice of security, unless waived, must be given forth­with, that
is to say, must be tendered or filed on the day on which the petition of
appeal is received by the Court;



**295   **

** **

(a)                a copy of the petition of appeal must be furnished at or
before the time the security is accepted and the deposit made;



The other requirements are 



(c)        security must be tendered and perfected and the deposit made within
twentv days from the date of the decree or order appealed against.



Soertsz J. took the view that the requirements at (a) and (b) are essential
and non‑compliance is not curable under S.756(3). Regarding the other
requirements, particularly at (c), he held that the omission to tender and
perfect security and to make the deposit within twenty days and other
omissions, mis­takes and defects occurring in the course of tendering
security, and in the course of perfecting the appeal generally may be condoned
under S.756(3) in proper cases i.e. if there has been "reasonable" omission,
mistake or defect and the respondent has not been materially prejudiced.



The reason for holding that S.756 (3) does not cover all failures was that
firstly, in the opinion of Soertisz J., if it is to be interpreted to cover
all failures it will have to be recast, for instance, as follows; **" in the
case of a failure to comply with or **of any mistake, omission or defect **in
complying** with". Secondly, he said that the requirements which he
characterised as essential are immediately within the appellant's power whilst
the other requirements are not within his power since they can be effectively
done only with notice to the respondent (p.247).



Having so interpreted the section, the Court proceeded to decide the
preliminary objection to the appeal namely that the notice of security had not
been served on the respondent. Notice was served through the Fiscal who failed
to serve it on the respondent as he could not be found. Had the appellant
properly advised himself he could have obtained a direction of Court under
S.356 to serve it on the respondent's proctor but



##  296





this had not been done. The Court held that there was no fail­ure to comply
with any special requirement of S.756 but that it was only an omission to take
a more effective course in comp­lying with an imperative requirement of S.756
which is curable under S.756(3).



_Careem v. Uvais_ (10) (Sansoni J.) ‑ The appeal was rejected on a preliminary
objection that the bond does not provide for hypothecation of the money
deposited in Court as security for costs of appeal, as required by 5.757. A
submis­sion that the error was due to the illness of the appellant's proctor
was not accepted in view of the fact that as the proc­tor had signed the bond
it was not open to the appellant to say that he was not able to contact his
legal adviser; the Court also held that there was prejudice to the respondent
in that the bond not having been hypothecated he has no preferential right to
the money.



_Noris Appuhamy v. Udaris Appu_ (11) (Weerasuriya and Sansoni JJ) ‑ The appeal
was rejected on a preliminary objec­tion that there has been a failure to give
notice to the respond­ent of the tender of security in terms of S.756(1). Held
that this failure is fatal unless relief can be given under S.756(3). The
Court was unable to give relief in view of the binding decision of the
Divisional Bench in _de Silva v. Seenathumma_ (supra) where it was held:



"Where there has been a total failure to comply with one of the terms of S.756
relief will not be given even if it should be apparent that no material
prejudice has been occasioned to the respondent by such failure"



_Chelliah v. Selvanayagam_ (12) (Weerasuriya & Sinna­thamby JJ) ‑ On an
objection by the respondent to security by bond hypothecating immovable
property, the Court ordered deposit of money on a date beyond the time
prescribed for that purpose by S.756. The money was deposited but the



#### 297

** **

appellant failed to hypothecate the same. Held, the failure to hypothecate the
sum of money in terms of S.757 within the extended time is a fatal
irregularity. The appeal was accord­ingly rejected.



_Pathinayake v. Kannangara_ (3) (Basnayake CJ & De Silva J) ‑Where the
appellant had furnished a bond for security for costs of appeal but failed to
include a clause therein hypothe­cating the money, the appellant was permitted
to cure the omission under S.756(3) by including a clause for that purpose on
payment of the respondent's costs. The record was sent back to the original
Court to enable the appellant to furnish a bond in the proper form.



_Sameen v. Abeywickrema_ (2) ‑ In this case the Privy Council restated the law
in different terms. The dispute which went up for its decision arose thus. On
the day the appeal was lodged (Saturday the 16th ) the appellant's proctor
telephoned the respondent's proctor's office and spoke to Mr. Cooray who said
that the member of the firm who handled the case was not available but he
would receive notice of security on behalf of the firm. However, when the
appellant's proctor went there with the notice there was no one to receive it.
On Monday the 18th the notice was taken there again when it was received
"subject to objections" and was filed in Court on the same day. The Supreme
Court upheld a preliminary objection to the appeal that the notice had not
been given "forthwith" and did not proceed to consider relief possibly in the
light of _Seenathumma's_ case which was binding.



The Privy Council held (disagreeing with the view taken in _Seenathumma's_
case that had the notice been filed in Court on the 18th for service on the
respondents through the Fiscal it should be treated as having been filed
"forthwith"; since that expression need not in every case mean the same day";
how­ever the said notice had first been served on the respondent's proctor
without a direction under 5.356 for such service and then filed in Court not
for service on the respondents through



##  298



the Fiscal but for the purpose of informing the Court that the respondent's
proctor had received it; and hence it was not in conformity with S.756.



Yet the Privy Council granted relief having regard to the "technicality" of
the objection and the fact that the respond­ent had not been materially
prejudiced. The Privy Council thought that Mr. Cooray agreeing to accept
notice may well have led the appellant's proctor to suppose that notice was to
be waived and so led him not to file the notice in Court with the appeal.



However, before granting relief, the Privy Council had to get some of the
previous decisions oat of the way by adopting a different and more liberal
interpretation of S.756(3). In doing so their Lordships said that they did not
wish to suggest that relief was not rightly refused in particular cases. The
rul­ings of the Privy Council on the legal aspects may be summa­rised as
follows:



(a)        Disagreeing with the "limitation" placed by Fisher CJ on S.756 (3)
in _Goonasekera's_ case (supra) the Lord Chancellor said (p.560) ‑



"It does not attempt to'distinguish between substantial or more or less
trivial mistakes, omissions or defects, and the sub‑section, in their
Lordships' view, applies in relation not just to some, but to all, the
provisions of S.756".



(b)        On the relevance of an excuse for non‑compliance with a requirement
of the section adverted to in _Abeysinghe's_ case (supra) the Privy Council
clarified that Abraham CJ does not appear therein to say that the powers of
the Court under s.756 were in any way restricted. The Lord Chancellor
explained that the existence of an excuse is relevant to the exercise of the
Court's discretion to grant relief and said 

** **

#### 299

** **

            "But the sub‑section itself does not provide that relief shall not be granted if there is no excuse for non­compliance and to interpret it in this way is in their Lordships' opinion, wrong" __  (p.561).



(b)               Commenting on the judgment of Soertsz J. in _Seena­thumma's_
case (supra), the Privy Council opined 



i.          the view that in the case of a total failure to comply with a term
of 5.756 relief should not be given even if no material prejudice has been
caused is not a correct reading of Abraham CJ's statement in Abeysinghe's case
(supra) ‑ (p.561).



ii.                   S.756(3) is expressed to apply in relation to any
mistake, omission or defect. ‑ (p.562).



iii.         the Supreme Court has the power to grant.relief on such terms as
it may deem just in the case of a fail­ure to comply with an essential
requirement df S.756. "The only limitation imposed by the sub­section is that
the Court has not the power to do so unless it is of the opinion that the
respondent has not been materially prejudiced". ‑ (p.562).



The Lord Chancellor concluded 



"It does not follow that relief should be given even if the respondents have
not been materially prejudiced but relief should not be lightly withheld, for
the effect of refusing relief may be to deprive a litigant of access to the
Supreme Court and, if the originial judgment is wrong, amount to a denial of
justice". (p.563).



It seems to me that the above interpretation in the context of the broad
general principles ennunciated by the Privy Council, is both correct and fair.
It acknowledges the flexibil­ity which is inherent in S.756(3) corresponding
to the present S.759(2); it does not fetter the discretion of the Court to
decide whether relief may be granted; the Court is free to make its



##  300



decision on the facts and circumstances of each case; and finally; it does not
deny the imperative charactor of the requirements of the section.



The provisions of the A.J.L. and the present Code prescrib­ing the procedure
of an appeal are much simpler than those contained in S.756 of the old Code
and on the whole less stringent. In particular the express provisions in
S.756(2) for abatement of the appeal for failure to give security and make the
deposit as required by the section has been deleted. Hence the interpretation
of S.756(3) by the Privy Council should apply to the corresponding S.759(2) of
the present Code with greater force. The Court of Appeal is bound by /the
judgment of the Privy Council but this Court is not so bound. _Rat­nayake v.
Bandara_ (13). Nevertheless, for the reasons given above I see no reason to
depart from the interpretation given by the Privy Council. Viewed in this
light the statements con­tained in the judgment under appeal and in some of
the pre­vious decisions of the Court of Appeal are erroneous.



In _Arulampalam v. Daisy Fernando_ (14) the question of the validity of the
appeal was raised not as a preliminary objection to the appeal itself but in
proceedings before the Court of Appeal against an order allowing writ of
execution. That order had been obtained' by the plaintiff on an applica­tion
made on the 25th day from the date of the judgment in his favour. By that date
the defendant had given the initial notice of appeal against the judgment.
This was followed by the petition of appeal. The order issuing the writ was
chal­lenged by the defendant on the ground that the application for it had
been made in breach of S.761 of the Code before the expiry of the time allowed
for appeal i.e. 60 days allowed for filing the petition of appeal as was held
in _Careem v. Amara­singhe_ (15). The plaintiff submitted that the defendant
had failed to give a valid notice of appeal and as such the bar under S.761
did not apply. The Court of Appeal accepted this submission holding that there
is no valid notice of appeal in that ‑



##  301



(a)        it had been signed by an Attorney‑at‑Law who is not the registered
Attorney‑at‑Law, in breach of S.755(1) which is fatal to its validity; and



(b)        the money deposited as security had not been hypothe­cated by bond
as required by S.755(2)(a) read with S.757(1) which is "a fatal irregularity".



Jameel J. (with G.P.S. de Silva J. agreeing) held that as the notice is bad in
law, no appeal could 'be filed after the lapse of 14 days, and the 14 days
becomes the operative period of time for S.761. The application for writ is
well beyond this 14 days time limit and was therefore, not filed during the
applicable period and pending appeal. In the resutt the Court allowed the
order allowing the writ.



On the first ground Jameel J. relied on _Silva v. Cumara­tunga_ (16) which
held that the petition of appeal should be signed by the proctor whose proxy
is on record and that in default, the Supreme Court, had no power to grant
relief. On the second ground he cited _de Silva v. Seenathumma_ (supra) and
_Chelliah v. Selvanayagam_ (supra) and added that the notice of appeal is
incurably defective. On the defendant's prayer for order to stay execution
pending appeal he said 



"In the circumstances, this Court cannot..... act under S.759 (2) and grant
any relief to the defendant......."



I think that the case could have been decided on the first ground alone. The
power of the Supreme Court under sub­section (3) of S.756 of the old Code was
expressly limited to curing mistakes etc. in complying with the provisions of
that section and hence did not cover a defect in the drawing and signing of
the petition of appeal as required by S.755. In the way the new Code has been
re‑arranged, relief under S.759(2) would, upon a literal construction, appear
to apply even to such a non‑compliance; thus S.759(2) covers "any mistake,
omission or defect.....in complying with the provisions of the



##  302





foregoing sections" and the expression "foregoing sections" can on its plain
meaning refer even to S.755(1) relating to the drawing and signing of the
notice of appeal. However, where the non‑compliance arises by reason of the
fact that such notice of appeal has been signed by an Attorney‑at‑Law who is
not the registered Attorney‑at‑Law it is a breach not merely of S.755(l) but
of S.24 which requires that an Attorney‑at­Law, if he is to represent a party
has to be duly appointed; and S.759(2) cannot be invoked to cure such breach.
Thus in _Cumarasinghe's_ case (supra) Maartensz J. said (p.140) 



"The ratio decidendi in the old cases, with which I respectfully agree, was
that this Court cannot recognise two proctors appearing for the same party in
the same cause".



In the circumstances, the statements contained in the Court of Appeal judgment
in relation to the second ground can be regarded as obiter.



Coming to the merits of the second ground it is to be noted that in
_Seenathumma's_ case cited by Jameel J. Soertsz J. him­self did not classify
the provision for hypothecation of the money deposited as security as an
essential requirement the non‑compliance of which is not curable under
s.756(3). In _Sel­vanayagam's_ case Weerasuriya J. gives no reason for
treating such non‑compliance as a "fatal irregularity". He may have so
described it possibly for the reason that the failure there was to hypothecate
money, deposited beyond the prescribed date on an order of the Court.



It is also significant that nothing in the judgment of the Court of Appeal
indicates that the defenaant's Counsel sought any relief under S.759(2). On
the contrary his submission which the Court refused to accept was that the
Court cannot in the course of an application to stay execution pending appeal,
reject the notice of appeal but must postpone the deci­sion as to its validity
until the hearing of the main appeal. For



###  303



these reasons too _Daisy Fernando's_ case cannot be regarded as an
authoritative decision on S.759(2).



In _Kiri Banda v. Ukku Banda_ (17) Perera J. (with Banda­ranayake J. agreeing)
rejected an appeal on a preliminary objection that it had not been presented
within 60 days of the judgment as required by S.755(3). The Court declined to
grant relief under S.759(2) in the absence of "reasonable cause", on a
submission that the mere statement that there has been a mistake, omission or
defect would entitle a party to seek relief under this section in the absence
of prejudice to the opposing party, Perera J. said (p.194) 



If this construction ...... is accepted, even where such failure in
occasioned by gross negligence, carelessness or neglect of the defaulting
party or his registered Attor­ney, it would result in such conduct being
condoned by the Court".



The decision of this Court in _Vithana v. Weerasinghe_ (18) was distinguished.
This decision of the Court of Appeal is in accord with precedent and the
principles ennunciated by the Privy Council in _Abeywickrema's_ case (supra).



In _Dona Ceciliana v. Kamala Piyaseeli_ (5) Goonawardena J. held that the
failure to hypothecate money deposited as security for the respondent's costs
of appeal is a failure to comply with an essential step in perfecting the
appeal and is not correctable under S.759(2). He said that the presence of
S.756(2) in the old Code providing that "the petition of appeal shall be held
to have abated", where the petitioner fails to give security as provided
supports the view that S.756(3) of that Code had no application to a situation
where the failure was to furnish security. Citing the case of _Chelliah v.
Selvanaya­gam_ (supra) he thought that this view has equal application to the
present provision. He also relied on the case of _Daisy Fer­nando_ (supra).
Assuming that S.759(2) has application, he was of the opinion that in any
event on the facts and circumstances



##  304



of the case material prejudice had been caused to the respond­ent and upheld
the preliminary objection and rejected the appeal.



The decision of the Court of Appeal to reject the appeal can be sustained on
the second ground alone. It was on this basis that special leave to appeal
from that decision was refused by this Court ‑ S.C. **Special L.A. No. 17/90
SCM of 19.07.90.** As regards the Court's opinion on the meaning of S.759(2)
it is observed 



(a)        the presence of S.756(2) of the old Code was no bar to relief under
S.756(3). It has been held that such relief may be sought against an order of
abatement under S.756(2) _Abeysinghe's_ case (supra). In any event S.756(2) of
the old Code has been deleted in the present Code.

(b)        the Court's opinion on the meaning of S.759(2) is not supported
even by the very strict construction of the corresponding S.756(3) of the old
Code in _Seenathum­ma's case_ (supra).



(a)                The Court's opinion is contrary to the Privy Council
decision in _Abeywickrerna's_ case (supra) which enlarged the power of the
Court to grant relief which decision is binding on that Court.



In _Vithana v. Weerasinghe_ (18) this Court adopted the rea­soning of the
Privy Council in Abeywickrema's case (supra). Having cited a passage from the
Lord Chancellor's judgment Wanasundera J. said (p.57) 



"The provisions we are called upon to consider though similarly worded are
much wider in scope......"



Applying the above principles to the case before us, I hold that the opinion
expressed by the Court of Appeal on the applicability of S.759 (2) of the Code
is wrong. This leaves me with the question as to whether the respondent ought
to have been given relief under that section on the facts and circum‑



#### 305



stances of the case. In view of its strong opinion on the applicability of
S.759(2) the consideration of this question by the Court of Appeal is scanty
and is limited to prejudice aris­ing by reason of the continuation of the
litigation. Had that Court altogether declined to consider the question of
prejudice and this Court were left with no material on that question I would
have remitted this case to that Court with a direction to consider the matter.
Since this is not the case here, I am of the view that this Court can and
should, in the interest of justice, make the decision in that regard.



Section 759(2) reads 



"In the case of any mistake, omission or defect on the part of the appellant
in complying with the provisions of the foregoing sections, the Court of
Appeal may, if it should be of the opinion that the respondent has not been
materially prejudiced, grant relief on such terms as it may deem just".



Precedent shows that these provisions are flexible and the power of the Court
is wide. Such power has to be exercised in furtherence of substantial justice,
having regard to the need to comply with imperative requirements of the law. I
am inclined to the view that it is not a power coupled with a duty as is
understood in the field of writs. No doubt if the preconditions exist the
Court must grant relief but the evaluation of the rele­vant material and the
forming of the opinion as to prejudice are all matters in the discretion of
the Court. It is to be noted in this connection that prejudice' has not been
defined for the purpose of this section. In this context "prejudice" means
"injury, detriment or damage caused to a person by judgment or action in which
his rights are disregarded; hence injury to a person or thing likely to be the
consequence of some action" (The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary 3rd Ed.).
It includes past as well as prospective harm or detriment. Prima facie the
section connotes prejudice which has occurred but continuing



#### 306





prejudice is not excluded. What is required to bar relief is not any prejudice
but material prejudice i.e. detziment of the kind which the respondent cannot
reasonably be called upon to suffer. If there is such prejudice it is no
argument for the appellant to contend as a matter of right that it can be
miti­gated by appropriate terms such as the payment of costs.



The discretion of the Court is exercised on the basis of the facts and
circumstances of each case. The Court may consider the impact of continuance
or the protraction of litigation, in particular in the context of what
Goonawardena J. described as the "living problems of laws delays" in _Dona
Ceciliana's_ case (5). It is no answer to this to say that the individual
appellant himself is not responsible for the delay in the partic­ular case.
When a preliminary objection is raised by reason of this mistake, the
litigation is protracted on that account at the expense of the respondent. It
cannot be repaired by an order for costs. The Court may in appropriate cases
consider whether there is an explanation for the mistake, which the defaulting
applicant alone may be in a position to give. In that event, he cannot fold
his hands and insist on his right to relief. If he cannot explain his failure,
the inference of gross negli­gence or carelessness may result. In which event
the Court may exercise its discretion against him and refuse relief under
S.759(2). If that discretion is exercised fairly this Court will not
interfere.



In the instant case, the notice of appeal was filed in 1983 and when the
preliminary objection was taken on 11.05.90 the appellant obtained a
postponement in view of the objection. If that was done in order to check with
the registered Attorney-­at‑Law the reason for the failure to hypothecate
security, no material whatever was submitted to the Court when the matter came
up for argument on 05.06.90. Instead, Counsel for the appellant argued that
hypothecation is unnecessary as a mat­ter of law and alternatively claimed
relief under S.759(2) with



#### 307



a mere statement that no material prejudice has been caused to the respondents
by the omission.



I think that in the circumstances of this case the lack of any explanation for
the non‑compliance, the fact that the bond not having been hypothecated, the
respondent has no preferen­tial right to the money and the protraction of the
litigation militate against the grant of relief under S.759(2). As such, the
refusal to grant relief under S.759(2) is justified.



In the result, I dismiss the appeal with costs.



_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/5.html_  

