##  Kulakulasuriya v. Ranmenika - SLR - 331, Vol 1 of 1990 [1990] LKSC 5;
(1990) 1 Sri LR 331 (18 June 1990)

**

331

KURUKULASURIYA  
v.  
RANMENIKA

**

SUPREME COURT.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J., MARK FERNANDO, J, AND AMERASINGHE, J.,  
S. C. APPEAL No. 12/87,  
MAY 23 AND 25, 1990.

_

Landlord and tenant - Payment of rent for specific months - Appropriation of
such rent against arrears of previous months - Deposit of arrears before
summons returnable date.

_

**332**

(1) Where the defendant tenant has failed to aver that the agreed rent was in
excess of the authorised rent to support his plea that he was not in arrears,
there is no burden on the plaintiff- landlord to plead the standard or the
authorised rent. This objection was not taken at the trial or in the Court of
Appeal or in the written submissions and therefore it was too late to agitate
the question in the Supreme Court.

(2) Section 31 of the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972 as amended provides for a
continuance of the tenancy and keeps in force retrospectively the original
contract of tenancy despite termination by notice. Once the contractual
tenancy is ended by notice, the landlord loses no rights by accepting rent
from the statutory tenant. The mere acceptance of rent is insufficient to
create a new tenancy. Acceptance of rent for a period subsequent to the notice
revives the tenancy only if from the facts established an intention to waive
can reasonably be interred. Every such payment does not ipso facto amount to a
revival. Parties must be shown to have been ad item as to the terms. A waiver
of notice cannot be presumed.

(3) It was established that deposits of rent had been made with the local
authority by the defendant, mentioning the specific months for which rent was
being paid. These were drawn by the plaintiff without reservation. According
to the principles governing appropriation of payments in the Roman Dutch Law
the first general rule is that when there are several debts owing to the
creditor and the payment made is insufficient to discharge the entire sum due
the debtor has the right to declare at the time he makes payment which of his
debts he wishes to reduce.

Since the debtor had elected to appropriate payment he made to specified
months, the Court must consider whether the debtor has been unreasonable in so
appropriating the payments. The debtor continued to occupy the premises and
failure to pay rent would expose him to an action for ejectment. The facts
also disclose a course of dealing between the parties, a pattern of making
payments for specified months from the very inception of the tenancy. The
creditor was therefore entitled reasonably to believe that the debtor intended
appropriation to be made for those designated months and no other. Considering
all the circumstances it cannot fairly be said that the debtor was
unreasonable in what he did. The creditor was obliged to consent to the
appropriation of payments made by the debtor. The Court should give effect to
that decision.

Appropriation of payments by the operation of the Roman Dutch taw principle
that unspecified debts should be carried to that account which it is most
beneficial to the debtor to reduce and that when accounts are of the same
nature so as to make no difference to the debtor the payment must be carried
to the oldest account is applicable only in the absence of a decision by the
parties. This is not the case in the instant litigation.

Appropriation of payments is done at the time of making the payment. The
statute does not prohibit the parties from exercising such an option either
expressly or by way of inference. There is no conflict in this area between
the common law and the statute. If the payments are appropriated by the
parties in a certain way then the principles of the common taw apply to those
payments and they will be applied in the designated manner. The two streams of
law will operate in all areas where there is no conflict.

Thus if payments so appropriated are sufficient to meet all the debts
specified in the notice of termination of tenancy, then the plaintiff will
fail in his action. If not there will remain unpaid arrears of rent Here there
was a period of five months anterior to the months for

**333**

which payments had been assigned in respect of arrears of rent for which rent
was not paid. Hence the tenant is in arrears and the plaintiff is entitled to
judgment.

**

Cases referred to;

**_

(1) Ansar v. Hussain S. C. Appeal No. 71/80 - S. C. Minutes of 18.02.86._  

_

(2) Wellington v. Amerasinghe [1987] 1 Sri LR 45._  

_

(3) Ephraims v. Jansz 3 NLR 142._  

_

(4) Fernando v. Fernando 55 NLR 465._  

_

(5) Eastern Hardware Stores v. Fernando 58 NLR 568, 569._  

_

(6) Fonseka v. Naiyar Ali 22 NLR 447._  

_

(7) Vincent v. Sumanasena 55 NLR 478._  

_

(8) Fernando v. Samaraweera 52 NLR 278, 283, 284, 285._  

_

(9) Attorney-General v. Ediriwickramasuriya 41 NCR 499._  

_

(10) Virasinghe v. Peiris 46 NLR 139._  

_

(11) Dias v. Gomes 55 NLR 357._  

_

(12) Perera v. Maggie Nona Hamine 76 NLR 547_  

_

(13) Bardeen v. de Silva 66 NLR 547_  

_

(14) Ramzan v. Sardar 73 NLR 380.

_**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

W. P. Gunatillake with J. A. J. Udawatte, U. S. Sooriyarachchi and C. Gamage
for plaintiff- Appellant._  

_

W. Rajapakse with C. Viknarajah and C. de Silva for defendant- Appellant.

Cur. adv. vult.

_

June 18, 1990.  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J.,

**

This appeal raises a question of law whether if payment of rent is made
specifying particular months for which it is being paid could the rent be
appropriated towards arrears due for a period prior to that month. Leave to
appeal on this question of law was granted by the Court of Appeal.

The plaintiff-appellant instituted action in the District Court as the
landlord of the premises in suit for ejectment of the defendant-respondent-
tenant for arrears of rent in a sum of Rs. 900 and for damages at the rate of
Rs.125/- a month until final disposal. The plaint was filed under the
provisions of the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973. It was stated
as a material fact that the defendant had failed to pay rent from October
1975. Notice to quit was given on 23.7.76 requiring the defendant to quit the
premises on or before 10.11.76. Whilst admitting tenancy

**334**

the defendant-respondent denied being in arrears of rent and prayed for
dismissal of the action.

The case proceeded to trial on the following issues :

Plaintiff's Issues : -

(1) Was the defendant in arrears of rent in terms of s. 22 (2) of the Rent
Act, No. 7 of 1972 ;

(2) If so, is the plaintiff entitled to the relief prayed for ?

Defendant's Issues :

(3) Was the notice to quit sent by the plaintiff to the defendant valid in law
as the arrears of rent demanded had been paid by the defendant before he
received the notice to quit ;

(4) Was the defendant in arrears of rent on date of institution of the action
?

The trial Judge held that the defendant had before 19.10.77 the summons
returnable date, deposited the entirety of the arrears payable and was
therefore entitled to relief in terms of s. 22 (3) (c) of the Rent Act.

It was the plaintiff's case that he rented the premises to the defendant on
10th July 1971 on a monthly rental of Rs.125/- on tenancy agreement "P 1".
Plaintiff admitted taking an advance of three months rent at the commencement
of the tenancy P 2". The plaintiff also admitted that the defendant paid rent
directly to the plaintiff until June 1975 -"P3" to "P48" - being counterfoils
of rent receipts of the payments made. This last payment for the month of June
1975 had been made only on 18.3.76. No settlement was possible before the
Conciliation Board on the complaint of the plaintiff. Notice to quit was sent
on 23.7.76 terminating the tenancy with effect from 10.10.76. The action was
instituted as aforesaid on 31.5.77. It was in evidence that from the month of
May 1976 the defendant had deposited monies in the plaintiff's favour with the
local authority the Kotte-Galkissa Gam Sabha as rent. Each such deposit made
to the local authority mentioned a specific month in respect of which the
payment was being made. Sometimes an amount more than the monthly rental was
deposited. The overpayments also were appropriated by the defendant-

**335**

debtor for specific debts (months). This was the defendant's evidence given at
the trial. The plaintiff withdrew these monies from the local authority up to
October 1977 all amounting to a sum of of Rs. 2,125/although all arrears due
to him as at October 1977 was, according to the plaintiff a sum of Rs. 3000/-.
This was computed on the basis that the period specified in the notice of
termination of tenancy as being the period in which the tenant was in arrears
was two years (i.e.) from October 1975 to the date on which the tenant was
required to appear in Court in answer to the summons which was 19.10.77. Thus
two years rent at the rate of Rs. 125/- per month amounted to Rs. 3,000/-. The
deficit of Rs. 875/represented 5 months rent. According to the plaintiff's
computation the arrears of rent amounting to Rs. 875 - should be assigned for
the months of October 1975 to February 1976 for the following reasons:

(a) The defendant stopped paying rent directly to the plaintiff after June
1975 ;

(b) As the plaintiff has taken three (3) months advance rent at the
commencement of the tenancy the defendant has been given credit for same which
covers the period July to September 1975. Thus arrears are being claimed from
October, 1975 as set out in the plaint ;

(c) The defendant has made deposits of monies as rent with the local authority
mentioning specific months for which rent was being paid reflected in
counterfoils of receipts "P 3" to "P 48" and by the defendant's own documents.
The first payment has been assigned by the defendant for the month of May,
1976 and other payments assigned in respect of March and April 1976 and months
succeeding May 1976 - (i.e.) June 1976 onwards to the summons returnable date.

The plaintiff claims that under the Roman Dutch Law of Contract once the
debtor appropriates a debt by assigning a particular payment to a particular
debt that payment extinguishes the debt so specified. Counsel cited "Law of
Contract" - Weeramantry, Vol. 2. p. 676 paras 701 onwards and Walter Pereira's
"Laws of Ceylon" 2nd Ed. p. 772 ; Wessels "Law of Contract in South Africa",
2nd Ed. Vol. It, para 2294.

Learned Counsel for the plaintiff-appellant contended that the trial Judge and
the Court of Appeal were in error in treating the deposits made

**336**

to the local authority as rent tendered to the landlord in respect of all
arrears of rent claimed by applying the provisions of s. 22(3)(c) of the Rent
Act and ignoring the assignment of those payments by the defendant to
particular debts. It was Counsel's submission that the said provisions of the
Rent Act cannot be applied willi-nilli to a situation where there are a series
of debts, and payments made in liquidation of those debts are directed to
apply to specific debts by the debtor. In such a situation the Roman Dutch Law
has to be applied to the payments so assigned at the time of payment. It a
balance of unpaid debts is left the plaintiff was entitled to recover such
balance as arrears of rent by means of a properly instituted action. Had the
defendant not assigned payments be made in the manner he did, then it would
have been different. Learned Counsel for the plaintiff-appellant submitted
that although this point of law was raised and argued before the Court of
Appeal that Court had failed to deal with it in the course of its judgment.

Turning to the position taken by the defendant-respondent before this Court on
the question of law raised in the reference, the only submission made in the
written submissions filed by the defendant-respondent was that as the
plaintiff has admitted that before the summons retunable date the defendant-
respondent had tendered Rs. 2,125/- to the local authority which sum had been
withdrawn by the plaintiff-landlord, the action must fail in view of the
supervening conditions of s. 22 (3) (b) of the Rent Act and that the decision
of the Supreme Court in Ansar v. Hussain (1) was authority for this
proposition. Also cited was the case of Wellington v. Amerasinghe (2) which
held that where there is excess rent in the hands of the landlord there will
be an automatic set off (i.e.) that the provisions of the Rent Act determined
the matter. In the course of oral submissions however respondent's Counsel
also submitted that the Roman Dutch Law principle that was applicable was not
that relied upon by the appellant (supra) but that unspecified debts should be
carried to that account which it is most beneficial to the debtor to reduce
and that when accounts are of the same nature so as to make no difference to
the debtor the payment must be carried to the oldest account - vide "Laws of
Ceylon" Waiter Pereira, 2nd Ed. p. 772, items (3) (4) in the second paragraph
thereof and Ephraims v. Jansz(3) and Fernando v. Fernando (4)1t was submitted
that in the instant case the debts were of the same nature.

In the course of the oral hearing before us teamed Counsel for the respondent
also sought to raise several other arguments for the first time which were
objected to by the appellant. They were

**337**

(i) that the standard rent has not been pleaded in the plaint and therefore
there was no mode of calculating arrears of rent ; you cannot demand more than
the authorised rent ; that even the authorised rent was not pleaded; that when
a landlord comes into Court there must be certainty as to whether the
proceeding was in respect of premises the standard rent of which for a month
does not exceed Rs. 1001- or which exceeded Rs. 1001- as different provisions
of law applied to each such situation ; thus a mandatory provision had been
ignored ; this was therefore a fatal irregularity which voided the
proceedings.

(ii) that the admitted acceptance of rent by the plaintiff-appellant for a
period subsequent to the notice to quit amounted to a waiver of the said
notice; that in the instant case there was no evidence that the withdrawal of
monies deposited with the local authority by the plaintiff was made without
prejudice to his rights in the action and therefore acceptance of rent was
without condition and amounted to a waiver of the notice of termination of
tenancy dated 26.7.76- Eastern Hardware Stores v. Fernando (5) - and Fonseka
v. Naiver Ali (6).

It would be convenient to first dispose of the matters not mentioned in the
written submissions and raised for the first time at this hearing; in regard
to (i) above viz; that the standard rent was not pleaded; the case proceeded
to trial on the basis of an agreed rent of Rs. 125l- per month. That being
common ground and the defendant pleaded that he was not in arrears of rent,
then there is a burden on the defendant to show at least by way of an averment
to that effect that the agreed rent was in excess of the authorised rent.
There was no such averment. There was no burden on the plaintiff therefore to
plead the standard or the authorised rent. This objection was not taken at the
trial and not raised in the Court of Appeal or in the written submissions. It
is too late now to agitate such a question. In any event, the defendant was
given three months notice of termination of tenancy which is the upper limit
and this would not have caused him prejudice.

In regard to the question raised in (ii) above, viz: that the acceptance of
rent for a period subsequent to the notice to quit amounted to a waiver of
notice, it was held by H.N.G. Fernando, A.J. (as he then was) in the case of
Vincent v. Sumanasena (7) that during the pendancy of an action

**338**

for ejectment under the Rent Restriction Act the tenant must continue to pay
rent as it falls due. Failure to do so may, by virtue of s. 1 <? of that Act
render him liable to be sued again for ejectment in a subsequent action on the
ground of non-payment of rent. Held, that during the pendency of an action for
ejectment the tenant must continue to pay rent as it falls due. The Rent Act,
No. 7 of 1972 as amended contains in s. 31 a provision similar to s. 14 of the
Rent Restriction Act. It provides for a continuance of the original contract
of tenancy. This provision thus keeps in force retrospectively the original
contract of tenancy. This being so the ratio decidendi in the case of Vincent
v. Sumanasena (supra) would apply The acceptance of rent in the present
circumstances does not amount to a waiver of the notice. Once the contractual
tenancy is ended by notice, the landlord loses no rights by accepting rent
from the statutory tenant. The mere acceptance of rent is insufficient to
create a new tenancy. The agreement to continue the tenancy must be proved. It
must be shown that the parties were ad idem as to the terms. A waiver of a
notice to quit cannot be presumed. Fernando v. Samaraweera (8); Attorney-
General v. Ediriwickramasuriya (9); Virasinghe v. Peiris (10); Dias v. Gomes
(11), Perera v. Maggie (12). Acceptance of rent for a period subsequent to the
notice revives the tenancy only if from the facts established an intention to
waive can reasonably be inferred. Every such payment does not ipso facto
amount to a revival. Eastern Hardware Stores v. Fernando (5).

Turning to the question of law raised in this appeal it is common ground that
the defendant-respondent deposited monies with the local authority as payment
of rent for specific months. The trial Judge has accepted the evidence of the
plaintiff in regard to these payments. A perusal of the documents produced -
deposits of payment - show clearly that payment of rent was being appropriated
by the debtor towards payment of specified debts at the time of payment.
According to the principles governing appropriation of payments in Roman Dutch
Law the first general rule when there are several debts owing to the creditor
and the payment made is insufficient to discharge the entire sum due
recognises the debtor's right to declare at the time he makes payment which of
his debts he wishes to reduce. The debtor has the liberty to do so. This rule
is based on the principle that, all things being equal, the interests of the
debtor prevails over those of the creditor. It has been stated that "the whole
doctrine of the Roman Dutch Law as to appropriation of payments turns upon the
intention of the debtor either express, implied or presumed"

**339**

-vide - Weeramantry "Law of Contracts", Vol 11, paras 701-705. pp 676680; Nathan "Common Law of South Africa",'2nd Ed. Vol 11, p. 659 

The facts of this case manifestly show the debtor's intention to appropriate
against specified debts. Since the debtor (the defendant respondent) has
elected to appropriate payments he made in the manner reflected by the facts
the Court must consider whether the debtor has been unreasonable in so
appropriating the payments. The debtor continued to occupy the premises. If he
fails to pay rent he exposes himself to an action for ejectment. The facts
also disclose a course of dealing between the parties, a pattern of making
payments for specified months from the very inception of the tenancy. The
creditor was therefore entitled reasonably to believe that the debtor intended
appropriation to be made for those designated months and no other. Considering
all the circumstances it cannot fairly be said that the debtor was
unreasonable in what he did. The creditor is obliged to consent to the
appropriation of payments made by the debtor. The Court should give effect to
that decision.

On the background of the law as stated above, it will be seen that on the
facts of this case, appropriation of the payments by operation of law as
contemplated by the Roman Dutch Law does not arise. The contention of
Respondent's Counsel (supra) that the rules by which payments are appropriated
by operation of law should be followed in this case is unacceptable. Those
rules which contain principles by which appropriation is decided by operation
of law are applicable only in the absence of a decision by the parties. This
is not the case we have before us.

It is left to consider whether the principles of the Roman Dutch common law
are applicable in an action brought under the statute \- the Rent Act, No. 7
of 1972 as amended. Appropriation of payments is done at the time of making
the payment, The statute does not prohibit the parties from exercising such an
option either expressly or by way of inference. This being so, the provisions
of s. 22 (3) (b) & (c) cannot be read as rendering nugatory the principles of
the common law. In my opinion there appears to be no conflict in this area
between the common law and the statute. If the payments are appropriated by
the parties in a certain way, then the principles of the common law apply to
those payments and they will be applied in the designated manner. The two
streams of law will operate in all areas where there is no conflict. Thus if
payments so appropriated are

**340**

sufficient to meet all the debts specified in the notice of termination of
tenancy, then the plaintiff will fail in his action. But if not, there will
remain unpaid arrears of rent.

To recapitulate the evidence accepted by the trial Judge, the notice of
termination of tenancy was dated 26.7.76. It declared that the tenant was in
arrears of rent from October 1975 onwards. The tenant was required to vacate
the premises on or before 10.11.76. Thus three months notice to quit the
premises was given. The tenant had not paid rent after June 1975. Then on
11.5.76 a deposit was made by the tenant to the local authority at the same
time appropriating that payment as rent for the month of May 1976. Deposits
made thereafter were also appropriated for specified months. Over-payments
were also made by the tenant on certain occasions amounting to Rs.250/- In her
evidence the defendant tenant appropriated those overpayments specifically to
the months of March and April 1976 and that evidence was not contested. Action
was instituted on 30.5.77. It was the plaintiff's case that he had by October
1977 withdrawn the total sum deposited by the defendant with the local
authority amounting to Rs. 2,125/- lying to his credit. The plaintiff's
evidence that was accepted by the trial Judge was that there still was a
balance of Rs.875/- due and owing to him as unpaid rent by the defendant as at
the date on which the defendant should appear in Court in respect of the
action as stated in the summons served on him. It was the plaintiff
appellant's contention that the unpaid balance represents five months rent in
arrears. Taking into account the obligation of the Court to uphold the right
of the debtor under the common law to appropriate payments to specific debts,
then it must be accepted that by such appropriation of the sum deposited
(Rs.2,125/-) there was still a sum of Rs. 875/- owing up to the date on which
he had to appear in Court. Thus the unpaid dues within the period specified in
the notice must relate to the five months in respect of which no appropriation
has been made. viz. October, 1975 to February 1976. It is no doubt a period
anterior to the months for which payments have been assigned in respect of
arrears of rent but they remain unpaid and the plaintiff is entitled to
judgment.

I am of the opinion that all payments made by the tenant as at the summons
returnable date have been lawfully appropriated as rent for the specified
months leaving unpaid arrears of five months rent. This being so the
provisions of s. 22(3) (b) and (c) have no application as the tenant

**341**

has failed to tender sufficient money to the landlord to meet all arrears of
rent specified in the notice to quit. In other words there was nothing left in
the Kitty for s. 22 (3) (c) of the Rent Act of 1972 to become operative. The
authorities relied upon by the Court of Appeal, viz. Ansar v. Hussain (supra)
which approved of Bardeen v. de Silva (13) and Ramzan v. Sardar (14) for
holding that all arrears of rent have been tendered by applying the provisions
of s. 22(3) (c) are inapplicable and are irrelevant. Those cases have been
decided upon different facts.

In this view of the law issues 1 and 2 should have been answered in the
plaintiff's favour. The plaintiff-appellant is entitled to succeed in this
action. I do not have the benefit of any views or findings by the Court of
Appeal on the question whether the principles of the Roman Dutch Law are
applicable to the facts of this case.

Since the tenant was in arrears of rent for several months and he appropriated
payments he made to specific months, the tenant must be regarded as having
tendered arrears of rent for those months to the landlord. If all the arrears
so tendered were insufficient to discharge the entire sum due as arrears then
the tenant remains in arrears of rent whether or not they were due for a
period prior to the arrears paid up. I set aside the judgments of the District
Court and the Court of Appeal and allow this appeal. As Counsel for both
parties have intimated to Court that the premises in suit have since been sold
and purchased by the defendant - respondent who is in occupation the prayer
for ejectment is redundant. The plaintiff- appellant is entitled to judgment,
arrears of rent from October 1975 to February 1976 both inclusive and damages
as prayed for, subject to the defendant-respondent's right to prove payment of
the whole or part of rents due. The defendant-respondent shall pay costs in
all three Courts.

**

FERNANDO, J. -** I agree.

**AMERASINGHE, J. -** I agree.

_**Appeal allowed.**

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1990/5.html_  

