##  K. G. N. Fernando v. Fawzi Mohamed - SLR - 96, Vol 1 of 1990 [1989] LKSC
5; (1990) 1 Sri LR 96 (6 July 1989)

**

96

K. G. N. FERNANDO  
v.** **  
FAWZI MOHAMED

**

SUPREME COURT  
ATUKORALE, J., FERNANDO, J. AND KULATUNGA, J.  
S. C. APPEAL No. 32/86 - C. A. APPEAL No. 8/76 (F)  
D. C. KALUTARA CASE No. 1821/MR.  
JUNE 12, 1989.

_

Defamation - Privileged occasion - Assessment of evidence.- Circumstances
justifying disturbing of findings on facts.

_

To an allegation in the plaint that certain words defamatory of the Appellant
(namely that the Appellant had a 'terrible reputation for being a terrible
womaniser' and that -several female patients had told him' that he examined
them in places that are not necessary) had been uttered by the Respondent in
the hearing of Kingsley Wickremasinghe a leading lawyer of Kalutara, the
Respondent responded with a denial and gave as his own version of his
conversation with the said lawyer that Wickremasinghe (a friend of the
Appellant) had asked him why he does not join the Appellant and run a Nursing
Home and the Respondent had said he was not interested. When Wickremasinghe
persisted the Respondent told him that the Appellant was tactless with his
patients and there was a rumour (of which he knew nothing personally and which
he did not believe) that he examined patients in unwanted places.

The District Judge held for the Appellant accepting Wickremasihghe's evidence.

It was argued that the Court of Appeal should not disturb findings of fact but
that Court held that the learned District Judge had misdirected himself on the
facts and the law in regard to privilege. The District Judge had attached
undue weight and importance to the position of Wickremasinghe in the community
and at the Bar.

**

Held on appeal to the Supreme Court

**

(1) There was no critical analysis of the evidence by the District Judge. The
Judge had failed to consider the impact (or even understand the significance)
of the evidence of another attorney-at-law Mohamed Hanaffi on Wickremasihghe's
version of the

**97**

circumstances in which the conversation between him and the Respondent began.
For according to Wickremasinghe the Respondent uttered the words complained of
without any provocation constituting more or less, a sudden and gratuitous
attack on the moral character of the Appellant. The most glaring error in the
District Judge's assessment of evidence was his failure to consider the
testimony of Mohamed Hanaffi that 2 days after the incident the Respondent had
met Wickremasinghe in his company and asked him whether he called the
Appellant a womaniser and Wickremasinghe replied "that is the meaning of what
you said

(2) The defence of privilege was available to the Respondent.

**

Case referred to

**_

Colletts Ltd. v. Bank of Ceylon (1984) 2 Sri L R. 253._

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

D. R. P. Goonetilleke with Shiranthi de Saram_ for the Plaintiff-Appellant.  

_

N. L. de Silva, P. C. with Faiz Mustapha, P. C., M. D. Mohamed and Mizam
Razzaq_ for  Defendant -Respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

July 6, 1989.  
**ATUKORALE, J.

**

At the conclusion of the hearing into this appeal we made order dismissing the
same with costs. We now set down our reasons for doing so.

Both parties to this appeal are medical practitioners who, at the relevant
times, were practising their profession in or around Kalutara. The Appellant
filed this action, which has given rise to the present appeal, against the
Respondent to recover damages in a sum of Rs. 50,000 for certain defamatory
statements alleged to have been uttered regarding him by the Respondent in the
verandah of the Magistrate's Court. Kalutara, in the presence of Kingsley
Wickremasinghe an Attorney-at law, practising at Kalutara Court. The precise
words allegedly uttered by the Respondent and forming the basis of the
appellant's claim are set out in paragraph B of the plaint. They are an
follows:

"Dr. George Fernando has a terrible reputation of being a terrible womaniser."

"Several female patients have told me that he examined them in places that are
not necessary."

"I have been asked to join him several times. I will lose the little practice
I have if I join him."

**98**

Dr. George Fernando referred to above is the Appellant.

In his answer the Respondent denied that he uttered the words set out above.
He averred that ever since he commenced practice at Kalutara the Appellant had
suggested to him that he should join him in running a Nursing Home or a
dispensary in partnership. He, however, did not give the Appellant a definite
reply although he had, in his own mind, decided no to join the appellant in
practice. On the day in question when he went to Kalutara Courts on business
Kingsley Wickremasinghe (who he knew was a friend of the Appellant) came up to
him and asked him why he does not join the Appellant and start a Nursing Home
in Kalutara or Beruwela. He told Wickremasinghe that he was not interested in
joining the Appellant. Wickremasinghe then advised him to do so. When he
persisted in his refusal Wickremasinghe asked him for the reasons why he was
not willing to join the Appellant. He then told Wickremasinghe that the
Appellant was tactless with his patients and that there was a rumour that the
Appellant examined patients in unwanted places though he himself knew nothing
about it personally and did not believe ii. The Respondent further averred
that the conversation that took place between him and Wickremasinghe on the
day in question was in consequence of the tatter's insistence on knowing the
reasons for his refusal to join the Appellant in practice and that the
communication so made by him to Wickremasinghe was a privileged communication
made on a privileged occasion and as such was not actionable. The plea of
privilege set up by the Respondent in his answer was put in issue at the
trial. It is not denied that the material words (whether they be those set out
in the plaint or those set out in the answer as having been said in response
to Wickremasinghe's query) were spoken by the Respondent in the presence of
and within the hearing of Wickremasinghe only and of no one else.

The learned District Judge after hearing the evidence held that the Respondent
uttered the defamatory words attributed to him in the plaint. He also held
that the occasion on which they were uttered was not privileged and that they
we re not privileged communications. He awarded the appellant a sum of Rs.
25,000/- as damages. The Respondent went in appeal to the Court of Appeal
which reversed the judgment of the trial judge and dismissed the Appellant's
action. The present appeal is from this judgment of the Court of Appeal.

At the hearing before us learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that the
question that arose for decision is this case was whether the

**99**

Respondent uttered the defamatory words set out in the plaint or not, that it
was essentially a question of fact, that the trial judge was the best judge on
questions of fact, that having seen and heard the witnesses on both sides he
accepted the version of the Appellant's witness Wickremasinghe, and rejected
that of the Respondent, that it was not open to the Court of Appeal to have
substituted its own view to that of the trial judge and that the Court of
Appeal should not have, in the circumstances of this case, interfered with the
trial judge's findings of fact. In view of learned Counsel's submission it is
necessary for us to examine closely the reasons which induced the Court of
Appeal to disturb the findings of fact of the Trial Judge.

A perusal of the judgment of the Court of Appeal discloses that the main
thrust of the submissions advanced in that court on behalf of the Respondent
(who was the appellant therein) was that the trial judge's approach to the
assessment of evidence in the case, particularly that of Wickremasinghe,
caused grave prejudice to the Respondent; that the Trial Judge had seriously
misdirected himself on certain vital items of evidence resulting in an
erroneous evaluation of the totality of the evidence in the case and that he
had misdirected himself both on the facts and the law in regard to the plea of
privilege raised by the Respondent. Upon a consideration of all the matters
urged before us at the hearing we formed the view that there was ample
material to substantiate each of the aforesaid submissions, the first two of
which, by themselves, would suffice to refute the arguments of learned Counsel
for the Appellant. We were in entire agreement with the view of the Court of
Appeal, which, though not expressly stated so, was implicit in its reasoning,
that but for the wrong approach adopted and grave misdirection's committed by
the Trial Judge he would not have failed to uphold the Respondent's version of
what took place on the day in question upon which was founded his plea of
privilege.

One of the opening paragraph of the judgment of the trial judge makes it
abundantly clear that he has attached undue importance and weight to the
position and standing enjoyed by the Appellant's witness, Wickremasinghe, in
the community and at the Kalutare Bar. He states therein that generally it
must be held that a person of the standing of Wickremasinghe would not, by
using such indecent words as are set out in the plaint, affirm to something
which did not actually happen. He further states that on a consideration of
the evidence of Wickremasinghe and of

**100**

the Respondent it is necessary to decide whether Wickremasinghe's evidence can
be accepted or not. He then proceeds to narrate briefly Wickremasinghe's
evidence but there is no, critical analysis of the evidence of either of them.
In regard to the evidence of Mohamed Hanaffi, Attorney - at -law, called by
the Respondent, the learned judge observes that there is a discrepency between
his evidence and that of Wickremasinghe as to whether the Respondent was
introduced or not to Wickremasinghe by Mohamed Hanaffi (Wickremasinghe
maintaining that he was and the latter denying the same) but that this
discrepency was of no significance and concludes that on a consideration of
their evidence it is not possible to hold that Wickremasinghe is a person who
would testify to words which were not uttered by the Respondent. But, as
pointed out by learned President's Counsel, he has totally failed to consider
the impact or even understand the significance of Mohamed Hanaffi's evidence
on Wickremasinghe's version of the circumstances in which the conversation
between himself and the Respondent began. According to the evidence of
Wickremasinghe the Respondent uttered the words complained of without any
provocation constituting, more or less, a sudden and gratuitous attack on the
moral character of the Appellant. But according to Mohamed Hanaffi,
Wickremasinghe came up to the spot where he and the Respondent were talking
and asked the respondent why he came there. When the Respondent said that he
wanted to get Mohamed Hanaffi's brother's building to start a dispensary at
Beruwela, Wickremasinghe asked him why he did not start a dispensary with the
Appellant, at which stage Mohamed Hanaffi stated he left the place to attend
to his work.

This evidence of Mohamed Hanaffi (which does not appear to have been seriously
challenged in cross-examination) materially corroborates the Respondent's
version of what transpired in conversation between him and Wickremasinghe. But
the learned judge has not even adverted to the same in his judgment. Nor has
the learned judge made any reference to that passage in the evidence of
Mohamed Hanaffi to the effect that when he, at the request of the Respondent,
accompanied the Respondent to meet Wickremasinghe about 2 days after the
incident and when on that occasion the Respondent asked Wickremasinghe whether
he had called the Appellant a womaniser, Wickremasinghe replied "that is the
meaning of what you said. "This evidence of Mohamed Hanaffi, if true,
negatives Wickremasinghe's accusation that the Respondent called the Appellant
a womaniser on the day in question. But, in my view, the most glaring error

**101**

of fact committed by the learned judge which led him to outright rejection of
the Respondent's evidence is his finding that the Respondent's testimony that
during his conversation with Wickremasinghe he was only referring to a
prevalent rumour (which he himself did not believe) that the appellant
examined patients in unwanted places was a mere afterthought on the part of
the respondent trotted out by him for the first time whilst in the witness box
with no reference to it even in his answer. This finding of the learned judge
is in the teeth of what had been stated by the Respondent not only in his
answer but also in his reply (D3) to the Appellant's letter of demand, in both
of which the Respondent has specifically set out that he told Wickremasinghe
that there was a rumour that the Appellant examined patients in unwanted
places, though he knew nothing about it nor believed it. Thus the rejection of
the Respondent's evidence was based on a wholly untenable and manifestly
erroneous finding of the trial judge. Quite apart from the above matters, the
trial judge's uncritical acceptance of Wickremasinghe's evidence is also borne
out by the fact that he has not paused to consider Wickremasinghe's conduct at
or about the time that the defamatory words were allegedly uttered by the
Respondent. Wickremasinghe says he was annoyed when the Respondent made the
defamatory statements concerning the Appellant, who was his close friend. But
he did not venture to contradict nor even to express his disbelief of the same
but remained silent. It is inconceivable that Wickremasinghe would have just
remained silent if, as alleged, the Respondent made a sudden and unprovoked
attack of such magnitude on the character of his good friend in his very
presence. Wickremasinghe's silence lends support to the Respondent's version
that he did not volunteer to make the disparaging words complained of or take
responsibility for the same as alleged but referred, only when pressed by
Wickremasinghe, to such a rumour as the reason for not wishing to join the
Appellant. There was also the clear evidence o_ Wickremasinghe himself that at
one stage he thought the matter should have been settled by an apology from
the Respondent. This statement is consistent more with a reference to a rumour
concerning the Appellant rather than a virulent attack made directly on the
Appellant's character. There was further evidence that the Appellant was
Wickremasinghe's election agent and trusted friend with whom there were
business transactions. It was, therefore, the duty of the trial judge to
approach Wickramasinghe's evidence with a certain amount of caution for there
was the possibility of, perhaps, even an unintended exaggeration out of his
loyalty

**102**

towards a trusted friend. It was further urged by learned President's Counsel
that Wickremasinghe's lack of candour was evident by the fact that he
repeatedly denied any knowledge of the contents of the Respondent's reply to
the letter of demand and of the position taken up by him in the answer vis-a-
vis the defamatory words allegedly uttered by him despite having attended on
two occasions the chambers of counsel who appeared for the Appellant in the
lower court for consultations. It appears to me that the learned judge from
the very outset of his judgment proceeded on the hypothesis that
Wickremasinghe, by virtue of his calibre and standing in life, could not but
have been a truthful witness on whose testimony he could safely act. As a
result he has failed to address his mind to the infirmities in the evidence of
Wickremasinghe or to embark on a fair and impartial evaluation of the evidence
as a whole. This approach undoubtedly has caused serious prejudice to the
Respondent's case. In the circumstances it was incumbent on the Court of
Appeal to review the evidence afresh and to arrive at its own findings of
fact.

Article 138 (1) of our Constitution mandates, inter alia, that the Court of
Appeal shall have and exercise an appellate jurisdiction for the correction of
all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by any Court of First
Instance. The Court of Appeal has thus the power and, indeed, is under a duty
to correct all errors of fact committed by an original court. Nowhere has it
been laid down that the Court of Appeal is powerless to interfere on questions
of fact. The submission of learned Counsel for the appellant that it was not
open to the Court of Appeal to disturb the findings of fact of the original
court and substitute therefor its own view of the facts is a preposition which
is not warranted. In an appropriate case it would be the duty of the Court of
Appeal to do so. The principles of law upon which an appellate court will
interfere with the findings of fact of a Court of First Instance have been
laid down in several decisions of the Supreme Court, both past and present.
One of the more recent judgments of the present Supreme Court on this point is
the case of Collettes Ltd. v. Bank of Ceylon (1) . Learned Counsel did not
seek to challenge the validity or applicability of these principles to the
facts of the instant case. Nor did he make any endeavour to explain the errors
and misdirections in the judgment of the learned trial judge enumerated above
except to repeat that the findings of fact, particularly the finding that the
Respondent uttered the defamatory words set out in the plaint arrived at

**103**

by the trial judge should accrue to the Appellant's benefit and should not be
disturbed. I think the following passage from the judgment of Sharvananda J.
(as he then was) in the above case applies with equal force to the judgment of
the trial judge in the instant case

"The trial judge has everlooked relevant considerations in the assessment of
the evidence. He had not directed his mind to relevant questions and had
failed to apply correct principles of law to the facts. The deficiencies in
the judgment are such that I am convinced that an Appeal Court will be failing
in its primary duty if it inhibits itself by regarding the findings of fact
arrived at by the District Judge as unreviewable and final just because
credibility of witnesses is involved. It was significant that Counsel for the
plaintiff when asked to substantiate certain findings of fact could fall back
only on the mere fact of the Judge's finding in his favour and not on any
other supporting material. I have no doubt , in fact I am convinced, that the
District Judge has grievously gone wrong in his opinion. It is a judgment
which by its manifest errors of law and fact would have resulted in a
miscarriage of justice had the Court of Appeal affirmed it."

I am of the view that the finding of the learned trial judge in the instant
case that the Respondent uttered the defamatory words testified to by
Wickramasinghe in his evidence is, as argued by learned President's Counsel
demonstrably unreasonable and the Court of Appeal was fully justified in
reversing the same. In fact in the Court of Appeal learned Counsel appearing
for the Appellant appears to have presented his arguments on the basis that
the Respondent had uttered only the words admitted by him and in the
circumstances set out by him. To say that there was a rumour that the
Appellant examined female patients in unwanted places would be defamatory of
him. Hence the issue that appears to have been substantially in dispute in the
Court of Appeal was whether the Respondent's defence of privilege was entitled
to succeed. The Court of Appeal held that it was. The Appellant, neither in
the application for special leave to appeal nor at the hearing before us has
sought to canvass this finding of the Court of Appeal.

**

FERNANDO, J. -** I agree.  

**

KULATUNGA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal dismissed**

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/5.html_  

