##  Sundarkaran v. Bharathi and Others - SLR - 46, Vol 1 of 1989 [1988] LKSC
5; (1989) 1 Sri LR 46 (1 November 1988)

**

46

SUNDARKARAN  
v.  
 BHARATHI AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 59/87  
C.A.L.A. (S.C.) NO. 22/87  
CA. APPEAL NO, 57/87  
RANASINGHE, C.J.  
SENEVIRATNE, J. & AMERASINGHE, J.  
OCTOBER 3 and 4 1988.

_

Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus - Liquor licence - Excise Department Circular
No. 221 of 14.02.1986 - Are decisions of the Government Agent, decisions of
the Excise Commissioner ? - Is concurrence of Member of Parliament necessary
?_ \- _Judicial review_ \- _Is a liquor licence a vested right in property ?_
\- _Natural Justice - Audi alteram partem - Does certainty of no change in
decision obviate necessity to afford opportunity to be heard ? Legitimate
expectation - Would court be acting in vain where relevant year of licence is
past ?

_

The petitioner was an applicant for a liquor licence for 1987. He had been
granted liquor licences for the two preceding years and in respect of 1987 he
was written to and asked to pay the licence fees. When he went to the office
of the Government Agent he was informed by the accountant that no licence
could be issued to him as he failed, to obtain the consent of all the members
of Parliament in the constituency in terms of Circular No. 221 of 14.02.1986,
He appealed to the Minister of Finance but received no response. He then moved
for a writ of mandamus to compel issue of the licence. The Court of Appeal

**47**

refused the application holding that the consent of all the members of the
constituency this being a multi member constituency was an absolute imperative
and judicial review was inappropriate because this was a matter of executive
policy.

**

Held

**

(1) All that Circular 221 required was that the members of the Parliament of
the constituency should be _consulted._ Their _concurrence_ was not an
essential requirement.

  2. The decision of the Government Agent was the decision of the acting Excise Commissioner.
  3. The court will not question the correctness of the conclusions or the decision not to issue the licence but the court can examine the decision making process in the interests of administrative Justice..
  4. It was not enough that the Government Agent had taken into account all the circumstances and not relied exclusively _on_ the objections of the Member of Parliament. It was imperative in natural Justice that the petitioner should have been heard before he was refused the licence. The assumption that the result is obvious from the outset does not obviate the requirement that the principle audi alteram partem should be complied with.
  5. The licence has a money value and was a vested right in property. As an existing licence - holder with legitimate expectations of success in obtaining the licence, the petitioner was entitled to a full and fair opportunity of being heard. The duty of fairness in cases of this type requires the decision maker not only to determine the application honestly and without bias or caprice but also  
fairly by hearing him according to Law.

  6. The court will not be acting in vain in quashing the determination not to issue the licence for 1987 because the right of the petitioner to- be fully and fairly heard in future applications is being recognised.

**

Cases Referred** :-

(1) _R v. Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal_ ex Parte Shaw [1952]
1All E.R. 122,127

_

  2. Ridge _v. _Baldwin [_ 1963] 2 All E.R 66,91;
_

  3. Chief Constable of North Wales Police _v. _Evans_ [1962] 3 All E.R. 141,151 ;

**48**

(4) _KM. Dayaratne_ v. _Y.M.W. Bandara_ S.C. NO. 924/77- October 3rd 1978
(1983) Bar Association Law Journal Reports Vol 1 Part 1 p. 23 ;

_

  5. Cooper v. Wandswroth Board of Works _[1 983] 14 CBNS 180 ;
_

  6. R _v. _Secretary of State for the Environment_ ex p. Brent London Borough 

_

_ Council [1922] 2 W. L .R. 693.734, [1983] 3 Ail E.R. 321 ;

(7) _General Medical Council v. Spackman_ [1943] A.C. 627, 644 ; [1963] 2 All
E.R. 66.H.L-

**

Appeal** from Judgment of the Court of Appeal reported in (1987) 2 Sri L.R.
243  ,

_

H.L. de Silva_ P.C. with _E.D. Wickremanayake. M.S.M. Suhaid_ and _Miss_ L.N.A

_

de Silva_ for petitioner. _M.S. Aziz,_ D.S.G. with _P. Karunaratne_ S.C. and
N.R.

_

Laduwahetty_ S.C. for respondents.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

November 1, 1988 **  
AMERASINGHE, J.

**

In December 1985 the Petitioner-Appellant had applied to the Government Agent,
Kandy (the predecessor in office of the 2nd Respondent-Respondent) for
licences to sell liquor. The Government Agent referred the application to the
Assistant Government Agent of the area where the licensed premises were to be
situated, in terms of Excise Department Circular No. 212 issued to all
Government Agents by the Excise-Commissioner, the Assistant Government Agent
on 18th December 1985 reported on the area of the premises and the location of
the premises in relation to places of worship and schools and recommended the
granting of the licences.

Excise Department Circular No. 212 reproduced the following decision on 4th
September 1 985 by the Cabinet of Ministers :

"The matter of the issue of licences for the sale of liquor was discussed and
it was decided that the licensing of wholesale and retail outlets for the
distribution of alcoholic beverages should be liberalised by authorising the
Excise Commissioner to issue licences for the sale of liquor to

**49**

private, wholesale and retailers recommended by Government Agents, after
consultation with the M.P. of the area, according to the needs of each area. "

By letter dated 10th December 1985 a Member of Parliament of the area
recommended the issue of the licence to the Petitioner-Appellant.

Licences for the sale of bottled toddy and " Foreign liquor (including locally
made malt liquor) not to be consumed on the premises " were issued for the
year ending on 31st December 1 985. Similar licences were issued again for the
year ending on 31st December 1986.

By Excise Department Circular No. 221 dated 14th February 1986 addressed .to
all Government Agents, the Excise Commissioner cancelled his. previous
instructions contained in Circulars Nos. 212 and 213 and issued new
instructions to Government Agents on the criteria for deciding whether liquor
licences should be granted or refused. Paragraph 5 of Circular No. 221 stated
as follows :

"No liquor licence will be issued by the Government Agent without the
concurrence of the M.P. of the area.. In the case of Multi-Member
Constituencies all the Members of the Constituency should be consulted before
licences, are issued. In Constituencies where there are no Members of
Parliament the District Minister shall be consulted. In Opposition Member
Constituencies the District Minister should be consulted before licences are
issued. "

By his Circular letter dated 22nd October 1986, the Government Agent wrote to
the Petitioner-Appellant asking him to pay his licence fees for the purpose of
renewing his licences for the year 1 987. However, when the Petitioner-
Appellant went to the office, of the Government Agent to make the required
payments, he was informed by the Government Agent's Accountant that no licence
could be issued to him.

The reason given was that in terms of paragraph 5 of the instructions issued
by the Excise Commissioner in Circular

**50**

No. 221 he was not qualified to receive the licences since he had failed to
obtain the consent of all the Members of Parliament in the Constituency. He
was informed that one Member of Parliament in the Multi-Member Constituency in
which the premises to be licensed was situated had objected to the issue of
licences to the Petitioner-Appellant.

Using the right of appeal given by Section 9 of the Excise Ordinance, the
Petitioner-Appellant appealed through his letter dated 3rd January 1987 to the
third Respondent-Respondent, namely, the Minister of Finance "to review my
case sympathetically and request the G.A., Kandy to renew my licence for the
current year so that I could continue in business. "

Not having received even so much as an acknowledgment of the receipt of that
appeal to the Minister, the Petitioner-Appellant applied on 1 5th January, 1
987 to the Court of Appeal praying for

  1. the issue of a Writ in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari quashing the refusal by the Second Respondent-  
Respondent - the Government Agent - to renew the licences applied for ;

  2. the issue of a Writ of Certiorari quashing the decision of the Third Respondent-Respondent - the Minister of Finance - to disallow the appeal to him by the Petitioner-Appellant;

  3. the issue of a Writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the Second Respondent-Respondent - the Government Agent - to renew the licences for the year 1987
  4. costs
  5. such other and further relief as to the Court of Appeal might seem meet.

On 10th September, 1987 the Court of Appeal after hearing Counsel for the
Petitioner and Respondents dismissed the Petitioner's application with costs.

**51**

On 15th October, 1987, the Court of Appeal granted leave to appeal to the
Supreme Court on the matters of Law set out in, paragraph 7 of the petition of
appeal. Paragraph 7 of that petition states as follows : "Being aggrieved by
the said judgment, the appellant asked for leave to appeal to the Supreme
Court, upon the following substantial questions of law, viz., that the Court
of Appeal has erred in holding that :

  1. the 2nd respondent (the Government Agent) was entitled to refuse the renewal of the said licences for the year 1987 upon the ground that the 1st Member for Harispattuwa Electorate had objected to the renewal of the said licences ;
  2. the said decision was, in the circumstances of this case, not liable to be quashed by way of a Writ of Certiorari ;
  3. the failure of the 3rd Respondent to deal with the Appellant's appeal in the circumstances of this case, was  
not a refusal liable to be quashed by way of a Writ of Certiorari ;

  4. the local Option Polls regulation made under the Excise Ordinance (Vol 1. Subsidiary Legislation) did not apply in relation to the licences issued to the Appellant and that even if they did apply, would not affect the Appellant's claim for relief;
  5. the Appellant was not entitled to a Writ of Mandamus to compel the issue of the licences to him for the year 1987."

In his appeal to this Court the Petitioner-Appellant prays that this Court

(a) quash by way of a Writ of Certiorari

(i) the determination of the 1st Respondent - the Acting Commissioner of
Excise - not to renew the Petitioner-Appellant's licence for the year 1987 .

**52**

(ii) the refusal or rejection of the appeal made by the appellant to the 3rd
Respondent -the Minister of Finance ;

(b) issues, a Writ of Mandamus compelling the 1st Respondent - the Acting
Commissioner of Excise - to renew the Appellant's licences for 1 987 ; licence
for the year 1 987.

The Acting Excise Commissioner himself made no decision to refuse to renew the
licence. The refusal was made by the Government Agent of Kandy. Counsel for
the Respondents-Respondents insisted that the Government Agent acted for and
on behalf of the Excise Commissioner from whom he took his orders and
directions in matters relating to the issue of liquor licences and was, to use
his own words, a mere " collector of revenue. " We may, therefore accept the
position that the decision of the Government Agent was the decision of the
Acting Excise Commissioner.

Counsel for the Petitioner-Appellant supported his case on four main grounds;
viz.

(1) that Circular No. 221 issued by the Excise Commissioner which the
Government Agent used as the basis of his decision was ultra vires and invalid
in aw because the statutory discretion conferred on the Government Agent could
be curtailed only by Rules made by the Minister by virtue of the powers
conferred upon him by Section 32 of the Excise Ordinance. (Cap 64 vol. Ill
Legislative Enactments 1 980 Ed.).

**53**

  2. that if Circular No. 221 was not altogether invalid then at least the directions contained in paragraph 5 of that Circular were ultra vires and invalid in law because, by virtually conferring a power of veto on Members of Parliament, a fetter had been placed improperly upon the use of the discretionary power conferred by statute on the Government Agent since such fetter was imposed by Circular instructions and not by legislation or subsidiary legislation, as it might have been.
  3. that if Circular No. 221 and paragraph 5 thereof were valid in law, the Court of Appeal had misdirected itself by erroneously  
construing the direction given in paragraph 5 to consult the Members of
Parliament in a Multi-Member Constituency to mean obtaining the consent of
such Members ;

  4. that the Petitioner-Appellant had a " legitimate expectation " that a licence would be issued to him and that therefore he  
had a right to be heard before the Government Agent made any decision on the
application for the renewal of the licences.

Although Mr. Aziz for the Respondents-Respondents argued that the Government
Agent had taken all the circumstances into account and did not rely
exclusively on the objections to the issue of the licences by one of the
several Members of Parliament, I am inclined to agree with Mr. H.L de Silva,
P.C. who argued that, whatever the Government Agent may or may not have done,
the Court of Appeal had erroneously refrained from granting the relief prayed
for by the Petitioner-Appellant on the ground that the failure to obtain the
unanimous support of all the Members of Parliament of that Constituency was
conclusive of the matter.

In my view, the duty of the Government Agent acting in accordance with
Circular No. 221 in the case of a Multi-Member Constituency is to consult all
the Members of Parliament in that Constituency. The relevant words of
instruction in paragraph 5 are as follows : " In the case of Multi-Member
Constituencies .all the Members of the Constituency should be consulted before

**54**

licences are issued. " The Court of Appeal, however, in my view, erroneously,
took the view that the direction required not merely consultation but also
concurrence, Ramanathan J. who delivered the Judgment of the Court, discussing
the effect of Paragraph 5 of Circular No. 221 (P8) said : "The change that had
been effected by it, so far as is relevant here and with respect to Multi-
Member Constituencies, was that all the Members of Parliament had to be "
consulted " which in the context in which such word is used in P8 had to mean
that these licences had to be issued with their " concurrence '', as is the
word used with respect to single member constituencies. "

There is a great difference between ' consult and concurrence

Notwithstanding the argument of Counsel for the Respondents-Respondents that
the Government Agent had exercised his discretion after considering all the
circumstances, including, but not entirely depending upon the objection to the
issue of the licences by one of the Members of Parliament, the Court of Appeal
was of the view that it was the failure of the Petitioner to obtain the
unanimous support of all the Members of Parliament that was the decisive
factor.

Ramanathan, J. says :

The Petitioner contends that he went to the Kandy Kachcheri to make the
payments due for the issue of the licences for the year 1 987 when he was
informed .... that such licences could not.... be issued as the First Member
of Parliament for this electorate had objected ; that when the Petitioner
pointed out that the 2nd Member of the electorate had recommended the issue he
was told in response that in terms of Circular (P8) in the case of Multi-
Member Constituencies both Members had to consent" _(sic.) "_ and that
therefore they could not be issued

In coming to the conclusion that the matter before the Court of Appeal was
inappropriate for judicial review because it was " a matter of executive
policy ", Ramanathan, J. says :

**55**

The thinking of the Government Agent the 2nd Respondent that this Was
something he should take account of even in the case of renewal, is we think
not such as would enable us .to describe such thinking or the subsequent
decision based thereon as unreasonable, (That his decision was in fact not to
renew such licences, and that based solely upon the objections of the 1st
Member of Parliament, we have no doubt and this is made clear by his own
affidavit at paragraph .18(1) (h)). "

Paragraph 18 (1) (h) of the Second Respondent's Affidavit, it must be pointed
out in fairness to the 2nd Respondent, does not show that his decision is
based " solely upon the objections of the 1st Member of Parliament. "

What the Second Respondent states in paragraph 18 (1) (h) is this:

I have examined the nature of the objections and after having given
consideration to them I am satisfied that the continuing of a liquor shop in
this area will affect the religious susceptibilities of the public of that
area and will not be conducive to their interests. I have decided therefore
that the licences should not be renewed for 1987. "

I might have dismissed the Petitioner-Appellant's appeal on the basis that,
the 2nd Respondent had in fact acted independently, without considering
himself, as Counsel for the Petitioner-Appellant contended, being " vetoed "
by the decision of one Member of Parliament but for the fact that I am not
satisfied that * in arriving at his decision the 2nd Respondent-Respondent,
(the Government Agent), had sufficiently informed himself of the facts of the
matter before him.

This was not a case in which there was agreement on the matters which formed
the basis for the 2nd Respondent's decision to refuse the granting of the
licences.

For example, in his affidavit filed in the Court of Appeal, the 2nd Respondent
says in paragraph 18 (e) :

**56**

"I also received a letter dated 4.1,2.86 from the Secretary, Ministry of
Finance arid Planning annexing a communication dated 1.12.86 addressed to the
Hon. Minister of Finance and Planning from the Hon. First M.P. for
Harispattuwa, objecting to the issue of the licence in his electorate (and
another in the same electorate). In this letter the First M.P. for
Harispattuwa has complained that these licences have been granted without him
being consulted " _(sic)._ " The First M.P. for Harispattuwa has also informed
me that the issue of these licences have created a public outcry among his
constituents as the outlets are situated in near proximity to religious places
and that there is a misapprehension gaining ground that as he is a member of a
minority community he is not taking steps to curb the opening of taverns and
liquor stores near places of Buddhist religious worship. "

The 1st Member for the Multi-Member Constituency of Harispattuwa swears in his
affidavit filed before the .Court of Appeal as follows :

I Abdul Cader Shahul Hameed, being a Muslim, do hereby solemnly, sincerely and
truly, declare and affirm as follows ;

  1. I am the 1st Member of Parliament for Harispattuwa having represented the constituents of Harispattuwa as their elected representative continuously for the past 27years.  


  2. This long association with Harispattuwa, which is a predominantly Sinhala-Buddhist electorate, and the  
meetings with the constituents, which I make a point, of holding regularly,
has given me a very intimate understanding of the needs and wishes of the
electorate.

3\. I recall that numerous constituents of Harispattuwa, some of whom
representing religious and social organisations, made representations to me
objecting strongly to the siting of two liquor shops at Alawathugoda and
Ranawana respectively.

**57**

  4. I conveyed these objections to the Government Agent, Kandy, and informed the latter of the increasing public pressure which was building up in my electorate over the siting of these two liquor shops.
  5. I also state that several of my constituents met me recently in Harispattuwa and indicated their relief that the  
liquor shops have-not been opened in 1987 and expressed their appreciation
that the authorities have  
considered their protests. "

On the other hand, the Petitioner-Appellant contends that the premises sought
to be licensed was not near places of Buddhist religious worship and did not
offend the religious susceptibilities of the people of the area concerned. He
argued that the 2nd Member of Parliament who was herself a Buddhist supported
the granting of the licences.

In her affidavit to the Court of Appeal dated 14th March 1 987 she says :

" 1. I am the affirmant abovenamed. I am the 2nd Member of Parliament for the
electoral district of Harispattuwa. I am a Member of the United National Party
to which the 1st Member of Parliament for Harispattuwa, Mr. A.C.S. Hameed also
belongs.

3\. I state that I am a Sinhala Buddhist and I am deeply concerned about the
religious susceptibilities not only of the Sinhala Buddhists in my electorate
but also about the religious susceptibilities of all my constituents whatever
community or religion " _(sic)_ " they belong ".

5\. I state that the " Headquarters " of the " Buddhist Balamandalaya "
referred to in paragraph 18 (g) of the affidavit filed by the 2nd Respondent
is not a place of religious worship. The premises are little more than a

**58**

shed and I am aware that they have been rented out, inter alia, for a Muslim
Wedding reception at which meat was served"

From his affidavit dated 30th March 1987 it is clear that the Government Agent
(the 2nd Respondent-Respondent) had satisfied himself that the premises to be
licensed was in close proximity to the Bauddha Balamandalaya premises which he
thought was a place of religious worship. However, the Petitioner-Appellant
strongly disputes the claim that the premises occupied by the Katugastota
Bauddha Balamandalaya is in fact a place of religious worship.

It may well be that the conclusion arrived .at by the 2nd Respondent-
Respondent that the place was a place of religious worship was a right
conclusion.

It would appear from Paragraphs 1.2 and 18 of the-2nd Respondent-Respondent's
affidavit dated 1st March 1 987 that he had received and considered protests
against the issue of licences from several organisations. However, the
Petitioner-Appellant in Paragraphs 4 and 5 of his affidavit dated 20th March 1
987 challenges the relevance of the representations and even challenges the
very existence of one of the organisations.

I do not question the correctness of the conclusions of the 2nd Respondent-
Respondents on these matters. Nor do I question his decision not to issue the
licences. These are matters for the decision of the appropriate authority
vested with the power of making such decisions. Indeed it would be an improper
usurpation of authority for me to do so. (See _R_ v. _Northumberland
Compensation Appeals Tribunal, Ex pane Shaw,_ (1) ; _Ridge_ v. _Baldwin, (2),_
and _Chief Constable of North Wales Police_ v. _Evans_ (3). I am, however, not
satisfied with the decision making process in the instant case. I do not think
that the Respondents acted fairly and therefore consider the matter to be one
which deserves judicial review in the interests of administrative justice.
(See _North Wales Police_ v. _Evans (supra, loc. cit).

_

The circumstances in which the 2nd Respondent-Respondent decided not to renew
the licences of the Petitioner-Appellant

**59**

show that he had failed to give the Petitioner-Appellant an opportunity of
meeting the objections which were supposed to have been made against the issue
of the licences. He had been issued licences for the two preceding years, he
had received a notice from the 2nd Respondent-Respondent requesting him to
make payments for obtaining his licences for 1987 and in pursuance of a
legitimate expectation that he would be issued the licences, he had raised a
loan of Rs. 750,000 to develop his < liquor sales business. It seems to me to
be manifestly on just and-improper that a decision to refuse to renew the
licences was made in the circumstances of this case without hearing the
Petitioner-Appellant who was being deprived not merely of a privilege but a
vested right in property.' (See per Vythialingam, J. (Abdul Cader, J.
agreeing) in the case of _KM. Dayaratne_ v. _Y.M.W. Bandara_ (4).

In _Dayaratne's_ case the Petitioner had been granted a licence annually under
the Excise Ordinance to sell foreign liquor at his shop at Mawanella.
Subsequently, on the orders of/the Respondent, who was the Government Agent,
the shop was closed by the Police. The licence issued was cancelled on the
orders of the Minister acting in terms of section 28A of the Excise Ordinance.
The Petitioner had not been given a hearing. Vythialingam J. says at p. 27 :

In deciding whether the principle audi alteram partem should be applied in the
instant case I would follow the approach adopted by the Privy Council in
_Durayappah's_ case _(A.T. Durayappah_ v. _W.J. Fernando_ 69 N.LR. 265). There
Lord Upjohn said at page 270, "In Their Lordship's opinion there are three
matters which must always be borne in mind in considering whether the
principle should be adopted or not. The three matters are First, what is the
nature of the property, the office held, status enjoyed, or services to be
performed by the complainant of injustice. Secondly, in what circumstances or
upon what occasions is the person claiming to exercise the measure -of control
entitled to intervene. Thirdly, when a right to intervene is proved what
sanction in fact is the latter entitled to impose on the other. It is only
upon a consideration of all these

**60**

matters that the question of the application of the principle can properly be
determined." In regard to the first matter here there is no complaint in
regard to any office held, status enjoyed, or services to be performed by the
Petitioner. He must come, if at all, as the holder of a right in property, "

Vythialingam, J., after analysing the various authorities on the subject, says
at p. 29 :

The fact that the licence in the instant case has a money value cannot be
doubted. The Petitioner paid Rs. 450/- as licence fee for the full year 1977.
On the strength of the licence he stocked his shop with foreign liquor .... He
could have made profits by the sale of the liquor. The licence can be. sold or
sub-rented  Under the general condition attaching to all Excise Licences sets
out " No privilege manufacture, supply, or sale or any interest therein "
shall be sold or transferred or sub-rented without the Government Agent's'
previous permission. (Paragraph 1 3 General Conditions Applicable to All
Excise Licences from and After September 30, 1955 Vol. I, Subsidiary
Legislation p. 585)-. So that the Petitioner had at that time a vested right
in property which had money value.

It has been repeatedly recognized that no man is to be deprived of his
property without having an opportunity of being heard. Even if what he had was
mere permission to which the Appellant-Petitioner had no legal entitlement or
claim of right, the refusal of the permission which had previously been
granted I think may be at least sufficiently comparable to the act of taking
away property so that the audi alteram partem rule will apply. I am unable to
agree with learned Counsel for the Respondents that the Petitioner-Appellant
was simply "hoping" against "hope" of being granted a renewal of a licence. He
had, in my view, a legitimate expectation of success and therefore a right to
a full and fair opportunity pf being heard.

Counsel for the Respondents-Respondents urged that the decision had not been
made capriciously. As an existing Licence-

**61**

holder with legitimate expectations the Petitioner-Appellant was entitled to
much more. The duty of fairness in cases of this type requires the decision
maker not only to determine the application honestly and without bias or
caprice but also fairly by hearing him according to the law.



There are, I think, in the words of Erie. C.J. in _Cooper_ v. _Wandsworth
Board of Works_ (5) " a great many advantages which might arise m the way of
public order, in the way of doing substantial justice, and in the way of
fulfilling the purpose of the statute by the restriction we put upon them,
that they, should hear the party before they inflict upon him such a heavy
loss. "

Counsel for the Respondent-Respondents argued that a fair hearing would make
no difference to the result in this case. " Procedure and merits should be
kept strictly apart since otherwise the merits may be prejudged unfairly. "
(H.VV.R. Wade Administrative Law, 5th Edition p. 475). The so called " no
difference " argument has been properly rejected on more- than one occasion
(e.g. See /?. v. _Secretary of State for the Environment ex p. Brent London
Borough Council_ (6)) but I should like to recall the words of Lord Wright in
_General Medical Council v. Spackman_ (7). His Lordship said :

If the principles of natural justice are violated in respect of any decision
it is, indeed, immaterial whether the same decision would have been arrived at
in the absence of the essential principles of justice. The decision must be
declared no decision. "

The perils of assuming that a result is obvious from the outset was vividly
and elegantly expressed by-Megarry, J. in _John_ v. _Rees_ (8) in the
following words :

As everybody who has anything to do with the law will know the path of the law
is strewn with examples of open and shut cases which, somehow were not of
unanswerable charges which, in the event, were completely answered of
inexplicable conduct which was fully explained ; of fixed and unalterable
determinations that, by discussion, suffered a change. "

**62**

I do not believe that this Court will be acting in vain or that quashing the
determination of the 1st Respondent not to renew the Petitioner-Appellant's
licences for the 'year 1387 and requiring that the Petitioner-Appellant be
fully and fairly heard before a decision with regard to any future
applications for licences are made, will be only a useless formality. '

I would express no opinion on the question of the validity of the Circular in
question or the validity of Paragraph 5 thereof because it is unnecessary for
me to do so having regard to the opinion I have reached on the third and
fourth propositions of Counsel for the Petitioner-Appellant of prefer to leave
these important questions open until they arise in _a_ case where decisions on
them are necessary.

For the reasons I have given t set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal,
quash the decision of the Respondents and make order that the Respondents-
Respondents do hear and determine according to law i.e. make due inquiry upon
its merits any application for a licence to sell liquor by the Petitioner-
Appellant may hereafter make.

I order that a sum of Rs. 2100 be paid to the Petitioner-Appellant as costs of
the proceedings before the Court of Appeal and this Court.

**

RANASINGHE, C.J.** \- l agree

**

SENEVIRATNE, J.** -l agree

_

Judgment of Court of appeal set aside. Decision of Respondents quashed.
Respondents directed to make due inquiry upon merits in future applications
for a licence.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/5.html_  

