##  Dhammika Yapa v. Bandaranayake and Others - SLR - 63, Vol 1 of 1988 [1987]
LKSC 5; (1988) 1 Sri LR 63 (17 December 1987)

**

63

DHAMMIKA YAPA  
V.  
BANDARANAYAKE AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
L: H. DE ALWIS, J., O. S. M. SENEVIRATNE, J.; AND H. A.G. DE SILVA, J.  
S.C. 110/87.  
NOVEMBER 16 AND 17. 1987.

_

     Fundamental Rights - Arrest without a warrant and detention under Emergency Regulations - Freedom to practise profession \- Freedom of movement - Mala fides

_

Articles 13(1) to.(4) and '14(1)(g) and (h) of the Constitution - Regulations
17(1), 18 (1), 19(2) and 54 of the Emergency Regulations \- Section 32(1)(b)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

One Mahinda Wijesekera, an attorney-at-law and Basnayake Nilame of the Vishnu
Devale, Devinuwara, was arrested on a complaint made by Ronnie de Mel,
Minister of Finance over the telephone to the 2nd respondent that Wijesekera
had led a mob which attacked his house. Thereupon the 2nd respondent. along
with the 3rd respondent on 30.07.1987 arrested the said Wijesekera who was
then. detained under a detention order, under Regulation 19(2) of the
Emergency Regulations signed by the 1st respondent on 31.08.198.7 and served
on Wijesekera on 01.08.1987 at about 4.00 p.m. On 04.08.1987 another detention
order dated 03.08.1987 issued by the 5th respondent under Regulation 17(1) of
the Emergency Regulations was handed to him (Wijesekera).

**

Held:

**

(1) A Police Officer is empowered by s. 32(1)(6) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act to arrest without a warrant a person against whom a reasonable
complaint of the commission of a cognisable offence has been made. Offences
under the Emergency Regulations are made cognisable by Regulation 18(1).

**64**

(2) In the circumstances of the violence that took place during this period
the 2nd respondent was justified in giving credence to the Minister's
complaint on the telephone made directly to him and in acting upon it. The
complaint afforded reasonable ground for suspecting Wijesekera to have
committed an offence under the Emergency Regulations and justified his arrest:
Being an attorney-at-law Wijesekera would have asked why-he was being arrested
and been told why.

(3) The. 1st respondent had issued the 1st detention order for the purpose of
investigating the complaint made against Wijesekera.

(4) Regulation 17 under which the 2nd detention order-was issued applies to
the detention of a person with a view to preventing him, inter aria from
acting in a manner prejudicial to the national security or to the maintenance
of public order or essential services. A person already in detention can yet
be detained under Regulation 17.

The first detention under Regulation 19(2) was for the purpose of
investigation and its duration could be only for 90 days- But here, as there
was material that the alleged offence was one of inciting people- to acts of
violence and the investigations revealed the possibility of his resorting to
the commission of further acts of a similar nature if released, the more
effective remedy was a detention order under Regulation 17. There is nothing
to prevent a detention order under Regulation 17(1) from being made while a
detention under Regulation' 19(2) was in force, provided the circumstances
justified it as in the present case.

(5) Such preventive detention under Regulation. 17 is not punishment and is
not ultra wires the Constitution. -

(6) The allegation of mala fides by reason of defeat of the Minister's party
on the votes of the District at the Referendum in 1982 and on account later of
the defeat of the candidate supported by him at the election of the Basnayake
Nilame of the Devinuwara ' Devala is in the former case too remote and in the
latter in the face of the available material and statements recorded,
inconclusive to support the allegation of mala fides.

**

Cases referred to: .

** _1\. Nallanayagam v. Gunatillake [ 1987] 1 Sri LR 297.

2\. Gunasekera v. De Fonseka (1972) 75 NLR 246.

3\. Nanayakkara v. Henry. Perera and others [ 1985] 2 Sri LR 14.

4\. Vijaya Kumaranatunga v. G. V. P. Samarasinghe and others-Fundamental
Rights Decisions of the Supreme Court vol. 2 p. 347.

5\. Rex v. Halliday (1917] A. C. 260, 265, 269.

6\. Gopalan v. State of Madras AIR [ 1950] S. C. 27.

7\. Liversidge v. Anderson (1942] A. C. 206, 254; [ 1941] 3 All ER 388.

8\. Hirdaramani v. Ramavah [1971] 75 NLR 67, 100.

_**

APPLICATION** under Article 126 of the Constitution for violation of
fundamental rights.

_

H. L. de Silva, P. C. with R. K. W Gunasekera, C. Dahanayake and Nimal S. de
Silva for petitioner:

Upawansa Yapa, D.S.G. with Tony Fernando, S.C. and Miss Anusaya
Shanmuganathan, S.C. for respondent.

_

_Cur. adv. vult._

**65**

December 17, 1987. -

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J.

**

This is an application made by D. D. Yapa; an Attorney-at-Law, on behalf of
Mahinda Wijesekera, presently detained at the Magazine Prison, Borella,
against the eight Respondents, under Article i 26(2), of the Constitution,
praying for the release of the said Mahinda Wijesekera, a declaration that the
said Wijesekera"s fundamental rights under Articles 13(1), 13(2), 13(4),
14(1), (g) and 14(1)(h) of the Constitution have been infringed and for
compensation to the said Wijesekera in a sum of Rs. 300,000. Mr. Wijesekera, I
understand has since been released, but this judgment was prepared when he was
still in detention.

The facts relevant to this matter are briefly as follows:

Mahinda Wijesekera is an Attorney-at-Law practising in Matara and is the
Basnayake Nilame of the Sri Vishnu Maha Devalaya, Devinuwara. According to the
Petitioner, the 2nd and 3rd Respondents came to Wijesekera"s house at about 7
a.m. on 30.7.87 and informed him that 'they had come to record a statement
from him. They requested him to accompany them to the Police Station, Matara.
He complied with their request and after they reached the Matara Police
Station Wijesekera was held in custody there, and was not allowed to return
home. He was not told the reason for his arrest.

On 1.8.1987, at about 4 p.m. the 3rd Respondent handed him a Detention Order
(X) signed by the first Respondent on 31.7.87 in terms of Regulation 19(2) of
the Emergency Regulations published in Government Gazette Extraordinary No.
462/2 of 18.7.1987.

On 4.8.1987 another Detention Order dated 3.8.1987 was issued by the 5th
Respondent under Regulation 17(1) of the Emergency Regulations and handed to
him.

Up to the date of the hearing of this application Wijesekera has been detained
for a period of 109 days. He was not produced before a Magistrate in terms of
article 13(2) 'of the Constitution and is prevented from practising his
profession as an Attorney-at-Law in violation of Article 14(1)(g) nor allowed
freedom of movement, in contravention of article 14(1)(h) of the Constitution.

**66**

The petitioner challenges (1) the legality of Wijesekera's arrest by the 2nd
and 3rd respondents on 30.7.87, (2). the legality and validity of the
Detention Order (marked X) made by the 1st respondent on 31.7.87, and (3) the
legality and validity of the Detention Order made by the 5th respondent on
3.8.87 (1 R5). The petitioner also assails the, validity of the arrest and
Detention Orders on the ground that they wee made mala fide at the instance of
Mr. Ronnie de Mel, the Minister of Finance. As mala fides is alleged in
respect of all these acts I shall deal with it last.  -

In regard to (1) the petitioner attacks the lawfulness of Wijesekera's arrest
on 30.7.87 by the 2nd and 3rd respondents on several grounds. Articles 13(1)
of the Constitution states. that

"No person shall be arrested except according to procedure established by law.
Any person arrested shall be informed of the reason of his arrest (vide
Nallanayagam v. Gunatillake and others (1)).

Regulation 18(1) of the Emergency Regulations, which is procedure established
by law, empowers any Police Officer to search, detain for purposes of such
search, or arrest without warrant, any person who is committing or has
committed or whom he has reasonable ground for suspecting to be concerned in
or to be committing or to have committed, an offence under any Emergency
Regulations. It was contended that the 2nd and 3rd respondents had no
reasonable ground for suspecting Wijesekera to have committed an offence under
the Emergency Regulations as they were merely acting on an oral statement made
by Mr. Ronnie de Mel on the telephone to the 2nd respondent on 30.7.87.
Learned Deputy Solicitor General on the other hand submitted that the
complaint of Mr. de Mel on the telephone was sufficient to raise a reasonable-
suspicion that Wijesekera had committed such an offence.

Regulation 54 of the Emergency Regulations states that: the powers of a Police
Officer under any. emergency regulation ' shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of his powers under any other written law."

**67**

Under section 32(1)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure act, a Police Officer
is authorised to arrest without a warrant any person:

"who has been concerned in any cognizable offence or against whom a reasonable
complaint has been made or credible information has been received or a
reasonable suspicion exists of his having been so concerned."

A Police Officer therefore is empowered to arrest without a warrant a person
against whom a reasonable complaint of the commission of a cognizable offence
has been made. Offences under the Emergency Regulations are made cognizable by
Regulation 18(1):

Regulation 26 (f) makes it an offence for. any person to excite or attempt to
excite or incite the inhabitants, or any section, class or group of them to
use any form of physical force or violence, breaches of the peace disobedience
of the law or obstruction of the execution of the law for the purpose thereby
of inducing-or compelling the Parliament or the government to alter any matter
by law established or to do or forbear from doing any actor thing.

A great deal of publicity was given in the mass media at the time to the
speeches made by the Minister of Finance, Mr. Ronnie de Mel, who strongly
advocated support for the Indo-Sri Lanka Accord entered into between the
President of Sri Lanka-and Prime Minister of India. Mr. Rajiv Gandhi was about
to visit this country in-order to sign the Agreement. on the evening of
the-29th July 1987 and Mr. Ronnie de Mel played a prominent part in the
ceremonies -to welcome him. It was also common knowledge that at the same time
there was considerable opposition by certain sections of the public to the
Agreement, and some of the extremists were. intending to resort to acts of
violence in an effort to stall the signing of the agreement and to prevent
its- subsequent implementation in Parliament. It is in this background that
the complaint of Mr. de Mel and the alleged conduct of Wijesekera must be
viewed.

Mr. Ronnie de Mel, on receipt -of certain information telephoned the 2nd
Respondent to Matara on the 30.7.87 at 7.25 a. m., the day after the Accord
was signed and informed him that a mob led by Mahinda Wijesekera had attacked
his house and inquired whether Wijesekera had been taken into custody. It was
admittedly in pursuance of this complaint 1 R4, which the 2nd respondent
recorded, that he along with the 3rd- respondent went to Wijesekera's house on
the morning of 30.7.87.

**68**

The question is whether the complaint was reasonable or the information
credible or whether there was reasonable ground for the 2nd and 3rd
respondents to have suspected 'Wijesekera to have committed an offence under
the Emergency Regulations 26 (f) which justified their arresting him on the
30th July 1987. It is true that Mr. de Mel was not a witness to the incident
and had not divulged the source of his information. But Mr. de Mel is the
Minister of Finance and it is inconceivable that as a responsible Cabinet
Minister he would have made a. frivolous complaint on the telephone to the 2nd
respondent. It is also unlikely that a person in his position would have
given credit to the information which he received, unless he was satisfied of
the truthfulness and reliability of his informant. In these circumstances the
2nd respondent, was in my view, justified in giving credence to the Minister's
complaint on the telephone and in acting upon it. That the 2nd respondent was
not mistaken in the action he took is confirmed by the statements made later
the same day by Priyantha (2R4) and. Sirisunanda Thero (2R2). Priyantha stated
that on the morning of the 29th July, he saw Mahinda Wijesekera come in a van
and getting down from it in. the midst of a crowd of about 200 to 300 persons
at Dondra Town. Wijesekera then raised his hands and addressing the crowd in a
loud voice said "Destroy the bungalow of the Finance Minister, also destroy
the office, attack the C.W.E. and set fire to the library." So saying', he got
into the van and went in the direction-of Gandara, while the crowd started
attacking the C.W.E. and the library. A part of the crowd went in the
direction of the Minister's office, damaged it and set fire to the bungalow.

According to Sirisunanda Thero's statement (2 R2) one Lionel came to the
temple on the night of the 29th and telephoned the Finance Minister, Mr.
Ronnie de Mel. He did not tell the priest who caused the damage to the
Minister's bungalow, but said he would disclose their names at the appropriate
time, He evidently had disclosed Wijesekera's name to the Minister because the
latter had mentioned it on the telephone to the 2nd respondent.

The petitioner produced affidavits from several lawyers marked X2 to X9 to
testify that Wijesekera was attending to his legal work in the precints of the
Magistrate's court Matara, from about 9 a.m., till 11.30 a.m., on the 29th
July in order to controvert the evidence that Wijesekera was going about
Dondra Town in his van that morning.

**69**

It is not the function of this court to test the credibility of the witnesses
and decide what evidence to accept, unless the evidence against Wijesekera is
so patently false and incredible that it must be rejected out of hand. The
evaluation of the evidence is a matter for the trial court, before which, no-
doubt, Wijesekera will, in due course, be tried. In my view, the Minister's
complaint was reasonable and. credible enough to afford the 2nd and 3rd
respondents a reasonable ground for suspecting Wijesekera to have committed an
offence under the Emergency Regulations and to justify his arrest. -

It was next contended that the arrest was illegal because the 2nd and 3rd
respondents were merely carrying out the orders of the 1st respondent without
themselves knowing the reason for it. In Gunasekera v. de Fonseka (2), it was
held that where an Assistant Superintendent of Police had purported to arrest
a person. under. Regulation 19 of the Emergency Regulations merely because he
had orders to do so from his superior officer, the Superintendent of Police,
and was not personally aware of the actual offence of which the person
arrested was suspected by the Superintendent of Police, such arrest is liable
to be declared to have been unlawful. A condition precedent for such arrest is
that the officer who arrests should himself reasonably suspect that the person
arrested had been concerned in some offence under the Emergency Regulations.

In the present case the 2nd respondent states quite categorically in, his
affidavit that he made the arrest, not on the orders of the 1st respondent but
on the specific complaint made to him over the phone, by Mr. Ronnie de Mel,
and that is borne out by the; complaint recorded by him (1134) and his entry
of the arrest made at the foot of 1 R4.

It was next alleged that Wijesekera was not informed of the reason; for his
arrest by the 2nd and 3rd respondents. The 2nd respondent, Nizam, who was the
Superintendent of Police, Matara, at the time, has filed an affidavit stating
that he explained to Mr. Wijesekera in the presence of his wife, that he and
the 3rd respondent, had come to take him into custody in connection with the
damage caused to the house of Mr. Ronnie de Mel, Minister of Finance; at
Devinuwara and to accompany them to the Police Station. Me; has made. a
contemporaneous entry in his Police note book to that effect at` Wijesekera's
house, an extract of which is produced marked ' 1 R4. Wijesekera is an
Attorney-at-Law and would have been well aware of

**70**

his legal rights, as is evidenced by his letter of 3.8.87 (X4) addressed to
the 1st respondent. He must surely have asked why he was being arrested and
been informed of the reason:

It was submitted that there is nothing in 1 R4 to indicate that the 2nd
respondent was acting under Regulation 18 of the Emergency Regulations. But
the Emergency Regulations were in operation at the time, and as stated
earlier, it was common knowledge that a spate of, violence had spread
throughout the country on the day the Peace Accord was signed. Wijesekera
therefore would have known that he was being arrested for an offence under the
Emergency Regulations, more so when he was informed by the 2nd respondent that
he was being taken into custody in connection with the damage caused to the
house of the Minister of Finance, Mr. Ronnie de Mel.

I am therefore of the view that Wijesekera's arrest was lawful and that he was
informed of the reason for his arrest.

The petitioner contended that the Detention Order dated 31.7.87 could not be
made under Regulation 19 because the arrest under Regulation 18 was illegal.
But in view of my finding that the arrest was lawful, this submission must
fail.

It was then submitted that the detention of Wijesekera under the Detention
Order dated 31.7.87 (X) was not made for the purpose of investigation but was
for a collateral purpose, namely, to prevent Wijesekera from officiating at
the Annual Perahera in Devinuwara and was done mala fide at the instance of
Mr. Ronnie de Mel.

In Nanayakkara v. Henry Perera and others (3) it was held by this Court that
the detention of a person arrested without a warrant under Regulation 18 can
be justified only if the detention is for search. The expression search, it
was held, is synonymous with investigation. Colin Thome J.. said

"It is manifest, therefore, that the detention of a person' arrested without a
warrant under Regulation .18. can be justified only if the -detention is for
further investigation.. It would be unlawful to detain such a person for an
unspecified and unknown purpose as this would be an' infringement of Article
-13 (4) of the Constitution."

**71**

In the present case the '1st respondent who issued the Detention Order states
in his, affidavit that it was made.. for the purpose of investigating the
complaint made against Wijesekera. In fact, the extracts from the Police
Information Book indicate that further investigations were in fact conducted
and that the statements. of S. Wimalasiri (2133);' Justin Galapathi and
Padmasiri (2135) were. recorded, though the latter two statements were
'recorded after the second Detention Order under Regulation 17(1) was made by
the 5th respondent on Wijesekera and after he was removed to the Magazine
Prison in Borella on the night of 3.8.1987.

It was next contended that-a Detention Order. under Regulation 17 could not be
made when Wijesekera was already in custody under: a Detention Order made
under Regulation 19. Regulation 17 reads as follows:

"(a) Where the Secretary to the Ministry of Defence is of opinion with respect
to any person that, with a view to preventing such person-

(a) from acting in any manner prejudicial to, the, national: security, or to
the maintenance of public order, or to. the maintenance of essential services;
or

(b) from acting in any manner contrary to any of the provisions of sub-
paragraph (a) or sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph: (2) ' of the Regulation 41 or
Regulation 26 of these regulations;

it is necessary to do, the Secretary may make order that such person be taken
into custody and detained in custody."

The argument was that Regulation 17 contemplated the case of taking into
preventive detention a person who was at large and that that was not so in the
present case because Wijesekera was already in custody on a Detention Order
made under Regulation 19(2).

Regulation 17 applies to the detention of a person with a view to preventing
him from acting in the manner set out in sub paragraph (a) or. (b) to that
regulation and is commonly referred to as preventive detention.

In the present case the Detention Order 'X". Was made by the 1st respondent
for the purpose of making investigations into the complaint of Mr. Ronnie de
Mel, the Minister of Finance in respect of

**72**

the damage alleged to have been caused to his house by a mob led by
Wijesekera. Investigations were set in motion and the statements of Priyantha
(2R4), Sirisunanda Thero (2R2) Wimalasiri (2R3) all pointed to the fact that
Wijesekera had incited a large crowd of persons' to destroy the bungalow of
the Minister of Finance, his office, the C.W.E. and the library and that he
was going about the town inciting the crowds to further acts of violence and
damage to public buildings.

As observed earlier this was a period highly charged with emotion and tension
prior to the signing of the Peace-Accord between the President of Sri Lanka
and the Prime Minister of India, which was strongly opposed by certain
sections of the people who in protest started setting fire to and damaging
public and private property Wijesekera, an At and. the Basnayake Nilame of the
Sri Vishnu Maha Devalaya, Devinuwara was a person who was capable of wielding
considerable influence in the area and it was alleged that he was inciting the
crowds to commit these acts of violence. His alleged conduct constituted not
only an offence under regulation 26(f) but was also prejudicial to the
national security 'and maintenance of public order for which a detention order
under Regulation 17(1) could have been made in the first instance.

The Detention 'Order 'X" made by the 1st respondent. under Regulation 19(2)
was for the purpose of investigation and its duration was for a period of
ninety days only. It is true that during the period of detention it would not
have been possible for Wijesekera to have committed any further offences under
the Emergency Regulations. But ', as the. alleged offence was one of inciting
the people to acts of violence and the investigation revealed the possibility
of his resorting to the commission' of further acts of a similar nature if
released, the more effective remedy was a detention order, preventing him from
doing so under Regulation 17(1). It may well have been that the I.G.P., the
4th respondent was of that view after he ascertained from the 2nd respondent
the nature of the evidence. available against Wijesekera on 3.8.87 when he
requested the 5th respondent, the Secretary to the Ministry of. Defence, in
his Report, to issue a Detention Order under Regulation 17(1). In any event
there is nothing to prevent a detention order under Regulation 17(1) from
being made while a detention order under Regulation  9(2) was, in force,
provided the circumstances justified it, as in the present case.

**73**

It was also submitted by the petitioner. that after the Detention Order under
Regulation 19(2) was made by the 1st respondent, there was no justification
for the 5th respondent, to have issued a Detention Order under Regulation
17(1) on the same material. But after the first Detention Order was made, the
statement of Wimalasiri was recorded on 2.8.87 disclosing further evidence
against Wijesekera. When the .4th respondent, contacted the 2nd respondent on
3.8.87 in order to find out the nature of the evidence available against
Wijesekera, there was in addition the statement of Wimalasiri. Then he made
his report and request to, the' 5th respondent to issue a Detention Order
under Regulation 17(1). The 5th respondent is the Permanent Secretary to the
Ministry of Defence and in addition to the report of the 4th respondent, would
have had access to intelligence reports regarding the extent of the unrest in
the country and the danger it posed to the security of the State, before he
satisfied himself that a Detention Order under Regulation 17(1) of the
Emergency Regulations was apparently the more appropriate order to make in
order to prevent-

Wijesekera from acting in any manner prejudicial to the national security and
for the maintenance of public order.

It was next contended by counsel for the petitioner that Regulation 17 (1) of
the Emergency, Regulations in terms of which the second Detention Order was
issued on Wijesekera violated Wijesekera's fundamental rights contained in
Article 13 (4) of the Constitution and was ultra vires the Constitution.

Article 13(4) states that: "No person shall be punished with death or
imprisonment except by order of a competent court made in accordance with
procedure established by law. The arrest, holding in custody, detention or
other deprivation of personal liberty of a person, pending investigation or
trial, shall not constitute punishment."

It was submitted that Article 15(7) permits the restriction of the fundamental
rights recognised by Article 12, 13(1), 13(2) and 14 but leaves untouched
Article 13(4). This very matter came up for consideration by this court in
Vijaya Kumaranatunga v. G. V. P. Samarasinghe and others (4) and it was held
that preventive detention' under Regulation 17(1) of the Emergency Regulation
cannot be regarded as punishment and, Article 13(4) had no application to it.
Consequently Regulation 17(1) was held not to be ultra vires the Constitution.

**74**

Mr. H. L. de Silva, P.C.; Counsel for the petitioner in his written
submissions tendered after the conclusion of the hearing of the application,
with the permission' of court; criticised the decision in Kumaranatunga's case
on the ground that Soza, J.' who wrote the judgment in that case (with
Samarakoon C.J., and Ranasinghe J., agreeing) had given an 'unduly restricted
meaning' to the word 'punishment'. He submitted that in its wider sense, the
deprivation or curtailment of personal liberty even though it may be actuated
or motivated by considerations of national security or public order, "yet in
its effects and consequences also inflicts pain or suffering on the subject by
reason of the deprivation of his freedom. It does not cease to be a
'punishment' on the person who is subjected to it, merely because the objects
or purposes of the State in taking such action are to protect national
security.  .

This submission does not commend 'itself to me. In Rex v. Halliday (5), which
was a case under the Regulations made under the Defence of the Realm Act, Lord
Finley L.C. at page 165 said

'On the face of it, the statute authorizes in this. sub-section provisions of
two kinds-for prevention and' for punishment. Any - preventive measures, even
if they involve some restraint or hardship upon individuals, do not partake in
any way of the nature of punishment, but are taken by way of precaution to
prevent mischief to the State. Anyone who infringes such regulations. will
become the proper subject of punishment." (The emphasis -is mine).

Later in his judgment at page 269 he went on to say:

"One of the most obvious means of taking precautions against dangers such as
are enumerated is to impose. some restriction on the freedom of movement of
persons whom there may be any reason to suspect of being disposed to help the
enemy. It is to this that regulation 148 is directed. The measure is not
punitive but precautionary. " - .

In. Gopalan v. State' of Madras (6) the Supreme Court of India, page 27,
Mukherjee J., at page 91 quoting Lord Finlay in Rex- . Halliday (supra) said

"The word 'preventive' is used in contradistinction to the word 'punitive'.
The object is not to punish a man for- having done something but to intercept
him before he does it and to prevent him SC-Yapa v. Bandaranayake (L. H. de
Alwis, J.)

**75**

from doing it. No offence is proved, nor any charge formulated; and the
justification of such detention is suspicion or reasonable probability. and
not criminal, conviction which can only be warranted by legal evidence, vide
Lord Macmillan; in Liverridge v. Anderson (7)".

Shukla in the Constitution of India 7th Ed., page 134 states:

'The essential concept' of preventive -detention is that the detention of a
'person is not to punish him for something he has done but to prevent him from
doing it. The basis for detention is. the satisfaction of the executive of a
reasonable probability of the likelihood of the detenu acting in a manner
similar to his past` acts and preventing him by detention from doing so (The
underscoring is mine).

The power of preventive detention is qualitatively different from that of
punitive detention.'

I accordingly hold that Regulation 17 (1) of the Emergency Regulations is not
violative of Article 13(4) and is not -ultra wires the Constitution.

The petitioner finally, attacked the validity of Wijesekera's arrest, and the
two Detention. Orders made against him on the ground that they were made mala
fide at the instance of Mr. Ronnie de Mel, the Minister of Finance. The
petitioner stated. that Mr. Ronnie de Mel was not happy about Wijesekera's
election in 1986 as the. Basnayake Nilame of the Sri Vishnu Maha Devalaya,
Devinuwara, after defeating by a majority B. A. Perera who had held that post
over two decades, Wijesekera was making elaborate arrangements to ' old the
annual perahera from August 5th to the 16th, 1987 and the petitioner states
that the 2nd and 3rd. respondents took him into custody on. 30.7.87 on a
groundless complaint made by. Mr. Ronnie de Mel on the telephone to the 2nd
respondent on the morning of the 30th July, in an order to prevent Wijesekera
from officiating at the forthcoming perahera. But the complaint 1 R4 and the
statement 1 R4a of Mr. de Mel, taken along with the other statements recorded
by the Police at that time do not bear out the petitioner. It was also stated
;that Wijesekera was the organiser of the rival S.L.F. Party for the
Devinuwara Electorate during the Referendum held in 1982, while Mr. de Mel was
the U.N.P. Member of Parliament for Devinuwara. The Minister failed to get a
majority of votes and was removed from Devinuwara and appointed Member of
Parliament for Bulathsinghala. The Finance Minister was embittered by his
defeat and was now

**76**

seeking to take political revenge on Wijesekera: But the Referendum was held
in 1982 and if the Minister was inclined to take political revenge against
Wijesekera it is hardly likely that he would have waited so long till 1987 to
do so.

The first Detention Order dated 31.7.87 was issued by the 1st respondent on
Wijesekera under Regulation 19 (2) of the Emergency Regulations,. detaining
him at the Matara Police Station. Under this regulation Wijesekera was to be
detained for a period not exceeding ninety days from the date of his arrest.
It is alleged that on 3.8.87, while this Detention Order was in operation at
the funeral of Jinadasa Weerasinghe who was the M.P.. for Tangalle, the
Minister of Finance in the presence of the 1st to the 3rd respondents called
B. A. Perera and told him that he would have to officiate at the August
Perehera because Wijesekera would not be free to do so. This is denied by the
1st and 3rd respondents . in their affidavits and by B. A. Perera, himself in
his affidavit 1 R2:`

Under the. proviso to Regulation 19 (1) a person arrested and detained under
the Regulation 18 must be produced before a Magistrate within a reasonable
time, and in any event, not later than thirty days after such arrest. An
application purporting to be under this proviso was made by Wijesekera's wife
in the Magistrate's Court of Matara on 3.8.87, within four days of his arrest,
praying that Wijesekera be produced before the Magistrate an I that his
detention be declared to be a penalty, violative of Article 13 (4) of the
Constitution, which relief was not within. the jurisdiction of the Magistrate
to grant. Order was however made by the acting Magistrate that Wijesekera be
produced in court on the 4th August. But on the night of the 3rd August
Wijesekera was taken to the Magazine Prison in Colombo upon a Detention Order
made by the 5th respondent under. Regulation 17(1)

It was submitted that this course of action was adopted by the respondents in
order to circumvent the order of the acting Magistrate. The respondents have
denied this allegation in their affidavits. It would appear that by 3.8.87 the
statement of another witness called Wimalasiri had been recorded on 2.8.87
supporting the statements of the other witnesses. When the 4th. respondent
ascertained from the 2nd Respondent on 3.8.87 what the nature of the evidence
against Wijesekera was, he decided to request the 5th

**77**

respondent to issue a Detention Order under Regulation 1,7 (1) evidently as
more appropriate than a Detention Order under Regulation 19 (2). The 5th
respondent has satisfied himself on this report and no doubt, on other
material available to him, that a detention order under Regulation 17 (1) was
necessary and has issued it (1 R 5). He was justified on the available
material in making such an order, in good faith:

In Hirdaramani v. Ratnavale (8), G. P. A. Silva, J., said:

"If a conclusion of good faith is equally possible, that is to say, if the
circumstances show that the Permanent Secretary could, have honestly held the
opinion which he did before making an order for detention the submission of
counsel (of bad faith) must fail.. The Permanent Secretary could therefore
have formed an opinion even if the material available fell short of what is
required for. proof. In the words of Lord MacMillan in Liversidge v. Anderson
(7): 'The question is one of preventive detention justified by reasonable
probability, not of criminal conviction, which can only be justified by legal
evidence. As I have indicated a 'a court of law manifestly could not pronounce
upon-the reasonableness of the Secretary of State's cause of belief unless- it
were able to: place itself in the position of the Secretary of State and were
in possession of all the knowledge, both of facts and of policy, which he had.
However, the public interest must, by the nature of things, frequently
preclude the Secretary of State from disclosing to a court or to any one else
the facts and reasons which actuated him'."

The petitioner states that on the 10th August, 1987 after the perahera was
over the Finance Minister visited the Devinuwara temple with the District.
Minister for Matara and the M.P. for Devinuwara and told the Chief Incumbent
of the Temple that Wijesekera is a thief and the Minister would remove the
black coat of Wijesekera and not allow him to be the M.P. for Devinuwara. The
Petitioner has annexed two affidavits X2 .and X3 from two persons who
purported to have over-heard it. The Chief Incumbent of the temple has' filed
an affidavit (1 R7) denying that Mr. Ronnie de Mel uttered those threats when
he  visited the temple on 10.8.87: In the affidavit X3 the Superintendent of
Police was alleged to be standing in the compound of the avasaya where this
conversation is alleged to have taken place, but he also specifically denies
in his affidavit the petitioner's allegation.

**78**

The allegation of mala fides-made by the Petitioner has been denied by the
respondents .and other persons in their affidavits so that it is not possible
to come to a positive finding that it has been established. -

For the reasons given I am of the view that Wijesekera"s fundamental rights
have not been violated. The petitioner's application is dismissed without
costs.

**

SENEVIRATNE, J**.-I agree.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J**.-I agree. _  
  
Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1987/5.html_  

