##  Balthazar v. Hulangamuwa and Another - SLR - 240, Vol 2 of 1986 [1986]
LKSC 5; (1986) 2 Sri LR 240 (16 May 1986)

**240**

**BALTHAZAR** **  
v.  
HULANGAMUWA AND ANOTHER

**

SUPREME COURT  
WANASUNDERA, J., RANASINGHE. J. AND L. H DE ALWIS, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 32/85  
C.A. No. 61/76(F).  
D.C. COLOMBO No 79169/M.  
MARCH 24, 26, 27 AND 31, 1986.

_

Delict-Defamation -Military Law-Exclusive jurisdiction-Absolute privilege-
Malice

_

The 1st defendant an Army Major complained to the Army Commander that the
plaintiff who was the Commanding Officer of the Gemunu Watch had on 6.7.1973
committed an indecent assault on the 2nd defendant who was the wife of the 1
sit defendant and attempted to rape her. This complaint was made to the Army
Commander at Colombo on or about 14.7.1973 and he convened a Court of Inquiry
under the provisions of the Army Act to investigate the complaint. The Court
of Inquiry reported to the Army Commander adversely against the plaintiff. As
a result His Excellency called upon the plaintiff to retire from service and
the plaintiff acceded to this request.

The plaintiff sued the two defendants for defamation alleging that the
complaint made by the 1st defendant was false and malicious and without
reasonable and probable cause and that the complaint was made in pursuance of
a conspiracy between the two defendants. The defendants pleaded inter alia the
defence of absolute privilege.

**

Held-

**

The 1st defendant had a sufficient interest to make the charge against the
plaintiff and the Army Commander had a reciprocal duty to receive it. The oral
complaint relied on by the plaintiff constitutes an initiation of proceedings
before the Court of Inquiry and is a part and parcel of the proceedings. It
would therefore be entitled to absolute privilege The question of malice is
therefore irrelevant and all the evidence extraneous to this issue should be
struck out.

The defence of absolute privilege is available even where the statement is
voluntary

"The general principle of law is that no action will he for defamatory
statements made by a party and used in the course of any proceedings before a
Court of Justice or tribunal recognised by law. Such statements include
pleadings, interrogatories, affidavits, evidence and the judgment on the
record, even though such statements are false and malicious and irrelevant No
action will also lie for defamatory statements contained in any document which
is incidental to the proper initiation of judicial or quasi judicial
proceedings, namely, an information, complaint, writ by which proceedings are
set in action. The privilege will attach even if the document contained
something which was irrelevant or which should not have been contained
something which was irrelevant or which should not have been contained in it"

**241**

**

Cases referred to :

** _

(1) Dawkins v. Lord Rokeby - (1873) L. R. 8 0. B. 255, 263, (1875) 7 H. L.
744.

(2) Royal Aquarium and Summer and Winter Garden Society Ltd. v. Parkinson - [
1892] 1 0. B. 431.

(3) Co-partnership Farms v. Harvey Smith - [1918] 2 K. B. 405

(4) Marks v. Frogley - [ 1898] 1- Q. B. 888.

(5) Frazer v. Hamilton - 33 T. L. R. 431.

(6) Fraser v. Balfon - 34 T L. R. 502 (H. L.).

(7) Lincoln v. Daniels - [ 1962] 1 0. B. 259; [ 1961] 3 All E. R. 740.

(8) Trapp v. Mackie - [ 1979] 1 All E. R. 489.

(9) Nell's Court of Request Cases - 1845 p. 87.

(10) Attennaike v. Don Juanis - (1857) 2 Lorenz 122.

(11) Marshalls Judgments - 402.

(12) Silva v. Balasuriya - (1911) 14 N.L.R. 452.

(13) Wijegunatileke v. Joni Appu - (1920) 22 N. L. R. 231.

(14) Poulier v. Alles - (1924) 2 7 N. L. R. 219.

(15) Abdul Cader v. H. P. Kaufmann and L. D. Parsons - (1928)'29 N.L.R. 453.

(16) Harrison v. Bush - (1855) 5 E. & B. 348.

(17) Hunt v. Great Northern Railway - [ 1891] 2 O. B. 189.

(18) R. v. Rule - [1937] 2 K. B. 375.

(19) Adam v. Ward - [ 1917] A. C. 309.

(20) Watson v. M'Evan- [1905] A.C. 480.

(21) Bersford v. White - (1914) 30 T. L. R. 591. (22) Lilley v. Roney-(1892)
61 L.J.Q.B. 727. (23) Gerhold v. Baker - (1918) W. N. 368.

(24) Rippon v. Shapcott - C.A. - 1951 - unreported but referred to in Lincoln
v. Daniels (7).

(25) Szalatnay-Stacho v Fink - [ 1946] 2 All E. R. 231

(26) Roy v. Prior - [ 1970] 2 All E. R. 729.

(27) Rasselblad (GB) Ltd. v. Orbincon - [ 1985] 1 All E R. 173.

_ **

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal reported in [ 198412 S.L.R. 29.

_

H. L. de Silva, P .C. with K. Kanag-lswaran and S. Mandaleswaran for the
plaintiff-respondent-appellant.

Dr. H. W. Jayewardene, Q.C. with Ronald Perera and Miss T. Keenewinne for the
defendant-appellants-respondents.

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**242**

May 16, 1986. **  
WANASUNDERA, J**. read the following Order of Court

**ORDER OF THE COURT

** This is an action for defamation filed by the plaintiff (appellant) against
the 1st and 2nd defendants (respondents), husband and wife, jointly and
severally, claiming damages in a sum of Rs. 150,000 against them. The
plaintiff was at all material times holding the rank of Lieutenant Colonel in
the Sri Lanka Army and was the Commanding Officer of the 1st Battalion, Gemunu
Watch. The 1st defendant was also an officer of the Sri Lanka Army and held
the rank of Major in the C.L.I. and was attached to the South-East Area
Command. The defendants lived in quarters in the Gemunu Watch Camp Area,
Diyatalawa, which came within the authority of and was allotted to the
Commander of the Gemunu Watch. He had moved into those quarters with the
permission of Mr. Madawala the then Commanding Officer of the Gemunu Watch. At
that time the plaintiff was second in command and lived in the mess and
continued to do so even after he became the Commanding Officer of the Gemunu
Watch, with the defendants also continuing to occupy the quarters to which
they had moved in earlier.

The plaintiff states that on or about the 14th July 1973 the 1st defendant had
maliciously and falsely complained to Major-General Attygalle at Colombo that
the plaintiff had on 6th July 1973 at about 8.30 p.m. committed criminal force
on the 2nd defendant, with intent to outrage her modesty, and had attempted to
commit the offence of rape on her. The plaintiff averred that the said
complaint was made in pursuance of a conspiracy between the 1st and 2nd
defendants to have the plaintiff removed from the office of Commanding Officer
and thereafter to secure for the 1st defendant a higher position in the Army.
It is not quite clear whether the cause of action is based on this conspiracy
or defamation simpliciter, although it had proceeded for all purposes as one
for defamation.

The defendants in their answer stated that on the 14th July 1973 the 1st
defendant complained to the Army Commander that on the night of 6th July the
plaintiff was guilty of an indecent assault on the 2nd defendant during the
absence of the 1st defendant from the house. Further answering the defendants
stated that consequent on the complaint the Army Commander convened a Court of
inquiry

**243**

under the provisions of the Army Act to investigate the complaint and the
Court of Inquiry, after inquiry, had reported to the Army Commander adversely
against the plaintiff. As a result of this finding His Excellency the
President had called upon the plaintiff to retire from service and the
plaintiff acceded to this request.

The defendants also took up two legal defences, namely, that the complaint was
made by the 1st defendant, in the discharge of his duties as an army officer,
to the Army Commander and that it was a privileged communication and was made
on a privileged occasion. The second legal objection was that the plaintiff
had failed to give notice of the action as required by section 80 of the Army
Act.

The plaintiff obtained judgment in the District Court. The District Court held
that the complaint made by the 1st defendant was false and made maliciously
and without reasonable and probable cause; that the complaint had been made in
pursuance of a conspiracy between the two defendants; that the plaintiff
suffered humiliation and disrepute; that in consequence of the complaint the
plaintiff was removed from office of Commanding Officer; and that the
plaintiff was therefore entitled to damages in a sum of Rs. 150,000.

It would appear that on appeal to the Court of Appeal the defendants had
submitted the following principal questions for adjudication, namely

(a) That the cause of action set out in paragraph 4 of the plaint was not
borne out by the evidence.

(b) That the complaint and the proceedings consequent thereon by the Military
Court of Inquiry were absolutely privileged.

(c) That the complaint related to military discipline and was a military
matter cognizable by the Military Authorities which had exclusive jurisdiction
to deal with the matter and a civil court was precluded from questioning or
inquiring into those proceedings

(d) That the plaintiff had failed to comply with the provisions of section 80
of the Army Act (Cap. 357), which required the giving of notice of action.

**244**

The Court of Appeal after hearing submissions of counsel allowed the
defendants' appeal and dismissed the plaintiff's action. In disposing of the
appeal the Court of Appeal had dealt with ground (c) alone and held that the
complaint being by one Army Officer against another, relating to a matter
concerning discipline in the Army, it was cognizable only by a military
tribunal and the plaintiff could not maintain any action in a civil court
based on such a complaint.

Mr. H. L. de Silva for the plaintiff-appellant submitted to us that the
plaintiff, though an Army Officer, does not cease to be a citizen of Sri Lanka
so as to be deprived of his ordinary civil rights and the protection of the
civil courts. He also stated that the Court of Appeal had wrongly applied the
principle of exclusive jurisdiction which related only to matters concerning
military discipline and in any event submitted that it would not apply to a
malicious civil wrong which was the finding of the District Court.

Expanding on this Mr. H. L. de Silva submitted that military law was only a
part of the law of the land. It is applicable on a statutory basis and was
subject to the common law. A man who enlisted as a soldier did not cease to be
a citizen and did not forego his civil rights except to the extent expressly
covered by the military law. It was his submission that an Army Officer who
inflicts a civil wrong on another officer could be held accountable in the
civil courts and in this particular case, which was an action for defamation,
the defendant enjoyed only a qualified privilege which has been negatived by
proof of malice.

Counsel on both sides cited a number of authorities relevant to this precise
question which seems to be the main issue before us. Some of them are similar
to the issue before us though not identical and it may be possible to glean
from them some general principles that may be applicable to the facts of this
case. But before we turn to them there are certain other submissions that can
be conveniently disposed of at this stage.

Mr. Jayewardene for the respondents has contended that the plaintiff's case
has to be dismissed because the precise cause of action pleaded in the plaint
has not been established by the evidence. This is apart from his main
submission that in view of the absolute privilege applicable in respect of the
cause of action pleaded by the plaintiff, the cause of action should be struck
off and the action dismissed.

**245**

Mr. Jayewardene has drawn our attention to paragraph 4 of the plaint where the
plaintiff has alleged that on or about 14th July 1973 the defendants had
maliciously and falsely complained to Major-General Attygalle at Colombo that
the plaintiff had on 6th July 1973 at about 8.30 p.m. committed criminal force
on the 2nd defendant with intent to outrage her modesty and had attempted to
commit the offence of rape on her. Mr. Jayewardene has referred to the written
complaint made by the 1st defendant to the Army Commander on 14th July 1973.
The content of this document does not identify the plaintiff nor has it
referred to any offence committed by anyone. It is only the caption which
gives some indication of the nature of the complaint and the officer who was
involved. But it is conceded by plaintiff's counsel that this caption was
inserted at the request of the Army Commander and Mr. H. L. de Silva said that
he was not relying on it. If the matter rested there, we would have had to
uphold Mr. Jayewardene"s submission.

But Mr. H. L. de Silva has submitted further that he is not relying on the
written complaint P9 referred to above, but he is basing his action on an oral
complaint made by the 1st defendant to the Army Commander on the same day soon
after the written complaint was handed over to Major-General Attygalle. It
would appear that after the written complaint was handed over, there had been
a conversation between the 1st defendant and the Army Commander. Major-General
Attygalle has said in evidence that in the course of that conversation the 1st
defendant repeated the allegations he had earlier made on the 12th July. The
first intimation of this incident to the Army Commander had taken place on the
12th July when the 1st defendant at Diyatalawa telephoned the Army Commander
in Colombo and informed him that an offence had been committed on his wife
(without specifying the offence) and had identified the perpetrator of the
offence as the plaintiff. Even if this material is inadequate, Mr. H. L. de
Silva goes further and relies on an averment in the answer which, while
denying the allegation in paragraph 4 of the plaint, goes on to state "that on
the 14th July 1973 the first defendant complained to the Commander of the Army
that on the night of the 6th July the plaintiff was guilty of an indecent
assault on the second defendant during the absence of the first defendant from
his home".

Mr. H. L. de Silva concedes that, although all this material is not identical
with the precise cause of action pleaded in the plaint, he however submits
that at least one matter stated in the plaint is

**246**

substantially the same as the averment pleaded in the plaint; though
differently worded, and as such it is adequate to maintain the action. As a
general principle it has been stated that in a libel you must in your
pleadings declare upon the words and it is not sufficient to state their
substance. The learned trial judge had not given his mind to this important
discrepancy, which is of some substance. To say the least, it would have had a
substantial bearing on the reckoning of damages apart from any other
implications. Since it is possible to dispose of this appeal on the main
issue, it is unnecessary to go into this matter at this stage.

As stated earlier, counsel for the appellant has criticised the basis of the
ruling of the Court of Appeal, namely, that the subject matter of this action
is a military matter not cognizable by the court, but falls within the
exclusive domain of the military authorities. He also stated that there was no
authoritative decision of the English courts on this matter. One of the
defences taken from the outset by the defendants was that the alleged
statement was absolutely privileged. In the authorities that were cited to us,
we find that this was an alternative ground for decision along with the ground
of exclusive jurisdiction. It seems correct that the question of the exclusive
jurisdiction of a military tribunal has not been passed on by the House of
Lords in England although there are decisions of the Court of Appeal, and
probably it is for this reason that Mr. Jayewardene pressed before us the
alternate ground of absolute privilege on which there are definitive rulings
of the highest court in England. In regard to this submission Mr. H. L. de
Silva submitted that this is a civil action for defamation on a voluntary
statement made by the 1st defendant and not a military matter and can be
litigated in the ordinary courts. He further submitted that the 1st defendant
only enjoys a qualified privilege under the common law in respect of his
complaint and that this has been forfeited by the finding of malice on the
part of the defendants by the learned trial judge.

We are relieved to some extent by the concession made by counsel for the
appellant that there would be absolute privilege for an inquiry relating to a
purely military matter under law from going into the differences in the
English and the Roman-Dutch law on this subject. The extension of absolute
privilege to inquiries relating to military matters, even when there is
malice, in analogy to the principle that absolute privilege exists in respect
of statements made in the course of proceedings before courts of justice is a
settled principle of English law

**247**

and decided by the highest courts. Vide Dawkins v. Lord Rokeby (1), Royal
Aquarium v. Parkinson (2), Co-partnership Farms v. Harvey Smith (3), Marks v.
Frogley (4), Frazer v. Hamilton (5), Frazer v. Balfori (6), Lincoln v. Daniels
(7) and Trapp v. Mackie (8). Whatever be the position in Roman-Dutch law, this
English principle relating to judicial proceedings has been adopted in this
country and has also been the settled law of this country for almost 150
years. Vide Nell's Court of Requests Cases 1845 (9), Attennaike v. Don Juanis
(10), Marshall's Judgments (11), Silva v. Balasuriya (12), Wijegunatileke v.
Joni Appu (13), Poulier v. Alles (14) and Abdul Cader v. Kaufmann (15).

As far as we understood Mr. H. L. de Silva's submission, he stated that
because this is a voluntary statement not made under legal compulsion, it
enjoys only qualified privilege which is forfeited by proof of malice. But
counsel has conceded - and that was also the holding of the trial judge - that
the Army Commander had in the circumstances of this case a duty to entertain
the complaint. In the circumstances of this case can a reciprocal right in the
1st defendant also be inferred entitling him to make that complaint ?

In Harrison v. Bush (16), Lord Campbell, C.J., said:

"A communication bona fide upon any subject matter in which the party
communicating has an interest.... is privileged, if made to a person having a
corresponding interest or duty, although it contains criminating matters
which, without this privilege, would be slanderous and actionable."

In Hunt v. Great Northern Railway (17), Lord Esher, M.R. said:

"A privileged occasion arises if the communication is of such a nature that it
could be fairly said that those who made it had an interest in making such a
communication and those to whom it was made had a corresponding interest in
having it made to them. When these two things co-exist, the occasion is a
privileged one. "

In R. v. Rule (18), the Court said

"The common interest may be in respect of very varied and different matters;
indeed the only limitation appears to be that it should be something
legitimate and proper, something which the courts will take cognizance of and
not merely an interest which is due to idle curiosity or a desire for gossip-"

**248**

The above principles were stated in the context of qualified privilege.

Even when there is no duty to make a statement, it is privileged if it is made
in the protection of some lawful interest such as property or reputation. In
Adam v. Ward (19), the plaintiff, a member of Parliament, had in the course of
a debate defamed a General of the Army. The General complained to the Army
Council, which went into the matter and found that the strictures were
unjustified. The Army Council directed the defendant, who was its secretary,
to publish in the newspapers a letter vindicating the General. This letter
also contained some defamatory material concerning the plaintiff. The House of
Lords held that the occasion of this publication was privileged. In the course
of his judgment Lord Atkinson said:

"Every subject of the Crown, whatever position of our far-flung Empire he may
inhabit, has and must have an interest in the British Army, its courage, the
confidence of its men in their offices, its discipline and efficiency... It
would be a disgrace and injury to the Service if a man publicly accused of the
shameful breach of duty... was allowed to continue in command of a brigade in
the Army, unless and until he had been cleared of the accusation made against
him. Every subject, therefore, who had an interest in the Army had an interest
in being by a public communication informed of the General's acquittal."

Salmond on Torts (14th Ed .) p.233 states:

"The same principle is applicable even when the interest of the defendant is
merely the general interest which he possesses in common with all others in
the honest and efficient exercise by public officials of the duties entrusted
to them. Thus any member of the public may make charges of misconduct against
any public servant and the communication will be privileged; but the charge

must be made to the proper persons-that is to say, to those who have a
corresponding interest."

It has been mentioned earlier that as an additional feature and reinforcing
his interests the 1st defendant occupied the premises allocated to the
commander of the Gemunu Watch and the plaintiff was its Commanding Officer.
The plaintiff was not only an officer superior in rank to the 1st defendant in
the Army, but also having some direct influence over his position. The
complaint was clearly made by the 1st defendant in his capacity as an officer
of the Army

**249**

relating to the conduct and discipline of an Army officer in his capacity as a
superior officer. It is beyond doubt that the 1st defendant had a sufficient
interest to make that charge against the plaintiff and the Army Commander had
a reciprocal duty to receive it.

We will now deal with Mr. H. L. de Silva's submissions that absolute privilege
would not apply to the complaint since it was in the nature of a voluntary
complaint. No doubt the compulsory nature. of the impugned statement has been
the subject of comment in some of the reported cases. But in those cases this
was stated as a fact in marshalling the evidence and not with a view to
drawing a distinction between voluntary and compulsory statements. This was
one ground among others which went into such decisions. Absolute privilege
rests on a broader basis and is dependent on a number of factors.

The general principle of law is that no action will lie for defamatory
statements made by a party and used in the course of any proceedings before a
court of justice or tribunal recognised by law. Such statements include
pleadings, interrogatories, affidavits, evidence, the judgment or the record,
even though such statements are false and malicious and irrelevant. No action
will also lie for defamatory statements contained in any document which is
incidental to the proper initiation of judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings,
namely, an information, complaint, writ by which proceedings are set in
motion. The privilege will attach even if the document contained something
which was irrelevant or which should not have been contained in it. Gatley,
paragraphs 401 and 409 to 411.

Mr. H. L. de Silva has submitted with reference to this matter that the
complaint of the 1st defendant is not a statement entitled to absolute
privilege because it falls outside the range or the terminal points covering
such privilege which is accorded by the law. The case law shows that the
courts have applied this principle sparingly and have not been inclined to
extend this principle of absolute privilege other than to "quasi-judicial
tribunals recognised by law". Even as regards courts and such tribunals, it is
confined strictly only to statements in which public policy and the public
interest require that such protection should be given. A voluntary statement
relating to a personal matter as in this case, Mr. de Silva submits, does not
qualify for protection. To enjoy absolute privilege it must constitute a
formal complaint and constitute part of the proceedings. In Linclon v. Daniels
(supra}, Lord Justice Devlin in analysing the legal position stated

**250**

"The absolute privilege which covers proceedings in or before a court of
justice can be divided into three categories. The first category covers all
matters that are done coram judice. This extends to everything that is said in
the course of proceedings by judges, parties, counsel and witnesses, and
includes the contents of documents put in as evidence. The second covers
everything that is done from the inception of the proceedings onwards and
extends to all pleadings and other documents brought into existence for the
purpose of the proceedings and starting with the writ or other document which
institutes the proceedings. The third category is the most difficult of the
three to define. It is based on the authority of Watson v. M'Ewan (20), in
which the House of Lords held that the privilege attaching to evidence which a
witness gave coram judice extended to the precognition or proof of that
evidence taken by a solicitor. It is immaterial whether the proof is or is not
taken in the course of proceedings. In Beresford v. White, (21) the privilege
was held to attach to what was said in the course of an interview by a
solicitor with a person who might or might not be in a position to be a
witness on behalf of his client in contemplated proceedings."

It is the second and third categories that have a bearing on the matter before
us. In Watson v. M'Ewan (supra), the Earl of Halsbury Lord Chancellor reasoned
that if this absolute privilege is not granted, a plaintiff could say:

"I do not bring the action against you for what you said in the witness-box,
but I bring the action against you for what you told the solicitor you were
about to say in the witness box.' If that could be done the object for which
the privilege exists is gone, because then no witness could be called; no one
would know whether what he was going to say was relevant to the question in
debate between the parties. A witness would only have to say, 'I shall not
tell you anything; I may have an action brought against me tomorrow if I do;
therefore I shall not give you any information at all'. It is very obvious
that the public policy which renders the protection of witnesses necessary for
the administration of justice must as a necessary consequence involve that
which is a step towards and is part of the administration of justice-namely,
the preliminary examination of witnesses to find out what they can prove.".

An examination of the case law shows how difficult it is to delimit the second
and third categories. In Watson v. M'Ewan (supra), the House of Lords held
that a witness who makes a statement to the

**251**

client and solicitor in preparing the evidence for the trial is absolutely
protected. In Lilley v. Roney (22), a letter of complaint to the Law Society
against a solicitor's accompanied by an affidavit in terms of the rules under
the Solicitor's Act was held to be absolutely privileged. Lord Devlin in
Lincoln v. Daniels (supra) commenting on this case said:

"Lilley v. Roney is no authority for the proposition that all proceedings must
be regarded as initiated when first a letter of complaint is written to the
body authorised to try them. The letter that case followed the form given in
the Schedule to the Solicitors Act Rules, and, as required by the rules, was
accompanied by an affidavit. Cave, J. said: 'The letter with the affidavit is
the form given for setting in motion what are admittedly judicial
proceedings'. On such a point form is of the first importance; it is by form
rather than by the substance of the complaint that a writ is to be
distinguished from a letter before action. When the body to whom the letter is
addressed has many other functions besides that of investigating complaints,
it may not be easy to say when 'proceedings' begin."

We find the following cases falling on the other side of the line, namely,
where the privilege was denied: Gerhold v. Baker (23), Rippon v. Shapcott
(24), Szalatnay-Stacho v. Fink (25), Lincoln v. Daniels (supra) and Roy v.
Prior (26).

In Gerhold's case (supra) the plaintiff carried on business in London and had
applied to a London tribunal constituted under the Military Services Act, 1916
for exemption from military service. He claimed the exemption on the basis
that he cultivated a farm in Essex, which came under the Tendering tribunal in
Essex. The military member of the London tribunal wrote to the defendant, who
was a member of the Tendering tribunal being its agricultural representative,
stating that the chairman of the London tribunal wanted the defendant's
assistance in deciding the matter. In reply the defendant, while expressing
his inability to be present, included some very derogatory remarks about the
plaintiff as a farmer. Bankes, J., without elaborating on the reasons, held
that this case can be distinguished from Watson v. M'Ewan (supra).

In Rippon v. Shapcott (supra), the plaintiff was a barrister whose name was
included in a list of counsel entitled to conduct defences before courts-
martial in Germany. The list had been prepared by the defendant, a member of
the Judge-Advocates Department in consultation with the Bar Council. The
alleged libel was contained in a

**252**

letter written by the defendant to the Bar Council to the effect that the
Judge-Advocate General had removed the plaintiff's name from the list and
stated that this was due to misconduct on the part of the plaintiff. Although
the letter was not in form a complaint as such, the Bar Council took action on
it. It was held that the letter could not be accorded absolute privilege.

Szalatnay-Stacho v. Fink (supra) was a war time case relating to the
Czechoslovakian Government in exile in London. The Public Prosecutor of the
Czechoslovak Military Court of Appeal sent the letter complained of together
with some statements to the Military Office of the President of the Republic
of Czechoslovakia. Somervell, L. J., held that "the effect of the letter was
that the defendant was forwarding a dossier for investigation and any action
that may be thought proper" and that it was too remote from actual or
contemplated proceedings.

In Roy v. Prior (supra) the Court held that the immunity did not extend to
evidence contained in an affidavit given by a solicitor in support of a bench
warrant which was given ex parte and in circumstances in which the person
against whom the warrant was sought had no means and no other party had any
interest in challenging the evidence.

Some of these cases were reviewed in Lincoln v. Daniels (supra). In this case
the defendant wrote two letters to the Secretary of the Bar Council containing
defamatory matter concerning the plaintiff, who was a Queen's Counsel. The
Court of Appeal, while stating that the position was not entirely
satisfactory, held that the Bar Council was a distinct body from the Inns of
Court and derived its powers from the general meeting of the Bar and did not
exercise judicial functions. The letters therefore did not initiate
proceedings and were too remote from possible subsequent proceedings before
the Benchers to which absolute privilege would have been accorded. Devlin, L.
J., said

"It is a question how far the principle in Watson v. M'Evan (supra) is to be
taken. The other authorities in which the case has been considered show that
the connection between the two things-the evidence and the precognition, the
document and the draft, the actuality that is undeniably privileged and the
foreshadowing of it-must be reasonably close."

**253**

His exact reasoning appears to be contained in the following passage.

"I have come to the conclusion that the privilege that covers proceedings in a
court of justice ought not to be extended to matters outside those proceedings
except where it is strictly necessary to do so in order to protect those who
are to participate in the proceedings from a flank attack It is true that it
is not absolutely necessary for a witness to give a proof, but it is
practically necessary for him to do so, as it is practically necessary for a
litigant to engage a solicitor The sense of LORD HALSBURY'S speech is that the
extension of the privilege to proofs and precognition is practically necessary
for the administration of justice, without it, in his view, no witness could
be called I do not think that the same degree of necessity can be said to
attach to the functions of the Bar Council in relation to the Inns of Court.
It is a convenience to the public to have a central body to deal with, but
that is as high as it can be put in my judgment the defence of absolute
privilege fails "

Turning to the facts of the present case if the plaintiff had based his
arguments on the written complaint P9, then this may well have been a border-
line case and the plaintiff could have pressed the argument that the letter
being vague and unspecific in form was in the nature of a general intimation
and not a charge and was too remote to be considered as an actual initiation
of proceedings But unfortunately for the plaintiff a reliance on P9 would at
the same time imperil his case having regard to the first objection taken by
Mr. Jayewardene that there was nothing defamatory of the plaintiff in P9 Now,
when we come to the so-called complaint of the 14th July relied on by Mr. H L
de Silva we find that it is closer in proximity to the proceedings than P9 It
would also appear that this oral complaint constituted a discussion between
the Army Commander and the 1st defendant after P9 was handed over, whereby the
Army Commander made inquiries and elicited the details and circumstances
relating to the vague statements contained in P9. There is no doubt that it is
upon this material that Major-General Attygalle, the Army Commander, then
proceeded to take definitive action to convene a court of inquiry. This
statement therefore determines the starting point or the point of initiation
of the proceedings and falls within class two referred to by Lord Devlin and
is not a matter of precognition or remoteness The statement relied on by
plaintiff's counsel is not lust a vague request for investigation-that could
have been said of P9-but contained specific

**254**

charges and constituted a specific request for investigation and relief The
very fact that counsel for the plaintiff relies on the oral statement also
shows that the complaint did not require a specific form - in fact the
applicable statutory provisions do not prescribe a form.

In Hasselblad (GB) Ltd v Orbinson (27) a written complaint was sent to
European Economic Community which had power to hold inquiries The U K Court of
Appeal held that, since the Commission's proceedings relied heavily on written
communications to provide the foundation for its decision, the letter was
regarded as having been sufficiently closely connected to the process of
giving evidence for it to be covered by absolute privilege

In all the circumstances of this case we would hold that the oral complaint
relied on by the plaintiff constituted an initiation of proceedings before the
court of inquiry and constitutes a part and parcel of the proceedings. It
would therefore be entitled to absolute privilege. If so, the question of
malice is irrelevant to the decision and all the evidence extraneous to this
issue should be struck out.

We therefore make no pronouncement either way on the other factual matters
referred to by the learned trial judge

We therefore affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeal on this ground and
dismiss the appeal with costs. The defendants would be entitled to costs in
all three courts. _  
  
Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/5.html_  

