##  Collettes Limited v. Bank of Ceylon - SLR - 253, Vol 2 of 1984 [1984] LKSC
5; (1984) 2 Sri LR 253 (20 December 1984)

**  253**

**  **

**COLLETTES LIMITED**

**v.**

**BANK OF CEYLON**



SUPREME COURT,

SHARVANANDA, J., ABDUL CADER, J. AND RODRIGO, J.

S.C No. 48/83 ‑ C. A. No. 325/74 (F) ‑ D. C. COLOMBO 73754/M.

JUNE 18 TO 20, 25 TO 27, 29, 1984.

JULY 2 TO 5, 9 TO 11, 13, 16 TO 19, 23 TO 27, 30, 31, 1984.

AUGUST 1 TO 3, 6, 7, 9, 27, 1984.



_Jurisdiction of Supreme Court to review concurrent findings of fact arrived
at by the lower Courts ‑ Articles 127 and 128 of the Constitution ‑ Assessment
of demeanour of witnesses by trial Judge ‑ Non‑production of Register ‑
Presumption under section_



##  254



114 of the Evidence Ordinance ‑ Obligation to send bank statements by post ‑
Acquiescence ‑ Imputation of agent's knowledge to principal -Estoppel by
_acquiescence ‑ Scope of servant's authority ‑ Effect of prohibition to
determine whether an act of fraud and negligence by an employee was done in
the course of and within the scope of his employment ‑ Negligence and
remotenees of damages ‑ Novus actus interveniens - Onus of proof ‑ Effect of
fraud committed by officers and Directors of the Company who are not its
directing mind and will and not in control of the operation of the company ‑
Duress ‑ Commercial pressure duress ‑ Estoppel by convention._



The plaintiff was a company dealing in motor vehicles, repairs and spare
parts, and had an overdraft facility of Rs. 3 1/2 million on its account No.
22200 with the defendant bank. In August 1968, Harasgama, Managing Director of
the Plaintiff‑company made an application to the defendant‑bank to have the
overdraft facility increased to Rs. 5 million stating that the overdraft
amount then drawn was Rs. 2 million. When this application was processed it
was found that the amount overdrawn was much more. This was discovered on
28.11.1968. A check revealed that a large number of items of cheques and cash
which according to the Bank statements and deposit counterfoils in the
possession of the plaintiff amounting to Rs. 1,275,883.66 had not been
credited to the plaintiff's account and further a sum of Rs. 49,546.16 had
been debited as interest. Moreover fictitiously inflated stock statements
which did not correspond with those in the possession of the plaintiff had
been tendered month after month to the Bank to enhance the overdraft facility
and so enable as much as Rs. 3,431,409.99  inclusive of interest, expenses and
charges to be overdrawn. The fraud had gone on for 12 years and involved over
a million rupees. The Bank Statements were found to be fabricated and so were
the counterfoils.



On 05.12.1968 the defendant‑bank sent the plaintiff a certificate of balance
showing the overdraft as at 28.11.1968 to be Rs. 3,403,099.92 and this was
accepted by the plaintiff without protest. On 30.12.1968 the
plaintiff‑company, having earlier on  21.12.1968 executed a primary mortgage
in favour of the bank  hypothecating premises No. 101, D. S. Senanayake
Mawatha, Colombo against its indebtedess, signed a document admitting that as
at close of business on 14.12.1968 the amount overdrawn by it on its account
was Rs. 3,381,497.28.



The plaintiff‑company instituted this action on 22.11.1970 against the
defendant - bank praying for a declaration that cheques and cash to the value
of Rs. 1,276,883.03 were deposited by the plaintiff to the credit of its
current account No. 22200 with the defendant‑bank and the said account was
wrongfully debited with a sum of  Rs. 49,546.16 alleged to be due as interest
and that the plaintiff's said account was overdrawn on 18.11.1968 only in a
sum of Rs. 2,268,381 .34



For a first alternative cause of action the plaintiff pleaded that if the said
cheques and cash to the value of Rs. 1,275,883.03 had not in fact been
deposited then such non-deposit and/or misappropriation was due to the fraud
and /or negligent acts or omissions of the defendant and /or its servants and
agents acting in the course of their

**  255**



employment and within the scope of their authority. The defendant‑bank had
acted fraudulently and/or negligently in that it had permitted unauthorised
persons to have access to and control of blank forms of statements of account,
forms used to certify balances and/or other security documents and issued or
caused or permitted to be ad or facilitated the issue of fabricated or
incorrect receipts and monthly and weekly statements of accounts and
certificates of balances to the plaintiff. The plaintiff thus suffered a loss
of Rs. 1,275,883.66 together with debited interest in a sum of 49,546.16.



For a second alternative cause of action, if the cheques and cash to the value
of  Rs. 1,275,883.66 had not been brought to deposit, the defendant and/or its
servants had jointly with one Ingram who was the Sales Manager of the
plaintiff and a Director of Collettes Finance Ltd. a subsidiary of the
plaintiff‑company misappropriated them and plaintiff was entitled to recover
the said sum as loss and damage suffered.



The defendant‑bank took up the position that the cheques and cash referred to
had not in fact been deposited and the receipts in respect of such alleged
deposits were faked and disclaimed liability for the fraudulent actions and
concealments of Ingram who was plaintiff's Sales Manager and also a Director
of one of its subsidiaries. On the fraudulent representations made monthly by
the plaintiff to the defendant in regard to the value of its Stocks, the
plaintiff was able to overdraw on its current account more than it would
otherwise would have been entitled to overdraw and the damages if any suffered
by the plaintiff was due to its own fraud. The defendant had sent the
plaintiff statements of accounts, and certificates of balances relating to the
current account of the plaintiff and so also had the auditors sent
confirmation slips of the state of its current account but the plaintiff had
not questioned them nor had it at any time material to the action imputed
fraud to the defendant's employees. The plaintiff had accepted the certificate
of balance of 05.12.1968 without protest and signed the document of 30.12.1968
acknowledging it had overdrawn a sum of Rs. 3,381,497.28. In addition the
plaintiff had executed a primary mortgage in respect of premises No. 101 D. S.
Senanayake Mawatha. On the faith that no allegations of fraud were being made
against it the defendant extended further credit facilities to the plaintiff.
Therefore the plaintiff was estopped from now denying the sum due or asserting
fraud and negligence and claiming damages. The plaintiff company then filed a
further pleading on 10.12.1971 averring that it, through two of its Directors,
was induced to sign the mortgage dated 1.12.1968 and document dated 30.12.1968
by the deliberate misrepresentations, Suppressions of facts, duress, undue
influence and threats of harm to the Company by the defendant's General
Manager, C. Loganathan, and by a breach of the fiduciary duty the defendant
owed the plaintiff‑company and its Managing Director Harasgama.



At the conclusion of the trial Counsel for the plaintiff‑company conceded he
had failed to prove his main cause of action viz. the alleged deposit of cash
and cheques to the value of Rs. 1,275,883.66 and the District Judge found
accordingly but he (Counsel for plaintiff) relied on the two alternative
causes of action based upon fraud and negligence and/or misappropriation on
the part of the Bank's agents and employees acting in the course of and within
the scope of their duties.



The bank employee mainly involved was Abeywickrema. He worked in the Foreign
Department of the defendant‑bank as a ledger clerk from 1955‑1957 and in the
Loan Department from 1957‑1962 and from 1962 to June 1966 again in the Foreign

##  256



Department as clerk‑in‑charge of checking export documents. From 15.06.1966
the worked in the York Street. Branch on Ledger No. 8 where plaintiff s
account was until September 1966\. He later worked on Ledger No. 9 from
11.06.1968 to 23.08.1968 and during this period plaintiff's account was in
this Ledger. Amerasinghe was also working with Abeywickrema  from 12.08 1965.
at the defendant-bank and he succeeded Abeywickrama as Ledger clerk-in-charge
of  plaintiff's account on 23.08.1968 right up to 28.11.1968 when Ingram's
fraud was discovered. The Plaintiff's case was that Abeywickrema went out of
his way to pilfer plaintiff's statements of accounts when he was not in charge
of plaintiff's account and later when he was in charge of its account between
June to September 1966 and June to August 1968 and fraudulently handed them
over to Ingram. From August to November 1968 Amerasinghe handed over the
statements to Abeywickrema to be delivered to Ingram.



On the first alternative cause of action, the trial Judge found that the
defendant-bank had been negligent in the matter of storing its blank forms and
keeping them away from the reach of unauthorised persons. It had failed to
follow its own Rules and instructions set out in the Bank of Ceylon Manual of
Operations with regard to the delivery of bank statements and certificates of
balances. Its employee Abeywicrema helped later by another employee
Amerasinghe had in the course of his employment intercepted the genuine bank
statements and certificates thus preventing them from going by post and
substituted them with fabricated statements and certificates on pilfered
obsolete and discarded blank forms available in the Bank and handed them to
Ingram for delivery to the plaintiff-company and also introduced into the bank
fabricated stock certificates received from Ingram who was his brother-in-law.
These acts and omissions the trial Judge held established negligence and
complicity on the part of Bank in the fraud committed by its employees mainly
Abywickrema. The trial Judge therefore held with the plaintiff on the first
alternative cause of action and entered judgment for plaintiff in a sum of Rs.
1,169,240.93 as representing the loss and damage sustained by the plaintiff.



On the second alternative cause of action the trial Judge held that no
misappropriation by the defendant's employees had been proved and that it was
Ingram the plaintiff's Sales Manager who had misappropriated the cash and
cheques.



**Held ‑**



(1) The appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is all embracing and
unfettered. On leave to appeal being granted under Articles 127 and 128 of the
Constitution the Supreme Court is vested with Power as a final Court of Civil
and Criminal appellate jurisdiction to consider the correctness of the
decision appealed against on any ground whether on questions of fact or law
and to affirm, reverse or vary any judgment or decree of the Court of appeal
or any Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution. It has
jurisdiction to revise concurrent findings of fact reached by the lower court
in appropriate cases. However, ordinarily it will not interfere with findings
of fact based upon relevant evidence except in special circumstances as for
instance where the judgment of the lower Court shows that the relevant
evidence bearing on a fact has not been considered or irrelevant matter have
been given undue importance or that the conclusion rests mainly on erroneous
considerations or is not supported by sufficient evidence. In the instant case
the District Judge had grievously gone wrong in his opinion. The judgment by
its manifest errors of law and fact would result in a miscarriage of justice
if the Court of Appeal had affirmed it.

##  257



(2) An appellate Court can interfere, although it will do so rarely, with the
trial Judge's assessment of demeanour. The demeanour of a witness ought not to
be adopted by a trial Judge without  testing it against the whole of the
evidence of the witness Harasgama Managing Director of the plaintiff- bank
that he failed to take into account  that Hiragana's principal claim was false
and untenable to his own knowledge, that his evidence on the non‑receipt of
the Bank's statements by post when the other subsidiaries of the Group had
received theirs by post was open to question, that he had employed private
detectives to steal documents from the defendant and that he had not taken
timely steps to prevent Ingram's flight from Sri Lanka.



(3) For the defendant‑bank to be liable for the acts of Abeywickrema and
Amerasinghe they must have been committed fraudulently or negligently in the
course of and within the scope of their employment as Ledger Clerks under the
defendant. In order to determine whether the proved act of negligence of fraud
on the part of a servant is within or without the scope or course of his
employment, it is not enough to decide whether or not what was done was
prohibited conduct. The prohibition may either limit the scope of his
employment or merely regulate his conduct within the sphere of his employment.
If the latter the employer from liability if the act was merely a mode or
method of doing what the servant was employed to do. The distinction is
between an order which limits the scope of the employment and an order which
limits the method in which the duties of the servant may be performed.



(4) According to the Bank rules the Ledger Clerk is prohibited from having
anything to do with the sending out of the bank statement which is handled by
an independent officer called the Adjuster who in this area of duty was an
"outsider" and his actions did not bind the Bank. The Ledger Clerk permitted
to hand over weekly statement to a customer in a book maintained by the Ledger
Clerk the entries wherein are initialled on identification by the cheque book
clerk. In practice these statements are handed over by the Ledger Clerk to the
person who comes to deposit the Company's monies.



The rules of the Bank's Manual of Operations are merely counsels of perfection
and they afford valuable criteria of the risk against which the bank has to
guard. They do not constitute a legal measure of the liability of the Bank and
failure to comply strictly with them cannot render the Bank negligent. The
trial Judge erred in thinking otherwise. The Bank's admitted obligation to
send the statement of accounts to the plaintiff could be fulfilled by sending
them by post or by delivering them to plaintiff's representatives.



(5) In any event the plaintiff-company's employees paul Fernando the
Accountant and Lionel Fernando the Assistant Accountant and their predecessors
before them and the Accounts Section were aware of and acquiesced in the
handing over of the monthly statements (from 1958 to 1962) and weekly
statement (from 1962 to November 1968) to Ingram (their Sales Manager and
Director of one of their subsidiaries) and their knowledge is in law the
knowledge of the Company even if the Managing Director Harasgama was, though
this is unlikely, unaware of it. The knowledge of an agent will generally be
imputed to his principal where the agent received the  agent  information in
connection with a transaction in which he is acting for his principal and
where it is his

##  258



An acquiescence is not a question of fact but of legal inference from facts
found. It must be intentional conduct with knowledge. Plaintiff is now
estopped by twelve years (1956 to 1968) of acquiescence from complaining that
the delivery of the bank statements to Ingram is wrongful : it is bound by
such performance. Although thee plea of estoppel arising from acquiescence was
neither pleaded nor raised in the issues, yet the trial Judge dealt with the
issue of plaintiff's acquiescence and found against the defendant on it. Hence
this matter can be dealt with in appeal.



(6) By acquiescing in Ingram's acts of collecting the bank statements the
plaintiff held him out to the defendant as having authority to collect the
monthly and weekly statements and thereby dispensed with the necessity of
sending them by post. The plaintiff by its conduct ratified and adopted the
delivery of the statements to Ingram on  its behalf and the obligation of the
defendant to send them to the plaintiff was thereby discharged. There was here
estoppel by acquiescence.



(7) When Abeywickrema handed over the bank statements to Ingram when he was
not functioning as Ledger Clerk in charge of plaintiff's accounts, he did
something so remote from his duties as to be altogether outside and
unconnected with his employment. There was no evidence that the plaintiff or
Ingram relied on any ostensible  authority of Abeywickrema to hand over the
statements or changed positions upon the faith of it nor is there evidence of
any representation made by the defendant bank. the essence of ostensible
authority is that the employer by his words or conduct represents to third
parties that his servant has his authority to perform certain types of  acts
and once the third party has acted on the faith of that ostensible authority
the master is not entitled to deny that the servant in truth had such
authority. A prohibition cannot effect a servant's ostensible authority unless
it is known to the other party. The liability  of the employer will not be
affected by an order which limits the method or mode by which the duties of
the servant may be performed.



During the two spells June to September 1966 and 11th June to 23rd August 1968
when Abeywickrema was functioning as Ledger Clerk working on plaintiff's
accounts he had authority according to the Bank Rules to hand over the
statement to the plaintiff‑company or its accredited representative and if he
had negligently, fraudulently or otherwise wrongly assumed that Ingram was an
authorised representative of the  plaintiff‑company and delivered to him the
bank statements the bank will be liable.



Abeywickrema and Amerasinghe acted in the transaction to help Ingram. The
issuing of the statements to Ingram was acquiesced in by the
plaintiff‑company. Hence the plaintiff‑company cannot claim against the
defendant‑bank on the basis of the negligent or fraudulent acts committed by
defendant's agents or servants.



(8) The trial Judge's finding that Abeywickrema prepared the false bank
statements relating to plaintiff's account cannot be sustained and must be set
aside.



(9) The evidence in any event does not conclusively establish that during all
the 12 year period 1956 to 1968 none of the Bank statements and certificates
came to the plaintiff by post. Except for the 75 weekly statements admitted by
Abeywickrema to have been delivered by him to Ingram the plaintiff must be
held not to have proved that the other monthly and weekly statements from
August 1956 to the end of November 1968 had not been received by post by the
plaintiff‑company because :

**  259**



_(a)        _Ingram could have, on the basis of the arrangements for handling
plaintiff's mail at its own office, appropriated. the genuine bank statements
and certificates at the plaintiff's own office on their arrival by post and
substituted them with faked ones.



_(b)_        One Ledger Clerk at least of Bank namely Bunny during the period
he handled plaintiff's account had not handed over the bank statements to
Abeywickrema and these statements would have gone by post.



_(c)        _The Bank Statements of the other companies of the Collettes group
were admittedly coming by post.



_(d)_         The plaintiff had called for weekly statements from the Bank
obviously in its anxiety to monitor its finances more closely and would want
to scrutinize the Bank statements regularly and if these were not coming by
post it would have been known to the Accounts Section and Directorate of the
plaintiff.

_ _

_(e)_         The burden of proof of the non‑receipt by post of the Bank
Statements was on the plaintiff but the Inward Mail Registers of the plaintiff
which would have shown the non‑receipt of the Bank Statements by post though
listed were not produced raising an adverse inference on the basis of section
114 of the Evidence Ordinance.



(10)      It would have been impossible for the bank to ensure against its
Ledger Clerk pilfering bank statement forms. In any event the bank cannot be
liable for forgeries committed by a third party on discarded forms stolen from
the bank. It would be far- fetched to say the bank facilitated the forgeries.
It is a clear case of novus actus interveniens. Assuming there was negligence,
the damage complained of could not have been contemplated as a reasonably
foreseeable consequence of such negligence. The damages claimed are too
remote.



(11)      The onus of proof is on the plaintiff to show that a particular item
of damage is not remote before he can recover it. Plaintiff has not discharged
this burden.



(12)      A company is liable in torts for all the wrongful acts of the
persons who control the  management of its undertaking when they are acting as
such. Those persons may be the Directors collectively, or some of the
Directors who in fact manage the Company's businesses or the governing body
may be a single Managing Director or even a Manager who is not a Director at
all. These will be in the "brain area" of the company and be its directing
will and mind, its alter ego. But Ingram was not the directing mind and will
of the Company. He was not in the "brain area" or in the top management area
of the Company and did not hold any position of control nor share in the
management. The role he Played in the administration of the company was a
subservient role, the role of a trusted employee or servant or agent. Nor can
the co‑perpetrators of the fraud from the Company's Directorate ‑ Samuel
(Finance Director), Wickremasinghe and Classen (Directors) ‑ be individually
or collectively identified with the Company as representing its directing mind
and will. They were not in control of the operation of the Company cannot be
identified with the company. Hence the plaintiff's action cannot fail on the
Principle that a wrong‑doer is out of court. The maxim of public policy ex
turpi causa  non oritur actio does not apply.

##  260



(13)      The allegations of duress, influence and threats in connection with
the admission of the amount of the overdraft and mortgage bond made for the
first time in the plaintiff's further pleadings of 10. 12.71 are an
afterthought and not borne out by the previous correspondence and the
concession that Rs. 1,273,883.60 in­ cash and cheques was not in fact
deposited. Further the bond and the document admitting the  quantum of the
overdraft were voluntarily approved by the Board of Directors of the
plaintiff‑company. There was not that coercion that will vitiate consent.
Harasgama had no ground to doubt the correctness of the bank's accounts and
the Bank's demand for a certificate accepting the correctness of the accounts
even though supported by a certain measure of economic pressure was lawful.
The plaintiff was still free not to succumb to such pressure. It had the
benefit of independent advice and  it raised no protest until three years
later. The demand of the defendant‑bank was neither unjust nor
unconscionable. Therefore the commercial pressure under which the plaintiff
acted did not amount to duress. The District Judge's finding on duress is
wrong.



(14)      When the parties made the basis of their transaction an agreed
statement of facts the truth of which is assumed by the convention of the
parties, each will be estopped as against the other from questioning the truth
of the statement of the facts so assumed. This is the principle of estoppel by
convention. It was on the certificate admitting the quantum of liability and
the Mortgage bond that the defendant continued to extend overdraft facilities
to the plaintiff. The plaintiff having obtained this advantage to which it.
became entitled on the basis of acceptance of the certificate and the
execution of the Mortgage bond cannot now resile from them and say they are
void. The plea of estoppel by convention is entitled to succeed.

Cases referred to :



(1) _         Srimati Bibhabati Devi v. Kumar Ramendra Narayan Roy _[ 1946] AC
508, 521.



(2)        Silva v. Swaris (1904) 1 Bal 6 1.



#### (3)        Nawadun Korale Co‑operative Stores Union Ltd. v. Premaratne
(1954) 55 NLR 505



(4) _         Sri Lanka Ports Authority v. Peiris _[ 1981] 1 Sri LR 101.



(5)        Flower v. Ebbw Vale Steel, Iron and Coal Company Limited [ 1936] AC
206, 220, 221.



(6)        Powell v. Streatham Manor Nursing Home [ 1935] AC 243.



(7)        Yuill v Yuill [1945] All ER 183, 188, 189.



(8)        Raghavamma v. Chenchamma AIR 1964 SC 136.



(9)        _Mt. Bilas Kunwar v. Desraj Ranjit Singh_ AIR 19 15 PC 96 ; 37
Allahabad 557, 30 IC 299



(10)      _Thirumalai 1yengar v. Subba Raja_ AIR 1962 Madras 219



(11) _      Karwadi v. Shambharkar _AIR 1958 Bombay 296.



(12)      _Ramanathan Chettiar v. Viswanathan Chettiar_ AIR 194 1 PC 43.



(13)      _Chandra Narayan Dec v. Ramachandra Serawgi_ AIR 1946 Patna 66



(14)      _John Henshal (Ouarries) Ltd v. Harvey_ [1965] 1 All ER 725, 729.





##    261



(15)      _H, L. Bolton (Engineering) Co. Ltd. v. T J. Graham & Sons Ltd._ [
1956]13 All ER 624,630.



(16)      _Applebee v. Percy_ [ 1874] L. R. 9C. P. 64 7, 656.



(17)      _Stiles v Cardiff Steam Navigation Co._ [1864] 33 L.J. O.B, 310.



(18)      _Penhallow v. Mersey Docks and Harbour Board_ (1861) 30 L.J. Ex.
329, 331.



(19)      _Sunlife Assurance Co. of Canada v. W. H. Smith & Son Ltd. _(1934)
150 Law Time 2 11, 2 15.



(20)      _Dodwell & Co. Ltd. v. John _(1918) 20 NLR 206.



(21)      _De Bussche v. Alt_ [ 1878] 8 Ch. D. 286, 314.



(22)      _Cairncross v. Lorimer_ (1860) 3 Macq. (H. L.) 829.



(23)      _Sarat Chunder Dey v. Gopal Chunder Laha_ [ 1892] L. R. 19 A. C. 1A
203.



(24)      _Plumb v. Cobden Flor Mills Co. Ltd._ [1914] A.C 62,67



(25)      _Limpus v. Londen General Omnibus Co_. [1862] 1H & C 526.



(26)      _Canadian Pacific Railway v. Lockhart_ [ 1942] 2 All ER 464, 468;
(1942) A. C. 591.



(27)      _Twine v. Bean,s Express Ltd._ [1946] 1 All ER 202 ; 175 L.T 131.



(28)      _Lloyd v. Grace, Smith & Co. _[1912] AC 716, 737.



(29)      _Uxbridge Permanent Benefit Building Society v. Pickard_ [1939] 2
K.B. 248 ;(1939) 2 All ER 344.

_ _

(30)      _Metropolitan Police Commissioner v. Charles_ [1976] 3 All 112, 114

_ _

(31)      _Freeman & Lockyer (a firm) v. Buckhurst Park Properties _(Mangal)
Ltd. [1964] 1 All ER 630, 641, 646 ; 1964 2 Q.B. 480

_ _

(32)      _Kooragang Investments Pty Ltd. v. Richardson & Wrench Ltd. [1981] 3
All ER 65._

_ _

(33)      _United Africa Co. v. Saka Owoade [1957] 3 All ER 216 ; 1955 A.C
130._



(34)      _London County Council v. Cattermoles (Garages) Ltd. [1953] 2All ER
582 ; 1953 1 WLR 997._

_ _

(35)      _Goh Choon Seng v. Lee Kim Soo [1925] AC 550._



(36)      _Biggar v. Rock Life Assurance Co. [1902] 1 KB 516._



(37)      _Munday v. London County Council [1916] 2 K.B. 331, 334._



(38)      _East Suffolk Rivers Catchment Board v. Kent [1940] 4 All ER 527,
532 : [1941] A.C 74 (H.L.)._



(39)      _Overseas Tankship (U.K.) v. Morts, Docks & Engineering Co.  The
Wagon Mound (No. 1) [1961] 1All ER 404 ; [1961] A.C. 388 ; [1961] 2 WLR 126
(P.C)._



(40)      _Hughes v. Lord Advocate [1963] 1 All ER 705 ; [1963] 2 WLR 779 ;
[1963] A.C. 837 (H.L.)_

_ _

(41)      _McLean v. Bell (1932) 147 L.T. 262 ; 48 TLR 467._



(42)      _Re Polemis and Furnss, Whithy & Co. Ltd. 1921 3 KB 560_



##  262



(43) _       S. S. Singleton Abbey v. S. S. Paludina [ 192 7] A. C. 16, 25‑26
(H. L)._



(44)      _The Paludina [1925] P 40, 43, 48, 49, 50 (C.A.)_



(45)      _The Oropesa 1942 P. 140, 144._



(46)      _The qropesa [ 1943] 1 All ER 211 ; 1943 P 32, 37 (C. A.)._



(47)      _Canadian Pacific Railway Company v. Kelvin Shipping Company Limited
(1927) 138 Law Times 369 (H. L.)._

_ _

(48)      _The Guildford [ 1958] 3 All ER 915, 919._



(49)      _McWilliams v. William Arrol & Co. [ 1962] 1 All ER 623, 626, 628
(H.L)._



(50)      _McLoughlin v. O' Brian [ 19831 AC 410, 426._



(51)      _Woods v. Duncan [1946] AC 401, 442._



(52)      _Weld ‑Blundell v. Stephens [1920] AC 956: 986. _



(53)      McKew v. Holland & Hannen & Cubitts (Scotland) [ 1969] 3 All ER
1621, 1623.



(54)      _Home Office v. Dorset Yacht Co._ [ 1970] 2 All ER 294, 298.



(55)      _Petrovitch v. Callinghams [ 196912 Lloyds Reports 386._



(56)      _Stansbie v. Troman [ 1948] 1 All ER 599 ; 1984 2 KB 48._



(57)      _Lamb v. London Borough of Camden [ 1981] 2 All ER 408._



(58)      _Henderson v. Williams [ 1895] 1 QB 521, 529 ; [1902] AC 325,
331-332._



(59)      _Bank of Ireland v. Evans Trustees [ 1955] 5 HL 380._



(60)      _Lloyds Bank Ltd., v. E.B. Savory & Co. [1933] AC 201 , [1932] All
ER 105, 109._



(61) _       Motor Traders Guarantee Corporation Ltd. v. Midland Bank Ltd.
[1937] 4All ER  90,94._



(62)      _Orbit Mining & Trading Co. v. Westminster Bank Ltd. [1962] 3 All ER
565, 580._



(63)      _Lennard's Carrying Co., Ltd. v. Asiatic Petroleum Co., Ltd. [1915]
AC 705_



(64)      _Fanton v. Denville [1932] 2 K. B. 309._



(65)      _Rudd v. Elder Dempster & Co. [1933] 1 K. B. 566, 576._



(66)      _H. M. S. Truculent, The Admiralty v. The Divina (Owners) [1951] 2
All ER 968._



(67)      _The Lady Gwendolen 1965 2 All ER 283_.



(68)      _Tesco Supermarkets Ltd. v. Nattrass [ 1971] 2 All ER 127 (HL)_.



(69)      _Smith v. Jenkins (1969) 119 CLR 39 7 (1970) 44 A. L. J. R. 78._



(70)      _Barton v. Armstrong [1976] AC 104._



(71)      _Pao On v. Lau Yiu Long [ 1980] AC 614._



(72)      _Maskell v. Horner [1915] 3 KB 106._



(73)      _Occidental Worldwide Investment Corp. V. Skibs A/S Avanti The
"Sibeon" and the "Sibotre" [1976], 1 Lloyds 283._

_ _

(74)      _North Ocean Shipping Co. Ltd. v. Hyundai Construction Co. Ltd.
[1978] 3 All ER 1170  _



**  263**



(75)      _Universe Tankships Inc. of Monrovia v. International Transport
Worker's Federation [ 1982]2 All ER 67._

_ _

(76)      _Thom v. Motor Trade Association [1937] 3 All ER 157, 160._



(77)      _The Amalgamated Investment and Property Co. Ltd., v. Texas Commerce
International Bank [ 1981] 3 All ER 5 77, 584._

_ _

(78)      _Keen v. Holland 1984] 1 All ER 75._



(79)      _Grundt v. Great Boulder Proprietary Gold Mines Ltd. (1938) 59 CLR
641, 657._



(80)      _Verschures Creamenes v. Hull & Netherland Steamship Co. Ltd. [1921]
2 KB 608,612._



(81)      _Foster v. Essex Bank 17 Massachussets Reports 478._



(82)      _Giblin v. McMullen [1868] LR 2 PC 317._



(83)      _Foley v. Hill [1848] 2 HL Cas. 28._



(84)      _De Zilva v. Cassim (1903) 7 NLR 230, 233._



(85)      Gray v. Barr [ 1971] 2 All ER 949.



(86)      _Colburn v. Patmore 1834 1 CR. M. & R 73 ; 3 L. J. Ex. 317. _



(87)      _Hardy v. Motor Insurers Bureau [ 1964] 2 All ER 742._



(88)      _Derry v. Peek [1889] 14 App. Cas. 33 7._



(89)      _Le Lievre v. Gould_  [1893] 1 QB 491, 503.



**APPEAL** from the Court of Appeal.



_P Navaratnarajah, Q. C._ with _H. L. de Silva, P. C., K. Kanag Iswaran, S.
Mahenthiran, K. Neelakandan, Miss U. Weerasinghe, Miss. R. Kandasamy_ and _A.
A. M. Illiyas_ for Plaintiff‑appellant.



  _H. W. Jayewardene, Q.C._ with _J. W. Subasinghe_ , _P.C., K. N. Choksy,
P.C., L. C. Seneviratne and Lakshman Perera_ for defendant‑respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._



October 10, 1984.

SHARVANANDA, J.



This appeal has come up before this court, with leave granted by the Court of
Appeal on the ground that it involves substantial questions of law and also
with leave granted by this court, under article 128(2) on the ground that this
was a fit case for review by this court. When so  granting leave this court
granted permission to both plaintiff‑appellant and the defendant‑respondent to
make submissions on the entire case, both on facts and on the law involved in
this case.

##  264



## Concurrent findings of facts



At the hearing before us when Counsel for the defendant‑respondent canvassed
the correctness of certain findings of fact made by the trial Judge which were
confirmed by the Court of Appeal, counsel for the plaintiff‑appellant objected
to the reviewing by us of the concurrent findings of fact arrived at by the
lower courts and urged that this court should not disturb the concurrent
findings of fact. Counsel for the appellant invited this court to adopt the
practice of the  Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, of declining to
review the evidence for the third time when there are concurrent judgments  of
two courts on clear questions of facts and referred us to certain propositions
enunciated by the Privy Council in _Srimati Bibhabati Devi v. Kumar Ramendra
Narayan Roy_ (1). With reference to that practice the Privy Council said at
page 521 :



"In order to obviate the practice, there must be some miscarriage of justice
or violation of some principle of law or procedure. That miscarriage of
justice means such a departure from the rules which permeate all judicial
procedure as to make that which happened not in the proper sense of the word
judicial procedure at all".



I have observed that the practice of non‑interference in a. case of concurrent
findings of facts "is not a cast‑iron one, and ...... there may occur cases of
such an unusual nature as will constrain the Board to depart from the
practice."



Article 127 of our Constitution spells out the appellate jurisdiction of this
court. It provides that this court (Supreme Court) is a final court of civil
and criminal appellate jurisdiction for the correction of all errors in fact
or in law which shall be committed by the Court of Appeal or any court of
first instance, tribunal or other institution and that this court may, in the
exercise of its appellate jurisdiction, affirm, or reverse or vary any
judgment or decree of the Court of Appeal. It will thus be seen that the
appellate jurisdiction of this court is all embracing and unfettered. On leave
being granted under  Article 128 to appeal to this court, this court is vested
with the power, as a final Court of Appeal to consider the correctness of the
decision appealed against on any ground, whether on questions of fact or law.
This is a court of re‑hearing. _Silva v. Swaris_ (2), Sansoni, J. in _Nawadun
Korale_ _Co ‑operative Stores Union Ltd. v Premaratne_ (3)  the leave granted
under Article 128, though it is a precondition for the maintainability of an
appeal to this court, cannot circumscribe the scope of the appeal _Sri Lanka
Ports Authority v. Pieris_ (4). Thus this court undoubtedly has

**  265**



the jurisdiction to revise the concurrent findings of fact reached by the
lower court in appropriate cases. However, ordinarily it will not interfere
with findings of fact based upon relevant evidence except in special
circumstances, such as, for instance, where the judgment of the lower court
shows that the relevant evidence bearing on a fact has not been considered or
irrelevant matters have been given undue importance or that the conclusion
rests mainly on erroneous considerations or is not supported by sufficient
evidence. When the judgment of the lower court exhibits such shortcomings,
this court not only may but is under a duty to examine the supporting evidence
and reverse the findings



Counsel for the defendant‑respondent has persuasively argued before us that
this court being the final appellate court for and within the Republic of Sri
Lanka, is the counterpart of the House of Lords which is the Supreme Court of
Appeal in Great Britain, and it would be more appropriate that this court
should follow the practice of th House of Lords in the exercise of its
appellate jurisdiction on questions of fact, rather than that of the Judicial
Committee of the Privy Council, Which is the final court of appeal of the
British Commonwealth and British colonies. In the nature of things the Privy
Council labours under certain handicaps in embarking on a fresh examination of
facts for the purpose of reviewing concurrent findings by lower courts. The
court from which an appeal is taken whether from a colony or some Dominion is
naturally better adapted to appreciate local customs, conditions, habits and
ways of the witnesses. The local court is better equipped to assess evidence
involving questions of relationships and ‑conduct peculiar to the locality
from which the case came and whose significance is specially within the
knowledge of the courts of that country. The Privy Council suffers inevitably
from its alienage, though it is the apex of the hierarchy of courts. I would
therefore prefer to adopt the practice of the House of Lords in the matter of
consideration of questions of facts since that court, like the Supreme Court
of Sri Lanka, suffers no such limitations as the Privy Council in the matter
of findings of fact by an alien trial court.



Halsbury Laws of England, 4th Edition, Vol. 10, para 744 at page 340 and 341
states the jurisdictional practice of the House of Lords as follows :



" Except in cases when the findings of fact by the tribunal appealed from are
made final by statute, questions of fact are as much open to review by the
House of Lords as are questions of law. The House

##  266



is, however, reluctant to disturb concurrent findings of facts of the courts
below, but will revise the findings if it considers them erroneous or if fresh
evidence is available. Moreover the House will hesitate to interfere with the
findings of the judge who saw and  heard the witnesses, unless it is a
question not of credibility of the witnesses, but of sufficiency of the
evidence. However, the House will more readily form an independent opinion
where the finding of fact is really an inference drawn from facts specifically
found by the judge and where there is no question of the credibility of the
witnesses. "



In this connection the observations of Lord Wright in _Flower v. Ebbw Vale
Steel, Iron & Coal Company Limited_ (5) at 220, 221 are relevant to the
consideration of the judgment under appeal :

##  267



fact. I his House will always in Proper cases reconsider the evidence
notwithstanding that there are concurrent findings of fact, and this is a case
in my opinion in which reconsideration is justified."



Circumstances in which an appellate court will interfere and ought to
interfere with the judgment of the trial Judge on questions of fact largely
founded on opinion of witnesses' demeanour are set out vividly by Lord Greene
M.R. in _Yuill v. Yuill_ (7)  as follows :



"We are reminded of certain well known observations  in the House of Lords
dealing with the position of an appellate court when the Judgment of the trial
Judge has been based in whole or in part upon his opinion of the demeanour of
the witnesses. It can, of course, only be on the rarest occasions, and in
circumstances where the appellate court is convinced by the plainest
considerations that it would be justified in finding that the trial Judge  has
formed a wrong opinion. But when the court is so convinced it is, in my
opinion, entitled and indeed  found to give effect to its conviction. It has
never been laid down by the House of Lords that an appellate court has no
power to take this course. Puisne judges would be the last persons to lay
claim to infallibility, even in assessing the demeanour of a witness. The most
experienced Judge may, albeit rarely, be deceived by a clever liar or led to
from an form an unfavourable opinion of an honest witness and may express his
view that his demeanour was excellent or bad, as the case ay be. Most
experienced counsel can, I have no doubt, recall at least e case where this
has happened to their knowledge. I may further point out that an impression as
to the demeanour of a witness ought not to be adopted by a trial judge.
Without testing it against the whole of the evidence of the witness in
question."



In my view the opinion of the trial judge on vital questions of fact is flawed
by the kind of shortcoming referred to by Lord Greene M.R. The trial judge has
overlooked relevant considerations in the assessment of the evidence. He had
not directed his mind to relevant questions  and had failed to apply correct
principles of law to the facts. The deficiencies in the judgement are such
that I am convinced that an appeal court will be failing  in its primary duty
if it inhibits itself by regarding the findings of fact arrived at by the
District Judge as un reviewable and final just because credibility of
witnesses is involved. It was significant that Counsel for the plaintiff when
asked to substantiate certain findings of fact, could fall back only on the
mere fact of the Judge's finding in his favour and not on any other supporting
material. I have no doubt, in fact I am convinced, that the

**  268**



District Judge has grievously gone wrong in his opinion. It is a judgment
which by its manifest errors of law and fact would have resulted in
miscarriage of justice had the Court of Appeal affirmed it. The trial judge
seems to have been carried away by the demeanour and manner in which
Harasgama, the Managing Director of the Plaintiff‑company and the chief
witness in the case, gave his evidence  and withstood the cross‑examination of
counsel for the defendant bank. He had not tested his testimony by the
intrinsic merit and nature of the evidence in the case. It is unfortunate that
the trial Judge has  lost his priorities in the matter of testing the
credibility of witnesses. When one goes by the record, certainly, Harasgama's
testimony does not bear examination. The favourable impression that he had
created on the District Judge by his demeanour in court has outweighed or
displaced all other relevant considerations in determining the veracity of the
witness. The trial Judge had, in assessing Harasgama's evidence, failed to
take into account the fact that plaintiff's principal claim to the sum of Rs.
1,273,883.66 that was alleged to have been deposited with the defendant bank
was a false claim, false to the  knowledge of Harasgama who gave instructions
for the preferring of  that claim. Counsel for the plaintiff at the end of the
trial, in his final  submission, was obliged to abandon that claim as the
evidence militated against the claim. Plaintiff's auditors had prior to the
institution of the action reported to Harasgama, that the claim was count was
untenable. The effort made by Harasgama, in the course of his evidence to
distance Ingram from him, his reluctance to report Ingram's fraud to the
Police and have the fraud investigated  and his employment of private
detectives, not to uncover the fraud inside his company but to steal
defendant's documents, all disclosed a designing nature, not disposed to
candidness. These matter should have made the trial Judge wary of accepting
Harasgama's evidence on vital issues. Certainly, on the crucial question
whether the plaintiff was receiving the Bank's weekly statements by post,
during the time Harasgama was Managing Director, 1962‑68, his evidence that he
was not aware that the plaintiff‑company was not receiving them by post cannot
accepted with confidence and was not sufficient to discharge the onus that lay
on the plaintiff to establish non‑receipt of them by post. The trial Judge
erred in basing his acceptance of his evidence on his demeanour in the witness
box, without submitting his testimony to a critical examination as to why for
six years he had failed to notice such an irregularity if it in fact existed.
When the company was receiving the monthly statements relating to No. 2
account of the

**  269**



company and of the company's subsidiaries regularly by post, but was for some
mysterious reason not receiving by post the weekly statements relating to No.
1 overdraft account, it is unbelievable that a businessman like Harasgama was
not interested, if such was the fact, in ascertaining Why the bank was not
sending by post the weekly statements. This criticism of the trial judge's
assessment of Harasgama applies also to his assessment of Lionel Fernando.



I have had the advantage of reading the judgment of Abdul Cader, J. He has
dealt with the salient facts of the case and the errors committed by the trial
Judge. I agree with his analysis of the errors. In my view the Court of Appeal
was justified in reversing the judgment of the District Court. Since Abdul
Cader, J., has dealt with the facts and I agree with his conclusions, I shall
deal mainly with the issues of law involved in the appeal.



The plaintiff-company instituted this action on 22.11.70, against the
defendant bank praying for a declaration that cheques and cash to the value of
Rs 1,275,883.03 were deposited by the plaintiff to the credit of the current
account bearing No. 22200 with the defendant bank ; and that the said account
was wrongfully debited with a sum of Rs. 49,546.16 alleged  to be due as
interest and the  plaintiff's said accounts was overdrawn on 18.11.1968 only
in a sum of  Rs. 2,268,381.34.



For a first alternative cause of action the Plaintiff pleaded that if the said
cheques  cash had not in fact been deposited, then such non‑deposit and/or
misappropriation thereof was due to the fraudulent and/or negligent actions or
omissions of the defendant and/or its servants and agents, acting in the
course of their employment and within the scope of their authority, for whose
actions and omissions the defendant is in law liable and responsible ; the
defendant‑bank had fraudulently and/or negligently issued or caused or
permitted to be issued or fabricated or facilitated the issue of fabricated or
incorrect receipts and weekly statements of accounts to the plaintiff,
particularly in that :



_(a)_ The defendant bank, being aware that incorrect weekly statements and
receipts were being issued to and received by the plaintiff company, failed
and neglected to inform the plaintiff and/or to stop such issue and/or to take
reasonable precautions ;

##  270



_(b)_ The defendent‑bank failed and neglected to exercise proper care and
control in respect of the, custody and issue of blank forms of statements of
accounts.



_(c)_ The defendent‑bank had failed and neglected to exercise proper care and
control in respect of the issue and delivery of receipts and weekly statements
of accounts and certificates of balances to the plaintiff.



_(d)_ The defendant permitted unauthorised persons to have access to and
control of bank forms of statements of account, forms used for certifying
balances and/or other security documents.  



The plaintiff stated that the above were the causes of such non‑deposits
and/or misappropriation thereof and that by reason thereof the plaintiff had
suffered loss and damage in the said sum of Rs. 1,275,883.66 together with a
further sum of Rs. 49,546.16 being interest debited.



For a second alternative cause of action the plaintiff averred that if the
aforesaid cash and cheques totalling Rs 1,275,883.66 had not infact been
deposited, the defendant and/or its servants had jointly with one W. L. Ingram
(who was both the Sales Manager of the, plaintiff‑company and a Director of
Collettes Finance Ltd., a subsidiary of Collettes Company) misappropriated
such cash and cheques and that the plaintiff was entitled to recover the said
sum as loss and damage suffered by the plaintiff from the defendant bank.  


The position taken up by the defendant‑bank, in the amended answer is briefly
: that the cheques and cash alleged by the plaintiff to have been deposited
with the defendant‑bank have not in fact been so deposited ; that the
documents purporting to be receipts of the defendant‑bank in respect of such
deposits are all fake documents ; that the defendant‑bank is not liable for
any of the fraudulent actions or concealments attributed to Ingram who was the
Plaintiff's Sales Manager by the plaintiff ; that, by reason of fraudulent
representation made by the plaintiff‑company to the defendant‑bank monthly in
regard to the value of the stocks held by the plaintiff-company, the plaintiff
was able from time to time to overdraw monies on the  plaintiff-company's
aforesaid current account in excess of the amount which the plaintiff was
entitled to overdraw ; that the damages, If any, suffered by the plaintiff-
company are due to the fraud which was entirely engineered and accomplished by
the plaintiff-company ; that

##  271



the defendant‑bank had sent the plaintiff‑company from time to time statements
of accounts and also certificates of balances relating to the aforesaid
current account of the plaintiff company ; that the auditors of the
defendant‑bank also sent, in the usual course of business, confirmation‑slips
showing the state, of the plaintiff company's said current account ; that the
plaintiff‑company never questioned the correctness of the aforementioned, bank
statements, certificates of balance and/or the confirmation slips, and
accepted them without demur ; that all times material to this action, the
plaintiff-company made no allegation of fraud on the part of the employees of
the defendant‑bank ; that, at the express request of the defendant‑bank, the
plaintiff‑company gave a primary mortgage of the premises bearing No. 101, D.
S. Senanayake Mawatha, Colombo. in respect of the monies found to have been
overdrawn by the plaintiff-company as on the 28th November 1968 ; that on
30.12.68 the plaintiff-company expressly admitted that the plaintiff‑company
had overdrawn the amount which the defendant‑bank stated had been so overdrawn
as on 14.12.68 and further admitted that the said sum was still due and owing
to the defendant‑bank as on 30.12.68 ; that the defendant‑bank having, been
intentionally made to believe that the plaintiff-company was making no
allegation of fraud against the defendant‑bank in regard to the loss sustained
by the plaintiff‑company, the defendant‑bank extended further credit
facilities to the plaintiff‑company and refrained from stopping or curtailing
in any way the existing facilities ; the plaintiff‑company was now estopped
from denying the genuineness and, the receipt of the  aforementioned
statements and the correctness of the amount  overdrawn by the plaintiff and
was precluded from asserting that the defendant‑bank has been guilty of
fraud‑negligence, and claiming  damages on such basis.



After the defendant‑bank filed its amended answer, the Plaintiff‑company filed
further pleadings by Which the plaintiff‑company averred that the
plaintiff‑company, through two of its directors, was induced to sign the
document, dated 30.12.68 (and referred to in the amended answer) acknowledging
the amount stated by the defendant‑bank as having, by 14.121968, been
overdrawn by the plaintiff-company, not only by the deliberate
misrepresentations and suppressions of facts made by the defendant-bank's
General Manager, C. Loganathan, but also by the exercise of duress, undue
influence and threats of harm to the

##  272



plaintiff‑company's business by the said Loganathan, and also by a breach by
the defendant‑bank of the fiduciary duty it owed towards the
plaintiff‑company.



The case proceeded to trial on 30 issues. Counsel for the plaintiff frankly
conceded in his written submissions, after the trial was concluded, that the
plaintiff‑company had failed to prove that the plaintiff‑company had deposited
to the credit of its account with the defendant‑bank the various amounts in
cash and by cheque set out in the schedule "B" to the plaint, that therefore
issues 1 and 2 which were based upon the main cause of action be answered
against the plaintiff‑company. Accordingly the said issues were answered in
the negative. The plaintiff's main cause of action as set out in the plaint
having failed, the plaintiff then relied on the two alternative causes of
action set out in the plaint, based upon the fraud and negligence of and the
misappropriation by the defendant‑bank's agents and  servants, acting within
the scope and in the course of their duties.



In regard to the second alternative cause of action the trial Judge held that
no misappropriation of any money belonging to the plaintiff‑company by the
employees of the defendant‑bank had been proved and that it was Ingram
"plaintiff's employee" who would have misappropriated the said cash and
cheques belonging to the plaintiff‑company and dismissed that claim. The
plaintiff makes no complaint against this finding.



The trial Judge however held that the first alternative cause of action had
been established against the defendant‑bank and had entered judgment in favour
of the plaintiff in a sum of Rs. 1,169,240.93 as representing the loss and
damage sustained by the plaintiff by reason of the negligence of the defendant
and/or its servants.



In regard to the first alternative cause of action the trial Judge found that
the defendant‑bank ‑



_(a)_   was negligent in that



(i) Abeywickrema, the Ledger Clerk of the defendant-bank had during the period
June 1966 to 19.8.1968 violated the instructions relating to the delivery of
statements ;

##  273



(ii) In respect of the period before and after the period during which
Abeywickrema was the Ledger Clerk, the employees of the defendant‑bank had
failed to follow instructions with regard to the delivery of bank statements ;



(iii) That the defendant‑bank had failed to, carry out periodical checks of
the stocks, of the plaintiff‑company ;



(iv) The defendant‑bank had failed to have proper care and custody of its
blank Bank Statement Forms ;



_(b)_ Was guilty of fraud in that Abeywickrema had during the period, he was
Ledger Clerk from June 1966 to 19.8.1968, in the course of his duties prepared
false bank statements in respect of the plaintiff‑company's accounts.



The trial Judge has held that negligence and complicity in the fraud on the
part of bank employees, mainly Abeywickrema and Amerasinghe, have been
established and that in order to consider the legal implications of
Abeywickrema's complicity in the fraud, it had to be viewed in this way ‑



(1)        He extracted genuine bank statements and handed them to Ingram.

           

(2)        He introduced into the bank fabricated stock certificates having
received them from Ingram, knowing them to be so.



(3)        He probably pilferred obsolete blank statement forms.



The District Judge has held that neither the extraction of genuine statements
nor the introduction of fabricated stock, certificates was an act done in the
course of Abeywickrema's duties and the introduction of stock certificates by
carrying and handing them over to the bank's relevant officer, was also not
done in the course of his duties, and that these were clearly done for his and
Ingram's purposes. He further held that Abeywickrema prevented genuine
statements from going into Collettes by post ; he also held that the forms
were obtained by Abeywickrema or obtained aided by him, But that this act of
pilfering was not done in the course of performance of his duties. That it was
also outside the scope of his duties and the bank was not liable because
Abeywickrema stole the forms and gave them to Ingram. He held that the bank
was guilty of negligence, in that it did not take proper care of its obsolete
forms and that the free availability of the forms enabled a fraud to be
perpetrated.

##  274



Concluding this analysis of the evidence the trial Judge has held follows :  


"With regard to the extraction of statements, as in pilfering blank forms, it
was not done in the course of the performance  of Abeywickrema's duties as
assigned to him by the bank, but was done for his own purpose. From 1.7.5 6 ‑
May 1966 Abeywickrema had not been in the York Street Branch. He had been
there from June 1966 to 19.8.1968. Thereafter till 28.11.68. it  was
Amerasinghe. During Abeywickrema's period at the ledger, could the preparation
of false statements by him make the bank liable ? At this time he was
perpetrating the fraud in the course of' his   duties, no matter that those
were not the instructions given to him by the bank. The instructions of the
bank to him were to prepare statements, but he prepared false statements in
the course of  performing the duties he was assigned, and preparation of
statements was incidental to the carrying put of the bank's orders. He could
also be said to be negligent in that instructions for delivery of statements
had been observed in the breach. So was Amerasinghe and others.



As far as the periods before and after Abeywickrema's service at the‑ ledger
department go the negligence of the bank, arises from the failure of officials
to follow the important instructions with regard to the delivery of
statements.



Thus it would be seen that the acts of commission and omission by various
servants of the defendant amount to negligence as contemplated by law."



The issues that were framed in connection with the first alternative cause of
action and the District Judge's answers to same are‑



8.      Was the defendant under a duty arising from agreement,  practice and/or course of dealing to send correct receipts and correct weekly statements of accounts to the plaintiff ? 



_Ans_ _:_ Yes ‑ also admitted after the issue was suggested



9.      Had the defendant by its servants or agents acting in the course of their employment and within the scope of their authority and/or for whose acts and omissions the defendant is in law liable and responsible, fraudulently issued, caused or permitted, to be issued incorrect receipts and weekly statements of account to the plaintiff ? 



_Ans :_ Yes, only weekly statements ; not receipts.

##  275



10\.       Did the defendant by its servants or agents acting in the course of
their employment and within the scope of their authority and/or for whose acts
and omissions the‑defendant is liable and responsible ; fabricate or cause or
permit to be fabricated the said incorrect receipts and weekly statements of
accounts?



_Ans :_ Yes, only weekly statements ; not counterfoil receipts.



11        (i)         Did the defendant fail and neglect to ‑exercise proper
control over and in respect of the‑



_(a)        _custody and issue of blank forms of statements of account and
forms used for certificates of balances and other security documents ?



_(b)        _issue and delivery of receipts, weekly statements of account and
certificates of balances to the plaintiff ?



Ans : 11 (i)       _(a)_        Yes.  


            _(b)_        Yes, of weekly statements of account only.



11 (ii)        Did the defendant by its servants or agents ‑



_(a)_ acting in the course of their employment and within the scope of their
authority and/or



_(b)_ for whose acts or omissions the defendant is in law liable and
responsible facilitate the issue or fabricate the incorrect receipts or weekly
statements of account?



Ans (ii) _(a)_ Yes ‑ weekly statements only.  


_(b)_   Yes ‑ weekly statements only.



12.Did the defendant by its servants or agents acting in the course of their
employment and within the scope of their authority and/or for whose acts or
omissions the defendant is in law liable and responsible fraudulently conceal
from the plaintiff that the said receipts and weekly statements of account
were incorrect ?



_Ans :   _Yes ‑ weekly statements of account only.

##  276



13.Even if the sum of Rs. 1,275,883.66 had not been deposited to the credit of
the plaintiff's account, but if issues 8 and 9 to 12 or any of them are
answered in favour of the plaintiff, has the plaintiff suffered loss and
damage in a sum Rs. 1,325,425.82 ?



_Ans:_   Yes.



Counsel for the defendant at the outset admitted the Bank's duty referred to
in issue 8 above and stated that the issue could be answered in the
affirmative. The case for the plaintiff in the trial court was that
Abeywickrema had handed over regularly fabricated bank statements to Ingram.
But, perhaps in view of the fact that genuine bank statements could not have
been altered to fall in line with the accounts maintained in the
plaintiff‑company's office as it would have been very necessary for
Abeywickrema to have knowledge' of the entries appearing in the books of the
company and there was no evidence that he had any such knowledge, counsel for
plaintiff modified his case in argument before us and stated to us that,
presently, his case was that Abeywickrema had handed over genuine bank
statements which contained the true and accurate position of the plaintiff
company's current account with the defendant‑bank as set out  in the books of
the defendant‑bank and that Ingram had fraudulently substituted altered
statements and that the statements that were in the possession of the
plaintiff‑company were statements fabricated by Ingram. It was only after the
genuine statements had got into the hands of Ingram that fabrication could
have taken place. The part  played by Abeywickrema was to pilfer the genuine
statements prepared by the bank before they were posted and to deliver them to
Ingram. Thus on the concession of counsel for the plaintiff, it has to be held
that what Abeywickrema handed over to Ingram were genuine bank statements and
not the false statements that were substituted for same by Ingram and that
neither the Bank nor its servants took part in the fabrication of the
statements that ultimately reached the plaintiff. On the basis of this
concession, the district Judge's aforesaid finding that the defendant-bank is
guilty of fraud, in that Abeywickrema had during the period that he was the
Ledger Clerk From June 1966 to August 1968, in the course of his duties
prepared false bank statements relating to plaintiff's account cannot be
sustained and has to be set aside. The answers to aforesaid issues 9 and 10 by
the trial Judge too correspondingly get vitiated as the defendant-bank was not
involved by itself or through its agents in the issue or fabrication of the  

##  277



false weekly statements in the Possession of the plaintiff. The weekly
statements referred to in issues 9 and 10 are the fabricated statements.
Assuming that the plaintiff has established that Abeywickrema had stolen all
genuine weekly bank statements and had irregularly delivered the same in
person to Ingram, that fact by itself does not implicate the bank in respect
of the weekly statements fabricated by Ingram. The delivery of the genuine
bank statements to Ingram, although irregular, in that they had not been sent
by post cannot in any sense be said to conclude to the fabrication of the
false weekly statements ; it only enabled Ingram to thwart the genuine
statements reaching the plaintiff. The false statements could have been
prepared from the knowledge that Ingram had of what monies and cheques were
deposited with the bank and what were not. I shall later deal with the finding
of the District Judge that Abeywickrema gave the statements to Ingram with
full knowledge that Ingram obtained the statements for a fraudulent purpose
and. that Ingram wanted the genuine statements before they went by post to the
plaintiff and that the perpetration of the fraud was made possible by such
delivery and how far that finding affected the defendent‑bank.



Issue 12 refers to fraudulent concealment from the plaintiff "that the ‑said
weekly statements of accounts were incorrect" There is no evidence that the
bank by itself or through statements. The submission of the substitution of
the false weekly The submission of counsel that Abeywickrema gave the genuine
bank statement to Ingram, with knowledge that Ingram obtained the statements
for fraudulent purposes did not extend to suggest that the bank by its
servants was concealing from the plaintiff the fact that the false weekly
statements in the possession of plaintiff were incorrect.



The trial Judge has come to a finding that from 1956 to November, .1968,
Abeywickrema delivered the bank statements (monthly from 1956 to 1962 and
weekly statements from 1962‑1968) to Ingram and that the said statements were
not sent by post to the plaintiff as claimed by the defendant‑bank. The Court
of Appeal has not disagreed with this finding. It has assumed the correctness
of this finding without analysing the evidence in support of such a finding. I
agree with Abdul Cader, J., for the reasons stated by him, that this crucial
finding is not Supported by the evidence and probabilities of the case. The
District Judge has failed to consider the question of burden of proof that was
on the plaintiff to establish that the bank statements were not sent by post
by the bank, a fact in issue for the establishment of the plaintiff's

##  278



case. Since the relevant period extends from 1956‑1 968 and there was no
witness who could speak for the whole period of 12 years. The only reliable
documentary evidence that was available to the plaintiff to establish the
non‑receipt of the bank statements was the inwards Registers which it
regularly kept in the course of its business, and which were available for
production at the trial as they have included in the plaintiff's list of
documents. These registers would have reflected whether these statements came
by post and were the best evidence to prove the fact that they did not come by
post.



For the reasons given by Abdul Cader, J., one cannot with confidence, accept
and act on the oral evidence of witnesses like Lionel Fernando or Samuel or
Harasgama himself.



## Presumption under Section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance



The plaintiff could have supported its evidence with the registers, which were
regularly and contemporaneously kept, showing the incoming mail They
undisputedly afforded relevant and substantive evidence But . for some reason
best known  to  the plaintiff, these registers, which would have been
conclusive, have not been put in evidence by the plaintiff. Since the relevant
documents, namely the Inwards Mail Registers which were admittedly in
existence have not been placed before this court, an adverse inference has
therefore to be drawn against the plaintiff that these registers would, if
produced, have belied plaintiff's assertion. Since the plaintiff has withheld
these documents which are in its possession the  Court may properly draw a
presumption under section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance that these documents,
if produced would refute the plaintiff and show that the bank statements were
in fact being received by post by the plaintiff‑company, and that the
plaintiff's witnesses were not speaking the truth when they testified that
these statements were not coming by post. "All the relevant documents admitted
to have been in existence have not been placed before the Court and an adverse
inference has, therefore, to be drawn against the appellant." _Raghavamma v.
Chenchamma_ (8). Counsel for the plaintiff in his written submissions has
referred to certain Indian cases in support of his contention that" It is an
established principle of law that it is for the suitor to decide which would
be the best evidence to prove his case and for failure to produce one piece of
evidence, an adverse inference should not be drawn against a party who has
chosen not to file it unless the other side has called for that evidence." I
cannot accept the correctness of this proposition of law. I have examined the
cases referred to by the

##  279



Plaintiff, namely _Mt. Bilas Kunwar v. Desraj Ranjit Singh_ (9) _. Thirumalai
Iyenger v. Subba Raja_ (10) _Karwadi v. Shambharkar_ (11)  _Ramanathan
Chettiar v. Viswanathan Chettiar_ (12) ; none of these cases support The
plaintiff's proposition that no adverse inferences should be drawn against a
party who had chosen not to produce a relevant document unless the other side
has called for that evidence. The Sheet‑anchor for his contention is following
statement of Farwell, J., in the case of _Mt. Bilas Kunwar v. Desraj Ranjit
Singh_ (9).



"The High Court Judges 'attach great significance' to the non‑production of
the books showing the accounts of the general estate, and appear to draw an
inference therefrom adverse to the plaintiff's claim : any such inference is,
in their Lordships' opinion, unwarranted. These books do not necessarily from
any part of the plaintiff's case it is, of course, possible that some entries
might have appeared therein relating to the bungalow. But it is open to a
litigant to refrain from producing any documents that he considers irrelevant
; if the other litigant is dissatisfied, it is for him to apply for an
affidavit of documents, and he can obtain inspection and production of all
that appear to him in such affidavit to be relevant and proper. If he fails so
to do, neither he nor the court at his suggestion is entitled to draw any
inference as to the contents of  any such documents. There is no ground for
any inference such as is made in the High Court that the books, if produced,
would have shown rent credited to Jagmag or set off against some claim against
her. They related to a different property, and the possibility of entries
relating to the bungalow therein is very remote, but even if it had been
greater, the Court was not entitled to draw any such  inferences. It is for
the litigant who desires to rely on the contents of the documents to put them
in evidence in the usual and proper way ; if he fails to do so no inference in
his favour can be drawn as to the contents thereof."



This statement of law by Farwell, J., has to be appreciated in the context of
the facts in which it was stated and not isolated from the context. In that
case, the plaintiff's case was that the purchase of the  bungalow in suit by
the deceased Taluqdar in the name of his Mohammadan mistress Jagmag Bibi was a
benami transaction in that, the purchase money was paid by Taluqdar. Was given
to the  possession and management of the bungalow was given to the plaintiff
who was one of the two widows of the deceased and she had managed the property
in question from the time of the death of the

##  280



deceased. The defendant resisted the plaintiff's claim to the bungalow on the
ground that Jagmag the Mohammadan mistress of the deceased was the absolute
owner of the bungalow and that she had paid the purchase money and had
collected the rents of the bungalow. The Privy Council accepted the finding of
the trial Judge that the evidence given by Jagmag was quite untrustworthy and
also accepted the evidence of the plaintiff that all rates, rents and taxes
and repairs ground rent of the bungalow had been paid by the plaintiff, and
that she had let out to various tenants from 1891 down to the commencement of
the action the premises in suit. It was in this context that the Privy Council
stated that the High Court of Allahabad which set aside the judgment of the
trial court had erred in attaching significance to the non‑production of the
books of the deceased's estate which it was the contention of the defendant,
if produced would show that rent had been credited to Jagmag. It is to be
noted in  this case that the plaintiff was not relying on any entry in the
books in support of her case. On the other hand, it was the defendant who
pleaded that there were entries in the plaintiff's books which supported her.
It is in this context that the Privy Council stated that nothing adverse could
be drawn against the plaintiff's non‑production of the books which according
to her were not relevant. On the other hand since the defendant was relying on
certain alleged entries in the book it was for him to have taken proper steps
to have summoned the plaintiff to produce the books and in the event of the
plaintiff failing to produce the books after the summons then an inference
could have been drawn against the plaintiff that had the books been produced
it would have supported the defendant's case. The Judgment of the Privy
Council does not lend any support to the proposition that if plaintiff fails
to produce documents in his possession which are relevant to support his case,
he should have been summoned by the defendant to produce them before the
presumption under section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance could be drawn. He is
not bound to produce documents which prove defendant's case unless he has been
summoned, according to law, to produce same by defendant. The Patna High Court
had in _Chandra Narayan Deo v. Ramachandra Serawgi_ (13) misunderstood or
misapplied the judgment of the privy Council in the above case by taking one
portion of the judgment out of its context and relying on the isolated
statement as the ratio decidendi of that judgment. The High Court had failed
to note that the books referred to in the Privy Council judgment, did not form
part of the plaintiff's case and that it was the defendant who was relying on
them.

##  281



In those circumstances the Privy Council rightly held that the presumption
under section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance could not be drawn against the
plaintiff.



On the other hand in the instant case, it is to be noted that the burden was
on the plaintiff to prove the non‑receipt of the bank statements and in that
connection the Inward Registers referred to by plaintiff's witnesses as
supporting their oral evidence were highly relevant. It was not necessary for
the defendant‑bank to have summoned the plaintiff to produce the Inward
Register as no burden lay on the defendant to establish the non‑receipt and
the defendant was not relying on them in support of its case. The plaintiff
was relying on the Inward Registers to support its case that it did not
receive by post the bank statements and no explanation has been given for
their non‑production.



In the other cases _Ramanathan Chettiar v. Viswanathan Chettiar_ (12) and
_Karwadi v. Shambharkar_ (11), relied on by, the plaintiff, the evidence was
that the relevant accounts or register were not available or had been lost and
that explanation had been accepted by the Judge and hence there was no
question of withholding the evidence from court. Hence the court quite
properly said that no adverse inference can be drawn for non‑production of the
said documents though they were relevant. Woodroffe and Ameer Ali in their Law
of evidence, 12th Ed. vol. 3 at page 2153 have stated the correct position in
law‑



"A distinction should be made between documents relevant to one's case and
those which are not so relevant. If a party to a case does not produce the
document which is the best evidence in support of his contention an inference
can be drawn that, if produced, it would be against his contention. But if the
document is not relevant to his case no adverse inference can be drawn from
his non‑production unless he was asked to produce the document and he fails to
do so."



Had the trial Judge had the above relevant consideration in mind it is highly
improbable that he would have held that the plaintiff had proved that it did
not receive any of the bank statements from 1956 right up to November 1968.
The Inward Letters Registers were relevant also for the purpose of showing
that the plaintiff did not receive, not only the bank statements but also the
certificates of balance sent annually by the defendant‑bank, the
confirmation‑slips sent out annually

##  282



by the auditors of the defendant‑bank, the overdraft limit advice setting out
the limit of the over‑draft, alleged to have been sent out monthly by the
defendant to plaintiff setting out the limit of the overdraft from January
1966. According to the plaintiff, though the defendant‑bank had regularly sent
overdraft limit advices from 1962 to the end of December 1965, apparently for
no good reason the defendant‑bank had stopped sending such advices from
January 1966 and the plaintiff never questioned the defendant‑bank about this
alleged non delivery of overdraft limit advices though they were necessary to
the plaintiff to ascertain the limit of the overdraft available to it.



I agree with Abdul Cader, J., that except for the 75 weekly statements
admitted by Abeywickrema to have been delivered by him to Ingram, the
plaintiff has not proved that the other monthly and weekly statements from
August 1956 to the end of November 1968 had not been received by the
plaintiff‑company. It was admitted by plaintiff that if any one of these
statements did reach the plaintiff‑company unaltered and un tampered, the
plaintiff‑company could have become aware of the fraud committed by Ingram and
this alternative cause of action could not have been maintained by him.



Let me now assume, for the purpose of argument, that the district Judge was
correct in finding that none of the monthly and weekly statements were sent by
post by the defendant‑bank to the plaintiff but were delivered personally by
Abeywickrema to Ingram:  what is the legal consequence of such failure? It is
in evidence that Paul Fernando, Chief Accountant and his Assistant Lionel
Fernando were aware and their predecessors in office should also have been
aware of the fact that the bank statements were not coming by post but were
delivered by Abeywickrema to Ingram, who in turn brought them to the company.
It is highly significant that throughout the period of 12 years from 1956 to
1968 there was no protest by the plaintiff‑company against this personal
delivery of bank statements to Ingram. In its plaint the plaintiff stated that
the defendant‑bank was under a duty arising from agreement, practice and/or
course of dealing to send correct weekly statements of accounts to the
plaintiff. The plaint does not specify how the weekly statements of accounts
were to be sent to plaintiff whether by post or through a representative of
the company. The defendant‑bank's position was that it normally sent its
statements by post. ** **

**  283**

** **

## Acquiescence



In answer to issue 8 the defendant‑bank has admitted its obligation to send
weekly statements of account to the plaintiff. Now the question arises whether
the only way that the bank could have discharged its obligation of sending
weekly statements was by post or whether delivery of the bank statements to a
representative of the company without any protest from the company was a
substituted mode of performing that obligation of sending the monthly
statements and was sufficient. The reference to "practice and/or course of
dealing by the plaintiff and the defendant" referred to in the plaint and
issue 8, is significant. The fact that the plaintiff never objected to the
substituted mode of performance by defendant‑bank of its obligation tends to
show that the plaintiff was satisfied that the defendant‑bank should perform
its obligation of sending the weekly statements by delivering the same to
Ingram on behalf of the company and had waived the defendant's obligation to
send by post and that the plaintiff accepted the personal delivery by hand of
the monthly statements to Ingram as proper delivery to itself, perhaps because
of the special status accorded to Ingram in the company in connexion with its
bank matters. The defendant‑bank was in the circumstances entitled to assume
that the company had acquiesced in the bank/its servants treating Ingram as
its accredited representative to receive, on its behalf, the statements from
the bank. It is relevant to note that the shows that in its dealings with the
bank, the plaintiff employed Ingram to exclusively handle them. In these
circumstances it should be held that by its conduct the plaintiff company
acquiesced in the bank delivery of its statements to Ingram as regular by it
and that thereby the bank discharged its obligation of sending the weekly
statements to it. As the plaintiff‑company had approbated the handing over of
the monthly statements to Ingram from August 1956 it would not be open now for
the plaintiff‑company after 12 years to disown the delivery of the monthly
statements to Ingram as improper and allege want of due performance by the
defendant of its obligation of sending the weekly statements of accounts to
it.



A waiver or acquiescence must be an intentional conduct with knowledge.



But it was contended that Harasgama, the Managing Director of the
plaintiff‑company was blissfully not aware that the company received the bank
statement through Ingram and that since the Managing

##  284



Director of the plaintiff‑company had no knowledge of the receipt by Ingram of
the bank statements on behalf of the company, the company cannot be credited
with knowledge of that mode of delivery of the bank statements, However, the
evidence in the case is that Paul Fernando, the Chief Accountant and Lionel
Fernando, the Assistant Accountant were aware of the receipt by Ingram of the
monthly statements and presumably their predecessors in office in the accounts
section of the company must have also been aware of that fact. That Ingram was
himself bringing the bank statements to the plaintiff‑company seems to have
been not only well known in the plaintiff‑company but was accepted as the
regular thing by those in the plaintiff‑company whose business it was to
receive and scrutinise such documents. Lionel Fernando, an Assistant
Accountant of the plaintiff‑company to whom Ingram admittedly handed over the
alleged bank statements stated that when there was a delay in the receipt of
the bank statements Paul Fernando did not get in touch with the
defendant‑bank, but used to request him to find out from Ingram about such
delays. Assuming that Harasgama was speaking the truth, when he testified that
he was not aware of the fact of the receipt by Ingram of the bank statements,
though it is difficult to believe his evidence on this point, particularly,
for the reason that he did not, for such a long period of time, inquire as to
how the bank statements of the plaintiff‑company which the defendant‑bank had
been specially requested to send weekly from 1962 and not monthly, were not
being received by post while the subsidiary companies of Collettes and the
company's other account No. 22201 were receiving their statements by post from
the defendant‑bank, yet in my view the knowledge of the relevant officers or
servants of the plaintiff‑company who, in the company's organisation, were in
charge of the company's accounts, namely Paul Fernando and Lionel Fernando and
their predecessors in office must be attributed to their employer and be
deemed in law to be the knowledge of the plaintiff‑company their employer.



## Knowledge of servant, when imputed to employer

** **

It is well settled that the knowledge of an agent will generally be imputed to
his principal if the agent received the information in question in connection
with a transaction in which he is acting for his principal and it is his duty
to communicate that information to his principal



"Where, any fact or circumstance, material to any transaction, business, or
matter in respect of which an agent is employed,

##  285



comes to his knowledge in the course of such employment, and is of such a
nature that it is his duty to communicate it to his principal, the principal
is deemed to have notice thereof as from the time when he would have received
such notice if the agent had performed his duty, and taken such steps to
communicate the fact or circumstance as he ought reasonably to have taken.
Provided that where an agent is a party or privy to the commission of a fraud
or misfeasance upon or against his principal, his knowledge of such fraud or
misfeasance, and of the facts and circumstances connected therewith, is not
imputed to the principal." Bowstead on Agency, 12th Ed. pp. 242 and 243.



Atiyah in his Treatise on "Vicarious Liability in the Law of Torts,"
discussing the topic of imputation of knowledge to an employer, states at page
189-



"It seems that the servant's knowledge will only be imputed to the employer
where the information in question is relevant to the task being performed by
the servant, and where it is part of the servant's duties to take any
necessary action consequential on the information, or at least to inform his
employer of it. Hence information acquired by subordinate staff, even if
acquired while they are actually in the course of performing their duties,
does not necessarily fall to be treated as known to the employer. However in
the case of companies and other corporations, knowledge of directors and
managers and other "responsible officials" is normally treated, in accordance
with modern principles of company law, as the knowledge of the company itself
and this is probably so irrespective of the circumstances in which the
knowledge is acquired, so long as it is in connection with the company's
business in some way or other.



Lord Parker, L.J., in _John Henshal (Quarries) Ltd. v. Harvey_ (14) expressed
the view that-



"There is fundamentally no difference between a master who is an individual
and a master who is a limited company, save that in the case of a limited
company their knowledge must be the knowledge of those whom, in the case of
_H. L. Bolton (Engineering) Co. Ltd. v. T. J. Graham & Sons Ltd. _(15)
Denning, L.J., referred to as the brains of the company. There is no doubt
there are many cases where somebody who is in the possession of the brains‑may
be a director, managing director, the secretary or a responsible officer of
the company ‑ has knowledge, his knowledge has been held to be the knowledge
of the company."

##  286



In _Applebee v. Percy_ (16) Lord Coleridge, C.J., said-



"Where a certain business or the performance of a certain duty is deputed to a
servant, a notice to the servant so acting is a notice to the master, because
he has placed the servant in his stead to represent him quoad that particular
business or duty."



In _Stiles v. Cardiff Steam Navigation Co._ (17) Crompton, J., sad-



"I quite agree that the knowledge of a servant representing his masters and
acting within the scope of their delegated authority may be competent to
affect his masters with that knowledge."



and Shee, J., said-



"Corporations are in this respect in no different position from private owners
; and if it could be shown that the mischievous propensity of the dog was
known to any person having the of the business, or of the yard, or even of the
dog, or whose duty it would be to inform the company of what the dog had done,
it might do."



In _Penhallow v. Mersey Docks and Harbour Board_ (18) Blackburn, J., said-



"If a Corporation cannot know anything except by its servants, it would seem
that the Corporation must be liable for the knowledge of its servants and acts
of its servants or not liable at all."



In _Sunlife Assurance Co. of Canada v. W. H. Smith & Son Ltd._ (19) Greer,
L.J., said-



"A company of course is, as a person, incapable either of being innocent or
guilty, but has only a _persona;_ for by theory and law it must act by an
agent. When the question is as to a libel which has been disseminated or
published to some member of the public by a company or an individual whose
business it is to exhibit documents similar to that which contained the libel
in question, then you will have to consider, was the dissemination innocent ;
and if a company leaves it to one of its salesman to sell a paper, or to one
of its salesman to exhibit on his stall an invitation to buy a paper, it is
just as much responsible for the state of mind the agent has when he
disseminated the defamatory matter as if it was there itself as, a  person
exhibiting the poster or selling the paper, as the case may be."

**  287**



In _Dodwell & Co. Ltd. v. John _(20) the Manager of the plaintiff‑company drew
upon the plaintiff‑company's banking account four cheques and delivered the
same to defendants who were partners of the firm of E. John & Co. carrying on
business as share and produce brokers. The Manager had no authority to draw
cheques for his private transactions. The Trial Court held that the defendants
were not personally aware that they had received among the items paid over to
them for the purchase of the shares which they bought for Williams, the
aforesaid Manager as his brokers, cheques fraudulently drawn on the
plaintiff's funds and that they took the cheques honestly without noticing the
names of the drawers and without thinking of them as in a different position
from the other cheques received in the course of their transactions with him.
The Privy Council however held at page 208-



"But it is obvious that the appellants' (defendants') clerks, who brought the
cheques to the partners for endorsement, must have seen that the name of the
drawers was that of the respondents (the plaintiff‑company). However little
the clerks may have known of Williams's (the Manager of the plaintiff‑company)
real transactions and however innocently the cheques were brought and
endorsed, the knowledge of the names on the part of the clerks was the
knowledge of the appellants (the defendants)."



In the present case the knowledge of Paul Fernando, the Chief Accountant and
that of Lionel Fernando Assistant Accountant and their predecessors in office
who were the plaintiff's responsible officials in charge of the accounts of
the plaintiff‑company must be regarded as knowledge of the plaintiff‑company
and their knowledge should be attributed to their employer, the
plaintiff‑company. In this view of the matter the company should be held to
have been aware from 1956 of the delivery to Ingram of the bank statements and
to have acquiesced in such delivery to Ingram as representative of the
Plaintiff‑company, by the Bank in the discharge of its obligation of sending
its weekly statements of accounts to the plaintiff.



## Acquiescence



"If a person having a right and seeing another about to commit, or in the
course of committing an act infringing upon that right, stands by in such a
manner as really to induce the person committing the act, and who might
otherwise have abstained from it to believe that he assents to its being
committed, he cannot afterwards be heard to complain of

##  288



the act. This is the proper sense of the term 'acquiescence', and in that
sense may be defined as quiescence under such circumstances as that assent may
be reasonably inferred from it, and is no more than an instance of the law of
estoppel by words or conduct" Per Thesiger, L. J., in _De Bussche v. Alt_
(21).



"If a man, either by words or by conduct has intimated that the consents to an
act which has been done, and that he will offer no opposition to it, although
it could not have been lawfully done without his consent, and he thereby
induces others to do that from which they otherwise might have abstained, he
cannot question the legality of the act he has so sanctioned, to the prejudice
of those who have so given faith to his words or to the fair inference to be
drawn from his conduct . . . I am of the opinion that, generally speaking, if
a party having an interest to prevent an act being done has full notice of its
having been done, and acquiesces in it, so as to induce a reasonable belief
that he consents to it, and the position of others is altered by their giving
credit to his sincerity, he has no more right to challenge the act to their
prejudice, than he would have had if it had been done by his previous license"
Per Lord Campbell, L.C. in _Cairncross v. Lorimer_ (22). This passage was
quoted with approval by the Privy Council in _Sarat Chunder Dey v. Gopal
Chunder Laha_ (23).



An acquiescence is not a question of fact, but of legal inference from facts
found. In view of the inference that the plaintiff‑company should be deemed to
have been fully aware that the defendant- bank was handing over the bank
statements to Ingram by way of discharging its obligation to send the
documents to the plaintiff, and had acquiesced in such discharge of the
obligation, plaintiff is now estopped by twelve years of acquiescence from
complaining that the delivery to Ingram is wrongful; it is bound by such
performance.



The proposition of law enunciated in Spencer Bower- Estoppel by Representation
(2nd Ed.) pp. 261‑262‑as applied to the facts of the present case may be
re‑formulated thus-

  
"Where the plaintiff‑company has a legal right to due delivery of the weekly
bank statements which has been infringed over a period of years by
defendant‑bank under the mistaken belief that the Bank's acts of delivering to
Ingram are not infringements of plaintiff's rights at all and plaintiff is all
the time aware of its own legal rights in the matter and of the bank's
infringement of that right and the bank's

##  289



erroneous belief that it is not in any way infringing on plaintiff's legal
rights but exercising rights of its own and yet with that knowledge, the
plaintiff so conducts itself or so abstains from objection, protest or other
action as to foster or maintain the erroneous belief in the bank and thus
induces the bank to continue in such course of conduct on the faith of the
plaintiff's inaction, then the plaintiff cannot be permitted afterwards to
assert its own rights or contest the bank's right to have delivered the bank
statements through Ingram."



Counsel for the plaintiff‑appellant has protested that the plea of estoppel
arising from acquiescence was not pleaded in the answer nor raised in the
issues and therefore should not be entertained by us. But I find that the
trial Judge dealt with the issue of plaintiff's acquiescence when he posed to
himself the question "Was there such a course of conduct known to the Chief
Executive Harasgama and acquiesced in by him ? Was the bringing of statements
by Abeywickrema to Ingram known to Harasgama ? Harasgama says 'No'. I believe
him. Was he acquiescing in its coming into Collettes by any process other than
the post ? There is no evidence to that effect," and answered "In my view the
effort made to lead me to the inference that Ingram's removal of the Bank
statements and Harasgama's acquiescence fails." In view of the District
Judge's answer to the plea of acquiescence Counsel for the defendant‑bank is
entitled to canvass in the Appeal Court the correctness of the Judge's finding
on the question of estoppel by acquiescence and I hold that the Judge has not
looked at the question in the correct perspective and has therefore erred in
his answer to the question of acquiescence.

##  

## Scope of servant's authority ‑ effect of Prohibition

** **

The evidence shows Abeywickrema was working in the Foreign Department of the
defendant‑bank as a Ledger clerk from 1955‑57 and was working in the Loan
Department from 1957‑62, as a clerk‑in‑charge of bank investments, guarantees
and security and from 1962 to June 1966 again in the Foreign Department as a
clerk‑in‑charge of checking export documents. Then he was transferred to York
Street Branch on 15.6.1966 and worked on Ledger No. 8 where the plaintiff's
account was, from June‑September 1966\. He again worked in No. 9 Ledger from
11.6.68 to 23.8.1968 (Plaintiff's account was in this Ledger during this
period). He was sent on relief panel on 24.8.1968 and worked in the Savings
Department, Foreign Department in Moratuwa and Maradana branches.

##  290



Amerasinghe was also working with Abeywickrema from 12.8.1965 and he succeeded
Abeywickrema as Ledger Clerk‑in‑Charge of plaintiff's account on 23.8.68 right
up to 28.11.68 when Ingram's fraud was discovered. According to the Trial
Judge Abeywickrema went out of his way to pilfer plaintiff's bank statements
when he was not in charge of plaintiff's account and later when he was in
charge of plaintiff's account during the two periods June 1966 to September
1966 and June 1968 to August 1968 he fraudulently handed them over to Ingram ;
and Amerasinghe when he was the Ledger Clerk‑in‑Charge of plaintiff's accounts
between August to November 1968 on the advice of Abeywickrema, handed over the
bank statements to Abeywickrema to be delivered to Ingram. The plaintiff
states that both Abeywickrema and Amerasinghe, the servants of the
defendant‑bank had fraudulently and/or negligently, acting in the course of
their employment and within the scope of their authority, issued the bank
statements to Ingram, and that the bank is in law liable for the fraudulent
acts of the said servants. Thus the defendant‑bank is sought to be made liable
vicariously. The trial Judge has held that the extraction of genuine bank
statements by Abeywickrema and Amerasinghe and delivery of same to Ingram was
not an act done in the course of their duties, and that the bank was hence not
liable for their said acts. The District Judge has however, held that during
the period Abeywickrema was the Ledger Clerk from  June 1966 to 19th August
1968, he was preparing false statements in the course of performance of his
duties and that the bank was thereby implicated. The plaintiff has conceded in
this court that this conclusion cannot be supported and I have already held,
supra, that this finding that Abeywickrema prepared the false statements is
untenable ; hence the defendant‑bank cannot be cast in liability on this
ground.



Counsel for the plaintiff‑appellant however persisted in contending that the
defendant‑bank was vicariously liable as employer for the alleged acts of
Abeywickrema and Amerasinghe in handing over the bank statements to Ingram.



For the defendant‑bank to be liable for the acts of Abeywickrema and
Amerasinghe they must have been committed fraudulently or otherwise in the
course of and within the scope of their employment as Ledger Clerks under the
defendant‑bank.

##  291



The Bank of Ceylon Manual of Operations P 253/D 56 sets out the rules of the
bank for the despatch of their monthly or weekly statements to their
constituents. It sets out :



## End of Month Despatch of Statements



"The statements will be initialled by the Ledger Officers after checking them
against the end of the month's Trial Balance and passed over to _Adjuster_ for
despatch to the customers. The Adjuster will obtain a certificate of despatch
of statements duly signed by the Ledger officer, clerk enclosing and the post
clerk.



## Daily or Weekly Despatch of Statements

** **

"The Adjuster will be responsible for the sending out of these statements also
... The Adjuster will secure the necessary clerical assistance for the
enclosure of statements into envelopes. _As far as possible those allotted to
this duty must not be connected to the current accounts department_... The
Ledger officer initials these after verification of the balance and sends them
in a book maintained for the purpose to the post clerk. The latter initials
for the number of statements received by him after despatch to the customers
by post."



Statements that are handed over to customers directly over the counter or to
their authorised representative are entered in a book maintained for the
purpose by the Ledger Officers and sent to the cheque book clerk to be
initialled by him and handed over to the customers on identification."



The Bank rules relating to Ledger operation (D 46) set out the duties of the
Adjuster as follows :



"The responsibility for the despatch will come under an independent officer
who will be called the "Adjuster". In regard to this aspect of the duties he
performs, in a large office there will be no difficulty in selecting _an
officer unconnected to current account_ to perform this duty in addition to
other work. In a small office the Manager himself will perform the duties of
an Adjuster."



From the bank rules (P253/D56 and D46) it is clear that the bank had a
definite purpose in keeping the Ledger Officer in charge of the current
account at a distance away and unconnected from the office of the Adjuster who
was responsible for the sending out of the weekly statements of the bank. The
bank attached great importance to the fact that the responsibility for the
dispatching of the statements came under an independent officer called
Adjuster who had no connection with the current accounts. In its scheme of
distribution and definition of duties the bank was very particular that the
office and duties of the Ledger Clerk were distinct and removed from the
office and duties of the Adjuster. In fact the Adjuster was purposefully kept
remote from the Ledger Clerk. It was not a case of the Ledger Clerk being
merely

##  292



prohibited from having anything to do with the despatch by post of the weekly
statements to the customers. It was a case of delimitation of the area of his
work and duties, so that if the Ledger Clerk purported to any part of the
Adjuster's work he did something which did not come within the scope of his
employment and which was outside his employment. As far as despatch of weekly
statements by post was concerned, as the trial Judge has rightly observed he
was an "outsider" and the bank was not bound by his actions. However, the
Ledger Clerk was permitted to hand over the weekly statements to a customer or
to the agent of the company who has been authorised by the company (an
authorised representative)



Abeywickrema has in evidence referred to the bank rule that "the statements
that are handed over to customers directly over the counter or to their
authorised representative are entered in a book maintained for the purpose by
the Ledger Officer and sent to the  cheque‑book‑clerk to be initialled by him
on identification and added that Ledger Clerks deviate from the rule, and that
in most cases the Managing Director of the company does not come to collect
the statements but sends the person who comes to deposit the money to collect
the statements and in practice it is accepted, and that he had given such
statements not only in Collettes' case but also in the case of other companies
to whose representatives the statements were handed over and that it was the
normal practice. He also claimed that he had authority to give statements to
persons who he thought had the right to receive them.



Mr. Loganathan, the General Manager of the defendant‑bank has stated in
evidence that an authorised representative of the customer was entitled to ask
for those statements of accounts and that "authorised" means authorised to ask
for a specific statement or authorised for a specific occasion or on standing
instructions ; for a specific statement a writing is necessary ; where there
is express or implied authority it is not necessary ; it is like the customer
himself coming and getting it ; it depends on the circumstances."



In order to determine whether the proved act of negligence or fraud on the
part of a servant is within or without the scope or course of his employment,
it needs to be pointed out that it is not enough to decide whether or not what
was done was prohibited conduct. The prohibition may either limit the scope of
his employment or merely regulate his conduct within the sphere of his
employment. "There are ** **

##  293



prohibitions which limit the sphere of employment, and prohibitions which only
deal with the conduct within the sphere of employment." Per Lord Dunedin in
_Plumb v. Cobden Flour Mills Co. Ltd._ (24). In the former case, the employer
will not be liable, in the latter he will. Express prohibition of the wrongful
act is no defence to the employer, if that act was merely a mode of doing what
the servant was employed to do. An example of this kind is _Limpus v. London
General Omnibus Co._ (25) where the defendant company was held liable for an
accident caused by the act of one of its drivers in driving across the road so
as to obstruct a rival omnibus. It was held to be no defence that the company
had issued specific instructions to the drivers not to race with or obstruct
other vehicles. The driver whose conduct was in question was engaged to drive
and the act which did the mischief was a negligent mode of driving for which
his employer must answer, irrespective of any authority or of any prohibition.



Another example of the kind is _Canadian Pacific Railway v. Lockhart_ (26)
where a servant in disregard of a written notice prohibiting employees from
using private‑owned motor cars for the purpose of the company's business
unless they were adequately protected by insurance, used his uninsured private
motor car for the purpose of carrying out his duties, and the employers were
held liable on the ground that an order to employees not to use uninsured cars
merely limited the way in which the work was to be performed, so that the
liability of the employer was not excluded if damage is caused when the order
is disobeyed. In the course of his judgment, Lord Thanberton at page 468 said



"If the prohibition had absolutely forbidden the servant to drive his motor
car in the course of his employment, it might well have been maintained that
he was employed to do carpentry work and not to drive a motor car, and that,
therefore, the driving of a motor car was outside the scope of his employment,
but it was not the acting as driver that was prohibited, but the non‑insurance
of the motor car, if used as a means incidental to the execution of the work
which he was employed to do." Per Lord Thankerton in _Canadian Pacific Railway
Co. v. Lockhart,_ (supra)



An example of the other kind is _Twine v. Bean's Express Ltd._ (27), where the
employers had expressly instructed their drivers not to allow unauthorised
persons to travel on their vehicles and affixed a notice to

##  294



this effect on the driver's van. Despite this, the driver gave a lift to a
person who was killed by reason of the driver's negligence. The Court of
Appeal held that he was acting outside the scope of employment and accordingly
his employers were not liable. The act of giving a lift to an unauthorised
person is not merely a wrongful mode of performing an act of a class which the
driver is employed to perform but the performance of an act of a class which
he was not authorised to perform at all and hence he was acting outside the
course or scope of his employment. Where a servant acts outside the course of
employment he ceases pro hac vice to be a servant ; an act done solely for the
servant's own interests and purposes, and outside his authority is not done in
the course of his employment, even though it may have been done during his
employment.



The fact that the servant disobeys the orders of his master does not
necessarily mean that he acted outside the course of his employment. The
distinction is between an order which limits the scope of employment, the
disobedience to which means that the servant is not acting in the course of
his employment and an order which limits the method in which the duties of the
servant may be performed the disobedience to which does not mean that the
servant is acting outside his employment. Once a prohibition is properly
treated as defining or limiting the scope of the employment, any action of
disobeying thereof does not constitute a mode of performing an act but is a
performance of an act which the servant was not employed to perform.



One matter which may be relevant, in considering the effect of an express
prohibition is the reason for the prohibition. If the only reason for the
prohibition is that the master wishes, by this means to escape vicarious
liability for his servant, it is not likely to succeed. In _Canadian Pacific
Railway v. Lockhart_ (supra) the only reason for the prohibition was that the
employer wished to avoid liability and it was there held that the prohibition
did not have the desired effect. A prohibition which indicates what the
servant is employed to do will exempt the master from liability for acts done
outside the prohibited realm. But one which limits the mode of "performance"
leaves the master liable. In the present case it appears to me the
defendant‑bank had, in its area of work, a definite purpose in excluding the
Ledger Clerks from area of work assigned to the Adjuster The Ledger Clerk's
area of was restricted to the preparation of the monthly statements and he had
to hand over the prepared statements to the Adjuster to be

**  295**



posted. The prohibition against the Ledger Clerk transgressing into the
Adjuster's duty of getting the statements posted, thus relates to the scope of
employment of the Ledger Clerk and not to the mode of performance of his duty.
The District Judge has correctly observed that "it will be seen from the
instruction (P56) that the personnel in the current accounts departments are
to be eliminated from the duty of enclosing the statements in envelopes
......... and above all that this duty of despatch or delivery is to be held
by a special officer."



When Abeywickrema handed over bank statements to Ingram while he was not
functioning as a Ledger Clerk in charge of plaintiff's accounts he did
something so remote from his duties as to be altogether outside and
unconnected with his employment. Such acts of Abeywickrema therefore should be
regarded as outside the relationship of master and servant and as that of a
stranger



In Story on Agency, the learned author states in section 452‑



"The general rule is that the principal is liable to a third person in a civil
suit 'for the frauds, deceits, concealments, misrepresentations, torts,
negligence and other malfeasances or misfeasances and omissions of duty of his
agent in the course of his employment, although the principal did not
authorise, or justify or participate in, or indeed know of such misconduct, or
even if he forbade the acts or disapproved of them."



He then proceeded in section 456



"But although the principal is thus liable for the torts and negligence of his
agent, yet we are to understand the doctrine with its just limitations that
the torts or negligence occur in the course of the agency. For the principal
is not liable for torts or negligence of his agent in any matters beyond the
scope of the agency, unless he has expressly authorised them to be done or he
has subsequently adopted them for his own use and benefit."



These Passages from Story were quoted with approval by Lord Macnaghten in
_Lloyd v. Grace, Smith & Co._ (28) where the House of Lords held that the
principal is liable for the fraud of his agent's act Within the scope of his
authority, whether the fraud is committed for the benefit of the principal or
for the benefit of the agent.



Counsel for the appellant relied heavily on the case of _Uxbridge Permanent
Benefit Building Society v. Pickard_ (29) where it was held that the
defendants, a firm of solicitors were liable for the fraud of their

##  296



Managing Clerk in purporting to negotiate a mortgage for a non‑existent
property with forged title deeds. As in Lloyds case (supra) the clerk had full
authority to conduct the business of a solicitor's office in the name and on
behalf of its principal. It was not within his actual authority to commit a
fraud but it was within his ostensible authority to perform the acts of the
kind that came within the business conducted by a solicitor. The Managing
Clerk put in charge of that office was unquestionably given, in fact full
authority to conduct the business of a solicitor's office, on behalf of and in
the name of his principal. That authority would cover, not merely acting for
clients but also carrying through all transactions which would normally be
carried through by a solicitor. So long as he was acting within the scope of
this class of action, his employer was bound, whether or not the clerk was
acting for his own purposes or for his employer's purposes. In of his judgment
Greene, M. R. said at page 348 :



"In the case of a servant who goes off on a frolic of his own, no question
arises of any actual or ostensible authority upon the faith of which some
third person is going to change his position. The very essence of the present
case is that the actual authority and the ostensible authority .... were of a
kind which, in the ordinary course of an everyday transaction, was going to
lead to third persons, on the faith of it, changing their position  That is
within the actual and ostensible authority of the clerk. It is totally
different in the case of a servant driving a motor car, or in cases of that
kind, where there is no question of the action of third parties being affected
in the least degree by any apparent authority part of the servant."



"In the Uxbridge case, the third party was dealing with a Managing Clerk
occupying the position of the principal whose authority to deal with the third
parties was not denied. But where the issue is one of actual authority or
total absence of authority, the case gives no support for an argument that
authority need not be proved.



If a servant is expressly prohibited from doing an act he cannot be treated as
having either express or implied authority to do the act in question. If
therefore the servant commits a tort in the course of doing a wholly
prohibited act he will not, prima facie, have been doing an  authorised act
and the master will not be liable. However a prohibition cannot affect a
servant's ostensible authority unless it is known to the

##  297



other party. "The essence of ostensible authority is that the employer, by his
words or conduct, represents to third parties that his servant has authority
to perform certain types of acts on his master I s behalf, and once the third
party has acted on the faith of that ostensible authority, the master is not
entitled to deny that the servant in truth had the authority. It is, in short,
a form of estoppel by representation. Atiyah at page 234.



In the _Uxbridge case_ , the third party had relied on the ostensible
authority of the clerk who was put in charge of the plaintiff's business and
hence having full authority to conduct the business of a solicitor's office on
behalf of and in the name of his principal. But in the present case there is
no evidence that the plaintiff or Ingram relied on any ostensible authority of
Abeywickrema to hand over the monthly bank statements or changed their
positions upon the faith of it, nor is there evidence of any representation
made by the defendant‑bank that Abeywickrema did have the authority to deliver
the bank statements when he was not working as a Ledger Clerk in charge of
plaintiff's accounts. "The whole foundation of liability under the doctrine of
ostensible authority is a representation believed by the person to whom it is
made, that the person claiming to contract as agent for a principal has the
actual authority of the principal to enter into the contract on his behalf."
Per Lord Diplock in _Metropolitan Police Commissioner v. Charles_ (30) ; vide
also similar enunciations of the law in _Freeman and Lockyer (a Firm) v.
Buckhurst Park Properties (Mangal) Ltd._ (31) at page 641 by Pearson L. J.,
and at 646 by Diplock, L. J.



In the above circumstances the defendant‑bank cannot be held liable for the
pilfering of bank statements and the unauthorised issue of them to Ingram by
Abeywickrema during the periods when he was not functioning as a Ledger Clerk,
in charge of plaintiff's account, as these acts were not done in the course of
his employment. The defendant will not be liable also for the issue of the
bank statements by Amerasinghe to Abeywickrema after Abeywickrema left the
York Street Branch of the defendant‑bank, to be handed over to Ingram as he
had no authority to do so. The bank rule (D 56) did not countenance such
handing over as Abeywickrema did not purport to be an authorised
representative of the plaintiff. But the same cannot be said of the issue of
bank statements by Abeywickrema to Ingram during the two spells namely
June‑September 1966 and 11. 6.1968 to 23.8.1968, when Abeywickrema was
functioning, as Ledger Clerk

##  298

** **

working on plaintiff's accounts. It 'would appear from the above rules that
Abeywickrema had, during this period, authority to hand over bank statements
to the plaintiff‑company or to its accredited representative. If he had
negligently, fraudulently or otherwise wrongly  assumed that Ingram was an
authorised representative of the plaintiff‑company and had delivered to him
the bank statements, the bank will be liable for such mistaken or wrong
exercise or  performance by its officer of his duties.



In the recent case of _Kooragang Investments Pvt_. _Ltd. v._ _Richardson &
Wrench Ltd._ (32) the Privy Council stated determining whether an act done by
a servant or agent was the course or within the scope of his employment in
cases where was no dealing by the Injured third party with the servant or
agent was done in the course or within the scope of his employment in cases
_where there was no dealing by the injured third party with the servant or
agent_ and where the issue was one not of ostensible authority but of actual
authority or total absence of authority. It was necessary in order to render
the master liable, to prove that he had authorised the act, and authority
could not be inferred from the fact that the acts done were of a class which
the servant or agent was authorised to do in the master's behalf. In this case
the evidence was that the servant, a valuer, did valuations for a group of
companies during a period when he was ordered by his employer not to do
business with them and it was clear that he had no authority to make the
valuations in question and in making them had acted to tally outside the
course and scope of his employment.  


In the case of _United Africa Co. Ltd. v. Saka Owoade_ (33) (cited by
plaintiff ) a transport contractor introduced to the appellants two men
representing them as his driver and clerk and stated that when the  appellants
had goods to be carried they should be given to the two men. Goods were given
by the appellants to one of the two men for carrying. But the goods were never
delivered. The Privy Council held the contractors liable because fraud was
committed in the course of the servants' employment and the true inference
from the facts was that the conversion of the goods was done within the course
of the servants' employment.



 In _London Country Council v. Cattermoles (Garages) Ltd._ (34) (relied on by
Plaintiff) the defendant who was the owner of a garage employed P' in the
garage to assist in moving cars, so as to make way for other cars. P' had no
driving licence and he was forbidden to drive vehicles. The defendant was held
liable for the man's act ; in driving

##  299



the van into the highway so as to back it into the garage, clear of the access
to the petrol pumps lying on the ground, he was doing an act within the scope
of his employment, though he was doing it in an unauthorised way. Although it
was illegal for 'P' to drive on the highway as he had no licence the fact that
the accident occurred when he took the van off the garage premises on to the
highway did not affect the result. "Where the servant is doing some work which
he is appointed to do, but does it in a way which his master has not
authorised and would not have authorised, had he known of it, in these cases,
the master in nevertheless, responsible." Per Lord Phillimore delivering the
judgement of the Privy Council in _Goh Choon Seng v. Lee Kim Soo_ (35).



Counsel for the defendant-respondent invoked also the principle enunciated in
_Biggar v. Rock Life Assurence Co.,_ (36) to resist the claim against the bank
for the alleged fraud of its officers Abeywickrema and Amerasinghe.



"His conduct (the agent's) in this case was a gross violation of duty, in
fraud of his principal, and in the interest of the other party. To hold the
principal responsible for his acts, and assist in the consummation of the
fraud, would be monstrous injustice. When an agent is apparently acting for
his principal, but is really acting for himself or third persons and against
his principal, there is no agency in respect to that transaction, at least as
between the agent himself, or the person for whom he is really acting, and the
principal .... The fraud could not be perpetrated by the agent alone. The aid
of the plaintiff or the insured, either as an accomplice or as an instrument,
was essential. . . " (p 525). "The power of the agent would not be extended to
an act done by him in fraud of the company and for the benefit of the
insured." (p. 525).

           

Here in this case Z' signed the proposal form, riddled with false statements
invented by Y'. an agent of the defendant-Insurance company without reading
and he was held disentitled to recover on the policy on the ground that Y'
invented the answer having really acted not as an agent for the company, but
as an agent for Z'.



In my view the principles of this case would not apply if the wrongful acts of
Abeywickrema and Amarasinghe were (according to the plaintiff's case ) not
done for the benefit of the plaintiff-company, but for the benefit of Ingram
who, according to the plaintiff, was not

**  
 300**



Collecting the statements as agent for the plaintiff‑company. But as
Abeywickrema and Amerasinghe acted in the transaction to help Ingram, the
issuing of the statements to whom, according to my finding, was acquiesced in,
by the plaintiff cannot, according to this principle, claim against the
defendant's agents or servants.



## Remoteness of Damages ‑ Novus Actus Interveniens



"Negligence alone does not give a cause of action , damage alone does not give
a cause of action. The two must co‑exist." Per Reading, C.J. in, Munday v.
London County Council (37) cited with approval by Lord Simon in  East Suffolk
Rivers Catchment Board v. Kent, (38)."  



It is not the act but the consequences on which tortious liability is founded.



In cases of negligence, damages can only be recovered if the injury complained
of, not only was caused by the alleged negligence but was also injury of a
class or character foreseeable as a possible result of it. (Vide _Overseas
Tankship (U.K.) v. Morsts Docks & Engineering Co. The Wagon Mound No. 1 _(39)
_Hughes v. Lord Advocate_ , (40). "The essential factor in determining
liability is whether the damage' such a kind as the reasonable man should have
foreseen"



"In the law of negligence the test of whether the consequences were reasonably
foreseeable is a criterion alike of culpability and of consequences."



Per Viscount Symonds in the _Wagon Mound No. 1 (1961)_ 1 All E.R 404 at 415
(supra).



It is not for every consequence of a negligent conduct that a man is
responsible in law. The guiding principle is that though the negligence of the
defendant may have been one of the inducing causes leading up to the damage (a
cause without which damage would not have been suffered-causa sine qua non),
he will not be liable unless it was the "actual", "effective", "proximate"
cause (causa causans) in the sense that he was blameworthy in being the cause
of the plaintiff's damage. The defendant would not be liable, even though his
negligence had been proved, if such negligence did not proximately cause
damage. The defendant's negligence should have actually caused the

##   301

** **

damage ‑ vide Macintosh and Scoble on Negligence in Delict, 5th Ed. at 77.
Lord Wright in _Mclean v. Bell_ (41) said "The decision however of the case
must turn, not simply on causation, but, on responsibility."



At one time the law was that unforeseeability was no defence _(Re polemis and
Furness Whithy & Co. Ltd._ (42), but the law now is that there is no liability
unless the damage is of a kind which is foreseeable. _The Wagon Mound No. 1_
(supra). The liability for damage today is thus based on the concept of
foreseeability. The damage should have been foreseen by a reasonable man as
being something of which there was a real risk, unless the risk was so small
that the reasonable man would feel justified in neglecting it.



Although in the law of Negligence the duty to take reasonable care was
confined to reasonable, foreseeable dangers, the fact that the danger that
actually materialised was not identical with the danger reasonably foreseeable
did not necessarily result in liability not arising. The _Wagon Mound case
(No. 1)_ seeks only to bar recovery of an unforseeable type of damage. If the
damage be of a type that is foreseeable, then recovery is still available,
even if the degree of damage is unforeseeable or if the precise manner in
which the damage occurs is unforeseeable. Even if the plaintiff proves every
other element in tortious liability he will lose his action if the harm which
he has suffered is too remote a consequence of the defendant's conduct. Damage
may be too remote because it is not in the view of the law caused by the
wrong. _Hughes v. Lord Advocate_ (supra).



"Between the act of the wronged doer and the final harmful consequences there
may intervene either the act of some person or .... some natural force which
makes such a contribution to the ultimate result as to immunize the wrong
doer's act and, in effect, insulate it from the result complained of. Where
such an intervening force becomes a superseding force so as to exonerate the
wrong‑doer from liability, the latter is entitled to base his defence on the
maxim _novus causa interveniens_. " Macintosh and Scoble ‑ Negligence in
Delict th Ed.67.



If the intervening act of a third party be malicious or of an intentional
character, then it does become a superseding cause, unless the Wrongdoer
should have realised and appreciated the likelihood of its Occurence by reason
of the situation created by him ‑ a new cause is not to be regarded as
independent if its intervention was a risk inherent in the situation created
by the defendant's act.



**  302**

** **

**Onus of Proof**



Before enlarging on the subject of remoteness of damage it is relevant to
consider the question of onus of,proof. Lord Sumner in _S. Singleton Abbey v.
S. S. Paludina_ (43) said "that the plaintiff must show that a particular item
of damage is not too remote before he can recover it." Similar statements
appear in the judgments of the Court of Appeal in _The Paludina_ (44) by
Bankes, Scrutton & Atkin L. J J respectively. In the _'Oropesa'_ (45) Langton
J., treated the onus as being on the plaintiff and Lord Wright in the Court of
Appeal _(The Oropesa_ (46)) agreed entirely with his judgment. On the other
hand, it has been said by Lord Haldane & Lord Dunedin in _Canadian Pacific
Railway Company v. Kelvin Shipping Company Limited_ (47) that defendant must
show that a particular item of damage is too remote he is not to be held
liable for it. These various dicta were considered by Lord Merriman P., in
_The Guildford_ (48) and without attempting to resolve the divergence of
opinion in the House of Lords, he favoured the view that it was the
plaintiff's onus.



 In _Mc Williams v. Sir William Arrol & Co_. (49) Viscount Kilmuir , L.C. said
at page 626:



"The necessity, in actions by employees against their employers grounds of
negligence, of establishing not only the breach of duty but also the causal
connection between the breach and the injury complained of is in my view part
of the law of both England and Scotland".



And Viscount Symonds said at page 628 ‑ "I do not doubt that it a part of the
law of Scotland as it is part of the law of England that a causal connection
must be established between a breach by an employer of his duty at common law
or under a statute and the damage suffered by his employee."



Since the plaintiff has to prove that the damage that he has suffered is the
"direct", "natural", "the natural, proximate" consequence of the defendant's
action, I am of the view that the onus of proof even on issues of remoteness
is on the plaintiff. Referring to the question onus of proof McKerron in his
Law of Delict ‑ 6th Ed. at page 128 states ‑



" The plaintiff must prove that the damage is traceable to the defendant's act
with reasonable certainty, and is not merely a conjectural result of it. He
must further prove that the act was either _the_ cause or a cause, legally
responsible for the damage ; in other words, that the damage is not too
remote."

##  303



"Foreseeability, which involves a hypothetical person, looking with hand sight
at an  event which has occurred, is a formula adopted by English law, not
merely for defining, but also for limiting, the persons to whom the duty may
be owed, and the consequences for which an actor may be held responsible.' Per
Lord Wilberforce _‑ McLoughlin v. O'Brian._ (50).



A consequence is too remote if it follows a break in the chain of causation or
is due to _novus actus interveniens_. "It is the quality of the act" said Lord
Simonds, "which determines the issue, for it is not every intervening act
which breaks what is called the chain of causation. If I throw a squib into a
crowd, I am liable to the man who is hurt, though intervening hands have
passed it on. When I speak of the quality of the act, I refer in particular to
that aspect of it which I believe to be all important in ... the law of tort,
namely whether it is an act which the actor could reasonably have contemplated
or foreseen". _Woods v. Ouncan_ (51). What is new and independent which could
not reasonably be foreseen, is generally a supervening human act. "In general"
said Lord Sumner "(apart from special contracts and relations and the maxim
respondeat superior), even though 'A' is in fault, he is not responsible for
injury to 'C' which 'B', a stranger to him, deliberately chooses to do. Though
'A' may have given the occasion for 'B's mischievous activity, 'B' then
becomes a new and independent cause." Consistently with this it was held that
if 'A' writes a libel on 'C', which is published by 'B' over whom 'A' has no
control, 'A' is not liable to 'C'. Until publication, no tort at all is
committed, and when publication does take place, it is due to 'B' not to 'A'
_Weld ‑Blundell v. Stephens _(52). Lord Reid in _Mc Kew v. Holland & Hannen &
Cubitts_ _(Scotland)_ (53) at 1623 said ‑



"If a man is injured in such a way that his leg may give way at any moment he
must act reasonably and carefully. It is quite possible that in spite of all
reasonable care his leg may give way in circumstances such that as a result he
sustains further injury. Then that second injury was caused by his disability
which in turn was caused by the defendant's fault. But if the injured man acts
unreasonably, he cannot hold the defender liable for injury caused by his own
unreasonable conduct is _novus actus interveniens_. The chain of causation has
been broken and what follows must be regarded as caused by his own conduct and
not by the defendant's fault or the disability caused by it. Or one may say
that unreasonable conduct of the pursuer and what follows



##  304



from it is not the natural and probable result of the original fault of the
defender or of the defender or of the ensuing disability. I do not think
foreseeability comes into this. A defendant is not liable for a consequence of
a kind which is not foreseeable. But it does not follow that he is liable for
every consequence which a reasonable man could foresee. What can be foreseen
depends almost entirely on the facts of the case, and it is often easy to
foresee unreasonable conduct or some other _novus actus interveniens_ as
being" likely. But that does not mean that the defender must pay for the
damage caused by the _novus actus_.



Again in _Home Office v. Dorset Yacht Co. Ltd._ (54) at 298 Lord Reid stated‑



"It is said that the respondents must fail because there is a general
principle that no person can be responsible for the acts of another who is not
his servant or acting on his behalf. . . So the question is really one of
remoteness of damage. And I must consider to what extent the law regards the
acts of another person as breaking the chain of causation between the
defendant's carelessness an, damage to the plaintiff.



There is an obvious difference between a case where all the links between the
carelessness and the damage are inanimate so that looking back after the
event, it can be seen that the damage was in fact the inevitable result of the
careless act or omission, and a case where one of the links is some human
action. In the former case the damage was in fact caused by the careless
conduct, however unforeseeable it may have been at the time that anything Like
this would happen. At one time the law was that unforeseeability was no
defence.....  But the law now is that there is no liability unless the damage
was of a kind which was foreseeable ....



On the other hand, if human action (other than an instinctive reaction) is one
of the links in the chain, it cannot be said that, looking back, the damage
was the inevitable result of the careless conduct... Yet it has never been the
law that the intervention of human action always prevents the ultimate damage
from being regarded as having been caused by the original carelessness .The
convenient phrase _novus actus interveniens_   denotes those cases where such
action is regarded as breaking the chain and preventing the damage from being
held to be caused by the careless conduct. But every day there are many cases
where, although one of the

##  305



connecting links is deliberate human action, the law has no difficulty in
holding that the defendant's conduct caused the plaintiff loss. . .What then
is the dividing line ? Is it foreseeability or is it such a degree of
probability as warrants the conclusion that the intervening human conduct was
the natural and probable result of what preceded it ? There is a world of
difference between the two . . . ."These cases show that, where human action
forms one of the links between the wrong doing of the defendant and the loss
suffered by the plaintiff, that action must at least have been something very
likely to happen if it is not to be regarded as _novus actus interveniens_
breaking the chain of causation. I do not think that the foreseeable
possibility is or should be sufficient, for then the intervening human action
can more properly be regarded as a new cause than as a consequence of the
original wrong doing. But if the intervening action was likely to happen, I do
not think that it can matter whether that action was innocent or tortious or
criminal." (p. 300)



It will have to be shown that the commission of the offence was the natural
and probable, as distinct from merely foreseeable result of the defendant's
wrong. But where a stranger intended to inflict the damage upon the plaintiff,
generally such a wrongful in tension on the part of the stranger‑third party
will relieve the. defendant of liability. That this is not always so can,
again be illustrated by cases of negligence consisting in a failure to guard
against the very act that happened. In _Petrovitch v. Callinghams Ltd_. (55)
the defendants, who had been engaged by the plaintiff's husband to carry out
decorations on his London house, were held liable for the theft of the
plaintiff's  husband to carry out decorations on his London house, were held
liable for the theft of the plaintiff's jewellery by a thief who had entered
the house through the street door left ajar by one of the defendants' painters
during the tea break. See also _Stansbie v. Troman_ (56) where the theft by a
thief was regarded as the kind of thing which was likely to happen ; the
defendant was held responsible on the ground that the act of the third person
could not have taken place but for the defendant's own fault or breach of
duty.



The dictum of Lord Reid in _Home Office v. Dorset Yacht Co_. _(supra)_ that
"where damage was caused by intervening human action liability for damage
should be limited to that which was likely" or "very likely" as criticised by
the Court of Appeal in _Lamb v. London Borough of Camden_ (57) as being not
sufficient since that could still extend the But every day there are many
cases where, although one, defendant's liability beyond all reason and lead to
bizarre or ludicrous results. Oliver, L. J. observed that "'likelihood' is a
somewhat

##  306



uncertain touchstone" and that "it  may be that some more stringent standard
is required. There may, for instance, be circumstances in which the court
would require a degree of likelihood amounting almost to inevitability before
it fixes a defendant with responsibility for the act of a third party over
whom he has and can have no control". (p. 418)



Watkins, L. J. thought that reasonable foreseeability should always be applied
without any gloss and suggested that "a robust and sensible approach to this
very important area of the study of remoteness will more often than not
produce, I think, an instinctive feeling that the event or act being weighed
in the balance is too remote to sound in damages for the plaintiff". (p. 421)



The action or default of the plaintiff may thus serve to extinguish his claim
for damage by reason of the fact that he had acted un reason of the fact that
he had acted  unreasonably or unlawfully. His irrational or felonious act may
break the chain of causation between defendant's wrong and his damages. In
this context as between the plaintiff and the defendant each is identified
with any third party for whom he is vicariously responsible. The rule that
negligence of a servant in the course of his employment is imputed to his
master applies whether the master is the plaintiff or the defendant. In the
instant case, even assuming that the defendant-bank was negligent in failing
to take care of the blank forms, it is manifest that the loss and damages
sustained by the plaintiff by reason of the misappropriation of the amount of
Rs. 1, 169,240.93 is attributable to the fraud and misappropriation committed
by the plaintiff's own officers, chief among whom was, according to plaintiff,
Ingram. The alleged negligence of the defendant‑bank might have been causa
sine qua non, but it was not sufficient in the circumstances to prevent the
fraud of the plaintiff's officers from being the causa causans of the loss.
Their fraudulent behaviour provides a glaring example of what a hypothetical
reasonable man in the position of the defendant could not have reasonably
foreseen as likely to result from the alleged negligence. No bank would
reasonably reckon with its is a customer who is a business‑man remaining
silent for weeks, months and years together without bringing to its notice
that he was not receiving by  post the monthly or weekly statements, if there
was such a def is strange behaviour on the part of plaintiff's officers that
even in1962 when at the plaintiff's request the arrangements had been altered
the statements to be sent weekly and not monthly, they chose to keep silent
about this non‑receipt by post of the bank statements. The rules of fair
dealing between man and man impose a duty on a customer

**  307 **



vis‑a‑vis his banker to notify the banker of his objection to the non‑posting
of the statements, if the bank had failed to post them. The defendant‑bank
was, in the circumstances entitled to assume in the absence of such complaint
that the  plaintiff had no complaint in the matter of the receipt of the
statements by it. The defendant could not have reasonably counted on plaintiff
having in its employ or management dishonest or incompetent persons. In any
event, the tenuosness of the linkage between defendant's negligence, if any,
and the loss suffered by the plaintiff is so apparent that the plaintiff's
claim to connect the two as cause and effect strikes me as far‑fetched and
fanciful. The loss suffered by the plaintiff is remote beyond the pale of
defendant's reasonable foreseeability.



In my judgment this is essentially a case in which, as between two innocent
persons, one of whom must suffer for the fraud of a third person he should
suffer who by his conduct or indiscretion has .enabled such third person to
commit the fraud or occasion the loss‑Vide Lord Halsbury in _Henderson v.
Williams_ (58). The Directorate of the plaintiff company must be presumed to
have known e manner in which the administration of their office. was organised
d conducted. It reposed excessive confidence in Ingram and placed in the sole
charge of its transactions with the defendant‑bank without exercising any
effectual supervision over him ‑ if the allegation  is  true  that  it  did
not  receive by post the bank‑statements ‑ and by acquiescing in his
collecting the bank statements held him out to the defendant as having
authority to collect monthly or weekly statements and thereby dispensed with
the bank sending such statements by post in performance of its obligation. e
plaintiff cannot after the lapse of twelve years now be heard to say at Ingram
had no real authority to receive on its behalf the bank statements and that
the defendant had defaulted in its obligation to Pd by post the said
statements. The plaintiff had, by its conduct ratified or adopted the delivery
of the statements to Ingram on its ,half and thereby had induced the
defendant‑bank to forbear transmitting the statements by post.



The District Judge has found that the defendant was negligent in t, it had
failed to be careful in the storing of blank forms which were be used for its
statements. The evidence shows that the fabricated weekly statements in the
possession of the plaintiff company were d in forms which had been discarded
as far back as 1960 and had ceased to be in use after 1960. The trial Judge
has held that



##  308



Abeywickrema had pilferred the blank forms though "there is no direct evidence
of his doing so"‑ "since he had opportunities for handling them, being an
employee of the bank". He has also held that this act pilfering was obviously
not done in the course of the performance his duties and that the bank is
therefore not liable, as Abeywickrema had stolen the forms and given them to
Ingram. But he has held the pilfering by Abeywickrema was possible because of
the negligent manner in which the forms were stored or permitted to be availed
by anyone, particularly one working in the bank. I cannot appreciate the
rationale of this finding. As a ledger clerk Abeywickrema necessarily to have
access to those forms. It would have been impossible for the bank to insure
against its ledger clerks pilfering those forms. For the performance of their
duties, they had to be entrusted with these forms and it would be well‑nigh
impossible to have a check on their disposition of these forms. These forms
themselves, are of no value and a bank cannot reasonably be expected to expend
as much care in their preservation as if they were  the  property of third
parties. It has to be remembered that the bank the owner of those forms.
Pilfering of such property by its employee bad enough but to make the bank
liable for what a thief does with stolen property would, in any event, offend
the rule of remoteness of damage. If somebody steals my revolver from my
unlocked drawer and shoots a third person, I cannot be fixed with
responsibility f crime. Similarly a bank cannot be liable for the forgeries
committed a third party on forms stolen from the bank. It is far‑fetched then
then that the bank facilitated the forgeries‑it would be a clear case of novus
actus interveniens. Though the trial Judge has come to the finding of
negligence from the act of pilfering, he has however failed to co, this
negligence to the loss suffered by the plaintiff How the suffered by the
plaintiff is caused by this item of negligence In been examined by the trial
Judge. I agree with the Court of Appeal that, even assuming that the defendant
was negligent in the storing of the old blank forms, the damage that the
plaintiff complains of case could not have been contemplated as a reasonably
foreseeable consequence of such negligence.



In the _Bank of Ireland v. Evans Trustees_ (59) the trustees w a corporate
body called upon the bank to replace a stock sold forged power of Attorney
bearing the genuine impression corporate seal. The defence was that the
carelessness of the t in the custody of their seal enabled the clerk to impose
on the bank

##   309



and disentitled them to relief. The court rejected the defence on the ground
that the negligence, if there was negligence in the custody of the seal, was
only remotely connected with the transfer which the bank set up as good
against the trustee.



" If a man should lose his cheque‑book, or neglect to lock the desk in which
it was kept, and a servant or stranger should take it up, it is impossible in
our opinion to contend that the banker paying his forged cheque would be
entitled to charge his customer with that payment. Would it be contended that
if he kept his goods so negligently that a servant took them and sold them, he
must be considered as having concurred in the sale, and so be disentitled to
sue for their conversion ? " Per Parker, J. at pp. 410, 411.



The District Judge has also held as an item of negligence against the
defendant that its failure to have periodical inspection of plaintiff's stock
enabled Ingram to carry out the fraud. I agree with Abdul Cader, J. and the
Court of Appeal that this finding has no foundation in law. The rule for
periodic inspection was a requirement provided for defendant's benefit, to
protect its interests. That was a right of the defendant and not a duty owed
by it to the plaintiff. Hence failure of the defendant to exercise that right
is not a breach of duty owed to the plaintiff and no question of negligence on
the part of the defendant arises in the absence of a duty.



The ultimate basis of the trial Judge's finding of negligence against the
defendant-bank is the violation by Abeywickrema and other bank officials of
the bank's instructions embodied in the bank's Manual of Instructions (D 56)
respecting its internal administration ; particularly the manner of delivery
of the weekly bank statements of the plaintiff company.



The legal position relating to such rules framed by a bank was considered by
the House of Lords in the case of _Lloyds Bank Ltd. v. E. B. Savory & Co._
(60) where Lord Buckmaster stated at page 109 ([1932] All ER).



"These rules and statements are not a legal measure of the liability of a
bank. They may fall short, or they may exceed what the court   may regard as
their duty in a particular case, but they afford a very valuable criterion of
obvious risks against which the bank thinks it is their duty to guard."

##  310



The question was also considered by Goddard, J. in the case of _Motor Traders
Guarantee Corporation Ltd. v. Midland Bank Ltd_.(61).



"But it is said, and said with great force, by Mr. Willink, that, shows that
if the officers of the bank did not obey their regulations, he goes a very
Long way to establishing a ca negligence. I think it cannot be taken always as
a universal principle, because, if the facts showed that the bank cashier had
taken every reasonable precaution to satisfy himself, and that he was
satisfied with the information he had got, and that the conclusion which he
had been able to draw from that information was such as satisfy anyone that
the bank might safely and properly take that  cheque, I do not see how it can
be said that, because he had not followed out to the letter the regulations of
the bank, because had not submitted it to the Manager's attention directly,
the would have been guilty of negligence......"



At page 96 Goddard, J. continued-



"I again say that ‑ I am far from saying that the plaintiffs.....are  entitled
to rely upon a literal performance, or are entitled to require a literal
performance, by the bank of these regulations. The bank does not owe a duty to
them to carry out this rule, that rule, or the. Other rule Indeed, I doubt
whether they owe their own customers the  duty of carrying out all the rules
which they may lay down as counsels of perfection. The question in every case
is not whether, the bank requires a particular standard of conduct, but
whether particular acts which are done are enough to discharge the onus which
is upon the bank either in respect of their own customer."



In _Orbit Mining & Trading Co. v. Westminster Bank Ltd_. (62) Harman, L. J.
approvingly referred to the two cases above motioned and said ‑



"So far as the Westminster Bank's rules are concerned, I am of opinion that
they are, no doubt counsels of perfection, but the fact they are not always
entirely complied with does not convict the bank of negligence, though no
doubt where the rules are not kept, matter needs close attention."



The above dicta emphasise that the rules of a bank are merely counsels of
perfection and that, though they afford valuable criteria of the risk against
which the bank has to guard against acts done by

##  311



themselves, they do not constitute a legal measure of the liability of a bank
and that failure to follow strictly any such rules contained in the Manual of
defendant‑bank's Instructions (D56), could not by itself render the bank
negligent.



The District Judge has erred in law in assuming that-



" when Abeywickrema, Amerasinghe and others chose to avoid compliance with
these rules, they were acting negligently" and when he reasoned "as far as the
periods before and after Abeywickrema's services in the Ledger Department go,
the negligence of the bank arises from the failure of officials to follow
important instructions with regard to the delivery of statements."



**Directing Mind and Will of the Company**

** **

We were treated to a very interesting and attractive argument by Senior
Counsel for the defendant‑bank that the fraud of Ingram coupled with the
misconduct of Samuel, Classen and Wickremasinghe must, in law, be considered
to be the fraud of the plaint company as these officials should be identified
with the company. According to him they " constituted "the directing mind and
will of the plaintiff company"



A company is liable in torts for all the wrongful acts of the persons, who
control the  management of its undertaking, when they are acting as such.
These persons may be the directors collectively, or they may be merely some of
the directors who in fact manage the company's business, or the governing body
may be a single managing director or even manager who is not a director at
all. The court is not bound by the formal provision of the company's
memorandum and articles in discovering who controls the management of the
company's business: the answer in each case will depend on the way the
company's affairs are actually managed at the date the tort is committed.



The directors and the members in general meetings are the primary organs of
the company between whom the company's powers are divided. However in relation
to the internal operation of a company, the general meeting, the board of
directors and even a Managing Director have, in effect, come to be treated as
organs  of the company rather than merely as its agents.

##  312



In order to fix a company with liability, the relation of principal a agent or
of master and servant must be established between the corporation and the
person who commits the tort, in respect of the tort in question.



In general the wide doctrines of agency and vicarious liability developed by
English Law enable a company to be held liable whenever justice so requires.
But circumstances can arise when a person is not held liable unless he himself
is personally at fault. If applied strictly to corporate bodies this would
mean that in such circumstances they would never be held liable. To avoid
this consequence the courts have evolved the theory that the acts and torts of
certain agencies of a company may be regarded as those of the company itself.
In effect these agencies are treated as organic parts of the company or as the
alter ego of the company, distinct from those who are merely employees or
servants. The judicial development of this aspect of corporate personality is
traceable to the speech of Lord Haldane in _Lennard's Carrying Co. Ltd_ . _v.
Asiatic Petroleum Co. Ltd._ (63). In that case a company which owned a ship
was seeking to take advantage of the limitation of liability under section 502
of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1894. This limitation is available only where
the injury is caused without the owner's "actual fault or privity." The loss
resulted from the default of Lennard, its Managing Director, and it was argued
that the Manager's fault or privity was not the fault or privity of the
company which was the owner and that it must be the actual personal fault or
privity of the company. It was contended that Lennard, though he had the
supreme control of the technical management of the ship, was nothing more than
agent or servant of the company and that he did not represent the company in
the sense of making his fault the fault of the company; in short that he was
not the alter ego of the company. In holding company liable, Viscount Haldane
delivering the judgment of the House said at pp. 713, 714‑



"My Lords, a corporation is an abstraction. It has no mind of, own any more
than it has a body of its own; its active and directing will must consequently
be sought in the person of somebody for some purposes may be called an agent,
but who is really directing mind and will of the corporation, the very ego and
centre of the personality of the corporation ‑.... If Mr. Lennard was
directing mind of the company, then his action must, unless a corporation is
not to be liable at all, have been an action which was

##  313



the action of the company itself within the meaning of section 502 .... It
must be upon the true construction of that section, in such a a case as the
present one that the fault or privity is the fault or privity of somebody who
is not merely a servant or agent for whom the company is liable upon the
footing respondeat superior, but somebody for whom the company is liable
because his action is the very action of the company itself."



In the case of _Fanton v. Denville_ (64) Greer, L.J. observed at page 329‑



"In actions against companies a general manager of the business is deemed to
be the alter ego of the company, and it would be responsible for his personal
negligence."



In _Rudd v. Elder Dempster & Co_. (65) Scrutton, L.J summarised the position
as follows :



"The company is liable for the fault or privity of somebody who is not merely
a servant or agent for whom the company is liable .... because his action is
the very action of the company itself. "



"A corporation .... is liable to its workmen for the negligence only of its
governing body, directors, or general manager."



In _H.M.S. Truculent, The Admiralty v. The Divina (Owners)_ (66) ‑ The third
Sea Lord was held to be the "directing mind" of the Admiralty and that "his
fault or privity was the fault or privity of someone who is not merely a
servant or agent for whom the Admiralty was liable on the footing of
respondeat superior but someone for whom the Admiralty was liable because his
action was the "very action of the Admiralty itself". In the case of _The Lady
Gwendolen_ (67) the fault of the assistant Managing Director of the
plaintiff‑company. was held to constitute "actual fault" of the
plaintiff‑company. In the course of his judgment Willmer, L. J. said at 294 ‑  


"It is necessary to look closely at the organisation of the company in order
to see of what individual it can fairly be said that his act or omission is
that of the company itself," and further observed at p. 295 "Where ... a
company has a separate traffic department, which assumes responsibility for
the running of the company's ships, I see no good reason why the head of the
department, even

##  

##  314



though not himself a director, should not be regarded as someone whose action
is the very action of the company itself, so far a concerns anything to do
with the company's ships." Winn L.J,, said at page 302 . . . "wherever the
fault either occurs in a function or sphere of action which the owner has
retained for himself or is that of a manager independent of the owner to whom
the owner ha surrendered all relevant powers of control, it is actual fault of
the, owner within the meaning of the section."



According to Wilmer & Winn LJJ. it would appear that a person whose fault is
to be taken as personal to the corporation need nn necessarily be a director.
On this analysis a departmental manager could be treated as alter ego of a
corporation in respect of such departmental matters provided the primary
control in fact was place in his hands. Thus it would appear that a company
will be liable for the acts and omisions of the "top management". Who
constitutes "to management" will have to be decided by careful investigation
an analysis of the particular corporation organised in relation to the facts
of a particular case. The general principle may involve lifting of the
corporate veil to discover the true factual position with respect to the
management of the company.

  
Useful guidelines on how the mind and will of a company may be manifested are
also to be found in the judgment of Denning, L. J. in _H.L. Bolton
(Engineering) Co. Ltd. v. T J. Graham & Sons Ltd. _(supra) at 630-  where he
said in vivid language :



"A company may in many ways be likened to a human body. They have a brain and
nerve centre which controls what they do. They also have hands which hold the
tools and act in accordance with directions from the centre. Some of the
people in the company 8, mere servants and agents who are nothing more than
hands to do the work and cannot be said to represent the mind or will. Others
are directors and managers who represent the directing mind a will of the
company, and control what they do. The state of mind these managers is the
state of mind of the company and is treat by the law as such." A little later
he continued at page 630 ‑ "  So here the intention of the landlord company
can be derived from the intention of their officers and agents. Whether their
intention is company's intention depends on the nature of the matter under
consideration, the relative position of the officer or agent and other
relevant facts and circumstances of the case."

**  315**

** **

In that case the Court held though the directors of the landlord company did
not hold any meeting of the board or pass any resolution or record  their
decisions in any minutes, since the conduct of the company s business was
left to the directors individually ; having regard to the standing of the
directors in control of the company's business the intention of the directors
was held, in the circumstances, to be the intention of the company.



In _Tesco Supermarkets Ltd. v. Nattrass_ (68) Lord Reid said, in this
connection, at pages 131, 132 :



"A living person has a mind which can have knowledge or intention or be
negligent and he has hands to carry out his intentions. A corporation has none
of these ; it must act through living persons, though not always one or the
same person. Then the person who acts is not speaking or acting for the
company. He is acting as the company and his mind which directs his acts is
the mind of the company. There is no question of the company being vicariously
liable. He is not acting as a servant, representative, agent or delegate. He
is an embodiment of the company or, one could say, he hears and speaks through
the persona of the company, within his appropriate sphere, and his mind is the
mind of the company. If it is a guilty mind then that guilt is the guilt of
the company. It must be a question of law whether, once the facts have been
ascertained, a person in doing, particular things is to be regarded as the
company or merely as the company's servant or agent. In that case any
liability of the company can only be a statutory or vicarious liability."



Referring to the passage in the judgment of Denning, L.J. quoted above, Lord
Reid said:



"In that case the directors of the company only met once a year they left the
management of the business to others, and it was the intention of those
managers which was imputed to the company. I think that was right. There have
been attempts to apply Denning,  L.J.'s words to all servants of a company
whose work is brain work, or who exercise some managerial discretion under the
direction of superior officers of the company. I do not think that Denning,
L.J. intended to refer to them. He only referred to those who represent the
directing mind and will of the company, and control what it does.

##  316



I think that is right for this reason. Normally the board of directors, the
managing director and perhaps other superior officers of a company carry out
the functions of management and speak a act as the company. Their subordinates
do not. They carry orders from above and it can make no difference that they
are given some measure of discretion. But the board of directors may delegate
some part of their functions of management giving to their delegate full
discretion to act independently of instructions fir them. I see no difficulty
in holding that they have there by put such. delegate in their place so that
within the scope of the delegation  he can act as the company. It may not
always be easy to draw the Ii but there are cases in which the line. must be
drawn."( p.132).



Lord Morris held in that case that 'C' who was one of the several hundreds of
Managers of the appellant company's supermarkets, could not have been
identified with the company. He said at page 140 :



"The company had its responsibilities in regard to taking all reasonable
precautions and exercising all due diligence. The careful and effective
discharge of those responsibilities required the directing mind and will of
the company. A system had to be created which could rationally be said to be
so designed that the commission of offences would be avoided. There was no
delegation of the duty of taking precautions and exercising diligence. There
was no such delegation to the manager of a particular store. He did not
function as the directing mind or will of the company. His duties as the
manager of one store did not involve managing the company. He was one who was
being directed. He was one who was employed but he was not a delegate to whom
the company  passed on its responsibilities......He was a person under the
control of the company......He was, so to speak, a cog in the machine which
was devised : it was not left to him to devise it. Nor was he within what has
been called the brain area' of the company."  



Lord Diplock, posed the question at page 155:  


"what natural persons are to be treated in law as being, company for the
purpose of acts done in the course of its business" and not merely its agents,
and the answer "is to be found by identifying those natural persons who by the
memorandum articles of association or as a result of action taken by the
directors or by the company in general meeting pursuant to the articles
entrusted with the exercise of the powers of the company ."

##   317



Lord Diplock did not extend the "brave and nerve centre" beyond those who by,
or by action taken under, the company's articles of association are entitled
to exercise the powers of the company. He disapproved the dicta to the
contrary in _The Lady Gwendolen_ (supra). It is to be noted that Lord Diplock
was alone in thus limiting the class of persons whose acts are to be regarded
in law as the personal acts of the company itself to those who by, or by
action taken under, its Articles of Association are entitled to exercise the
powers of the company. The evidence discloses that Ingram, an employee of the
plaintiff‑company was a Director of the company called Collettes Finance Ltd.,
which was in fact a subsidiary of the plaintiff company ; that he was a Sales
Manager of the plaintiff‑company ; he was engaged in various aspects of the
banking activities of the plaintiff‑company and its subsidiary more
particularly in depositing cash and cheques to the credit of the plaintiff
company's account, opening of Letters of Credit, preparing stock certificates,
regularly checking the bank balances of the plaintiff‑company and the loan
payments due from the plaintiff‑company from the Finance Department of the
plaintiff‑company and that the plaintiff‑company had taken out a fidelity
guarantee policy covering Ingram.



The Trial Judge has found that Samuel, together with Ingram was engaged in
this fraud and the Court of Appeal has affirmed this finding. Samuel was a
Finance Director of the plaintiff‑company and was responsible in submitting
forged certificates of balances to the auditors of the plaintiff‑company.
Wickremasinghe and Classen, directors of the plaintiff‑company had certified
false stock certificates on the basis of which overdraft facilities were
obtained from the defendant bank.



Counsel for the defendant‑respondent submitted in the light of these facts
that the fraud of Ingram and of Samuel, Wickremasinghe and  Classen  must  in
law  be  regarded  as the fraud of the plaintiff‑company on the ground that
they represented "the directing mind and will" of the company and their acts
and state of mind are the acts and state of mind of the company itself. Though
the evidence discloses that Ingram was a trusted employee of the
plaintiff‑company and played a number of roles in the activities of the
company, I cannot agree with the Court of Appeal  in holding that he was "the
directing mind and will" of the plaintiff‑company or that he was within the
"brain area" of the company. He was not holding any position of control in

##  318



the company; nor did he share the management of the company. The role he
played in the administration of the company was a subservient role, the role
of a trusted employee. He was always regarded as the company's servant or
agent. He was a person under the control of the company and not in any way in
control of the company. He was not in the area of top management and all his
activities did not involve managing the company and he cannot hence be
identified with the company. The evidence on record is not sufficient to hold
that Ingram was a "limb" of the plaintiff‑company. The evidence does not show
that Ingram could on his own independent initiative take any decision
regarding the administration of the company. Even on the question of overdraft
it was Harasgama who approached the Chairman of the defendant bank for
overdrafts and arranged the overdraft facilities and it was Harasgama whom
Loganathan, the Manager of the defendant bank contacted when the discrepancy
in the accounts was detect on 28th November 1968. In my view, in no sense can
Ingram described as a "directing mind and will" of the plaintiff‑company.. can
Samuel, or Wickremasinghe or Classen individually or collective be identified
with the company as representing the "the directing mi and will" of the
plaintiff company. They were not in actual control" the operation of the
company. They cannot be regarded as  Company.



The evidence does not show that in committing the fraud referred by the
counsel for the defendant, they acted as the Board of Direct " of the
plaintiff‑company. The findings of the courts below are th, Harasgama, the
Managing Director did not participate in the fr referred to. Certainly his
acts would have implicated the plaintiff‑company as he would have been, by
himself, and along the persons referred to above, constituted the "directing
mind will" of the plaintiff‑company. Abdul Cader J., has dealt fully with
involvement of Harasgama. Though he finds Harasgama guilty of misconduct he
does not convict him of any positive fraud. In circumstances, the invitation
of counsel for the defendant to identify Ingram, Samuel, Classen, and
Wickremasinghe as the plaintiff‑company and to hold the plaintiff‑company
guilty of fraud and deny it any relief on that ground cannot be upheld. In
view of these findings the question of the nature and extent of the
applicability of principle of public policy elaborated in _Smith v. Jenkins_
(69) that a  wrong‑doer is out of court, does not arise for consideration.

##  319





## Duress

In its answer the defendant‑bank stated inter alia, that the plaintiff
admitted that the bank statements in its possession P10 were fabricated ; and
that at the close of business on the 28th November, 1968, the balance standing
to the debit of the plaintiff‑company was Rs. 3,403,099.32 by way of over
draft, and that a certificate of such balance was duly sent to the
plaintiff‑company on 05.12.1968 and the company accepted the certificate
without protest and that the company made no allegation of fraud on the part
of the defendant‑bank or its employees and that in respect of the monies over
drawn by the plaintiff‑company in excess of facilities to which the
plaintiff‑company was entitled, the plaintiff‑company gave a primary mortgage
of the premises No. 101, D. S. Senanayake Mawatha, Colombo, with the buildings
thereon, at the request of the defendant bank and that the defendant‑bank
thereafter extended further credit facilities to the plaintiff‑company and
refrained from stopping facilities to plaintiff and from curtailing existing
facilities. Defendant pleaded that in the circumstances the plaintiff company
is by its conduct estopped inter alia ‑



( _a_ )        from denying that a sum of Rs. 3,403,099.32 had been overdrawn
by the plaintiff‑company as on 28.11.1968;



( _b_ )        from asserting that the defendant-bank had been guilty of any
fraud or negligence ;



_(c)_        from asserting any claim for damage on the basis of facts pleaded
in the plaint.



By its amended answer dated 23.10.71, the defendant‑bank further averred that
on 30.12.68, the plaintiff‑company expressly admitted to the defendant‑bank
that as at close of business on 14.12.68, a sum of Rs. 3,381,497.28 was
overdrawn by the Plaintiff‑company and that the said sum was still due or
owing to the defendant. Thereafter the plaintiff‑company, by further pleadings
dated 10.12.71 for the first time, took up the position that the Plaintiff ‑
company through two of its directors was induced to sign document dated
30.12.68 (subsequently marked D 132) and mortgaged bond dated 21.12.68 marked
D 121 in consequence of deliberate misrepresentation of facts and deliberate
suppression made by the defendant‑company and by Longanathan, its General
Manager, of the existence and contents of documents indicating that the
plaintiff

##  320



owed much less than the said sum and that the documents in t possession of the
plaintiff were genuine, authentic and/or duly received, and also because of
duress undue influence and threat of harm by Loganathan to plaintiff's
business and reputation. Plaintiff further pleaded that the defendant bank
acted in breach of its fiduciary duty to the plaintiff and Harasgama, its
Managing Director in including the plaintiff to sign the said document.



In respect of the above matters the following issues were framed (and answered
by the District Judge thus :



(25 E) At the close of business on 28.11.1968, had a sum of Rs 3,403,099.32
been overdrawn by the plaintiff.  


Ans. Yes.



(25 F)  Was a certificate of balance showing such overdraft of Rs.
3,403,099.32 duly sent to the plaintiff‑company on 5\. 12.1968 ?  


Ans. Yes.



(25 G)  Did the plaintiff‑company accept such certificates ?  


Ans. Yes, But under duress.



(25 H)  Did the plaintiff thereafter give a primary mortgage premises No. 101,
D. S. Senanayake Mawatha, to cover moneys overdrawn by the plaintiff‑company
in excess of the facilities which the plaintiff is entitled ?



Ans. Yes.



(25 1)    Did the defendant‑bank thereafter extend further credit facilities
to the plaintiff and refrain from stopping facilities a, curtailing existing
facilities ?  


Ans. Yes.



(25 J)    By document under the seal of the plaintiff‑company and attested by
its directors dated 30. 12.68, did the plaintiff ‑company expressly admit that
at the close of business on 14.12.68, a sum of Rs. 3,381,498.28 been overdrawn
by the plaintiff‑comapny on its current account?



Ans. Yes.

##  321



(26)  Is the plaintiff‑company estopped from denying that a sum of Rs.
3,404,099.32, inclusive of interest, expenses and charges had been overdrawn
by the plaintiff as at 28.11.68 ?



Ans. No.



(28)   Was the plaintiff through two of its directors induced to sign the
document dated 30.12.68 (D 132) and the mortgage bond (D 121 ) referred to in
issue 25 H in consequence of deliberate misrepresentation and other matters
referred to in 2a to 2c of the plaintiff's further pleadings ?



Ans. Yes.



(29)   Did the defendant and its then General Manager, Loganathan, act in
breach of its fiduciary duty to the plaintiff end its Managing Director S.T.
B. Harasgama in inducing the plaintiff to sign the said documents ?



Ans. Yes. With regard to the forms and disposal of statements.



(30)    If issue 28 and/or 29 are answered in the plaintiff's favour is the
plaintiff bound in any manner by the documents referred to in issue 28 ?



Ans. No.



The answer to issue 29, as very relevantly remarked in the Court of Appeal, by
the Trial Judge is not at all intelligible. Issue 29 related to the signing of
documents dated 30.12.68 (D 132) and the mortgage bond D 121, but the Judge
has answered issue 29, "Yes, with regard to forms and disposal of statements."
This answer indicates that the Trial Judge had not found that there has been a
breach of alleged fiduciary duty in respect of the two documents D1 21 and D1
32.



To appreciate whether there is any basis for the allegation of duress made by
the plaintiff as vitiating, the documents D 121 and D 132 it is necessary to
refer to certain correspondence that took place between the parties, prior to
the dates of the documents.



By the letter dated 5.12.68 the defendant‑bank sent to the plaintiff
certificate of balance relating to the plaintiff's current accounts No. 22200
and 22201 indicating that the balances standing to the debit of the account of
the plaintiff‑company (C. A. 22200) on the close of business on 28.11.68 was
Rs. 3,403,099.32 and that standing to the credit of the account of the
plaintiff (C. A. 22201) on 28.11.68 was Rs. 38,077.30.

##  322



By letter dated 7.12.68 (P219) Harasgama wrote to the General Manager of the
defendant‑bank "first we wish to thank you for all assistance given by you to
check the bank ledger statements for past several years with the statements we
have received from bank. By letter dated 13.12.68 (P220) Loganathan wrote to
Harasgama‑



"As you are aware it was the bank that discovered and report you the
discrepancy in your current account balance. You then produced at the request
of the bank a file of statements allege  have been sent by the Bank of Ceylon.
I pointed out to you examining those 'statements' which you had in your
possession purporting to be Bank of Ceylon statements that they were not
genuine bank statements, but were complete fabrications.... subsequently your
auditors were given an opportunity of checking, the bank ledger with the
'purported' bank statements and it was a  result of that you had been
convinced that a fraud had been committed......  On behalf of the bank I would
emphatically deny that those documents are genuine bank statements and I would
point  out that they are complete fabrications ......"



By letter dated 15.12.68 (P221) Harasgama wrote to Loganathan "the writer is
fully cognizant of the bank's position in regard to the 'bank
statements'.......  We are fully conscious that the bank's position is and at
all times has been that bank statement' in our possession  are fabrications.
As we have explained to you at our discussion we had every reason to believe
that the statements were genuine, but I from the points mentioned to us by you
and the officers of your _we now know that in relation to the bank ledger the
statements in   question are fabrications_.



The minutes of the Board Meeting (D 182) of the plaintiff‑company held on
6.12.68, stated ‑



"the General Manager informs the Board that a large def had taken place in the
books of the company which is in the stage of investigation, estimated to be
1.2 million rupees. General Manager recommended that the facilities in the
limit application submitted were necessary for the company to continue  its
business ; although the company had a severe setback the tangible nett worth
of the company which as at 31.3.1967 three million would justify these
facilities. The General Man authorised to take whatever steps he determines
necessary to

##  323



ensure that the bank interests were adequately protected. He was also
authorised to grant them the facilities in the Limited applications, submitted
and also such other facilities he may consider necessary."



In his complaint to the Police dated 20.12.68 (P236) Harsgama states "the
scrutiny that is being carried out by the auditors Now reveals that the cash
of the company entrusted to him (Ingram) from time to time to be deposited to
the company's bank account at York Street and Foreign Department had not been
reflected in the bank ledger."



In regard to the mortgage bond D 121 or to the letter D 132 it has to be.
noted that there is no complaint of any compulsion with regard to them in any
of the letters written by the plaintiff company to the defendant bank and no
complaint in regard to them has been made and no relief claimed in respect of
it in the plaint either. In fact the plaintiff in its letter, for example D
143 dated 6th February, 1969 confirms the bond D 121. The first time that such
a complaint was made was only by the further pleading dated 10.12.71, almost
three years subsequent to the execution of the mortgage bond. The allegation
is evidently an after thought. The plaintiff‑company has admitted in the
written submissions made to the trial Judge that its substantive claim for a
declaration that cash and cheques to the value of Rs. 1,273,883.66 were
deposited by the plaintiff‑company with the defendant‑bank, must fail, as the
said sum had in fact not been so deposited. With this admission, as the Appeal
Court has remarked "the bottom was knocked off the allegations of duress and
compulsion." Furthermore the documents D 121 and D 132 had the voluntary
approval of the Board of Directors of the plaintiff company ; by their
certificate of total borrowings as at 31.12.68 (D 136), the seven directors of
the plaintiff‑company, including H. V. Pereira Q. C., affirmed the amount due
to the defendant bank as claimed by the defendant bank.



To give validity to a contract the law requires the free assent of the Party
who is to become liable under it. It therefore allows him to avoid my promise
extorted from him by terror or violence, whether on the Part of the person to
whom the promise is made or that of his agent. Duress, whatever form it takes,
is a coercion of the will which vitiates consent.

##  324



Economic pressure can in law amount to duress ; and that duress, if proved,
not only renders voidable a transaction into which a person has entered under
its compulsion but is actionable as a tort, if it causes damage or loss ‑
_Barton v. Armstrong_ (70) _  and Pao On v. Lau Yiu Long_ at p. 635 (71)‑



"In a contractual situation commercial pressure is not enough. There must be
present some factor which could in law be regarded as a coercion of his will
so as to vitiate his consent . . . . In determining whether there was a
coercion of will such that there was no true consent, it is material to
inquire whether at the person alleged to have been coerced did or did not
protest  whether at the time he was allegedly coerced into making the
contract, he did or did not have an alternative course open to‑him such as an
adequate legal remedy ; whether he was independently advised ; and whether
after entering the contract he took steps to avoid it. All these matters are,
as was recognised in _Maskell v. Homer_ , (72) relevant in determining whether
he acted voluntarily or not.



"The compulsion had to be such that the party was deprived of his freedom of
exercising his will"



American Law _Williston on Contract_ , 3rd Ed. now recognises that contract
may be avoided on the ground of economic duress. The commercial pressure
alleged to constitute such duress must however, be such that the the victim
must have entered the contra against his will, must have had no alternative
course open to hi must have been confronted with coercive acts by the party
exerting the pressure ‑ Williston, 3rd Ed. Vol.13, Ss 1603. American Judges
pay great attention to such evidential matters as the effectiveness of the
alternative remedy available, the fact or absence of protest, the availability
of independent advice, the benefit received, and the speed with which the
victim had sought to avoid the contract. Recently  two English Judges have
recognised that commercial pressure of  which can render a contract  voidable.
Kerr J. in _Occidental Worldwide Investment Corporation v. Skibs AIS Avanti
(The "Siboen" and the "Sibotre")_ (73) and Mocatta, J. in _North Ocean
Shipping Co. Ltd_. _v_. _Hyundai Construction Co_. (74) both stressed that the
pressure must be such that the victim's consent to the contract was not a
voluntary act on his part. In their Lorships' view, "there is nothing contrary
to principle in recognising economic duress as a factor which may render a
contract voidable,

##  325



provided always that the basis of such recognition is such that it must amount
to a coercion of will which vitiates consent. It must be shown that the
payment made or the contract entered into was not a voluntary act". per Lord
Scarman delivering the judgment of the Privy Council in _Pao On v. Lau Yiu
Long,_ (supra) at 635 ‑ 636\. Lord Diplock, in _Universe Tankships Inc_. _of
Monrovia v. International Transport Workers'   Federation_ (75) identifying
the rationale of the development of the legal concept of duress stated "It is
not that the party seeking to avoid the contract........ did not know the
nature or the precise terms of the contract at the time when he entered into
it .... The rationale is that his apparent consent was induced by pressure
exercised on him by that other party which the law does not regard as
legitimate, with the consequence that the consent is treated in law as
revocable unless approbated either expressly or by implication after the
illegitimate pressure has ceased to operate on his mind." (pp.  75, 76):,
continued "Commercial pressure, in some degree, exists wherever one party to a
commercial transaction is in a stronger bargaining position than the other
party. It is not, however, in my view, necessary, nor would it be appropriate
in the instant appeal to enter into the general question of the kinds of
circumstances, if any, in which commercial pressure, even though it amounts to
a coercion of the will of a party in the weaker bargaining position, may be
treated as legitimate and, accordingly, as not giving rise to any legal right
of redress". (p. 76).



Lord Scarman, though he dissented on another legal‑issue, stated the law as
follows at page 88 ‑



"The authorities  reveal two elements in the wrong of duress :



(1) pressure amounting to compulsion of the will of the victim; and (2) the
illegitimacy of the pressure exerted.



There must be pressure, the practical effect of which is compulsion or the
absence of a choice. Compulsion is variously described .... as coercion or the
vitiation of consent. The classic case of duress is, however, not the lack of
will to submit but the victim's intentional submission arising from the
realisation that there is no other practical choice open to him. This is the
thread of principle which links the early law of duress (threat to life or
limb) with later developments when the law came to recognise as duress first
the threat to property and now the threat to a man's business or trade."

##  326



The real issue in this appeal is . . . . as to the second element in the wrong
duress ; was the pressure applied by the I. T. F. in the circumstances of this
case one of which the law recognises as legitimate ? For as Lord Wilberforce
and Lord Simon in _Barton v. Armstrong_ (supra at p. 121 ) said ‑



"..... the pressure must be one of a kind which the law does not regard as
legitimate. "



As Lord Wilberforce and Lord Simon remarked. "In life, including life in
commerce and finance, many acts are done under pressure, sometimes
overwhelming pressure, but they are not necessarily done under duress. That
depends on whether the circumstances are such that the law regards the
pressure as legitimate.



In determining what is legitimate two matters may have to be considered. The
first is as to the nature of the pressure. In many cases this will be
decisive, though not in every case. And so the second question may have to be
considered, namely, the nature of the demand which the pressure is applied to
support .... The present is a case in which the nature of the demand
determines whether the pressure threatened or applied, was .... lawful or
unlawful. If it was unlawful, it is conceded that the owner acted under duress
and can recover. If it was lawful, it is conceded that there was no duress at
the sum sought by the owners is irrecoverable". P. 89, Lord Scarman proceeded
" .... . the law regards the threat of unlawful action as illegitimate,
whatever the demand. Duress can, of course, exist even if the threat is one of
lawful action; whether it does so depends on the nature of the demand.
Blackmail is often a demand supported by threat to do what is lawful, e. g.,
to report criminal conduct to the police. In many cases, therefore, 'what
(one) has to justify is not the threat but the demand'." (p. 89). _See Thorn
v. Motor Trade Association_ (76) ‑ Per Lord  Atkin. The plea of 'duress' poses
question whether the demand made by the defendant‑bank that plaintiff should
accept the certificate of balance showing that the plaintiff had over drawn
the sum of Rs. 3,403,099.32 was legitimate demand in the sense that although
compliance with it h been enforced by economic pressure that pressure was in
the circumstances lawful, so that there was no duress and the
plaintiff‑company is not entitled to deny the correctness of the certificate D
132\. Here are two commercial institutions wanting to business with each
other.. It may be that the defendant‑bank was in a

##  327



stronger bargaining position than the plaintiff‑company , that does not mean
that the defendant‑bank, in order to protect or secure itself, should not
bargain with the other party and in the process exert measure of commercial
pressure to fortify itself with an admission by the other party that its
accounts to date, which it honestly and reasonably believed to be correct,
reflected the correct position, and that, according to the said account, a
certain amount which was due to it on account of past dealings was in fact
correct and represented the liability of the other party. In the present case,
with hindsight we know that the defendant's ledgers represented the correct
accounts of the plaintiff and the plaintiff itself has admitted in court what
defendant had been urging right from 28.11.1968, that the alleged bank
statements in plaintiff's possession were fabrications and that the sum of Rs.
3,381,497.28 reflected in defendant's ledger are due from it to the
defendant‑bank. In its letter dated 15.12.1968 (P 221) Harasgama had
voluntarily written to Loganathan that, in relation to the bank's ledger, the
statements in the company's possession were fabrications. This letter was
written before the letter dated 17th December 1 968(P226) written by
Loganathan to Harasgama that  "we have today cancelled the overdraft facility
of Rs. 3,487,165 granted to your above account." It is to be noted that when
the impugned certificate P132 was given on 30.12.68, the plaintiff or
Harasgama had no ground to doubt the defendant's accounts and in fact did not
contest the correctness of the said accounts at any time. In the circumstances
that the parties were placed on 30.12.68, when the certificate P 132 was given
by plaintiff the demand of the defendant that the plaintiff give such
supported by a certificate, even though supported by certain economic pressure
was lawful and no question of duress arises. The demand was neither
unconscionable nor unjust. In any event, I am not satisfied that the
plaintiff‑company was not in such a desperate situation as to have no other
practical choice but to accept the certificate. On 30.12.1968 the date of P
132 its financial Plight was not so gloomy for it to have no freedom to
exercise its will but to succumb to the demand of the defendant‑bank ; it had
the benefit of independent advice and as stated earlier, it raised no protest
or complaint until three years later, when by way of further pleadings it
chose to buttress an admittedly false claim .



In my view, there is neither factual nor legal foundation for plaintiff's
belated plea of duress or misrepresentation in giving the mortgage bond D 121
and the certificate D 134.

##  328



The plaintiff has, in its further pleading, complained that the defendant and
Loganathan had, at the time that the document P 121 and P 132 were executed,
suppressed from Harasgama certain acts of negligence and irregularities on the
part of defendant's officers insinuating thereby that had he been aware of
them at the relevant dates, he would not have signed them. This is an
absolutely averment, false to the knowledge of Harasgama ; for, Harasgama had,
prior to the execution of these documents, come into possession of
defendant's documents which he got stolen from the defendant bank and had thus
become aware of the alleged negligence irregularities.



In my opinion issue 25 G should have been answered by the District Judge in
the affirmative without the qualification "but under duress," and issues 28
and 29 should have been answered in the negative against the plaintiff
company.



## Estoppel by Convention



Defendant had in issue 26 raised the question of estoppel. The Trial Judge,
though he has answered the issue in the negative has not ­discussed the merits
of the plea of estoppel by the advanced defendant. The plea is based upon the
documents D 121, D 132 given by the plaintiff‑company to the defendant, on the
basis of which the defendant‑bank continued the overdraft facilities
previously extended to the plaintiff company, and afforded the utilisation
facilities by the plaintiff company. The kind of estoppel relied on
defendant‑bank is what is known as estoppel by convention parties.

           

The principle of the estoppel was formulated by Lord Denning M.R ., in the
following passage in _Amalgamated Investment and Property, Ltd. v. Texas
Commerce International Bank Ltd._ (77) as follows:



"when the parties to a transaction proceed on the basis, underlying assumption
(either of fact or of law, and whether misrepresentation or mistake, makes no
difference), on which they  have conducted the dealings between them, neither
of them will be allowed to go back on that assumption when it would be unfair
or  unjust to allow him to do so."



The Court of Appeal in _Keen v. Holland_ (78) in the judgment of  Oliver, L.
J. was of the view that the above proposition  broadly stated.



##  329



Quoting Spencer Bower on Estoppel by Representation-3rd Ed. (1977) pp. 157 to
160‑Brandon, L. J. stated in _Amalgamated Investments and Property Co. Ltd. v.
Texas Commerce_ (supra) at page 591 that‑



"This form of estoppel is founded, not on a representation of fact made by a
represent or and believed by a representee, but on an agreed statement of
facts the truth of which has been assumed, by the convention of the parties,
as the basis of a transaction into which they are about to enter. When the
parties have acted in their transaction upon the agreed assumption that a
given state of facts is to be accepted between them as true, then as regards
that transaction each will be estopped as against the other from questioning
the truth of the statement of facts so assumed."



The governing principle of this species of estoppel was stated in "Blackburn
Contract of Sale" 3rd Edition, page 204 as follows :



"That when parties have agreed to act upon an assumed state of facts, their
rights between themselves are justly made to depend on the conventional state
of facts and not on truth."



Latham, C. J. in _Grundt v. Great Boulder Proprietary Gold Mines Ltd_. (79)
said at page 657 :



When a person obtains advantage by relying upon rights which can exist only
upon the basis of an assumed state of facts, he is not permitted there after
to rely upon other rights in relation to the same person which are
inconsistent with the existence of rights formerly asserted. "



Scrutton, L.J. in _Verschures Creameries v. Hull & Netherland Steamship  Co.
Ltd_. (80) stated the principle :



A person cannot say at one time that a transaction is valid and thereby obtain
some advantage, to which he could only be entitled on the footing that it is
valid, and then turn round and say it is void for the purpose of securing some
other advantage. This is to approbate and reprobate the transaction."



The evidence discloses that it was on the basis and faith of the documents D
121 and D 132 that the defendant bank continued to extend to the plaintiff
overdraft facilities. The plaintiff, having enjoyed the benefit of such
facilities and in every respect acted upon the basis

##  330



of the regularity and validity of the aforesaid documents and the correctness
of the statements embodied therein, cannot now b permitted to resile from the
representations made in the said documents. Departure by the plaintiff company
from the assumption thereon is unjust and unconscionable. I agree with the
Court of Appeal that the plea of estoppel by convention is also entitled to
succeed.



Before I part with the record I am constrained to record m disapproval of the
conduct of Harasgama, the Managing Director the plaintiff company who
conducted the litigation on behalf of the plaintiff company, in employing
detectives to steal documents from the defendant‑bank. He has admitted that he
had done so and in doing so he is certainly guilty of the offence of aiding
and abetting theft. The Trial Judge has not taken into account the fact that
the man who i guilty of such misconduct, is capable of resorting to any
strategy t achieve his object and that his evidence should be regarded wit
caution. The court should have been wary in accepting his uncorroborated
evidence.



Though I deeply appreciate the great pains that the trial Judge has taken over
his judgment, I cannot persuade myself to salvage it. I affirm the judgment of
the Court of Appeal reversing the judgment of the District Judge and
dismissing the plaintiff's action. I dismiss the  appeal with costs.



**ABDUL CADER, J**.



The plaintiff Company which enjoyed an overdraft facility with the
defendant‑Bank by application P218 of August, 1968, applied to the  Bank to
grant the Company a much larger overdraft facility than the existing 3 1/2
million. When this application was processed, it was found that the statement
made by the plaintiff concerning the sum overdrawn was much less than the sum
in fact, overdrawn from Bank. This was discovered on 28.11.1968. Promptly,
Harasgama, the Managing Director of the plaintiff‑company, was informed and
his orders the Accountant of the Company, Paul Fernando, took the weekly Bank
statements to the Bank and it was found that large sum of money, which,
according to the alleged Bank Statements in Company's possession, had been
deposited in the Bank, were not, in fact, deposited and that the weekly
statements alleged to have been sent by the Bank to the plaintiff were totally
different from led accounts in the possession of the defendant.

##  331



The overdraft facility extended to the plaintiff was up to a sum equal to 100
per cent of the landed costs of the goods in the possession of the plaintiff
each month, the total overdraft, in any event, not to exceed 31/2 million
rupees with an agreed variation after March, 1968, which I shall refer to
later. The Bank fixed the overdraft limit on receipt of the stock statements
monthly from the plaintiff. It became necessary, therefore, to examine the
stock statements sent by the plaintiff to the defendant and Samuel, the
Finance Director,  turned up that evening with the copies of the stock
statements in the possession of the plaintiff‑Company. It was now found that
the stock statement sent to the defendant month after month did not correspond
to the copies of the stock statements in the custody of the plaintiff ‑ that
the former had been overloaded with fictitious stocks ; the Bank had acted on
these overloaded fictitious statements and granted the overdraft facility ;
and that the plaintiff had operated on and drawn money on the basis of the
overdraft limit advices, the fraud running into over a million rupees.



Meanwhile the plaintiff‑Company entrusted the entire matter to their own
auditors who, after extensive investigation into the documents in the
possession of the plaintiff and with the consent of the defendant the
documents in possession of the defendant, submitted their report P103 ' in
February, 1972. The plaintiff filed this action in November, 1970.



For a principal cause of action, the plaintiff averred that the defendant
intentionally caused and permitted the plaintiff to believe that the
representations in the counterfoil receipts issued by the Bank on deposits of
moneys in the Bank and weekly statements of account Were true and to act upon
such belief. The plaintiff also averred that cash and cheques to the sum of
Rs. 1,275,883.66 which the defendant Bank claimed had not been deposited were,
in fact, deposited to the credit of the plaintiff's account and that a sum of
Rs. 49,546.16 which had been debited by the Bank as interest was not, in fact,
due. On this principal cause of action, the plaintiff prayed for a declaration
that the sum of Rs. 1,275,883.66, which the Bank denied  , was in fact due to
the plaintiff from the defendant and that the sum of Rs. 49,546.16 was not due
from the plaintiff to the defendant.



For a first alternative cause of action, the plaintiff averred that the
defendant had fraudulently and/or negligently issued incorrect

##  332



counterfoil receipts and weekly statements of accounts and facilitate the
issue of or fabrication of incorrect receipts and weekly statement of accounts
to the plaintiff particularly in that :



( _a_ )        the defendant being aware that incorrect receipts and weekly
statements were issued to the plaintiff, failed to inform the plaintiff and/or
to stop that issue and/or to take reasonable  



( _b_ )        defendant failed to exercise proper care and control of the
custody of the blank forms of the statements of accounts,



( _c_ )        the defendant failed to exercise proper control of the over the
issue and delivery of receipts and weekly statements of accounts an
certificates of balances, and



( _d_ )        the defendant permitted unauthorised persons to have to such
blank forms.



The second alternative cause of action was that, if as claimed by the
defendant, this sum of money had, in fact, not been deposited, the defendant
and/or its servants jointly with one Ingram and/or other  persons unknown to
the plaintiff misappropriated that sum of money and, therefore, the defendant
was liable in this sum as damage When issues were framed, issues 1 to 7
covered the principal cause of action issues 8 to 13 covered the first
alternative cause of action; issues 14 to 17 covered the second, alternative
cause of action; Certain consequential issues were framed by Counsel for the
defendant. He also raised further points of contest with reference the primary
mortgage given by the plaintiff to the defendant Bank a estoppel based
thereon. (Issues 25h to j and 26) whereupon Counsel for the plaintiff raised
issues 28 to 30 to meet the charge of estoppel.



Before I go on to the evidence in this case, I wish to make one thing very
clear that I cannot appreciate how the plaintiff came to Court with the
principal cause of action. This trial went on for a very long period the
District Court and Counsel were involved in a wild goose cha especially
Counsel for the defendant, as a result of the principal ca of action pleaded
by the plaintiff.  Immediately, this fraud was discovered on 28.11.68, it
would have been clear to Harasgama the fraud had taken place in his office and
that this sum of  Rs, 1,275,883.66 had not been deposited into the plaintiff's
account in  the Bank. As I have said earlier, the weekly statements in the
custody of the plaintiff had been checked with the ledger of the defendant
-Bank

##  333



on the morning of the 28th November  and it was discovered that the weekly
statements did not reflect the true state of affairs in the Bank ledger. That
evening, it was discovered that an enhanced overdraft facility had been
obtained from the Bank and operated  on fabricated stock statements sent by
the plaintiff to the defendant. Harasgama was a lawyer and the Managing
Director of the Company. It should have dawned on him that the fraudulent
original stock statement would have originated only from his Company. He
submitted that he suspected that Ingram was the culprit and he started
searching for him. In the written submissions, the plaintiff has admitted that
Harasgama suspected Ingram on the 29th. Harasgama called in his auditors and
they investigated fully and reported their findings  9 months before the
plaint was filed that the amount in contention had not been deposited with the
Bank to the plaintiff's credit. Therefore, it is indeed amazing that Counsel
had settled a plaint in total contradiction of the obvious truth and in
disregard of the report of the plaintiff's own auditors, on the basis that
this sum had been deposited with the Bank. The plaintiff framed not only
issues 1 to 7 on the basis of this obvious untruth, but went on with the trial
on these issues until the very end of the trial. Counsel for the defendant was
obliged to spend a good deal of his time and energy on meeting these issues,
with the result that certain matters relevant to the real dispute between the
parties were not fully explored, for which the plaintiff alone should take
responsibility.



Before  us, Counsel for the plaintiff gave his explanation for this amazing
conduct. He put the responsibility on Counsel for the plaintiff an eminent
Queen's Counsel who is no more, that because letter dated 31st December, 1968
(P 228), written by the plaintiff to the defendant, inquiring whether the
defendant was "now in a position to confirm or deny the genuineness of the
documents in our possession was not replied to, this cause of action was
introduced. By 'D 132' of 30.12.68 (previous day) the Directors of the
plaintiff‑Company had acknowledged and declared that as at close of business
on 14th December, 1968, a sum of Rs. 3,381,497.28 had been overdrawn by the
Company on current Account No. 222000\. The defendant, therefore, ignored this
letter sent by  the plaintiff. The plaintiff could no have had any doubt that
the relevant documents in its possession were fabricated documents and that
the disputed amount was never deposited in the defendant‑Bank. In the written
submissions to the

##  334



District Judge dated 6th  August, 1974, filed at the conclusion of the  trial,
the plaintiff had conceded that issue No. 1 be answered  in the negative and
issue No. 23 be answered in the   affirmative.  Issue  No. 1 reads as follows
:-



(1) "Did the plaintiff between 1.7.57 and 28.11.68 deposit to credit of its
account with the defendant‑Bank the various amounts set out in Schedule B to
the plaint?-



The plaintiff has stated as follows :



"Turquand Young & Company's reports establish that there is no evidence at all
that the amounts set out in Schedule B to plaint had been paid into the Bank."



_Issue No. 23_ :



"On 28.11.68, was the plaintiff's account overdrawn by the sum of 3,431,409.99
inclusive of interest, expenses, and charges ?"



The plaintiff had intimated this issue has to be answered in the affirmative.



These Reports were available to the plaintiff even before this a was
instituted. The question does arise whether the plaint was settled in
ignorance of these Reports because they were not handed over to Counsel by
Harasgama.



Even a Junior, not to speak of eminent Queen's Counsel, would not ever frame a
cause of action based on a mere failure to reply a made after the plaintiff
had admitted liability by certain documents, especially after plaintiff's own
auditors had reported that the m f had not been deposited. It is an insult to
the intelligence of' Counsel and not worthy of consideration at all. Even
Harasgama did not put forward this ground as the reason for this fantastic
principal cause of action. He said that Counsel had been talking of some from
of estoppel, but I do not find any estoppel pleaded either in the plaint or in
the issues in respect of this cause of action. It appears to me that Harasgama
was so desperate that he was prepared to cling to any straw available so long
as he could file a plaint against the def and drag it into Court. Even if it
be that, the principal cause 0 was introduced due to wrong instructions, why
did eminent Counsel who conducted the trial proceed with that cause of action
after facts would have become known to him at his conferences with the

##  335



plaintiff. The only reason that can be thought of is the obduracy of Harasgama
who did not want to give up his false claim till the defence witnesses had
been called. The cause was hopeless, but he persisted at the expense of
judicial time. The District Judge had no alternative except to answer the
issues 1 to 7 against the plaintiff.



As regards the second alternative cause of action, the District Judge held
that it was Ingram, an employee of the plaintiff‑Company, who would have
misappropriated the money and that neither the defendant nor its employees
joined in such misappropriation and, therefore, this second cause of action
failed. In fact, plaintiff placed no evidence in support of the allegation
that the defendant's employees misappropriated the money or any part thereof.
However, strangely, the District Judge answered the issues 14 to 17 in respect
of this second alternative cause of action in favour of the plaintiff. This
mistake the Court of Appeal corrected by answering these issues against the
plaintiff.



Counsel for the plaintiff before us did not question the correctness of the
decision on these two causes of action and arguments were addressed to us only
in respect of the first alternative cause of action. Issues 8 to 13 relate to
this cause of action. Issue 8 that and defendant was under a duty to issue
correct counterfoil receipt to send weekly statements of accounts to the
plaintiff was admitted by Counsel for the defendant.



Issue 11 (1) ( _a_ ) charges the defendant with failure to exercise proper
control over the custody and issue of blank forms of statements of accounts
and forms used for certified balances and other security documents. The
District Judge held in favour of the plaintiff. As regards blank forms of
weekly statements, it is not something like a blank cheque leaf which any
reasonably prudent man should know could be put to a fraudulent purpose. No
reasonably prudent man can expect forms discarded in 1960 to be put to use in
a complicated fraud and in my opinion the District Judge's finding against the
bank on this question is unreasonable. The District Judge has not discussed
the question of forms used for certified balances and "other security
documents", covered by this issue. I believe that what is meant by "certified
balances" is forms used for the certificate of balance. These certificates
were sent regularly by the defendant to the plaintiff's auditors. There was no
fraud in respect of these certificates of balances till 1965. Thereafter, it
was as a result of a

##    336



certain fraudulent request on the part of the Finance Director of the
plaintiff‑Company that these certificates of balance were sent to the plantiff
direct. I shall consider this aspect later on  After 1965, the certificate of
balance were received by the plaintiff from the Bank  but  they were
substituted with fictitious certificates by Ingram, Samuel by some other
employee of the Company to tally with the plaintiff's books or accounts. The
fraud, therefore, took place within t plaintiff‑Company. Therefore, the "forms
used for these balances" not come into question at all.



The District Judge has not considered any other security document and we were
not told what other security documents there were respect of which the
defendant failed to exercise proper control Therefore, the District Judge was
wrong in answering this issue in the affirmative. The answer should be in the
negative.



Issue No. 11 (1) _(b)_ relates to the delivery of receipts, weekly statements
of accounts and certificates of balances. The District Judge has answered this
issue as follows:



"Yes, of weekly statements only."



Therefore, he has held against the plaintiff in respect of counterfoil
receipts  and certificates of balances. Therefore, the only question that.
needs consideration in this case is the question of weekly statements and
whether the District Judge has answered this issue correctly. This is the only
substantial issue in this case, which I shall discuss in detail later.



Although there was no issue directly in point, the District Judge permitted
evidence to be led on the question of the inspection of the stocks pledged to
the Bank by the plaintiff The District Judge went to hold that the failure to
make such verification "constitute negligence which enabled culprits to draw
moneys on inflate fabricated stock certificates." It is, indeed, surprising
that the bank should be penalised for a fraud perpetrated by the plaintiff's
employees, taking advantage of the defendant's failure to inspect a verify the
stocks pledged to the Bank when the plaintiff has not rail any issue that the
defendant owed a duty to the plaintiff to inspect stocks. it owed no duty to
the customer and if the Bank chose not inspect, it did so at its own risk. In
this case, particularly, it was common ground that the plaintiff ‑Company was
being treated a specially favoured customer‑ specially for the reason that the
plaintiff

##  337



and the defendant had at this relevant period the same eminent gentleman, Mr.
H. V. Perera, Q. C., as chairman. Under the circumstances, I am not surprised
that the Bank did not care to inspect the stocks even after a subject clerk
had raised the routine query whether the stocks were to be inspected. This is
yet another straw.



I find no negligence on the part of the defendant on which the plaintiff can
rely to buttress its hopeless cause.



Yet another episode that the plaintiff put forward in support of its cause is
not found among the issues. In March, 1968, by P216 Harasgama requested the
Bank that the Company be permitted to enjoy a one million rupee overdraft
facility on the security of the "actual selling price of the stocks of spare
parts etc. or 2/3rd the value of the selling price of the stocks of spare
parts." This request was made on the basis that although a million rupee
facility had been permitted on certain other terms, that facility could not be
availed of due to certain difficulties referred to in that letter. Consequent
to this application, there was a discussion with the Bank officials and De
Mel, the Credit Intelligence Officer of the Bank, prepared a minute (D75 dated
25.03.68) to the General Manager. This minute has an interpolation in the
penultimate paragraph "or 65 per cent of the selling price whichever is
lower". In the course of the discussion with the Bank officials, it had been
found that all that the plaintiff was immediately interested in was a further
sum of five lakhs which could easily be accommodated by increasing the formula
then existing at 100 percent of the landed cost to 125 percent on the basis of
Harasgama  s statement in the course of the discussion that the company was
then utilising a two million rupee overdraft. It has been suggested by the
plaintiff that this interpolation was done by the Bank officials after the
discovery that the moneys drawn by the plaintiff had, in fact, come up to
about three million rupees and realising that if the formula of 125 percent of
the landed costs was applied the overdraft facility would exceed the ceiling
of 3 1/2 million this interpolation was made to accommodate Ingram and his
associates. The plaintiff contends that had the defendant's employee pointed
out to Harasgama that the Plaintiff ‑Company had drawn about three million
rupees on this overdraft facility and not two millions, the plaintiff would
have known in March, 1968, that there was a fraud being perpetrated on the
Company and the loss that the Company suffered thereafter could have been
avoided.

##  338



There appears to be some substance in the plaintiff's assertion that this
interpolation is an afterthought. The first 4 paragraphs give a, history of
the overdraft and this application. The fourth paragraph ends with the
following words :



Their immediate requirements will be met if we grant an overdraft up to the
extent of 25 percent of the landed cost of their stocks".



The next paragraph reads as follows :-



We recommend that the Bank advance against the stocks increased to 125 percent
of the landed cost, or _65 percent of the selling price whichever is lower_
and not the landed cost at present.



What I have emphasised is the interpolation. If we ignore the words
emphasised, the last paragraph will be consistent with the previous paragraph,
namely, that the immediate need of five lacks could be met by an increase of
the 100 percent facility to 125 percent. It would therefore, appear that the
interpolated clause was introduced to meet a special situation. It, is no
doubt, true that if this had been communicated to Harasgama, he would have
become alive to the fraud. But that is no reason to hold that the Bank is
liable to the plaintiff for this manipulation. There is no doubt that this new
provision was communicated to the Company because immediately thereafter from
March, 1968, the stock statements started arriving in the Bank giving the
selling price which was a concept originally suggested Harasgama in P 216 in
place of the earlier market price. There was no duty cast on the defendant to
communicate to Harasgama personally. Secondly, the plaintiff sought to make
out that Hashim, who was Loans Officer who dealt with this application, should
have noticed that discrepancy of two million in the first paragraph of D 75.
Hashim was called as a witness by the plaintiff and no questions were
addressed to him why he failed to notice this discrepancy, though the next wit
was questioned with reference to the duty to check the statement of  Harasgama
about the overdraft drawn. His statement to 'the Police does not touch this
question. De Mel was cross‑examined on this matter and he took the very
consistent stand that it was not for Hashim to study the first paragraph of
the minute, but all that was expected of Hashim was to carry out the
instructions issued to him to calculate the permitted overdraft on the new
terms and that he De Mel, took full responsibility for the interpolation. The
District Judge has cast doubts on the integrity of De Mel. This doubt is not
warranted as Harasgama who had had dealings with De Mel stated in evidence
that

**339**



De Mel was an honourable man and he should know better. Thirdly, even if some
of the Bank officials were influenced to keep this information away from
Harasgama that the plaintiff‑company was utilising only a two million
overdraft when, in fact, the figure had gone up to three million, it is a
situation which has been created by the plaintiff's employees. The defendant
Bank enjoyed no benefits thereby. It is possible that some officers in the
plaintiff Company and judging by their conduct which I shall refer to later,
Samuel, the Finance Director, two other directors of the Company,
Wickremasinghe and Classen, and the all important Ingram could have been
responsible for this situation. I cannot see how the plaintiff can benefit by
a fraud, if it was one, perpetrated by its own directors and officers by
influencing the officers of the Bank to commit a wrong. If such a thing was
done by the plaintiff's directors, it was as pernicious as the admitted theft
of the Copy of D 75 along some other documents by the plaintiff. In my
opinion, this episode cannot give rise to any relief against the Bank.



I now come to the real issue in this case on which hangs, in my opinion, the
entire case for the plaintiff. Did the Bank fail in its duty to send the
weekly statement of accounts to the plaintiff‑company ? The burden was on the
plaintiff to establish that the defendant failed to send those statements to
the company. The plaintiff's Counsel agreed that if it is proved that even one
statement had been delivered to the plaintiff, the plaintiff's case would
fail. Counsel, however, made it clear that if the statement had been delivered
to Harasgama or any other director of the Company then, the defendant would be
deemed to have delivered the statement to the Company. But Ingram was not a
director of the plaintiff‑Company and any delivery to Ingram would not be a
delivery to the Company. I am not going into the question as it is not
material for the purpose of my judgment.



On the basis of these submissions of Counsel for the plaintiff, has there been
delivery of weekly statements to the plaintiff‑Company by the defendant‑Bank ?
Counsel contended that both the lower Courts have decided that there had been
no delivery to the Company and that even the written submissions filed by the
defendant‑respondent before us have accepted the correctness of that finding.



Counsel for the defendant, however, whilst admitting that such submissions
have been filed, denied that such submissions would bind the defendant or that
the defendant accepted the correctness of that finding. Counsel for the
plaintiff urged that this Court should not

##  340



disturb the concurrent findings of the two Courts on a question of fact which,
according to him, were more or less sacred. The Court of Appeal has gone into
this question and after considering several cases set down the principle as
follows :



"...... where the trial judge's findings on questions of fact are based  upon
the credibility of witnesses on the footing of the trial  judge's perception
of such evidence, then such findings are entitle to great weight and also the
utmost consideration, and should b reversed only if it appears to the
appellate court that the trial judge has failed to make full use of the
"priceless advantage" given to him of seeing and listening to the witnesses
giving viva voce evidence and the appellate court is convinced by the plainest
consideration that it would be justified in doing so ; that where the findings
of fact are based upon the trial Judge's evaluation of facts, the appellate
court is then in as good  position as the trial judge to evaluate such facts,
and no sanctity attaches to such findings of fact of the tri judge : that, if
on either of these grounds it appears to the appellate court that such
findings of fact should be reversed, then the  appellate court "ought not to
shrink from that task."



I am in agreement with that view. The question whether all the statements over
the period of 12 years had been delivered or not to the plaintiff‑Company was
not one which could be decided on evidence alone. A good deal of inference had
to be drawn by the District Court before it came to that decision. Even the
plaintiff has admitted that the decision was dependent partly on
circumstantial evidence. On a consideration of all the material available in
the case, is clear that the District Judge missed this very important aspect
this question, namely, that it is spread over a period of 12 years from 1956
to 1968 during the course of which, it was urged by the plaintiff, not a
single statement of accounts had been received by plaintiff‑Company. When
dealing with this question, the District Judge states that the Bank statements
in the possession of Collettes from 1.7.56 till 30.11.68 appear not to have
been sent by post because none of them bore the serial numbers and date‑stamp.
He failed to consider that if statements were received by post and
_substituted after they went to the respective departments or Accounts
Department_ , obviously the substituted statements would not bear serial
number and the date‑stamp. He then went on to state that a large number of
these statements were not machine‑printed. The

##  341



same reason would apply for the absence of machine‑printed statements as,
obviously, a substituted fabricated statement would not be machine‑printed. He
then went on to consider the evidence of Amerasinghe and Abeywickrema.
Amerasinghe had assumed office as a ledger clerk only on 19.8.68. There is no
doubt that during Amerasinghe's period the weekly statements were delivered to
Abeywickrema, but that evidence would only relate to just 3 months, to just 12
weekly statements before the fraud was discovered.



Sirimanne about whose evidence the District Judge had doubts and who the
District Judge stated was "made to say certain things" had admitted in answer
to the interrogatories that there were about 75 statements that had been
handed over by Abeywickrema to the plaintiff. In fact, Abeywickrema in his
statement to De Mel (D48) had stated that "he had supplied not less than 10 or
more than 75 statements. (the number of statements sent out to Collettes were
about 300)". Nevertheless, Sirimanne admitted the maximum 75 in his answer to
the interrogatories. This was an admission made by Sirimanne at a time when
Sirimanne did not know that the plaintiff had been able to steal a copy of
Abeywickrema's statement from the Bank. That alone should have been sufficient
to convince the District Judge of the integrity of Sirimanne. When the
District Judge stated that Sirimanne had been "made to say", had he asked
himself by whom, he would have been confronted with a situation which, I am
certain, he would not have been able to answer. Sirimanne was not a minor
employee of the Bank, but a gentleman who had reached the pinnacle as General
Manager of the Bank and at the time he gave evidence he was not even‑in
office. The Court of Appeal had much to say about the District Judge in
respect of the assessment of Sirimanne's evidence with which I quite agree.
There was, therefore, direct evidence in respect of 75 statements only.
Abeywickrema in his evidence would not even admit the whole of it. However,
granted that 75 statements were handed over by Abeywickrema to Ingram, it only
means that a fraction of the statements had been handed over to Ingram.
Abeywickrema has also referred to 300 statements in D48. 300 statements will
cover 6 1/4 years only. Weekly statements commenced in December, 1962\. The
300 statements will cover this period only. The period prior to 1962 is not
covered at all. Abeywickrema had stated in D48 that he had handed over these
statements both during the time he was a ledger officer and also prior to that
during the time when he was in the loans department, and

##  342



outward bills department. In his evidence in Court, he stated that handed the
statements only when he was the ledger officer and not prior to that. Now
Abeywickrema was ledger officer at the York Street office from 15.06.1966 to
September, 1966 and from June, 196 to August, 1968, in charge of plaintiff's
ledger. So that all Abeywickrema's evidence would not cover the period prior t
15.06.1966. All that the District Judge held on a consideration of this
evidence was that "Abeywickrema and Amerasinghe and others who had made
statements available to Ingram had acted in breach of duty of care which the
Bank owed to Collettes." Amerasinghe spoke only a 3 months of the period in
issue, August to November, 1968 after he succeeded Abeywickrema. There is no
evidence that other ledger officers had made statements available to
Abeywickrema. 0n the other hand, there is a statement of Bunny who was also a
ledger clerk that so far as he was concerned, he did not deliver any statement
to Ingram or to Abeywickrema (D 19 2). He stated that he had worked as a
ledger clerk for about 5 months ‑ that no one collected any statements from
him. That will cover about 20 weekly statements which should have in the
routine gone by post. No other ledger clerks have been called to say that they
handed over any statements Abeywickrema. It is unreasonable to presume that
ledger clerks other than Abeywickrema and Amerasinghe followed a course
outside t instructions, to accommodate Abeywickrema. The District judge
appears to have then fallen into an error in coming to the view that since
there could be no pilfering in the plaintiff's mail room, there w no delivery.
He failed to consider that even though there could ha been no fraud in the
mail room, a statement received by post could substituted elsewhere in the
Company. Such a substitution could ha taken place, for instance, in the
Accounts Department, and if such substitution was possible, it cannot be said
that the plaintiff h, discharged its burden,



To consider whether such a substitution was possible, it necessary to go into
the conduct of several directors and official of this Company during the
relevant period dealt with by the Dist Judge, namely, 1966‑68\. The Finance
Director, Samuel, entered t fray by directing the Bank to send the
certificates of balance from. 1966 onwards, yearly, to the plaintiff direct
instead of to the plaintiff auditors with which instructions the defendant
Bank complied. This enabled the plaintiff Company to forward to the
plaintiff's auditors fabricated certificates of balance in keeping with the
fraud that was

##  343



being perpetrated by officers of the plaintiff Company. Even. the District
Judge was constrained to reject Samuel's explanation for this sudden change of
routine. Samuel whose duty it was to send to the Bank stock statements month
after month, thereafter chose to avoid signing the statements that went to the
Bank. Two other Directors came into the scene to assist the commission of this
fraud, Wickremasinghe and Classen with knowledge or without knowledge of the
fraud ' signing as many as 11 and 23 stock statements respectively after
January, 1966. These were fabricated statements. These did not bear the
initials of the typist. This was a job within the purview of Samuel. Neither
Wickremasinghe nor Classen attempted to find out fr6m Samuel whom they met
daily in the mail room why this burden had fallen on their shoulders. I am not
convinced that they were totally innocent in this transaction. These
statements carry certificates. Wickremasinghe and Classen were engineers, not
accountants. Their explanation that they were misled by Ingram will, in any
event, amount to recklessness.



We have then the evidence of Lionel Fernando who was an Assistant Accountant
dealing with these accounts. The District Judge found him truthful and
satisfactory as a witness. He stated he did not find any evidence which
involved him in any objectionable conduct in relation to matters relevant to
this case. If the District Judge had considered all the evidence relating to
Lionel Fernando dispassionately, he could not have come to that conclusion. In
fact, the District Judge has said in a different context that Lionel Fernando
said that Ingram telephoned him and he went into Ingram's room and there he
found Abeywickrema who gave some statements to Ingram and Ingram handed them
to him. Lionel Fernando had an accountancy qualification. He was Accounts
Clerk in 1950 in a different firm. He then worked in the Chartered Bank. Then,
he joined Mercantile Credit in 1958, and joined Collette Finance in 1959 as
Assistant Accountant. Ingram was then Sales Manager. In 1960, he joined
Mahajana Finance and in 1967 he joined Collettes Ltd. as Assistant Accountant.
With this vast experience of finance and banking, he should be presumed to
have known that statements had to be sent to the plaintiff Company by post,
but he did not find the statements coming via Abeywickrema and Ingram
objectionable. When some statements had been delayed, he had reported it to
the Accountant, Paul Fernando, who had told him to check with Ingram. It will
be reasonable to presume that if statements do not arrive in time, the

##  344



proper authority from whom information should be sought would  be the Bank
itself. When Ranasinghe was appointed to deposit monies from 1.10.67 in place
of Ingram, Ingram changed that arrangement and continued to deposit the cash
himself without any protest fro Lionel Fernando. Ingram produced counterfoil
receipts in respect of cash deposits which were not machine‑printed, while the
receipts for cheque deposits were machine‑printed. That did not arouse his
suspicion. Instead, Lionel Fernando was satisfied with Ingram's explanation
that he did not wish to wait in the queue. He had not care to ask Ingram why
he should wait at all when it was Ranasinghe's job to do it. From the Bench,
the President pointed to two cash deposit receipts in P 15 issued on the same
day, one machine‑printed and the other not. Some receipts did not bear the
account to which the money was deposited or even the name of the branch. He
did not think it is, matter worthy of any form of action. In fact, it was by
this process that the entire sum in issue in this case had been
misappropriated Ingram. He stated that Ingram telephoned him and got him down
t his office and handed over the weekly statements to him and that all the
statements from 1.4.67 were received through Ingram. In hill statement to the
police he had stated the Bank statements were kept under lock and key, But
Ingram who masterminded this complicated fraud could not have been deterred by
lock and key maintained by complainant, a fellow officer. Above all, Lionel
Fernando's suspicions were not roused when all the statements of the associate
companies were coming in one type of forms while the statements of Collettes
were in a different set of forms, which were at the trial shown to discarded
forms. There is evidence that Ingram had a free hand in this company and
enjoyed a high reputation. Lionel Fernando had worked with Ingram and trusted
him to do no wrong. It is even possible that Lionel Fernando was made to
believe that whatever Ingram had done  had the acceptance of the Company.



Counsel for the defendant urged that Lionel Fernando was a. involved in the
fraud. It is not necessary to make a decision on it question. It is sufficient
for my purpose to hold that though he may have participated consciously in the
fraud perpetrated by Ingram, nevertheless, that Lionel Fernando gave a blind
eye to Ingram's activities in the Accounts Department. The fact that the
directors were involved directly or indirectly in this fraud could have
further lulled Lionel Fernando into that sort of inactivity. In these
circumstances, Ingram could very well have substituted the fabricated

##  345



statements after the statements were received by post (except those that were
handed over by Abeywickrema to Ingram) in the Accounts Department. This is a
probability which I cannot overlook and the burden was on the plaintiff to
rebut this probability. The plaintiff had an opportunity to produce the Inward
Register of the Group of Companies and the Inward Register of this particular
Company to prove that while the other statements were being received by post
the statements relating to the plaintiff - company were not received. Although
the plaintiff listed these registers in the list of documents, they were not
produced. If these registers had been produced, the plaintiff would have been
in a position to show very convincingly by contemporary record of evidence
that while all the other statements were being received by post, the
Collettes' statements were not received. The plaintiff has submitted that no
adverse inference should be drawn against the plaintiff for the failure to
produce these registers, but without going into the law, it is sufficient for
my purpose to agree with the Court of Appeal that "they were of immense value
in disproving that the documents which the defendant‑Bank contended were
received by the plaintiff‑company were not, in fact, so received by the
plaintiff ‑company." Instead, plaintiff has relied only on the oral evidence
of Lionel Fernando, which is suspect and unreliable and of Abeywickrema which
does not extend to more than 75 statements.



As regards the mail room, Rajaratnam, Assistant Secretary, said that "the mail
relating to Collettes Ltd. is taken out and left on Mr. Ingram's side . . . "
_Mr. Ingram sorted out the Collettes Ltd._ mail . . . . The mail relating to
Collettes Ltd. is opened by Jamaldeen and given to Mr. Ingram for
date‑stamping....  The entering of the Inward Letter Register is done by me or
Mr. Ingram, or Jamaldeen ..... Whenever Collettes mail was voluminous I had
assisted Mr. Ingram .... Whenever Mr. Ingram was not available to open the
mail Mr. Samuel, Director Finance, took his place Up to February, 1968  mail
was opened in the Board Room in M/D's Office. The opening was done within his
sight  I can say that once a letter is received in the mail bag it is not
possible for it to be stolen or misplaced before they are distributed ... . In
1965, Mr. Ingram was on two days' leave....  In 1967, 1 1/2 days leave on 8 to
10th April, 3 days from 20th to 23rd April and 5 1/2 days from 28th April to
5th May to go to Singapore.

##  346



I have quoted as much as are relevant from Rajaratnam's statement D76. He did
not give evidence. His statement indicates that Ingra almost exclusively dealt
with the Collettes mail when he was present .In all probability he entered the
register in respect of Collettes' mail. (As Rajaratnam has not stated who
entered which register). Ingra took little leave in 1965, only two days. In
1966 nil and though took 10 days in April‑May, 8 days leave was taken to go to
Singapore The substitute in his absence was none other than Samuel who was
himself involved in the fraud. Therefore, Rajaratnam's ipse dixit that was not
possible to pilfer in the mail room may not be after all, to s the least, very
accurate. It should be remembered also that the 75 statements handed over by
Abeywickrema may have been part, during the days when Ingram was absent. The
question also arises why Ingram should have taken so few days' leave, except
to pilfer the statements. If Abeywickrema was handing over all the statement
Ingram need not have been niggardly in respect of his leave. (The months when
Abeywickrema and Amerasinghe were ledger clerks w in 1968 and the 1968 leave
particulars are not available in evidence).



The principal witness on whose evidence the District Judge acted was
Harasgama. Counsel for the defendant argued vehemently that Harasgama was
himself involved in the fraud and, therefore, was, party to manipulation in
the mail room. Once again, it is not necessary for my purpose to decide this
difficult issue. I will adopt the view that the Court of Appeal took that
"Harasgama had placed considerable trust and confidence in Ingram in the
conduct of the plaintiff ‑company".

           

According to Harasgama, all the mails were opened in his presence Ingram was
one of those who opened the mail‑as many as 6 of them of whom at least 3 of
them were present to open the mail. Collettes and C.M.T. letters were opened
by Jamaldeen and passed over Ingram or whoever else was present for
date‑stamping ; that (Harasgama) was not present always when the mail was
opened. At page 512, he gave further evidence. "All the mail was opened)
Jamaldeen. I did not see Ingram opening the mail .... I have Jamaldeen handing
the documents to Ingram for the purpose of stamping. _I would not know what
Ingram did (with) every document."_ Therefore, Harasgama, too says that Ingram
handled the Collettes statements and he did not know what Ingram did with
them.



##  347

  
Paul Fernando said that Harasgama told him that Ingram used to open the
Collettes mail ‑ a contradiction, this time, from Harasgarna himself through
Paul Fernando.



Harasgama is honest when he says he did not know what Ingram  did with any
document. This has to be so, as no person can be expected to watch the
progress of hundreds of documents from the envelopes to the respective
dockets. This is, in my opinion, a vital admission.



In the light of these circumstances, is this story that pilfering in the mail
room was not possible so foolproof? Add to this the loss that loomed on the
horizon for Harasgama who would sustain a direct loss of 40 percent of the 1.2
million involved and possible damage of the balance 60 percent if shareholders
sue him for negligence.



The District Judge has not considered all these deficiencies. He had not
'considered the many other deficiencies in the plaintiff's case, which I shall
set down later. Yet Counsel for plaintiff says that  Harasgama is a lawyer, a
Managing Director of a large firm and above all believed by the District Judge
to be an honest and truthful witness, which should not be disregarded. He also
says that this finding, too, received further sanctity by the endorsement of
the Court of Appeal. But the Court of Appeal has not considered the matter at
length. They had set down the failure to produce the Inward Postal Registers,
the failure of Harasgama to question why the statements of Collettes only we
not coming by post, and says that this could be due to the fact that Harasgama
knew that these statements were coming via Ingram. The Court then states that
the fact that other documents from the Bank which would have probably arrived
by post should have put Harasgama on his guard, and finally ended up by saying
that the District Judge had come to the finding that the statements were never
received by post and that "this finding is supported by the evidence and the
statement of witnesses Abeywickrema and Amerasinghe." But Amerasinghe's
evidence covers 3 months and Abeywickrema's at the maximum 75 statements.



Clearly the Court of Appeal has not analysed the evidence of the mail room
witnesses nor considered the contradictions, and the admission by Harasgama
that he did not know what Ingram did with the Collettes documents that came by
post. In any event this decision would relate only to a very short part of the
12 years in issue.

##  348



The only reason given by Harasgama for his insistence that the statements did
not arrive by post is the absence of the Collettes stamp on the statements in
Collettes possession. The evidence reads follows (p. 512):



"Oes.    Are you telling the Court that you know personally that statements
from the Bank came by post ?



Ans.     If the statements came by post they would be serial numbered and
date‑stamped.



Qes.     Are You telling the Court here on oath that no statements from the
Bank came by post?



Ans.     As far as I recall, if the statements came by post, they would have
date-stamp and the serial number.



Qes.     Are you telling me here in the witness box that no statements from
the Bank came by post?



Ans.     If the statements came by post they would have the date-stamp and the
serial number.



Qes.     You cannot give any other answer ?



Ans.     No."



As against the Honkong & Shanghai Bank, a similar action was field for a
similar failure to send statements. Harasgama's evidence on subject is
revealing. Unlike in this case, he does not know who ha over the statements
from that bank to whom and yet he hold the  Hongkong Bank, too  liable,
probably for the same reason the weekly statements did not bear the Collettes
stamp. But he overlooked the fact that if statements came by post, and they
stamped and if the fabrication was done later, the fabricated statements will
not have the Collettes' stamp.



Harasgama said this in evidence, page 571 :



"I gave instructions to file the plaint in this case.





Qes.     Were your lawyers under the belief that all the moneys were deposited
in the Bank of Ceylon ?

           

            Ans.     I do not know what their belief is.



Qes.     Did you tell them that the money was deposited in the Bank?



Ans.     I told them that we have not got credit for the moneys that were
deposited in the Bank.

##  349



I brought that to their notice when filing the plaint. I said that some  money
had not gone to the Bank. Then they mentioned something about estoppel.



Qes.     When the plaint was filed your lawyers believed that the money was
deposited in the Bank ?



Ans.     I know now that the money has not gone to the Bank. I asked them "why
are you claiming all this money."



Qes.     At the time the plaint was filed, you thought the money had gone to
the Bank ?



Ans.     I said we had not got credit for this.



Qes.     Later on you came to know that the money went to the Hongkong &
Shanghai Bank ?



Ans.     I don't accept that. I asked my lawyers why they were claiming this
amount. They were claiming 4.7 million rupees. Then I recall their mentioning
something about estoppel.



Qes.     Did you tell the Court that when the plaint was originally filed you
were of the view that you have not been given credit for the moneys that went
to the Bank of Ceylon ?



Ans.     I told my lawyers that, and I also told that "I am now aware that
this money had not gone to the Bank of Ceylon".



"I think I told them that after they filed the plaint."



I am of the opinion that the last line is an afterthought.



Having set his lawyers on an incredible path to prove the impossible, even
after the cross‑examination had brought his case on the principal cause of
action crashing down, he yet maintains he was right. At page 496, his evidence
is as follows :



"Qes.    You still claim this money from the Bank of Ceylon ?



Ans.     Yes, because of the utter negligence of the Bank of Ceylon. It is as
a result of the negligence of the Bank of Ceylon that they permitted this
cheque to be deposited in the Hongkong & Shanghai Bank."

##  350



How can the evidence of such a person be trustworthy‑one who is likely to
conceal the truth in his anxiety to win at any cost.



I will now come to Harasgama's evidence on two incidents which can be checked
with reference to contemporaneous documents.



In respect of Ingram's flight to Australia, the first statement made by
Harasgama to the I.G.P. was on 7.12.68 (P218). It should b noted that this
statement was prepared in advance and handed over to the I.G.P. and,
therefore, made after deliberation and probably in consultation with his
lawyers. In this statement, he has said, They _informed me yesterday_ (i.e.
6.12.68) that their Singapore office informed them yesterday (i.e. 6.12.68)
that they had been asked one Ingram for the issue of a visa to Australia and
wished to have confirmation that they may comply with the request." It would,
therefore, appear that Harasgama had been informed by the High  Commission on
the 6th December that they had been queried  about the issue of a visa on the
6th. In the next statement on 20.12.84, P236, he stated that "Ingram had
sought entry into Australia by OF738 on 30th November, 1968." He does not
state from where he go this information, but what is important to note is that
he states  that  Ingram had sought entry into Australia on 30th November, 1968
This, too, was a prepared statement. It is difficult to believe that the
Singapore office informed the High Commission only on the 6th of a request for
a visa for a flight on 30th. The next statement P1 14 makes this clear, when
it is read in its proper context.



The next statement he made was on 27th (P114). This statement was made on
28.12.08. To analyse this statement, it is necessary to reproduce this
statement :



"On _30.11.63_ I became aware that Mr. Ingram had left Island. I thereupon
inquired from the Australian High Commission Visa Officer whether a Visa had
been issued in Ceylon for Australia for one Mr. Ingram. He replied in the
negative. _Later in the afternoon_ he telephoned and informed me that they
received a cable from their Singapore office stating that a Mr. Ingram had
asked for the issue a visa to Australia and whether it was in order to issue
one to him. _In the morning when I spoke_ to him I did not give him any
details for this inquiry. In the afternoon when he telephoned me I went across
to the Australian High Commission and told him that Mr. Ingram was under heavy
suspicion in respect of a fraud in the Company's

##  351



Bank Account and that I would be happy if a visa is not issued to him. The
officer thereupon explained that such inquiries are at times only a formality
and a visa may already have been issued. _This took_ _place on 6.12.68._ In
between I was preoccupied trying to ascertain further details and to elicit
that information regarding the matters connected with the fraud. I asked him
to cable. I asked him to cable and ascertain whether a visa had already been
issued and on the following day he telephoned and told me that a visa had
_already been issued and that Mr. Ingram had already left for Australia on_
_30.11.68_ by flight No. OF. 738."



If one were to read this statement as it stands, it means that he had
contacted the Australian High Commission on 30.11.68 morning ; that same
afternoon (30.11.68) the High Commission informed him that they had received.
a cable stating that Mr. Ingram had asked for the issue of a visa and whether
it was in order to issue one. That same morning when he spoke to the High
Commission viz. 30.11.68, Harasgama did not give any details, but in the
afternoon when the High Commission telephoned him, he went there and told them
that Mr. Ingram was under heavy suspicion and that he would be happy if a visa
was not issued to him. It would appear that all those took place on 30.11.68.



However, this sentence appears at the end of this :



"This took place on 6.12.68."



Counsel for the plaintiff, taking advantage of this single sentence, submitted
that that incident that happened later in the afternoon refers to 6.12.68,
while what happened in the morning refers to 30.11.68.This interpretation does
not appeal to me. How could the Ambassador have asked Harasgama on the 6th
whether a visa could be issued, when in fact Ingram had left on the 30th. His
statement, "This took place on 6.12.68" appears to be an afterthought. If, as
I hold, the entire conversation took place as 30.11.68, the information that
he gave the I.G.P. will not be true.



In the evidence before the Magistrate (P115) Harasgama has stated that on the
30th evening, the Australian High Commission rang him up and told him that
Singapore had contacted them and wanted his formal approval to issue a visa to
Mr. Ingram. This certainly is in conflict with P 218 and contradicts the
interpretation placed by Counsel for the plaintiff on P 114. This evidence
accords with my interpretation. The District Judge dismissed it all as
"confusion of thought." I do not agree.

##  352





Counsel for the defendant has urged that this confusion on the part of
Harasgama is due to the fact that (1) the story of a conversation with the
Australian High Commission is totally false to give the impression that
Harasgama has made every effort to prevent Ingra from proceeding to Australia
or (2) if he made contact with the High Commission, he is not telling the
truth as regards when and what happened.



The next allegation against Harasgama is that he had failed to inform the
Police at the earliest possible opportunity. The Court of Appeal has gone into
this question at length. There is, no doubt, that Harasgam had to be driven to
the Police by Loganathan, General Manager of the defendant‑bank, and he made
his first statement only on the 7th 10 days after the discovery of the fraud,
but even in that statement to the I..G.P. he did not want action. It was only
after De Mel told him that he had made a statement to the Police that
Harasgama went to the Police on 20.12.68.



The District Judge glossed over this failure and took the view that Harasgama
had reported to the auditors, which was sufficient. But himself has stated in
a different context that had investigations commenced immediately the Police
would have been able to detect blank forms in Ingram's house. Counsel for the
defendant took it one step further and submitted that the Police would have
searched plaintiff's premises, too, as it was another likely place where the
fals6 returns could have been prepared.



What did Harasgama wish to avoid by his which was the first obvious thing to
do ? Why did he not make a attempt to trace Ingram to Nuwara Eliya through the
Nuwara Eliya Police on the 28th ? (it was only on the 29th evening that he
came to know that Ingram had not gone to Nuwara Eliya). Did he wait till he
got information from the High Commissioner that Ingram had gone Australia to
go to the I.G P. Even then why did he not want any action by the Police? These
are vital questions for which I have not been given an acceptable explanation.
The only inference I can draw is that when Harasgama came to know that the
fraud had been committed his own employee, he tried to cover up the fraud. But
I will not go to hold as Counsel for the defendant suggested, that Harasgama
gave information to Ingram and assisted him to leave Sri Lanka and the rest
was a vast pretence. Rather, he probably thought that had he gone the Police
they would search Ingram's premises and Collettes

##  353



premises and pinpoint the fraud on Collettes itself and that they might even
make criminal charges against some of his men. He, therefore, played safe by
calling in his auditors. But even to his auditors he did not hand over the
document P 216 relating to the 65 percent selling price formula and they had
to discover the new formula from relevant bank documents. Harasgama was asked
to produce his old passports. He gave the lame excuse that he had not
preserved them. Had he produced them it would have been possible to check the
periods of his trips abroad, and how often he was absent from the mail room.



Assuming that he was present on almost all days or a vast majority of the
days, his evidence was that he discussed the contents of the letters with the
heads of divisions. A bank statement is an important statement to discuss, as
a company which was running on a massive overdraft would have found it
necessary to check its balance regularly to conduct its business. Presumably,
it is for this reason that in December, 1962, plaintiff requested the
defendant to send weekly statements. (Unfortunately this letter has not been
produced to check whether Harasgama signed this letter personally). There
would be no point in calling for weekly statements unless there was a special
need for it and we have not been told of any other reason. Therefore, one
would expect Harasgama to discuss these statements with his fellow Directors
and to notice their absence if they were not received by post.



Yet another circumstance that would have definitely drawn attention is the
fact that the statements of all other associate companies were being received
by post. Surely, it should have dawned on any intelligent person that the
statements of one particular company were missing week after week, if such
statements had not come.



Plaintiff has submitted that Ingram ran a great risk by permitting the
statements to go by post. But it is even more true that Ingram ran a greater
risk if the statements did not go by post week after week, as Harasgama and
the other directors were bound to notice their absence. (This is on the basis
that Harasgama did not know that Ingram was receiving direct).



There were yet other statements involved. The limit statements which the bank
sent monthly indicating the overdraft permitted, were equally important
documents. They, too, were sent by post. Except to say that they were not
received after January, 1966, plaintiff has not produced the inward mail
register to prove that evidence. The limit

##  354



statements up to February, 1968, were sent on the basis of 100 percent landed
cost Counsel stated that Harasgama did not have to look into the limit advice
as he knew that the overdraft would be for t full value of the stocks. But
this is yet another untenable explanation. The stocks varied from month to
month sometimes by several lakhs, as it was bound to in any large commercial
establishment. if this explanation is correct, to know the overdraft limit
Harasgama would have had to look into the stock statement. But that statement
would not be a guarantee that the limit advice would have the same figure,
though it is a probability. Besides, the limit operates from the date the
advice and not the date of the statement. What is more natural than that, if
Harasgama had to look into a document, he would look forward to the limit
advice, look into it and discuss it with his fellow directors. How could he
have planned his business for the month except by discussions with his
co‑directors with the limit advice in hand ? It is inconceivable that the
plaintiff Company would ha remained silent without inquiries from the Bank,
had it not received the, limit advices after January, 1966\. Admittedly, these
advices were received by post prior to 1966. How is it that no one noticed
their absence in the post in 1966 and thereafter ?



After March, 1968, the limit was worked on a more complicated formula.
Harasgama admittedly knew that the basis was 125 percent of the landed value
of stocks, (granting that he did not know of the 6, percent formula)‑all the
more reason for looking into the limit advice rather than the stock statement.



Issue 11 (2) framed by the plaintiff reads as follows:-



"Did the defendant by its servants or agents ‑  


_(a)_        acting in the course of their employment and within the scope of
their authority and/or



_(b)_        for whose acts of omissions the defendant is in law liable and
responsible facilitate the issue or fabricate the incorrect, receipts or
weekly statements of account?"



Abeywickrema who is alleged to have handed over all the statements was a mere
ledger clerk. The defendant knew nothing about it. How much more the
contribution of Harasgama, Samuel, Wickremasinghe and Claessen, all directors
of the plaintiff Company when they failed notice the absence in the post of
the weekly statements and limit

##  355



advices‑a failure which would amount to utter negligence, at the least towards
facilitating Ingram's fraud, arid this failure was taking place to the
knowledge of Ingram.



In addition, inasmuch as the above 4 were directors of the plaintiff Company,
the negligence of the directors will amount to knowledge on the part of the
Company.



Therefore, if there was any facilitation, the negligence of the plaintiff
facilitated this fraud rather than the negligence on the part of the
defendant's servants, Abeywickrema and Amerasinghe, and such negligence was
responsible for the fraud perpetrated on the plaintiff.



But this is academic as I have held that the plaintiff has failed to prove
that all the weekly statements were not sent to the plaintiff by post.



Counsel for the defendant contended that the evidence against Harasgama was so
overwhelming that we should not hesitate to hold that he, too, was in the
fraud. I do not think so in respect of the events before the discovery of the
fraud. But in respect of his conduct after the discovery of the fraud,
Harasgama had not only attempted to suppress a Police investigation, but had
also stooped to steal documents from the Bank, probably assisted by bribery,
yet another act of dishonesty. It is sufficient for my purpose to hold that
his evidence is not such as to be trusted. I have said enough, I believe, why
I cannot, accept the finding of the District Judge or the Court of Appeal that
there was no possibility of pilfering in the mail room.



I have also held that there is a probability of the statements being
substituted in the accounts department.



Issues 25 _(e)_ , _(f)_ and _(g)_ to the effect that a sum of Rs. 3,403,093.32
had been overdrawn by the plaintiff and that a certificate of balance showing
the overdraft was sent to the plaintiff on 5.12.68 and the plaintiff accepted
such a certificate without protest have all been answered by the District
Judge in the affirmative. But in respect of the last issue he has answered
that the certificate was accepted without protest "under duress". He answered
issued 25 _(h)_ that the plaintiff thereafter gave a primary mortgage to cover
the moneys overdrawn by the plaintiff in excess in the affirmative. He then
answered issued 25( _j)_ in the affirmative, to the effect that the plaintiff
Company under its own seal expressly admitted that the sum of

##  356



Rs. 3,381,497.28 has been overdrawn by the plaintiff. Issue 26 that the
plaintiff was estopped from denying that a sum of 3,403,099.32 exclusive of
interest, expenses and charges had be overdrawn by the plaintiff as at
28.11.68 was also answered in the affirmative.



In response to these issues, Counsel for the plaintiff framed No.28 which
reads as follows :



"Was the plaintiff through two of its directors induced to sign the documents
dated 30.12.68 and the mortgage bond referred to in issue No.  25 _(h)_ in
consequence of the deliberate. misrepresentations and other matters referred
to in paragraph  2 _(a)_ , 2 _(e)_ of the plaintiff's further pleadings ?"



This paragraph 2 also speaks of the failure of the defendant to info the
plaintiff of various defaults by the defendant referred to in the lair and in
addition duress, undue influence and threats by Loganathan.



The District Judge examined this dispute at length and answered issue 28 in
favour of the plaintiff. But he failed to consider the fact he him self had
come to the conclusion, after the plaintiff abandoned the primary cause of
action, that a sum of Ps. 1.2 million had not been deposited to the credit of
the plaintiff in the plaintiff's account. The balance of the 3.381 million had
been moneys admittedly utilised  by the plaintiff for its business. I have
held that Harasgama knew of this situation even before the plaint was filed
especially after its own auditors had revealed that 1 .2 million rupees had
been misappropriated by plaintiff's own officers. In those circumstances, I
cannot see how it can be said that there has been any fraud inducement or
misappropriation by the Bank. The plaintiff needed further moneys for its
business. The Bank helped the plaintiff continue in business by giving a
higher overdraft on additional securities. This, the bank had to do not only
to ensure to itself I payment of the admitted sum of 3.381 million together
with further moneys to be lent, but also to ensure that the business would
continue in the interest of the country's economy and the hundreds employees
employed in this firm. If Loganathan took the necessary precautions to take
adequate security that was something that he to do as the Managing Director of
the Bank and also in terms of, directions given by the Board. In fact the Bank
was helping the plaintiff to extricate itself from a difficult situation and
to continue in business.

##  357



It may be noted that the landed cost of stocks with Collettes as at May, 1967
was 2,821,000 and ever since there had been a gradual reduction of stocks up
to September, 1968, which is the last stock statement available in P103, which
was 2,088,550 millions. Therefore, while the need for further money had
increased, the stocks had decreased. It was in that situation that the Bank
helped out the plaintiff to continue in business and I take the view that the
District Judge misdirected himself when he held against the defendant on this
issue. In fact, the Bank deserved gratitude instead of allegations of duress.



Counsel for the plaintiff has urged several points in favour of their
proposition in the final written submissions to this Court which I shall now
consider :



_(a)_ The fraud was not detected by the plaintiff Company, its auditors or by
its bankers.



The cross‑examination of Paul Fernando discloses that cheques meant for one
bank were deposited in another Bank, cheques were not deposited in time, cash
deposits were not supported by machine‑printed receipts and many more.
Obviously, this was due to negligence on the part of its own officers. Had
they done their duty properly, the fraud could have been detected long, long
earlier and stopped. Ingram took advantage of the lapse of his fellow
officers. In 1966, 3 directors joined in. The auditors were prevented from
doing a proper audit by Samuel's change of routine in 1966. On the other hand,
the defendant could not have known of the fraud taking place within the
plaintiff Company.



_(b)_ The substitution of fabricated statements was an essential element in
the concealment of non‑deposit of funds. The Bank had nothing to do with it
and had no knowledge of it, and

                       

_(c)_  The District Judge has found that pilfering of statements at the mail
meeting was impossible. It was fraught with a high degree of risk,



I have held against the District Judge's view Risk is always part of a
conspirator's armour,



_(d)_   Ingram would have preferred a less risky method. A reliable mode was
through Abeywickrema.

##  358



I agree. But there were also other ledger clerks involved who co‑operation was
necessary. We have Bunny's evidence that he not hand over statements. There is
no evidence that the other ledger keepers, except Amerasinghe, had not done
their official duties  correctly and properly,



_(e)_         There is direct evidence that Abeywickrema handed over
statements‑Yes, 75 only.



_(f)_        Avoidance of detection was vital.  


Yes, only if circumstances permitted.  


There is no evidence that the ledger officers, except Amerasinghe and
Abeywickrema helped Ingram,



_(g)_        Evidence of Amerasinghe supports transmission via Abeywickrema.



This covers only 3 months out of 12 years,



_(h)         _Defendant has not adduced evidence that statements were,  sent
by Post‑no __ adjuster or ledger officer called to give evidence.



There is no burden on defendant to prove this, as admitted plaintiff's
Counsel.



There is evidence that statements are sent to the adjuster who posts them
after making an entry of _the total_ number of statements sent. The bank. had
no means of placing evidence of posting statements to individual customers,



(i)         The Court of Appeal has not said anything contrary to the finding
of the lower Court.



I have dealt with this at length that the Court of Appeal merely adopted the
view of the District Judge without analysis.



(j)         The defendant had not challenged this finding in its written
submissions to the Court.



True, Counsel admitted that it was an oversight. He maintained and I agree
that that will not debar the defendant from agitating a question that was very
much in issue at the trial.



The plaintiff filed this action claiming that no Statements of Accounts had
been sent by the Bank to the defendant for a period of 12 years from 1956 to
1968. Even as plaintiff's Counsel admitted, it

##  359



involved the task of proving that not a single statement had been received by
the normal channel viz. by post. If the plaintiff was to succeed on oral
evidence alone, it was almost an impossible task, as the officers who worked
during this long period could have retired, gone abroad or passed away.
Nevertheless, that was the burden that the plaintiff undertook and the
plaintiff cannot succeed unless that task is accomplished. That is why in his
written submissions, Counsel for the plaintiff stated, "Since the relevant
period extended over a period of 12 years, the evidence relied on by the
plaintiff was partly direct and partly circumstantial.



There was no need for the plaintiff to depend on "partly circumstantial"
evidence to prove this fact, if the plaintiff had produced contemporaneous
records maintained by it in respect of receipt of letters received by post.
This the plaintiff for some unknown reason failed to do. Even in respect of
the recent period of 1966 to 1968, the inward letters registers, which had
appeared on the plaintiff's list of documents, were not produced.



Secondly, if the plaintiff is to succeed on circumstantial evidence, the
evidence led in respect of 1966 to '68 should be so convincing that the Court
cannot come to any other conclusion except that the modus operandi that was
operated in this latter period was the only modus operandi that could have
operated prior to 1966 too. But in this case, that is not the only conclusion
possible. For instance, statements received by post could have been pilfered
in the accounts department of the plaintiff. There is no evidence except that
of Lionel Fernando, but that evidence relates to the period after 1965. What
possibilities existed prior to 1966 is not spoken to by any witness, and the
burden is on the plaintiff to exclude such a possibility.



As regards the possibility of pilfering in the mail room, the only evidence on
the subject is that of Harasgama and Rajaratnam. Rajaratnam has not stated
when he joined Collettes or when he started duties in the mail room so that
his evidence cannot be related to the period prior to 1966. As regards
Harasgama I have held that his evidence cannot be accepted with confidence.



In any event, this is academic as I have held that even in respect of the
period 1966 ‑ 1968, the plaintiff has failed to exclude the possibility of
pilfering in the mail room or accounts department.

##  360



At the end of the trial the plaintiff conceded that the moneys alleged to have
been deposited with the defendant‑bank had been misappropriated by Ingram or
some other officers of the Company before moneys were deposited with the
defendant‑bank.



(1)        This was an admission that it was the plaintiff's officials who
were the miscreants.



For the purpose of perpetuating their fraud various other fraudulant acts had
been committed by the plaintiff's officers,



(2)        Non‑machine printed fabricated deposit slips purporting to be
receipts for payment of moneys deposited with the defendant had been handed
over to the Accounts Department of the plaintiff and they had been accepted
without verification,



(3)        Samuel instructed the Bank to send the Certificates of Bank Ledger
balances to the plaintiff direct from 1966 and they  had been suppressed and
instead certificates fabricated in the office of the plaintiff had been sent
to the plaintiff's auditors,

    

(4)        Stock Certificates were fabricated in the office of the
plaintiff‑company and were signed by two directors of' the Company who owed no
duty to sign them,



(5)        Confirmation slips had been received by post at Collettes and they
had been pilfered or suppressed in the office of the plaintiff‑company,



(6)       Admittedly, overdraft limit advices had been received till the end
of 1965\. The plaintiff stood nothing to lose by admitting the receipt of
overdraft limit by post till 1965, because they tallied with the stock
statement sent by the plaintiff to the defendant. Those received after 1965
have been suppressed.



I view of all these circumstances, specially the fraudulent acts committed by
the employees of the plaintiff‑company themselves, it is surprising that the
plaintiff chose to file this action. In my opinion, this is litigation that
should not have been embarked on over which several months of judicial time
had been wasted.

##  361



Counsel for the plaintiff are not to blame as they had to carry out the
instructions of Harasgama whose only obsession was to succeed.



So far as the defence was concerned, Counsel for the defendant had to put
forward all the defences that were available to them, which is quite natural,
as the stakes were high and the reputation of the bank was also involved.



Had I the power to order state costs, I would have done so.



I wish also to add that the various epithets that the District Judge used on
Loganathan were unnecessary and uncalled for. Certainly he was entitled to
reject his evidence and to give the reasons for rejecting his evidence. But
the epithets were unnecessary and should have been avoided.



In response to the plaintiff's case, the defendants raised several pleas of
law which led to several weeks of erudite arguments on both sides. I did not
deal with these questions of law for the reason that I have held that the
plaintiff had failed to prove the primary facts which it was its duty to prove
before the need areas to discuss the defences in law raised by the defendant.
However I have since had the benefit of reading the Judgment of Sharvananda,
J. who in his characteristic manner has dealt with all the matters of law that
were submitted before us, and come to certain conclusions with which I
respectfully agree.



I agree that the judgement of the District Judge be reversed and the Appeal
dismissed with costs.



RODRIGO, J.



Collettes Ltd. (a firm) is a Colombo‑based firm of dealers in commercial motor
vehicles and spare parts. It had started as a family concern which had built
itself into a prosperous and reputed firm. In May 1962 Mr. Harasgama, a
proctor by profession but more successful in business purchased forty per cent
of its shares and became its Managing Director. Still later in May 1963, its
stars were so propitious that Mr. H. V. Perera, Q.C., the brightest star that
ever shone in the legal firmament of the Island, came into its ken, as its
Chairman. Its bankers were the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank a  and the Bank of
Ceylon. The Bank of Ceylon is the premier bank of the country and the Chairman
of that too was Mr. H. V. Pereira, Q.C. at the

##  362  


material time. The Firm had substantial overdraft facilities with the Bank of
Ceylon from about 1962. Prior to that it had overdraft facilities with the
Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank. From time to time the Firm had sent for deposit
with the two banks, cash and cheques. As at the end of 1968 the sums so  sent
and not  deposited had amounted to  Rs. 1,275,883.66. This was during a period
of 12 years. The Firm had not been, during this time, sustained by a cent of
this money and had lived and survived on the overdraft facilities ‑ a fact it
is alleged was not known to Mr. Harasgama who from May 1962, after he joined
the Firm, drew cheques on the Firm's Bank account with the Bank of Ceylon as
and when required and found them honoured.



The Firm's upper limit of overdraft facilities with the Bank of Ceylon was Rs.
3.5 million and in August 1968 Mr. Harasgama required and upper limit of 5
million rupees and he made an application to the Bank of Ceylon (Bank)
accordingly. On this occasion he had told the Bank that as at that date he had
overdrawn only 2 million rupees. The application was thereafter processed and
on 28th November 1960 Mr. Sivagnanasothy of the Bank of Ceylon who was the
officer who processed that application found that the amount overdrawn had
exceeded 3 million rupees and not 2 million as Mr. Harasgama represented. Mr.
Sivagnanasothy had not suspected a time bomb hidden in this discrepancy, and
as a matter of business communication informed Mr. Harasgama of what he had
found in the overdrawn balance of the firm. Mr. Harasgama did not believe it.
So, he hurried to the Bank with bank statements collected from his office to
contradict Mr. Sivagnanasothy. Then the explosion. The Bank statements were
found to be fake. Not one or two of them but the whole lot of them. Mr.
Sivagnanasothy was right. The Firm had been diddled for years and years. The
Firm had lost a million rupees and more and the Bank was itself a casualty.
Thus started an investigation and allegations and counter allegations. The
case from which this appeal arises is the result.



The Firm finding itself in this predicament put the blame for its loss on the
Bank and perhaps desperately sued the Bank to recover its loss. This is what
the Firm said : It had on its staff a Mr. Ingram who had joined the Firm in
1952 at a time when the Firm was in the hands of its founder, the Collette
Family. He became the Firm's Sales Manager in 1965 . The Firm also had
subsidiaries one of which was Collettes  Finance Ltd. Mr. Ingram was a
Director thereof. He belonged to the

##  363



same community as the Collette's family and from even prior to 1956 the year
from which the Firm's tale of woe begins had entrenched himself in the
confidence of the Firm in his ability and integrity to such an extent that he
became its principal and even exclusive banking officer entrusted with all
banking business and deposits of the Firm's collections of cash and cheques.
Even after Mr. Harasgama became the Firm's Managing Director in May 1962 he
had not effectively changed Mr. Ingram's role in the firm. I say effectively
because an officer in one Mr. Ranasinghe had been assigned the task of taking
cash and cheques to the Bank with a fidelity policy of insurance being
obtained in his favour. But in fact, Mr. Ingram had got Mr. Ranasinghe to
side‑step and carried on as before as the Firm's exclusive Banking Officer.
Mr. Ingram had a brother in the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank and also found
himself a brother‑in‑law in 1956 in the Bank of Ceylon. The Bank supplied
statements of accounts monthly till December 1962 when Mr. Harasgama
introduced a change in that regard and required statements of accounts to be
supplied weekly. It is the Firm's account of what had happened that Mr. Ingram
from July 1956 had carried the Firm's cash ostensibly for deposit with the
Bank, but on many occasions he had deposited the cash and cheques in his own
pocket instead of in the Bank and covered it up with appropriate fabrications
of the bank statements. To enable him to do this he had to get hold of the
bank statements at some point in their passage from the Bank to the Firm and
this he did, though there is controversy as to the point at which he did it.
Even this was not enough for a successful fabrication. There was the necessity
to get possession of monthly overdraft limit advices and annual confirmation
of balance slips. These too were successfully intercepted.



Though there was an accountant he was only a figurehead. He had neither
authority nor experience. In any case he had joined the Firm rather late in
the day to have been in a position to become wise to what was going on. Mr.
Lionel Fernando was for all practical purposes the Accountant. He has been
there at all material times. He had the first opportunity and he had the
resources' to detect that the weekly statements and prior to that the monthly
statements were fakes and fabricated.



Anybody who has a Bank account knows that the Bank send a statement usually
monthly to its constituents of the state of his current account. It well show
the debits and credits and entries relating to  

##  364



withdrawals, deposits and transfers. This is the normal practice of  the Bank,
It is useful to the constituent. This did not absolve the constituent from
keeping his own account of the transactions with the Bank. In fact the
statement requires the account holder to check its entries carefully and bring
to the notice of the Bank any error discrepancy therein promptly. This can be
done only if the account holder himself keeps his own account of the
transactions. Anyway the Firm had done that and found no errors or discrepancy
in the statements. That is because the statements had been fabricated. The
Firm, however, blames the Bank for this fabrication. It says that this
fabrication was possible because of the conduct of the Bank. The conduct
alleged. is that the Bank had handed over the monthly and weekly statements to
Mr. Ingram instead of sending them by post as is usually done. This departure
from practice has enabled or facilitated Mr. Ingram to obtain possession of
the statements and fabricate them. If Mr. Ingram had not got possession of the
statements this way he would not have been able to fabricate them and prevent
the Firm's audit and accountants from detecting on the one hand the
misappropriation of money and on the other, Mr. Ingram would not have been
able to misappropriate moneys for more than a month the, longest. The Bank is
also blamed for Mr. Ingram having got possession of blank bank statement forms
without which these fabrications would not have been possible.



But the Bank disowns responsibility. It denies having handed over the
statements. It admits that a Mr. Abeywickrama, Mr. Ingram's brother‑in‑law who
was the Ledger Officer in the Bank for two spells of three months each in 1967
and 1968 respectively had handed over to Mr. Ingram the Firm's bank statements
and also on a few other occasions but not totalling more than 75 statements.
The rest of the statements are said by the Bank to have been sent by post. The
statements handed over by Mr. Abeywickrama are said by the Bank, and it is not
seriously disputed, to be genuine statements. It is also the case for the Bank
that in whatever manner Ingram got possession of the Bank's statements, they
were genuine statements at the time Mr. Ingram got possession of them. The
Firm on its part denies that the statements ever came by post and that they
had always been collected by hand from the Bank. If in fact the Bank could
establish that the statements had been sent to the Firm by post over the
period or for a matter of that, even a few of the statements had been sent by
post during the period, then the bottom will drop from the Firm's case.

##  365



There is, however, a finding by the Courts below that the statements had been
in fact delivered by hand to Mr. Ingram by Mr. Abeywickrema. Counsel for the
Bank strenuously challenges this finding and seeks support for the Bank's
assertion that the statements other than the seventy five referred to were
sent by post from an evidentiary presumption of fact. The Firm had not
produced in evidence its inward mail register to disprove the Bank's
assertion, though the Firm had listed it as a document to be marked in
evidence.



I shall address myself to the question of the Bank's liability on the basis of
the finding in the Court below that the statements had been delivered by hand
over the period. The despatch of bank statements to customers, though a
gratuitous service, is regulated by rules framed by the Bank itself for
guidance of its staff. According to them they are despatched by an adjuster to
whom the Ledger Officer sends the statements after they are prepared by him.
In the case of branches of the Bank the statements are despatched by the
Manager himself. They can, of course, be collected at the Bank by the customer
himself or an authorised representative of the customer. In that event a
Register is maintained for the person collecting the statement to sign an
acknowledgment of its receipt.



Mr. Ingram had collected the statements from the Bank but not according to the
rules. In the result it may be said that Mr. Ingram had collected the
statements in the Bank premises but not from the Bank. But then this is taking
a very technical view of bank practice. If Mr. Ingram in fact had authority to
collect these statements, it could not have mattered that the rules referred
to had not been complied with. Mr. Ingram's brother‑in‑law on the Staff of the
Bank had obliged Mr. Ingram by collecting the statements himself and handing
them over to him. They had been collected from the Ledger Officer, when he was
himself not the Ledger Officer in charge of the Firm's account.



It is this conduct of Mr. Abeywickrema that is at the root of this case. For
the Bank it is contended that it is not bound by Mr. Abeywickrema's delivery
of statements to Mr. Ingram because it was not part of his job in the Bank.
That is to say it was not done within the scope of his employment or in the
course of it. For the Firm it is said that the statements never came by post
but were always collected by Mr. Abeywickrema and handed over to Mr. Ingram in
pursuance of a conspiracy between the two of them to defraud the Firm. But the
alleged complicity of Mr. Abeywickrema is only circumstantial. It can

## 366



well be that Mr. Abeywickrema was merely obliging his brother‑in‑law.  It is a
common experience that a customer will bespeak the good offices of a friend or
an acquaintance in the Bank to expedite "his business. It must not be
forgotten that Mr. Ingram had occasion to come to the Bank practically
everyday to deposit cash and cheques and attend to opening of letters of
credit and so on. It is not that he came to the Bank only to collect
statements. The point however is, assuming that the statements were never
posted, whether Mr. Abeywickrema's conduct irrespective of his innocence or
guilt is a breach of duty by the Bank, howsoever arising. Normally the
statements would have gone by post. Their delivery in this manner was
unauthorised though some customers collect them over the counter rather
irregularly. But this is generally overlooked. Where an officer dishonestly or
even innocently but in a manner that is not authorised and outside the scope
of his employment delivers them over the counter, is the Bank liable to a
customer for any loss occasioned thereby ? This is the crux of the problem. In
_Foster v. Essex Bank_ (81) _(approved in Giblin v. McMullen_ (82))the Cashier
and Chief Clerk of the Bank fraudulently took and absconded with specie
deposited by a customer. The Court held that the Bank was nor responsible for
their fraud or felony as when they abstracted the customer's gold from the
cask in which it was contained, they were not acting within the scope of their
employment ; and added :



"The Bank was no more answerable for their act than it would have been if they
had stolen the pocket book of any person who might have laid it upon the desk
while he was transacting some business at the bank."



So that apart from negligence facilitating such an act on the part of the
Bank, a Bank is not liable for the loss of a customer's goods by the
fraudulent felony of members of its staff. What has happened here is no
different at the worst to the statements being stolen by Mr. Abeywickrema. It
must be the same if the delivery of the statements by a member of the staff
was innocently done actuated by a desire to be helpful to the customer. It
makes no difference that Mr. Abeywickrema innocently thought that Mr. Ingram
was in fact talking these statements to the Firm. He may well have thought so,
as there was never a protest over this long period of twelve years from the
Firm about Mr. Ingram's bringing them from the Bank by hand. True it is Mr.
Ingram was fabricating the statements and Mr. Abeywickrema's

##  367



conduct was facilitating Mr. Ingram to do so. But where was the negligence of
the Bank apart from Mr. Abeywickrema's conduct to facilitate the fabrication
by Mr. Ingram ? It is in evidence that it was administratively impossible for
the bank to oversee the despatch off individual statements to the different
customers. They are entered in a register in bulk by the adjuster. So that if
a particular statement is abstracted and delivered separately there is no way
of detecting it. This is not negligence on the part of the Bank. There is yet
another aspect to this matter. There is no negligence without a duty. The
ordinary duty of the Bank is to repay the money deposited and honour the
customer's cheques. The sending of statements by the. Bank is a gratuitous
service. Where an expectation is created gratuitously in the customer that
statements will come regularly from the Bank showing the state of his account
the Bank is only obliged to do its best with what it has got. It must use all
facilities of which it is possessed, but it is not bound to do more. It is not
bound to provide at its own expense the means of ensuring a higher degree of
performance. See _Giblin v. McMullen_ (supra at p. 339). The relationship of
the banker to customer is one of debtor and creditor only. It excludes any
fiduciary relations in the banker with regard to the current account. See
_Foley v. Hill_ (83). This is because the banker does not hold the customer's
money in trust for the customer. The banker is the borrower of the money which
he is free to spend as he likes like any other borrower. Normally the Money
Lending Ordinance would have applied here to bankers as well but for ss. 7 an
8 thereof as amended. So that there is no statutory duty for the bank even to
keep accounts and much less to furnish statements of account. It is the
business of banking that had brought into being these practices which do not
make the banker a professional accountant for the customer. The statements
being abstracted and delivered in an unauthorised manner to an unauthorised
person by a member of the staff not acting within the scope of his employment
without the Bank itself being negligent I n facilitating such conduct, I have
already said, does not involve the Bank in any liability for the loss
sustained by the Firm by Mr. Ingram's misappropriation and fabrication of the
accounts. This will be more so, if as Mr. Abeywickrema says the number of
statements delivered was only seventy‑five most of which were during two
spells of three months each as stated earlier. If Mr. Abeywickrema's evidence
is true then the genuine statements that went by post would have had to be
intercepted by Mr. Ingram in their passage to the Firm. If that were so the
fabrications have been committed without the Bank's unwitting

##  368



assistance to facilitate them. If the Bank cannot be faulted for the
delivery, in the   premises of the Bank, of the statements to Mr Ingram  by
Mr. Abeywickrema the case for the plaintiff‑Firm in my view runs  into a blind
alley. What is the position arising from the failure on the part on the firm
to produce its inward mail  register to disprove the  assertion by the Bank
that other than the seventy‑five statements referred to the statements had
always been sent by post in the normal  course of its business ? There is no
direct evidence of Mr.  Abeywickrema handing over the statements other than
those referred to. It is only circumstantial. One circumstance that breaks the
chain is collected by the statements though there was no written authority
granted the evidence of Bunny, the Ledger Clerk who says that no statements
were collected by Mr. Abeywickrema from him, for the Firm it had been
contended that the presumption arising from the failure to produce, the inward
mail register is rebutted by exceptions that are applicable of the facts of
this case. If I had to reach a decision on this aspect of the matter I am not
sure that I would not have been inclined to apply the presumption. In the
view, however, I have taken that taking the facts at its worst for the Bank In
this regard, still no liability attaches to the Bank, I do not consider it
necessary to decide this point.  

           

The Courts below have reached a finding of fact that the bank statements had
in fact not been posted but all along collected in the Bank premises by Mr.
Ingram. The Bank sought to build an argument based on that finding of fact to
the effect that Mr. Ingram had implied authority from the Firm to collect the
statements. In the Court of Appeal, he was labelled an accredited
representative. In support of this argument authorities were cited at length
invoking such principles of law as estoppel among others. This, in the first
instance, is wholly contradictory of the assertion by the Bank that the
statements other than the 75 referred to had been posted and that the inward
mail register, had it been produced, would have clinched that assertion. On an
examination of the evidence it appears to me that this argument slurs over
what has emerged as a basic fact that the statements, if they had been
collected as they would appear to have been over a long period of time, had
been so collected by Mr. Ingram from Mr. Abeywickrema who had delivered them
to him in an unauthorised manner to oblige Mr. Ingram as a friend and
brother‑in‑law. This line of argument compelled the Bank to bring in a
symbiotic argument that the corporate veil of the Firm had to be lifted to
look closer to ascertain the real standing of Mr. Ingram in the Firm's set‑up.
The argument is

##  369



that Mr. Ingram tough the Sales Manager of the Firm from 1965 and a Director
of  Collettes Finance Ltd. from 1963 was in practice on a par with the
Director of the  Firm by reason of his long association with the Firm and the
trust and confidence thereby enjoyed by him. He was therefore not merely a
Senior Executive, the argument ran, but in fact was a directing mind of the
Firm capable in law to bind it by his conduct . Thus, when he took delivery of
the statements from an  officer of the Bank, it was in effect the same thing
as the company or the Firm itself talking delivery. Anyway, at the least, it
is said, Mr. Ingram thus became the accredited representative of the Firm to
collect the statements though there was no written authority granted to him,
by the Managing Director of the Firm. This line of argument opened the flood
gates to no end of authorities and works on jurisprudence and the juristic
nature of corporations and decided instances of when and how the corporate
veil could be lifted to look behind the stage. The submission, however, ran
into inevitable difficulties in the factual matrix of the case. The Bank it
self had not authorised the delivery of the statements to Mr. Ingram. They had
been collected and delivered through what appears like a family arrangement.
It was never the Bank's affirmative case that its Senior Executive Officers or
anybody high up in its hierarchy was aware of the collection of the statements
by Mr. Ingram and that they had given the practice its stamp of approval in
the normal course of its business. There was no evidence given by any bank
officer including Mr. Sirimane or Mr. Loganathan to attach that kind of
character to Mr. Ingram's conduct and neither has such a position been even
adumbrated in the pleadings or in the answers. I have touched on this in
deference to Counsel who took some time in expounding the law on this matter.
But it is unnecessary in my view to further consider this question or examine
authorities cited since there is no factual foundation for this contention. I
have already said that the manner in which the statements were delivered and
collected did not involve the Bank in any liability for the reasons referred
to



Then the Bank turned to yet another ground to absolve itself from this alleged
liability namely to a wholesale fraud on the part of every director and every
principal officer in the Firm other than the Accountant who it was said was
only a figurehead as I had indicated. The argument is not that the Bank by any
omission or commission on its part facilitated Mr. Ingram to commit a fraud on
the Firm but the Firm itself from the Managing Director **downwards** to three
other

##  370



directors and its accounts officer including Mr. Ingram was engaged in
defrauding the shareholders of the Firm and the Bank itself. Though the
submission was vague as to the respective share of the spoils of the active
participants in the fraud it was pointed in the direction that Mr. Ingram did
not take the money beyond the front door of the Firm but made an about turn at
the front door and found his way back to the room of the Managing Director.
Support is derived for this from the admitted fact that from early 1966 the
Stock Sheets of the Firm sent to the Bank which was the basis of the overdraft
facility were dishonestly inflated to show a false stock position to obtain
overdrafts which otherwise it would not have got. These Stock Sheets had been
signed by two Directors Mr. Claessen and Mr. Wickremasinghe which was unusual
for them. They should have been normally signed by Mr. Samuel, another
Director but he did not. Dishonesty is alleged against the three of them. I
have already pointed out that Mr. Claessen and Mr. Wickremasinghe might well
have signed the statements not, necessarily through dishonesty but through
misplaced confidence in Mr. Ingram. To avoid risks of detection, it was said
that Mr. Samuel required certificates of balances coming from the Bank's
Auditors direct to the Firm's Auditors to be diverted to the Firm itself thus
by‑passing its Auditors. Then there were the monthly limit advices. These were
not collected by Mr. Ingram. They should have come by post. But there is no
evidence as to what happened to them assuming they came by post in ordinary
course and there is no satisfactory evidence that they did not come by post or
otherwise reach the Firm. The same was the position as to the fate of the
Annual Confirmation Slips. The inference of fraudulent conduct on the part of
the Managing Director himself acquires added weight, it is said, from the
conduct of the Managing Director himself subsequent to the disclosure of the
fraud by the Bank on 28 November 1968 in that he allowed, Mr. Ingram to take
flight from the Island on 29 November and deliberately delayed till 19
December to make a detailed complaint to the Police though he had sent a
tentative communication to the Police on 7 December.



The point in this exercise is to invoke a principle that will absolve the Bank
from liability if it were otherwise liable. The basic Roman Dutch Law maxim
that enunciates this principle is ex turpi causa non oritur actio which in
English Law finds its expression in the form ex dolo malo non oritut actio.
The principle derived from this maxim, based as it is on public policy, is to
deny the assistance of the Court to a plaintiff to

##  371



extricate himself from the difficulties in which his own improbity has placed
him. 'See _De Zilva v. Cassim_ (84). It must however arise in a transaction
which is either illegal, immoral or in the nature of a fraudulent confederacy.
See Broom's Legal Maxims‑9th Ed. page 473. Does this principle then apply in
the circumstances of this case ? I think not. The cases cited such as _Gray v.
Bar_ r (85) wherein cases like _Colburns v. Patmore_ (86) _and Hardy v. Motor
Insurers' Bureau_ (87) cited and referred to in the Court below are not
applicable to the facts of this case. There is no general principle that
whenever the plaintiff is the wrong‑doer in his own conduct without being
involved in a conspiracy he cannot succeed in his claim or that it provides a
defence to the defendant. If it were otherwise it will lead to the absurd
result that if you stole a bottle of whisky from me that I had purchased in
the Duty Free Complex without a duty free entitlement, I cannot sue you
successfully. If the plaintiff's Firm here is seeking to establish its own
fraud as part of its cause of action against the defendant‑Bank the maxim, of
course, will apply. But the Firm is seeking to do no such thing. In fact
though the claim of the plaintiff has magnitude in terms of money, the issue
in the case has hardly any. The issue is in inverse ratio to the magnitude of
the claim. The crux of the complaint of the Firm is this : It tells the Bank :
"See what somebody in your Bank has done. He has handed over the statements of
account to a scoundrel in our Firm. This has enabled him to misappropriate
cash and cheques of the Firm and keep us in the dark as to the true position
of our account by a fabrication of the statements." to which the Bank says "He
had no business to do it. He had done it on his own. We are not bound by it."
Whether this was a correct reply is what the Court has to decide. See also
"Selected Essays" on the Law of Torts by H. S. Davis (1924) pages 558 to 571.
I am of the view therefore that it was not necessary for the Bank to use this
principle based on public policy to resolve this simple issue of alleged
liability of the Bank. The Bank does not have a need to concern itself with'
the fraud committed by servants of the Firm, be they exalted or low. It is
true that the Bank itself had been defrauded by inflated stock sheets. But it
had not made any counter claim for the fraud practised and it has no direct
link to the ground of claim of the Firm. It is therefore an error in my view
to identify the Firm itself in the alleged fraud on the part of its servants.
There is no direct evidence that Mr. Ingram misappropriated the monies of the
Firm or that he fabricated the statements. It is the

##  372



circumstances that suggest strongly that he has. The fact of Mr. Claessen and
Mr, Wickremasinghe signing the Stock Sheets which were false and inflated will
make the Firm answerable to the Bank. But to argue that they by that fact
itself are proved to have signed the statement fraudulently is not tenable.
The principle of _Derry v. Peek_ (88) has been invoked to clothe the conduct
of Messrs. Claessen and Wickremasinghe in fraud. Derry v. Peek is much
misunderstood. See _Le Lievre v. Gould_ (89). 1 do not think that _Derry v.
Peek_ (supra) will assist when it comes to invoking the maxim ex turpi causa
non oritur actio. As I have said this is simply a case of some servants,
highly placed in the Firm misappropriating the monies of the Firm. Not one of
them had committed a fraud on the Bank though the Firm is answerable to the
bank for the conduct of its servants in respect of the Stock Sheets. Mr.
Ingram and Mr. Samuel had deceived the two Directors into signing the Stock
Sheets. Mr. Ingram's purpose in engineering false Stock statements was not so
much to defraud the Bank as to defraud the Firm by providing a cover‑up for
misappropriation by him. It is by no means a case of fraudulent conspiracy
between the Bank and the Firm. Hence the total inapplicability of the maxim
referred to, to the facts of this case, which can be decided without regard to
any such maxim. It is also a principle of law that where a dispute can be
decided without invoking the principle of public policy it should be decided
without invoking it.



The Bank then relied on a mortgage bond executed in favour of the Bank after
the discovery of the fraud to furnish additional security as a condition for
continued availability of the overdraft facility from the Bank. This, it was
said, contains an admission by the Firm that the Bank does not owe anything to
the Firm. For the Firm it was argued that the mortgage bond was given under
duress and therefore the admissions contained therein are void. In the view I
have taken and referred to earlier in this Judgment that the Bank has not
facilitated the commission of the fraud by Mr. Ingram and so the Bank is not
liable, it is not necessary to consider this submission.



would therefore dismiss this appeal with costs.



_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/5.html_  

