##  United Motors Ltd. v. Minister of Finance and Planning - SLR - 448, Vol 1
of 1983 [1983] LKSC 5; (1983) 1 Sri LR 448 (20 July 1983)

# 448

**UNITED MOTORS LTD.** ,

**v.**

MINISTER OF FINANCE AND  
PLANNING

SUPREME COURT,

RATWATTE J., VICTOR PERERA

AND SOZA J.

S.C. 49/82,  C.A. 46/82,

C.A. APPLICATION 2301/80.



Acquisition under the Business Undertakings (Acquisition) Act No. 35 of 1971 ‑
Regulation made by the Minis­ter ‑ Committee to ascertain assets and
liabilities Date of vesting ‑ Payments to be made after deductions.



This is an appeal by the petitioner ‑ appellant from an order of the Court of
Appeal refusing an application for a writ of certiorari and mandamus to quash
the orders made by the let respondent and to make payment in to direct‑the lot
respondent respect of the Business Undertaking. vested in the state under the
provisions of the Business Under­taking (Acquisition) Act No.35 of 1971. The
peti­tioner continued as a company though the business undertaking was
acquired by or vested in the Government.



When the Government takes over the business undertaking a person or company it
taken over the of undertaking with its subsisting assets and liabilities as a
going concern and thereafter continues manage and administer the affairs of
that undertaking. All rights and liabilities, under any contract



#  449



or agreement which relates to the purposes of that undertaking and subsisting
at the date of vesting become the rights and liabilities of the Govern­ment.
Thereafter payments are made‑to the pro­prietor out of the consolidated fund
and the Minis­ter is empowered to make regulations to give affect to the
business undertaking so vested. Regulation (2) provided for a Committee to
examine and report on the assets and liabilities, of the undertaking.
Regulation 4 required the Committee to ascertain the reasonable value of the
undertaking. Regulation 5 empowered the Committee to ascertain any pay­ments
due to any Government Department or other State Institution and loss sustained
by any statu­tory board or Corporation due to the activities of the
undertaking, and regulation 7 required a report on the assets and liabilities
and the Committee's recommendation in regard to the payments that may be due
in respect of the undertaking.  


The term payment contemplated the assessment there­of to be made after
examining the assets and liabi­lities specifically referred to in clause 5 and
payments must necessarily be for the balance of the assets after deducting the
liabilities vested.



After submitting the report the Minister made his order to deduct the amounts
due as liabilities of the business undertaking on the date of vesting.



 The question that arose was whether the deductions should be made from the
vested assets of the busi­ness undertaking as on the date of vesting or
whether these should be from the balance found to be due with accrued interest
at the time and date of payment. The petitioners contention was that none of
the items could be deducted as they were not liabilities which were vested on
the date of vesting as commission and professional charges were incurred by
the State after the date of vesting and outstanding Income Tax and Business
Turn­over Tax were not the liabilities of the vested

#  450



 business undertaking but, were statutory levies payable by the proprietor or
company to the State.



**Held:**



The 1st respondent had erred in making an order deducting all these items from
the balance assets with accrued interest for which the payment is due with
accrued to the petitioner  by reason of the vesting order.



Income Tax and Business Turnover Tax were the liabilities of the owner of the
business and not the liabilities of the business undertaking, since the
petitioner has defaulted, this amount would be a first charge on the sum
payable to him.



A writ of certiorari to issue quashing the orders made by the 1st respondent,
and to make payments to the petition after deducting professional charges and
Taxes.



_S.J.Kadiragamer_ , Q.C. with _K. Nadarajah_ and _K. Thevarajah_ for the
Petitioner‑Appellant.



_M.S.Aziz_ , Deputy Solicitor General, with _K. Sripavan_ , State Counsel, for
the Respondents.



July 20, 1983.  


**VICTOR PERERA, J.**



This is an appeal by the petitioner‑appellant from an order of the Court of
Appeal dated 15th July 1982 ref using an, Application for a Writ of Certiorari
and Mandamus to quash the orders made by the 1st respondent and to direct the
1st respondent to make payment in the manner indicated in the petition in
respect of the business undertaking vested in the State under the provisions
of the Business Undertakings (Acquisition) Act No. 35 of 1971. The petitioner
had made this application in

#   451



respect of the business undertaking carried on by the petitioner Company known
as 'United Motors Ltd. 'in C.A. Application No.2301/80.



The said petitioner, a duly incorporated Company, was admittedly the
'proprietor' of the said business undertaking.. The term 'proprietor'
according to the Act (Section 17) when used in relation to a business
undertaking means the owner of that undertaking or any other person authorised
by the owner to enter into contracts for the pur­pose of that undertaking.



The petitioner continued as a Company though the business undertaking was
acquired by or vested in the Government. Under Section 17 of the term
'business undertaking' means any undertaking of a commercial, industrial,
agricultural or professio­nal nature and includes‑



(i) all property, movable or immovable, which was used for the purposes of the
undertaking on the day immediately preceding the date of transfer or the
primary vesting date and which may be specified by the Minister of Finance in
the primary vesting Order;



(ii)  _subject to the provisions of this Act,_ all rights, powers, privileges
and interests arising in or out of such property or business and _all the
liabilities of the undertaking;_

_  _

(iii) all books, accounts and documents relating appertaining to the business
underta­king or any property of that undertaking.



The Business Undertakings (Acquisition) Act No. 35 of 1971 provided for the
acquisition for the Government, whether by agreement or compulsorily of any
business undertaking by requisitioning or com-



#  452



pulsory acquisition of any property necessary for the purpose of that
undertaking and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.



Section 4 makes special provisions relating to the rights and liabilities of
any 'business under­taking' acquired or vested in the Government. This section
is fully comprehensive and clearly spells out rights and liabilities that vest
in the Government when a businesses undertaking is acquired. It reads as
follows:‑



"4(1).   Subject to the provisions of sub‑section (2) where any business
undertaking is acquired by or vested in the Government all the rights and
liabilities under any contract or agree­ment which relates to the purposes of
that undertaking and which subsists on the date of transfer or on the primary
vesting date of that undertaking shall vest in the Government.



(2) The Minister repudiate the liabilities under any contract or agreement
referred to in sub‑section (1) if he is of opinion that such liabilities were
incurred mala fide, dishonestly or fraudulently. Notice of the repudiation
shall be given by the competent authority to the parties to the contract or
agreement.  


(3)  Where the Minister of Finance under sub­section (2) repudiates the
liabilities under any contract or agreement such liabilities shall be deemed
never to have vested in the Government.



(4)  For the purposes of this section, 'liabi­lities' shall not include any
loan repayable to a director of any business undertaking which is acquired by
or vested in the Govern‑



#  453

ment or to any member of the family of such Director."



It is clear from this Act that when the Government takes over the business
undertaking of a person or Company, it takes over the undertaking with its
subsisting assets and liabilities as a going concern and in terms of Section 5
it thereafter continues to manage and administer the affairs of that
undertaking. In terms of Section 4 all rights and liabilities _under any
contract or agreement which relates to the purposes of that undertaking_ and
_subsisting_ at the date of vesting, become the rights and liabilities of the
Govern­ment, but the other rights and liabilities of the Company do not pass
on to the Government. It is possible to visualise many such rights and
liabili­ties which do not vest. The Act had made provi­sions to take
_'payments'_ to the proprietor of the undertaking out of the consolidated Fund
(Section 17) and the Minister of Finance was empowered to make regulations in
terms of Section 12 for the purpose of carrying out or giving effect to the
principles and provisions of the Act in relation to the business undertaking
so vested. Section 12(c) provided for regulations for the payments to be made
in respect of any business undertaking or property acquired and in any matter
regarding the assessment of the amount of the payments and the mode of making
payments. The term 'payments' con­templated the assessment thereof to be made
after examining the assets and liabilities specifically referred to in Section
5 and payments must necessa­rily be for the balance of the assets after
deduc­ting the liabilities vested.



By Business Undertakings (Acquisition) Amend­ment Act No. 21 of 1980, a new
section was added after Section 12 as 12A which reads as follows :‑



"12A. Payments to be made in respect of ‑

#  454

  
(a) any business undertaking acquired by or vested in the Government; or



(a)  any property vested in, or requisitioned by, the Government, for the
purpose of any undertaking,



shall be considered _as accruing due from the date on which such business
undertaking or property,_ as the case may be, _was transferred to_ , _or
vested in_ , or requisitioned by, the Government. Interest at the prescribed
rate shall be paid on every such payment from the date on which it accrues due
until the date of payment."



This Section makes it clear beyond any doubt that the payments were to be made
in respect of the business undertaking and property acquired or ves­ted and
that the relevant date was the date of vesting for the purpose of the
assessment of the amount of the payment. Thus any liability which related to
the said business undertaking coming into existence after the relevant date
cannot be taken into consideration nor can any liabilities of the proprietor
other than the liabilities specifi­cally contemplated by Section 5 as having
vested be taken into consideration.

  

In terms of Section 12, the Minister of Finance made Regulations dated 9th
April 1975 published in Gazette No. 158/8 of 10th April 1975\. It is necessary
to examine all the regulations so made in order to appreciate the respective
functions the Committee and to see whether they have enlarged in any way the
scope of Section 4. Regulation (2) provides for the Minister of. Finance to
appoint a Committee to examine and report to him on the

#  
455

 assets and liabilities of the specified undertaking and not of the
proprietor. Regulation (4) requires the Committee to ascertain the reasonable
value of that undertaking. Regulation (5) reads as follows:-



­"5(1) For the purposes of arriving at the valuation of the specified
undertaking, the Committee may take into consideration the value at par of any
shares, holdings, investments or other interests, subject, however, to profits
earned, market conditions or other causes.



(2) For _all purposes of arriving at a valuation of the property_ , including
plant, machinery and other equipment of the speci­fied undertaking, the
committee may take into consideration the purchase price or the market price
at the time of purchase of such property, and deduct therefrom such amount as
may appear reasonable on account of depreciation, market conditions or other
causes.



(3)  For _all the purposes of' arriving at the valuation of the liabilities of
the specified undertaking,_ the Committee may take into consideration, inter
alia, any outstanding contractual or other lawful obligations, bona fide
transactions with any recognised financial or commercial institu­tions or
other persons excluding any member of the Board of Directors of the specified
undertaking, payments due to any Government Department or other State
institution and any loss sustained by any statutory board or corporation due
to the activities of the specified undertaking."



This regulation clearly defines the duties of the Committee to examine and
report to him on the Committee under three specified  categories.

#  456



Regulation 5(3) has not enlarged the ambit of Section 4 of the Act and has
limited the powers of the Committee to ascertain the payments if any due by
the said business undertaking to any Government Department or other State
institutions and any loss sustained by any Board or Corporation due to the
activities of the specified undertaking. Regula­tion 7 requires the Committee
to appoint to report to the Minister of Finance on the assets and liabi­lities
of the specified undertaking together with their recommendation thereon in
regard to the _pay­ments that may be due in respect ‑of the specified
undertaking_. After the amendment to the Act in 1980 the Minister made a
further regulation which was published in the Government Gazette
Extra­ordinary No. 92/4 dated 10th June 1980 specifying the rates of interest
payable on any payment.



At the hearing of this application in the Court of Appeal the learned Deputy
Solictor General who appeared for the respondents had made available to that
Court and to the Counsel for the petitioner the Report submitted by the
Committee to the Minis­ter of Finance. According to the figures set out in the
said report, the following amounts had been ascertained :‑

> > Valuation of Assets          Rs. 5,875,861.83  
>  
>>

>> Valuation of liabilities        Rs. 2,002,216.66  
>  
>>

>> Amount payable on this    Rs. 3,873,645.17

>>

>> basis

Interest was on this account according to the regulations  


at  4 1/2 percent from 8.3.72 ‑ 31.3.75  


at  5 1/2 per cent from 1.4.75 ‑ 30.9.77  


at  7 1/5 per cent from 1.10.77‑31.3.80 and  


at  10 per cent from 1.4.80 ‑ 31.12.80 and there after till the payment was
made.

#  457  


The Report, however, disclosed the following liabilities of the petitioner
Company and had reco­mmended that they should be deducted, namely ‑

> > (1)  Commission                     Rs. 33,700.63  
>  
>>

>> (2)  Professional charges       Rs. 80,511.28  
>  
>>

>> (3)  Outstanding Income

>>

>> Tax, Business Turn

>>

>> Over Tax & Penalties              Rs. 3,162,739.00

The question that arises is whether these deductions should be made from the
vested assets of the 'business undertaking' as at the date of ves­ting or
whether these should be from the balance found to be due with accrued interest
at the time and date of payment.



The Minister of Finance when he made his order after the Report was received
by him purported to deduct the amounts due on the said three items as
liabilities of the Business Undertaking due on the date of vesting. The
petitioner's contention was that none of the said three items could be so
deducted as they were not liabilities which were vested on the 8th March 1972,
the date of vesting, as the first and second items had been incurred by the
State after the date of vesting and as the third item, namely, Income Tax and
Business Turn­over Tax were not the liabilities of the vested business
undertaking. but were statutory levies payable by the proprietor or Company to
the State. In the Court of Appeal it was conceded by the Deputy Solicitor
General that the first item Rs. 33,700.63 claimed as commission was not a
liability and should not have been taken into the reckoning. In regard to the
second item of Rs. 80,511.28, though he did not make the same concession, he
had passed it over and confined his submissions to the third item only. At the
hearing before us as the petitioner filed an affidavit dated 13th December
1982 (PlO) in which he had set out the fact that

#  458



long after the vesting in or about June 1974, the petitioner had some
litigation in the District Court of Colombo and that the State claimed to have
incurred Rs. 80,511.28 in that litigation. The Depu­ty Solicitor General
conceded that this item could not be deducted. The contention therefore was
confined to the third item, Income Tax, Business Turnover Tax and the
penalties.



In regard to Income Tax, in this case the tax was imposed under the provisions
of the Inland Revenue Act No.4 of 1963. In terms of this Act income tax is
imposed in respect of the _profits and_ _income_ from any person including a
Company and profits and income mean profits from any trade, business,
profession or vocation and the several items enumerated in Section 13 of that
Act. There is no doubt that a business is treated as a separate entity in
order to ascertain its profits there­from, but the liability is that of the
proprietor or Company. In regard to Business Turnover Tax, the tax is imposed
under the Finance Act No.11 of 1963 and the business turnover tax is levied
from a person (including a Company) in respect of the _turnover_ made by that
person from that business in terms of Section 118. The mode of recovery of the
business turnover tax by any person in default as provided for in Section 145.
It is therefore clear that these taxes were the liability of the owner of the
business and not the liability of the business undertaking. This concept of a
'business underta­king' referred to the Act No. 35 of 1971 is a new concept.
It provides for the Government taking over of the business undertaking, and
the vesting or acquisition is limited to the rights and liabi­lities under a
contract or agreement of that under­taking. The Company continues in existence
and all other rights and liabilities, not covered by any contract or agreement
continue to be the rights and liabilities of the Company including any
liabili­ties repudiated in terms of Sections 4(2), 4(3) and



#  459



excluded in terms of Section 4(4). In this view of the matter, the Minister of
Finance in making his order under Regulation 7 on receipt of the Report from
the Committee appointed by him under the Act, has to make order that the
payment due to the proprietor shall be the amount of assets as assessed
deducting the assessed contractual liabi­lities that subsisted at the date of
vesting, in terms of Section 4 of the Act.



However, having examined the report of the Committee the Minister is entitled
to make an order in regard to the payment for balance assets so assessed with
the interest accruing thereon. In so making his order the Minister is entitled
to order the set off of moneys due to the State on any other liability not'
covered by Section 4 from the amount ultimately payable to the proprietor. In
terms of Section 109(l) of the Inland Revenue Art of 1973 tax in default is a
first charge on the assets of the defaulter and in this instance will be on
the balance assets (with accrued interest). In this case the petitioner had
defaulted and the amount due from him as tax would be a first charge on the
sum so payable to him.



The Minister, the 1st respondent, had there­fore erred in deducting the three
items from the balance assets (with accrued interest) for which the payment is
due to the petitioner by reason of the vesting of its business undertaking on
8. 3. 72. In view of the fact that the Deputy Solicitor General conceded that
the petitioner was not liable to pay Rs.33,700.63 by way of commission this
item will have to be struck off. In view of Counsel for the petitioner
agreeing to have the sum of Rs. 80,511.28 deducted as expenses incurred by the
Government though not strictly deductible and con­ceding that the
petitioner‑Company was liable to pay the outstanding income tax and penalties

#  460



therein amounting to Rs. 3,162,739.00, the 1st respondent is entitled to make
order for the appro­priation of the said sums of Rs.80,511.28 and
Rs.3,162,739.00 only from the amount ultimately payable, namely Rs.
3,873,645.17 with interest at the aforesaid rates until payment. It was
submitted that the petitioner had been paid a sum of Rs. 2,054,809.00.out of
this sum about January 1981 on account.



I  therefore direct a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari to issue
quashing the orders dated 12th March 1979 and 1st September 1980 made by the
1st respondent, the Minister of Finance, and that a Writ of Mandamus do issue
to the 1st respon­dent to pay the petitioner the sum of Rs. 3,873,645.17 with
interest thereon in terms of Regulation dated 4th June 1980 made by the 1st
respondent with a direction that the 1st respondent, shall be entitled to
deduct and appropriate the following sums only from this amount:



(1) Rs. 80,511.28 (professional charges)



(2) Rs. 3,162,739.00 (outstanding income tax and business turnover tax
together with penalties)



and any amounts paid to the petitioner on account up‑to‑date. The petitioner
will be entitled to costs in the Court of Appeal and in this Court.



**RATWATTE, J**., - I agree.



**SOZA, J**., - I agree.

  

**_Appeal allowed_.**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/5.html_  

