##  State Graphite Corporation v. Fernando - SLR - 590, Vol 2 of 1982 [1982]
LKSC 5; (1982) 2 Sri LR 590 (16 August 1982)

#  590

  **STATE GRAPHITE CORPORATION**

**v.**

**FERNANDO**

SUPREME COURT

SAMARAKOON, C. J., WANASUNDERA, J., AND WIMALARATNE, J.

SC. 87/81; CA (LA) 75/81; CA 1182/80

AUGUST 5, 1982



    Appeal ‑ Leave to appeal ‑ Supreme Court Rules 1978 ‑ Rules 4,8,18,20 & 24 ‑ Leave granted without other side being heard ‑ Civil Procedure Code, Section 763.



# Held ‑



The Court of Appeal can dispense with a hearing in granting leave _ex mero
motu_. In other cases where a party wishes to be heard or the issues involved
are, such that the Court ought not to make an order without hearing a party
affected, a proper hearing and determination of the application would
generally require a hearing however summary or brief that hearing may be.



The Bench which gave leave being the same Bench that gave the judgment was
fully conversant with the facts. It cannot be said that the exercise of the
jurisdiction of the Court was arbitrary.



**Cases referred to:**



(1) _Edward v. de Silva (1945) 46 N. L. R. 342._

  
(2) _Wimalasekera v. Parakrama Samudra Co ‑operative Agricultural Production
and Sales Society Ltd. (1955) 58 N.L.R. 298._



**PRELIMINARY OBJECTION** against order granting leave to appeal.



_N. Sinnatamby_ with _A. Cooray_ for petitioner‑appellant.



_H.W. Jayewardene, Q.C.,_ with _H.L.de Silva, S.A.,_ and _L.C. Seneviratne_
for 2nd respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._

August 16, 1982



**WANASUNDERA, J.**



Counsel for the 2nd respondent has taken a preliminary objection to the
hearing of this appeal, which purports to come before us with the leave of the
Court of, Appeal. He contends that the Court of Appeal lacked the necessary
jurisdiction to grant leave to appeal in this matter as the court made its
decision without hearing the 2nd respondent and this was a violation of a
mandatory requirement under the rules.



The application for leave to appeal was made in respect of a judgment of the
Court of Appeal in a petition filed, by the present



**591**

**  **

appellant for a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari. That petition
was refused by the Court of Appeal on the 8th of October 1981\. Thereafter, on
the 19th of October 1981, the appellant filed the application for leave to
appeal. The two respondents before us were named as respondents in that
application. This application for leave to appeal had been listed for hearing
on 28th October 1981 and was supported by counsel on that date. Counsel for
appellant stated that on a direction given by court, the matter was postponed
for the 30th of October 1981 to enable counsel to formulate the grounds of
appeal on which leave was being sought. When the matter thereafter came up on
the 30th of October 1981, the Court granted leave to appeal. It would be seen
from what had transpired that the respondents were neither noticed to appear
in court nor given a hearing before the court granted leave to appeal.



Mr. H.L. de Silva, who appeared for the 2nd respondent, invited our attention
to the provisions of rule 20 of the Supreme Court Rules 1978 and submitted
that the rule required the grant of a hearing to the respondent and this was
the condition precedent to the court acquiring jurisdiction to make a valid
order. He submitted that this failure to comply with this requirement rendered
the order, made by the Court of Appeal granting leave, null and void.



Mr. de Silva relied on two decisions, namely _Edward v. De Silva,_ (1), and
_Wimalasekera v. Parakrama Samudra Co ‑operative Agricultural Production and
Sales Society, Ltd.,_ (2), in support of his proposition. These decisions
relate to the interpretation of section 763 of the Civil Procedure Code which
allows the execution of a decree by the lower court even when the
judgment‑debtor has filed an appeal.



The decisions are to the effect that the failure to make the judgment‑debtor a
party respondent in such execution proceedings renders a judgment or order
made by the court a nullity.



These decisions appear to be based on the principle that once an appeal is
filed in an action, which has been concluded in a lower court, the lower court
ceases to have any further jurisdiction over the case and the lower court must
maintain the case in _statu quo_ until a decision is made by the appellate
tribunal. But a provision like section 763 allows the lower court to execute
the decree notwithstanding the appeal, and this may tend to impinge on the
powers of the appellate tribunal. However, such a provision has been



# 592



narrowly interpreted, so as not to derogate from the powers of the appellate
tribunal, and has been regarded as vesting only a limited jurisdiction.
Section 763 has therefore been interpreted strictly confining the lower court
to the exact provisions of the section. In _Edward v. De Silva_ (1), Soertsz,
J., observed:



" .... the Legislature continued the jurisdiction, that is to say, the
competency of the Court as the Court appointed to try and determine the case,
beyond its ordinary limits, but it took care to see, as it almost invariably
does, that its jurisdiction, in the sense of its power to act, and of its
correct action are made dependent on the observance of rules of procedure.
Some of these rules are so vital, being of the spirit of the law, of the very
essence of judicial action, that a failure to comply with them would result in
a failure of jurisdiction or power to act, and that would render anything done
or any order made thereafter devoid of legal consequence."



The matter before us deals with a different situation. It relates to the
process of filing an appeal and deals with that preliminary stage before an
appeal is actually lodged in the Supreme Court. Articles 127 and 128 of the
Constitution, which provide for the right of appeal to the Supreme Court,
reposes a portion of that power in the Court of Appeal itself. The exercise of
that power by the Court of Appeal does not impinge on the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court and the issues that arose in the cases relied on by Mr. de Silva
do not arise for consideration here.



There are also other differences between the rules of the Supreme Court and
section 763. As Mr. Sinnatamby rightly pointed out, section 763 not only
prescribes that the judgment‑debtor should be made a party to the execution
proceedings, but goes on to indicate, in no uncertain terms, that the
respondent should also be given the opportunity of being heard. The words "on
sufficient cause being shown by the appellant" is indicative of this.
Incidentally, in the two reported cases the applications did not even  name
the execution‑debtor as a party unlike the present application.



A closer scrutiny of the rules, reveals further differences. It seems to me
that the scheme formulated in the rules intended to leave an area of
discretion to the Court of Appeal in regard to the procedure that should be
followed in granting leave. The Court of Appeal is



**593**



empowered to grant leave _ex mero motu_ and this could be done at any time
within a period of 14 days from the date of the judgment or order. It was
conceded by counsel that the Court of Appeal need not give a hearing to the
parties if it chooses to exercise this power.



Rule 22 allows the court to entertain an oral motion for leave to appeal,
though this could be done only at the time the court delivers the final order
or judgment. If a party is not present on that occasion, it would still be
within the powers of the court to grant leave, although a necessary party may
not have been heard. Mr. de Silva however submitted that a party who is absent
on the date the judgment is delivered would not have a right to complain,
because he had denied himself the opportunity of being heard, owing to his own
default. But if the scheme of the rules required that an adverse or interested
party must be heard before the court could make a legally effective order,
then it is somewhat surprising to see that a matter of such significance and
importance does not find a place in the rules and has to be gathered by
implication, as Mr. de Silva sought to do. In this connection Mr. Sinnatamby
drew our attention to the parallel provisions dealing with the grant of
Special Leave by the Supreme Court contained in rules 4 and 8. Rule 4 is
identical with rule 20 relied on by Mr. de Silva. Rule 4, however, is
supplemented by rule 8 and this rule expressly enjoins the Registrar, Supreme
Court, to "forthwith give to the respondent notice of the making of such
application." Why is there a deliberate omission of a corresponding provision
in respect of applications for leave in the Court of Appeal? The answer is to
be found in rule 24.



This rule is peculiar to these provisions and somewhat unique in its
operation. It is worded as follows:‑



"24\. Upon an application for leave to appeal being filed, the Court of Appeal
may give such directions and direct such steps to be taken, as to it may seem
meet for a proper hearing and determination of such application."



This provision was clearly intended to free the Court of Appeal from
technicalities and to give it a certain amount of flexibility and discretion
in dealing with applications for leave to appeal. I need hardly emphasise that
such a discretion must be exercised justly and fairly and within the
perspective within which it was intended to operate.



# 594



In the present case the judgment in the writ application was delivered after
argument lasting nine days. The judgment was written by Soza, J. with whom
H.A.G. de Silva, J. agreed. It was not pronounced and delivered by the same
bench. It was pronounced on 8th October 1981 by another bench. Counsel for the
appellant stated that, in those circumstances, the appellant could not have
made an oral application for leave to appeal. A written application for leave
to appeal had been filed on the 19th of October 1981. It contained the names
of the present respondents as respondents to the application. It was supported
in court by counsel on the 28th of October 1981 before Soza, J. and H.A.G. de
Silva, J. The Court had then directed that the matter be fixed for the 30th of
October 1981 before the same bench, as the court desired counsel for the
applicant to formulate the grounds of appeal. When the matter came up on the
30th of October 1981, the court granted the appellant leave to appeal. The
order of Soza, J. with H.A.G. de Silva, J. agreeing, embodies eleven points of
law which the Court of Appeal considered "substantial enough to justify......
granting leave to appeal to the Supreme Court". The bench which gave leave was
the same bench that gave the judgment and was fully conversant with the case.
It would be observed that the matter had proceeded according to the directions
given by the court, and as far as the appellant was concerned he had complied
with express requirements of the law.



As far as the record goes, the non‑issue of notice on the respondents seems
consistent with the view that the court had formed the opinion that such
notice was unnecessary. There is a presumption as regards the regularity of
official acts.



The Court of Appeal can dispense with a hearing on granting leave _ex mero
motu_. In other cases it seems to me where a party wishes to be heard, or the
issues involved are such that the court ought not to make an order without
hearing and determination of the application would generally require a hearing
however summary or brief that hearing may be. Considering the large discretion
vested in the court, it is doubtful whether an omission in this respect will
affect the jurisdiction of the court rather than constitute a wrongful
exercise of a discretion. I am unable to say that the exercise of discretion
in this case has been arbitrary.



I also find that the 2nd  respondent may not be shut out from raising any
issue of a decisive nature, which he may have intended



**595**



to raise before the Court of Appeal even at this stake, but if substantial
prejudice has been caused to the respondent, this court would have given him
relief.



On the facts of this case, therefore, I see no useful purpose in sending this
matter back to the Court of Appeal to enable the 2nd respondent to be given a
hearing. In these circumstances the preliminary objection is overruled and I
leave the question of costs of this proceeding to which the appellant is
entitled to be taken into consideration when the court gives it final judgment
in this appeal.



**SAMARAKOON, C. J.** ‑ I agree.

**  **

**WIMALARATNE, J.** ‑ I agree.



Preliminary objection overruled.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/5.html_  

