##  Appuhamy v. Seneviratne - SLR - 601, Vol 2 of 1982 [1981] LKSC 5; (1982) 2
Sri LR 601 (31 December 1981)

#  601

**  APPUHAMY**

**v.**

**SENEVIRATNE**

SUPREME COURT

WANASUNDERA, J., WIMALARATNE, J., AND SOZA, J.

S.C. 42/81

C. A. 98/80

D.C. AVISSAWELLA 15294/RE

JULY 16, 1982.



    Landlord and tenant ‑ Rent and ejectment ‑ Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972 (as amended by Law No. 10 of 1977), section 22(l) (1A) and (IC) ‑ Settlement by parties in Court ‑ Waiver of statutory requirement by tenant ‑ Validity of waiver.



The landlord filed action for ejectment of tenant on the grounds that the
tenant was in arrears of rent for three months and that the premises were
reasonably required for the occupation of the landlord.



The standard rent of the premises was below Rs. 100/‑ p.m. and therefore the
landlord in accordance with section 22(1) (1A) caused notice to be served on
the Commissioner of National Housing.



However at the trial on 16.1.80 the parties entered into a settlement viz.
"Both parties state that they have arrived at a settlement of this case. The
defendant consents to hand over possession of the premises to the plaintiff on
or before 31.12.81. The defendant will not be paying rent to the plaintiff
during this period..." Judgment was entered in terms of this settlement.



On 25.2.80 before decree was entered the defendant moved the Court of Appeal
to have the judgment revised on the grounds that the District Judge had no
power to dispense with a statutory requirement that the Commissioner of
National Housing should find him alternative accommodation before the tenant
is ejected.



# Held ‑



It was open to the tenant to waive the requirement and to agree to vacate the
premises even before the Commissioner was able to provide him with alternative
accommodation. The maxim _" quilibet potest renuntiare juri pro se
introducto,"_ applies here.



#  602



**Cases referred to:**



(1) _Nugera v. Richardson (1949) 51 N.L.R. 116._



(2) _Dep v. Nagaratnam (1954) 56 N.L.R. 262._



(3) _Smith v. Poulter (1947) 1 All. E.R. 216._



(4) _Peachy Property Corporation v. Robinson (1966) 2 All. E.R. 981._



(5) _Nai Bahu v. Lala Ram Narayana (1978) A.I.R. (S.C.) 22._



(6) _Park Gate Iron Co. v. Coates (1870) L.R. 5, 634._



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_  _

_W. P. Gunatilake_ with _Rohan Jayawardena_ and _Miss Thalatha Wickremasinghe_
for defendant‑appellant.



_P.A.D. Samarasekera_ with _Upali de Almeida_ for plaintiff‑respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._



August 11, 1982.



**WIMALARATNE, J.**



            The object of Rent Restriction legislation has mainly been to control the amount of rent recoverable by a landlord from his tenant and to place limitations on the jurisdiction of the Court to eject the tenant by specifying the grounds on which ejectment could be obtained., But ever since Rent Restriction legislation was introduced into this country forty years ago, these restrictions have not in any way fettered the right and the duty of the Court to give effect to lawful compromises willingly entered into in a pending action between a landlord and his tenant. That the provisions of section 408 of the Civil Procedure Code (Cap. 101) relating to lawful compromises still remain intact notwithstanding these restrictions contained both in the Rent Restriction Ordinance of 1942 and the Rent Restriction Act of 1948 has been recognised by our courts in several decided cases, principally in _Nugera Vs. Richardson_ (1), and _Dep Vs. Nagaratnam_ (2). In the former case Gratiaen, J. considered it "monstrous to contend that the defendant who, in a tenancy action, has entered into an unobjectionable bargain to give up an advantage in consideration of obtaining some other benefit should be relieved from his bargain after he has received in full measure the benefit accruing from the, compromise"; at page 118.



**  603**

**  **

The question is whether this principle has to any extent been eroded by the
Rent Act, No.7 of 1972 or by Law No.10 of 1977 amending it; and also whether
the principle is yet applicable where the tenant seeks to repudiate the
settlement before he has enjoyed any benefit accruing from the compromise.



In the case of premises the standard rent of which is below Rs. 100/‑ (as in
the present case) I section 22(1) of the Rent Acts prescribes the grounds on
which a landlord may eject a tenant. One of the grounds is that rent has been
in arrears for three months or more after it has become due (section 22(1)
(a)). Another is that the premises are reasonably required for occupation as a
residence by the landlord or a member of his family (section 22(1)(b)). This
latter ground was available only if the premises had been let after the date
of operation of the Act. The amending law of 1977 extended its scope to
residential premises let before the Act as well. (section 22(1) (b)). The
premises in question had been let to the tenant before the main Act came into
force, and the landlord therefore had the right to ask for the ejectment of
the tenant on the ground of reasonable requirement too. But the amendment
stipulated in section 22(1) (1A) that the landlord of such premises shall not
be entitled to avail himself of this provision if he is the owner of more than
one residential premises and unless he has caused notice of such action to be
served on the Commissioner of National Housing.



In instituting the present action the landlord prayed for the ejectment of the
tenant from the premises _and_ for the recovery of rent and damages. He caused
notice of the action to be served on the Commissioner of National Housing as
required by law. The tenant denied that he was in arrears for more than three
months after it became due denied also that the premises were required for the
occupation of the landlord or his family, and pleaded further that the
landlord was the owner of more than one house. At the trial held on 16.1.80
the parties were represented by lawyers. A settlement was recorded in Sinhala
in these terms:‑ "Both parties state that they have arrived at a settlement of
this case. The defendant consents to hand over possession of the premises to
the plaintiff on or before 31.12.81. The defendant will not be paying rent to
the plaintiff during this period. The plaintiff consents to this. The
defendant undertakes not to sublet the premises or to cause any damage to it."
Judgment was entered in terms of this settlement, with a further clause that
if possession was not handed on the due date the plaintiff would be.



#  604



entitled to take out writ of ejectment without notice to the defendant and
recover arrears of rent in terms of the plaint. Both parties signed the record
consenting to these terms.



Before decree was entered (on 25.2.80) the defendant moved the Court of Appeal
to have the judgment revised on the ground that the District Court had no
jurisdiction to enter judgment for ejectment dispensing with the statutory
requirement that once action is filed in terms of the amending law the tenant
could not be ejected until alternative accommodation is provided by the
Commissioner of National Housing.



The pleadings have been subject to careful analysis by the Court of Appeal,
which has found that the averment in the plaint (dated 10.1.79) that all rents
had been paid up to 30.9.78 does not necessarily lead to the inference that
the rent was not in three months arrears when the tenancy was terminated,
because "there had been a recurring backlog Of three months arrears of rent at
any given point of time" There does not appear to be sufficient grounds,
therefore, to disturb the finding of the Court of Appeal that the present
action is one for ejectment on both grounds of reasonable requirement as well
as arrears of rent. A lawful compromise entered into in an action instituted
on the ground that rent has been in arrears for the stipulated period has
always been recognised and given effect to notwithstanding the restrictions
contained in the Rent Act.



It has been submitted by learned Counsel for the appellant that the trial
Judge has not considered the existence of any of the grounds under section 22
which are prerequisites for the institution of an action in Court. He has
referred us to certain decisions of the Courts in England _Smith vs. Poulter_
(1947) (3), and _Peachy Property Corporation vs. Robinson_ (4) in terms of
which the Court has no power to make an order for possession of a dwelling
house unless the Court considers it reasonable to do so, and that it is, the
duty of the Court to see whether the conditions required by the Rent Act are
satisfied, even though, not pleaded or raised by the tenant. There is a
requirement under section 3 of the English Rent and Mortgage Interest
Restrictions (Amendment) Act, 1933, that when a house is one to which the Rent
Restriction Acts apply, then the court has no power to make an order or
judgment for possession unless the court considers it reasonable" to do so.
Such cases are easily distinguishable because there is no provision similar to
the  above section 3 in our Rent Act.



**  605**



More relevant are Counsel's submissions based on the provisions of the Civil
Procedure Code of India relating to compromise of suits (o 23 R3). In _Nai
Bahu vs. Lala Ram Narayana_ (5) the Supreme Court summed up the position
thus:‑ "It is well settled that where the Rent Control and Restrictions Acts
are in operation, a landlord cannot obtain eviction of the tenant unless he
satisfies the requirement of the provisions of those Acts. It is also well
settled that if the Court does not find the permissible ground for eviction
disclosed in the pleadings and other materials on the record no consent or
compromise will give jurisdiction to the Court to give a valid decree for
eviction". This appears, with respect, to be an unexceptional exposition of
the law applicable to compromises entered into in actions to which the Rent
Act applies. In the present case the permissible grounds for eviction were
disclosed in the pleadings. Hence a compromise entitling the Court to make an
order for possession without inquiry was lawful and within the Court's
jurisdiction.



It is significant that the amending law does not impose any prohibition
against the entering of a simple decree for ejectment even in an action
instituted on the ground of reasonable requirement, without containing A
clause that the decree is being entered on that ground. The prohibition
contained in section 22(1) (1C) is against the issue of a writ of ejectment
until the Commissioner of National Housing has notified the Court that he is
able to provide alternative accommodation for the tenant _only in cases where
the decree has been entered on the ground that such premises are reasonably
required_ as a residence for the occupation of the landlord or for a member of
his family. The reason for this is manifest in that the legislature had no
intention for prohibiting lawful compromises between landlord and tenant even
where the pending action is one instituted under the amending law.



It seems clear that the Rent (Amendment) Law, No.10 of 1977 has been enacted
for the benefit of the owners of single houses, the standard rent of which is
below Rs.100/‑ and which had been let to the tenant prior to the date of
commencement of the main Act. If such an owner is able to satisfy the Court
that such premises are reasonably required as a residence for his occupation
he is entitled to a decree for ejectment in his favour. If the decree is
entered on the ground of reasonable requirement, then no writ of execution of
such decree shall be issued by Court until after the Commissioner of National
Housing has notified Court that he is able to provide



#  606



alternate accommodation for such tenant. This latter requirement is however, a
concession included for the benefit of the tenant, who in spite of the
reasonable requirement of the landlord, is not to be ejected without being
provided a house for his occupation by the State. It is, however, open to the
tenant to waive this requirement and to agree to vacate even before the
Commissioner of National Housing is able to provide alternative accommodation,
for " _quilibet potest renuntiare juri pro se introducto_ " \- the conditions
prescribed by a statute are not considered as being indispensable if the thing
which is to be done is for the benefit of a particular person or class of
persons. _Craies on Statute Law_ (6th Ed.) 269. Expanding on this principle
Montague Smith J. observed, in _Park Gate Iron Co. vs. Coates_ (6), that if
the objection goes to the jurisdiction of the Court, the requirement cannot be
waived; but if it be a condition inserted entirely for the respondents
security (such as proper notice of appeal and security) it may be waived. The
object of the requirement contained in section 22(1C) of the Rent (Amendment)
Law, No.7 of 1977, that no writ in execution of decree entered for the
ejectment of the tenant of residential premises, the standard rent of which
is. below Rs. 100/‑, on the ground that such premises are reasonably required
for occupation by the landlord or by a member of his family, shall be issued
until after the Commissioner of National Housing has notified the Court that
he is able to provide alternative accommodation for such tenant seems to be a
requirement inserted solely for the benefit and security of a class of
tenants. It is therefore one which may be waived by the tenant; for it may
sometimes be more advantageous to a tenant to compromise with the landlord on
‑favourable terms rather than to avail himself of alternate accommodation made
available by the Commissioner. If the settlement between landlord I and tenant
in _Nugera's_ _case_ (above) was "eminently' satisfactory", the tenant in the
present case seems to have obtained terms far more favourable, for he was
permitted to remain in occupation for two years without payment of any rent.



The circumstance that a. tenant who is a party to a lawful compromise which
permits him to remain in occupation for a stipulated. period seeks to have the
settlement vacated before he has enjoyed the fruits of the compromise would
not, in my view, effect the above principle. If, however, the settlement had
been induced by fraud, mistake , duress or other vitiating factor, then there
is no impediment in the way of his having it set aside. But there is no proof
of them in the present case.

**  **

**  607**



The appeal is accordingly dismissed with costs.



**WANASUNDERA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**SOZA, J.** ‑ I agree.



Appeal dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/5.html_  

