##  Blue Diamonds Limited v. Amsterdam Rotterdam Bank M.V. and Another (Amro
Bank Case) - SLR - 249, Vol 2 of 1993 [1980] LKSC 5; (1993) 2 Sri LR 249 (10
October 1980)

**249**

**BLUE DIAMONDS LIMITED  
v.  
AMSTERDAM - ROTTERDAM BANK M. V. AND ANOTHER  
(AMRO BANK CASE) **

  
SUPREME COURT.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.,

FERNANDO, J. AND

DHEERARATNE, .J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 17/91.

C.A. NO. 352/87(F).  
D.C. COLOMBO NO. 86745/M.  
JUNE 17 AND 19, JULY 10 AND 11, 1991.

FEBRUARY 4, 20, 21, 24, 25 AND 26, 1992.

_     Sale - Contract for sale of diamonds - Place where contract sought to be
enforced was made - Place where contract was made and cause of action arose -
Residence of branch of company - Jurisdiction - Traversing jurisdiction in the
answer. _

Arrangements were made primarily though the Blue Diamonds Limited's
(appellants) bankers the Bank of Ceylon, Colombo with the Amsterdam \-
Rotterdam Bank (Amro) of Amsterdam, the defendant for delivery of a parcel of
diamonds by Amro to B. Schatz B. V. upon certain terms as to payment. Alleging
that Amro did not comply with the agreed terms and conditions the appellant
instituted an action for damages against Amro.

The documents relevant to the sale were

(a) An export invoice dated 19.9.80 issued by the appellant describing Amro as
the consignee (account of B. Schatz B. V.) stipulating as terms. " To be
issued against a trust receipt for 180 days for the full c.i.f. value signed
by an authorized officer of Schatz B. V. The diamonds were 139.01 carats in
weight, having a c.i.f. value of US $ 50,742/95 (Rs. 863,645).

(b) Airway bill for carriage of parcel.

(c) A " cover schedule " issued by Bank of Ceylon to Amro describing appellant
as drawer and Schatz as drawee with notes and instructions. This was a
collection order issued by the Bank of Ceylon on behalf of its principal, the
appellant.

(d) A bill of exchange drawn by the appellant on Schatz for payment of US $
50,742.95, 180 days after sight in favour of Amro.

250

The parcel of diamonds together with documents was duly carried to Amsterdam
and delivered to Amro who delivered the parcel to Schatz without however
obtaining from Schatz a trust receipt and without presenting the bill of
exchange to Schatz for acceptance despite being aware of these terms.

By this time another two parcels of diamonds having invoice value of US $
45,826/55 and US $ 62,878/49 had been delivered to Schatz.

The original contracts of sale were varied by the substitution of agreed
revised sale prices - the revised price for the first parcel being reduced
from US $ 50,742/95 to US $ 41,892/71 and for the 2nd and 3 parcels US $ 33,
729/15 and US $ 58, 870/53. By 10.10.80 Amro had remitted a total of US $
135,492/39 (exactly US $ 1000 more than the total amount due on the revised
rates).

**Held**

1\. As there appeared to be a new agreement between the buyer and the seller
whereby the latter had agreed to a reduced price payable immediately, Amro
remitted such lower price. Thereupon bills of exchange and trust receipts
seemed not merely inappropriate but improper. Where the buyer has paid the
agreed price he cannot be required to execute instruments obliging him to pay
the price again.

2\. The contract sued upon was not a contract (whether of agency or otherwise)
concluded by means of discussions directly between the appellant and Amro, but
a contract evidenced by the export invoice, airway bill, cover schedule and
bill of exchange, constituted by the acts of the Bank of Ceylon and Amro.
Acceptance was not by telephonic communication to the appellant but by
intimation to the Bank of Ceylon and by performance. The contract had been
entered into in Amsterdam.

3\. (a) Section 45, of the CPC requires a statement of the facts setting out
the jurisdiction of the court to try and determine the claim. The necessary
averments must appear in the body of the plaint in the form of distinct
averments. The plea as to residence in the plaint was ambiguous. Section 9,
CPC confers jurisdiction on the District Court, within whose jurisdiction the
defendant resides. 'Resides' in the case of a natural person refers to place
where he has his family establishment and home. In the case of corporation in
India the corporation is deemed to carry on business at the sole or principle
office. But our Civil Procedure Code does not have a similar explanation. The
plea based on residence in the plaint is insufficient as there is no
unequivocal assertion that Amro resides within jurisdiction. The use of the
word 'deemed' in the plaint to describe residence suggests that Amro did not
in fact reside within the jurisdiction.

251

(b) In traversing jurisdiction the answer must in terms of section 76 CPC do
so by a separate and distinct plea expressly traversing such averment. The
general denial is insufficient. Even a specific denial of the paragraph in the
plaint averring jurisdiction would generally be insufficient if it could not
indicate whether the defendant -  
  
(i) was denying that a contract had been entered into and even if there had
been such a contract, it had not been entered into at Colombo ; or  
  
(ii) was denying such a contract, but was conceding that if such a contract
was proved, it had been entered into at Colombo ; or  
  
 (iii) while admitting that a contract has been entered into, was denying that
it had been entered into at Colombo.  
  
 What section 76 requires is a specific denial of jurisdiction. No particular
formula is required. A plea which ex facie and unambiguously involves a denial
of jurisdiction would suffice.  
  
(c) (i) Although the answer did not deny jurisdiction on the ground of
residence this does not amount to an admission of jurisdiction, because the
plaint was defective in that respect.  
  
 (ii) The answer contained an adequate denial of jurisdiction on the basis of
the place of contract because it denies any agreement entered into at Colombo
within the jurisdiction of the court.  
  
(iii) In regard to jurisdiction based on the accrual of a cause of action, the
answer did not adequately traverse jurisdiction because it contained only a
denial of the accrual of such cause of action and was silent as to
jurisdiction. That the District Court of Colombo had jurisdiction, on the
basis that the alleged cause of action arose within its limits was not denied
and had therefore to be treated as admitted by Amro.

4\. Where jurisdiction is admitted or deemed to be admitted no question arises
as to the burden of proof on the framing of issues. Section 150, explanation
makes it clear that the plaintiff must establish so much of the material part
of his case as is not admitted by the defendant. Although the contract had
been entered into at Amsterdam, the District Court of Colombo had jurisdiction
on the basis of the accrual of the cause of action.

5\. The fact that Amro, as a banker, obtained immediate payment from the buyer
and remitted it to the seller cannot per se be regarded as a breach. The
condition that delivery to schatz should only be upon obtaining a trust
receipt for 180 days and upon acceptance of a bill of exchange payable 180
days after sight was intended to give effect to a commercial transaction
between buyer and seller. Receiving the price 180 days before it was due is
favourable to the seller.

252

Adjustments, variations, negotiations and compromises are an inevitable and
continuing part of business transactions. The instructions originally given
were. varied and Amro substantially complied with them and the appellant
ratified Amros' conduct. The appellant failed to establish a cause of action.

**Cases referred to**

_01\. N. Y. Life Insurance Co. v. Public Trustee (1924) 2 Ch. 101._  
_  
02\. De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd. v. Howe (1906) AC 455._  
_  
03\. Cesena Sulphur Co. Ltd. v. Nicholson (1876) 1 Exch. D. 428._  
_  
04\. Union Corporation Ltd. v. I.R.C. (1952) 1 All E.R. 646._  
_  
05\. Bisset v. Loftus (1884) 6 S.C.C. 152._  
_  
06\. Sulaiman v. Ibrahim (1890) 9 S.C.C. 13'1._  
_  
07\. Mendis v. Perera (1908) 13 N.L.R. 41._  
_  
08\. Chetty v. Saibo (1891) 2 Cey. L.R. 37._  
_  
09\. Marimuttu v. Commissioner for Registration of I. & P. Residents (1956) 57
N.L.R. 307, 309. _  
_  
10\. Newby v. Von Oppen (1872) 7 Q. B. 293._  
_  
11.Dunlop Company v. Actien-Gesellschaft etc. Vorm. Cudell and Company (1902)
1 K.B. 342._  
_  
12\. Saccharin Corporation Ltd. v. Chemische Febrik von Heyden
Aktiengesellschaft (1911) 2 K.B. 516._  
_  
13\. The Theodohos (1977) 21 Q.B. 428._  
_  
14\. Le Mesurier v. Le Mesurier (1893) 3 S.C.R. 12, 19, 20._  
_  
15\. Le Mesurier v. Le Mesurier (1898) 1 N.L.R. 160._  
_  
16\. Harris v. Taylor (1951) 1 K.B. 580._  
_  
17\. Dulles v. Vidler 1 Ch. 842._  
_  
18\. Henry v. Geoprosco (1975) 3 W.L.R. 620._  
_  
19\. Arnaldo da Brescia, (1922) 23 N.L.R. 391._  
_  
20\. Gunawardene v. Jayawardene (1971) 74 N.L.R. 248._  
_  
21\. Perera v. Chelliah (1970) 74 N.L.R. 61._  
_  
22\. Rayner & Co. Ltd. v. Hambro's Bank Ltd. (1943) 1 K.B. 37. _  
_  
23\. Bank Melle Iran v. Barclays Bank (1951) 2 Lloyd's Rep. 367._  
_  
24\. Midland Bank v. Seymour (1955) 2 Lloyd's Rep. 147._  
_  
25\. Edward Owen Ltd. v. Barclays Bank Ltd. (1977) 3 W.L.R. 764._  
_  
26\. Richardson Scale Co. Ltd. v. Polimex-Cekop (1978) 1 Lloyd Rep. 161._  
_  
27\. Siporex Trade v. Banque Indosuez (1986) 2 Lloyd's Rep. 146._  
_  
28\. United City v. Royal Bank (1982) 2 Lloyd's Rep. 1._

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_Laksman Kadirgamar, P. C. with S. L Gunasekera, Miss. Laftha Seneviratne,
Shanaka de Silva, Maithri Gunaratne and Miss. S. M. Divulwewa for appellant._

  
_Eric Amerasinghe, P.C. with Harsha Soza for the respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

253

September 23, 1992.  
**FERNANDO, J.**

The plaintiff-Appellant company ("the Appellant") carries on the business of
cutting and polishing uncut, or rough, diamonds ; it purchases uncut diamonds
from foreign suppliers, and sells the finished product to foreign dealers. The
present appeal involves one such transaction connected with the sale of 139.01
carats of cut and polished diamonds by the Appellant to B. Schatz BV of
Amsterdam ("Schatz") ; certain arrangements were made primarily through the
Appellant's bankers, the Bank of Ceylon in Colombo, with the Amsterdam-
Rotterdam Bank ("Amro") of Amsterdam, the Defendant-Respondent, for delivery
of the diamonds by Amro to Schatz, upon certain terms as to payment. Alleging
that Amro did not comply with some of the agreed terms and conditions, the
Appellant instituted an action for damages against Amro ; this was dismissed ;
an appeal to the Court of Appeal was also dismissed. Several questions of law
being involved, special leave to appeal was granted.

**1\. THE FACTS**

Previous sales of diamonds by the Appellant to Schatz, had not given rise to
any disputes. Having obtained all necessary approvals and certificates, the
Appellant shipped the parcel in dispute in September 1980, and the rights and
obligations of the various parties involved have to be ascertained from the
following documents

(a) An export invoice (P12) dated 19.9.80 issued by the Appellant, describing
Amro as consignee ("Account of B. Schatz B.V."), containing a printed note at
the foot thereof " Through Bank of Ceylon, Colombo ", and stipulating

" TERMS : To be issued against a trust receipt for 180 days for the full
C.I.F. value signed by an authorised officer of Schatz B. V. Weesperplein 4,
Amsterdam."

The diamonds were 139.01 carats, in weight, having a c.i.f. value of US $
50,742/95 (Rs. 863,645/00).

254

(b) An airway bill (P1) dated 22.9.80 whereby the Appellant contracted with
Swissair for the carriage of the parcel valued at Rs. 855,008/72 from Colombo
to Amsterdam, the consignee being Arnro on account of Schatz.

(c) A " cover schedule " (P2) dated 25.9.80 issued by the Bank of Ceylon to
Amro describing the Appellant as " Drawer " and Schatz as "Drawee", and
containing the following notes and instructions

" Kindly acknowledge receipt of documents and follow instructions, inclusive
of general instructions overleaf, under advice to us."

" On maturity, please remit proceeds to Morgan Guaranty Trust Co. of New York,
23, Wall Street, New York 15, U.S.A., for credit of our account, under advice
to us by authenticated cable "

DRAWER  | DRAWEE | TENOR  | AMOUNT  
---|---|---|---  
Blue Peacock Diamonds Ltd. ,P. O. Box 439, Colombo |  B. Schatz B. V.,
Weesperplein 4, 1018 X A ,Amsterdam, Holland. | 180 Days D/A |  US$ 50,742/95  
  
Some of the general instructions on the reverse of the cover schedule were

"1\. Please present all bills and/or documents for acceptance or payment
immediately on receipt and advise result and/or date of maturity without
delay.

2\. Reason for dishonour should always be indicated when advising non-payment
or non-acceptance.

3\. If dishonoured, store goods on arrival in bonded warehouse (notify
insurance agents in the event of damage) ; insure against fire theft & S.R. &
C.C. for invoice value plus 10% and advise drawee. Any duty, landing, clearing
and warehousing charges must be collected from the consignee before delivery."

255

This " cover schedule " was thus a collection order issued by the Bank of
Ceylon on behalf of its principal, the Appellant.

(d) The cover schedule also confirmed the text of a tested telex sent to Amro
on 26.9.80

" Tested as on twentysixth September 1980 for USDLRS 50742-95 test.........
Our customer Blue Peacock Diamonds Ltd., has consigned to you a parcel of gems
on account of B. Schatz B. V. Weesperplein 4, 1018 X A, Amsterdam, under
Swissair airway bill No 085-5420 6736 STOP Please release parcel to drawees on
a trust receipt for 180 days for USDLRS 50742-95 signed by an authorised
officer of B. Schatz B. V. Weesperlein 4, 1018 X A, Amsterdam, Holland pending
receipt of the relevant shipping documents under our ref. FBC 43/713 STOP
Remit proceeds to Morgan Bank New York for the credit of our account and
request them to advise us by another authenticated cable on receipt of
proceeds STOP "

(e) A bill of exchange (P3) dated 24.9.80 drawn by the Appellant on Schatz,
for payment of US $ 50,742.95, 180 days after sight in favour of Amro.

The parcel of diamonds, together with a copy of the airway bill, invoice and
other documents, was duly carried to Amsterdam, and delivered to Amro. The
cover schedule, together with a copy of the airway bill, invoice and other
documents, as well as the bill of exchange, was sent by the Bank of Ceylon to
Amro by registered airmail, and was received on 1.10.80. There is no evidence
as to when Amro (a) received the parcel from Swissair, and (b) delivered it to
Schatz, but it is common ground that Amro did deliver the parcel to Schatz
without obtaining from Schatz a trust receipt, and did not present the bill of
exchange to Schatz for acceptance. In the absence of any assertion by Amro to
the contrary, it must be assumed that the telex sent on 26.9.80 was received
the same day ; in any event its text became known when the cover schedule was
received on 1.10.80. Amro did not claim in regard to the delivery of the
parcel that it had acted independently of the instructions of the Bank of
Ceylon given in the aforesaid telex and cover schedule, or that it had refused
to act on such instructions. Hence the factual position is that Amro delivered
the parcel to Schatz with full knowledge and

256

acceptance of the instructions set out (i) in the invoice, telex and cover
schedule, to obtain a trust receipt, and (ii) in the cover schedule, to obtain
acceptance of the bill of exchange.

By this time another two parcels of diamonds, having invoice values of US $
45,826/55, and US $ 62,878/48, had been duly delivered to Schatz. By a telex
dated 9.10.80 (P14) Schatz referred to " revised prices " in respect of all
three parcels ; this telex made detailed reference to each item of the
corresponding invoice, specifying the item number, weight in carats. "
original price" (old rate per carat), and " revised price " (new rate per
carat) ; it then set out the total weight in carats, the " original value "
and the "revised value." Reference was made throughout - seven times in all -
to " revised " price and " revised " value, and not to revised " profit ",
"commission" or otherwise. That telex further stated:

" We agreed melle (sic) prices foil. market conditions. You would send them to
me for a 6 percent less. Keep in mind prices where for 10 P.C. All your makes
are lighter, will still pay yr pr but reserve the right to lower a little bit
later, if not saleable ........... (Details of the revised invoices were set
out) .......... Total of revised invoices : USD 134.492, 39 USD 65.000
(payments made by us) to be paid by us USD 69.492,39. After receipt of yr
revised invoices by telex we will make this additional payment to you ....."

The Appellant respondent by a telex dated 10.10.80 (P13) ; protesting faintly,
but nevertheless confirming, the " revised " prices. Learned President's
Counsel for the Appellant, told us that " melle " meant a reduction. Detailed
reference was made to each item of each invoice, and this telex thus
constituted what P14 had requested, " yr revised invoices by telex ":

" I will confirm by yr prices but I feel that the prices we agreed for
ds/sc/am/3/80 and written on yr copy/my copy of the invoice in Colombo should
be paid...................... I give below the agreed revised invoice prices
as per yr tix. total of revised invoices : US dollars 134, 492.39. Pre-
payments advised by you US dollars 65,000 to be paid US dollars 69,492.39.
Please remit by t.t. preferably to American Express International Banking
Corporation, Colombo 1 Sri Lanka ............... or to Bank of Ceylon - for
Blue Peacock Diamonds Ltd. P1 ensure that Amro Bank

257

sends......... a tested telex to Bank of Ceylon confirming that they paid US
dollars 45,000 on yr behalf for Blue Peacock Diamonds........"

The position in regard to payments at this point of time (i.e. immediately
before 10.10.80) was as follows :

Invoice No.

|

Original Amount

|

"Revised Price"

|

Payments

|  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
3/80

|

45.826/55

|

33.729/15

|

15,000

|

(11.9.80)  
  
4/80

|

50.742/95

|

41,829/71

|

45,000

|

(29.9.80)  
  
5/80

|

62,878/48

|

58,870/53

|

5,000

|

(3.10.80)  
  


|

TOTAL

|

134,492/39

|

65,000

|

  
  
BALANCE DUE 69,492/39

Thus, as stated in the telex (P14), the total due on the three invoices
(revised prices) was US $ 134,492/39, of which US $ 65,000 had been paid, and
the balance due was US $ 70,492/39. A sum of US $ 70,492/39 (exactly US $ 1000
more than the balance then due) was remitted on 10.10.80. Amro then informed
the Appellant, by telex dated 14.10.80 (P4), that

" Re your telex dated Okt, 10, 1980 to Schatz herewith we inform you that on
Okt. 13, 1980 we sent directly to Branch of Ceylon, Colombo a telex, in which
we confirm the payment order of USDLRS 45,000 - in your favour. We also
request you to instruct the Bank of Ceylon to inform us by tested cable that
the drafts in our possession to the amounts of USDLRS 45.826,55 USDLRS
50742,95 and USDLRS 62.878,48 can be cancelled when you have received the
payments of USDLRS 15.000, - USDLRS 45.000, - USDLRS 5.000 - and USDLRS 70492,
39."

Prima facie, the original contracts of sale were varied by the substitution of
agreed revised sale prices. Although P13 and P14 were communications between
the Appellant and Schatz, both parties expected Amro to be informed, for the
agreed balance ($6,492/39) was to be remitted by Amro ; the last sentence of
P13 demonstrates the Appellant's awareness that Amro was kept informed of
previous payments as well. Although instructions for the several payments were
given earlier, the Appellant appears to have received

258

confirmation from the Bank of Ceylon of the receipt of each such payment about
a week or two later : thus the receipt of US $ 45,000 and US $ 5,000 remitted
on 29.9.80 and 3.10.80 respectively, were confirmed on 14.10.80 and 9.10.80
respectively. The final payment of US $ 70,492/39 made on 10.10.80, was
confirmed on 28.10.80. It is however clear from the correspondence that by
10.10.80 Am had remitted a total of US $ 135,492/39.

The Appellant appears to have sent another telex dated 15.10.80 to Schatz, but
this has not been produced. It is clear from P4 that all three contracts
required Amro to obtain from Schatz acceptance of bills of exchange, and
presumably also trust receipts. The purpose of these instruments was to obtain
not immediate payment, but payment within 180 days or out of the proceeds of
re-sale, whichever was earlier : if payment was obtained, within the 180-day
period, under the trust receipt, obviously payment could not have been again
demanded under the corresponding bill. Faced with what seemed to be a new
agreement between the buyer and the seller whereby the latter agreed to a
reduced price, payable immediately, Amro remitted such lower price. Thereupon
bills of exchange and trust receipts seemed not merely inappropriate but
improper : where the buyer has paid the agreed price how can he be required to
execute instruments obliging him to pay the price again ? Not unnaturally, by
P4 Amro asked for instructions - although probably regarded as purely formal -
for the cancellation of the inchoate bills, thus making perfectly clear the
basis on which it was acting. There is nothing to suggest that at that stage
the Appellant disputed the correctness of Amro's belief or conduct. It was
only 18 months later that the Appellant for the first time took up the
position that a sum of US $ 50,742/95 was outstanding on that contract. The
contents of P4 establish that Amro did not represent to the Appellant that a
trust receipt had been , obtained and that the bill had been accepted. Two
further matters need to be mentioned. Even if the revised prices are ignored,
and the payments made by Amro are treated as if they had not been appropriated
to any particular contract, there is no explanation as to how the Appellant
appropriated these payments to satisfy the first and the third in full, and
not to the second before the third. In whichever way these were appropriated
there would have been a surplus of almost US $ 27,000, and the Appellant
failed to explain why credit was not given in this sum as against the claim of
US $ 50,742/95 : inexplicably, the Appellant did not produce the

259

 relevant books of account, and this made the contention that the accounts
were complicated all the more untenable. However, the documents show that Amro
did apportion the payments among the three contracts on the basis of the
revised invoice prices, so that US $ 41,892 had been paid in respect of the
contract in suit, reducing the balance due on that contract (i.e. had there
been no price reduction) to less than US $ 9,000 paid in respect of the
Contract in suit.

**2\. FINDINGS OF THE COURTS BELOW**

The District Court held that (prior to the transactions in question) there had
been discussions between representatives of the Appellant and Amro, in order
to obtain the assistance of the latter in regard to the export of diamonds by
the former to Schatz ; that the Bank of Ceylon had acted as the Appellant's
agent in the export of the parcels of diamonds, and that Amro had acted as the
Appellant's agent in delivering the diamonds to Schatz. As to whether there
was a contract between the Appellant and Amro in regard to this particular
sale of diamonds to Schatz, it was held that the Appellant had made an offer
to Amro, which had been accepted in Amsterdam. That contract had therefore
been entered into in Amsterdam ; the alleged breach, namely the failure to
obtain a trust receipt and to present the bill of exchange to Schatz for
acceptance, had also occurred in Amsterdam ; thus the District Court of
Colombo lacked jurisdiction by reference to the place where the contract had
been entered into, and where the breach occurred. Both at the time of that
contract, and the breach, Amro had no branch in Sri Lanka ; a branch had been
established and the business of banking was being carried in Colombo at the
time the action was instituted ; this was held not to confer jurisdiction ;
the fact that Amro filed proxy and answer, did not amount to a submission to
jurisdiction, as jurisdiction was traversed in the answer. On the merits of
the claim for damages, the Court held that although Amro had acted in breach
of instructions (by failing to obtain a trust receipt and acceptance of the
bill of exchange), the Appellant had not suffered any loss and damage thereby,
for the Appellant had agreed with Schatz to accept a reduced price, and this
had been remitted by Amro. The action was dismissed but, considering Amro's
breach of instructions, without costs.

260

These findings were upheld by the Court of Appeal, which dismissed the
Appellant's appeal with costs. The only question which was considered at some
length was whether the District Court had jurisdiction on the basis of
residence. It was held that a corporation which was carrying on business in
several countries could be held to be resident in more than one country ; but
such a finding ought not to be made unless the control of the general affairs
of the corporation is not centred in one country but is divided and
distributed among two or more countries ; one factor to be looked for is the
existence, in the place claimed as being a residence, of some part of the
superior and directing authority by means of which the affairs of the
corporation are controlled. N. Y. Life Insurance _Co. v. Public Trustee_ (1),
Ch. 101, De _Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd. v. Howe_ (2), Cesena Sulphur Co.
_Ltd. v. Nicholson_ (3), and _Union Corporation Ltd. v. l. R. C._ (4), were
cited. Amro could not be considered as resident in Colombo merely because it
had established a branch in Colombo, and there was evidence that " the Colombo
branch did not know anything about the said transaction in diamonds."

**3\. THE APPELLANT'S CONTENTIONS**

All these findings were strenuously contested by Mr. Lakshman Kadirgamar,
P.C., on behalf of the Appellant. His contentions in this Court be summarized
as follows

1\. As to Jurisdiction

(a) The District Court of Colombo had jurisdiction on one or more of the three
grounds pleaded - i.e. that the defendant resided, the contract was entered
into, and the cause of action arose, in Colombo - because none of these
averments had been duly denied in the answer, and jurisdiction had therefore
been admitted ;

(b) Assuming without conceding that jurisdiction had been duly traversed in
the answer, Amro had participated in the trial, adduced evidence, and invited
the Court to decide on the merits ; and had thereby waived its objections to
jurisdiction, and had submitted to jurisdiction ; and

261

(c) In any event, all three grounds had been proved. Having a place of
business at the time action was instituted, constituted " residence ". The
contract sued upon had been concluded by means of an offer made by the
Appellant ; Amro's acceptance had been communicated from Amsterdam by
telephone to the Appellant at Colombo, and had taken effect in Colombo. Some
obligations under the contract had to be performed in Colombo and, upon
breach, a cause of action had arisen in Colombo.

2\. As to the merits

(a) Amro's admitted breach of instructions, particularly the failure to
present the bill of exchange for acceptance, resulted in the Appellant being
deprived of a valuable security worth US $ 50,742/95 ; as a banker, Amro was
not entitled to look into any question of settlement or payment as between
buyer and seller, and should have carried out the Appellant's instructions
strictly ; and the Appellant was therefore necessarily entitled to judgment in
that sum ;

(b) In any event, the Appellant was entitled to nominal damages for that
breach ;

(c) Although certain payments had been made by Amro, there had been numerous
transactions over a long period of time, and it was not possible to identify
any of these payments as having been made on account of the transaction in
suit ; the burden was on Amro to prove its claim that Schatz had paid the
Appellant the amount due on the relevant sale, and since this had not been
established, the Appellant was entitled to the full amount claimed ; and

(d) The telexes P13 and P14 referred not to the several contracts of sale
between the Appellant and Schatz, but to another distinct contract between
them whereby Schatz had agreed to re-sell each parcel of diamonds and to share
the profits arising on such re-sale ; the agreement contained in those telexes
was for a revision not of the original sale prices as set out in the relevant
invoices. but of the agreed re-sale prices.

262

**4\. THE CONTRACT SUED UPON**

It is necessary at this stage to determine what exactly was the contract sued
upon. Mr. Kadirgamar submitted that there had been discussions in Amsterdam
between a director of the Appellant and an officer of Amro, followed by
telephone conversations between Colombo and Amsterdam ; Amro's acceptance of
the Appellant's offer had been communicated by telephone from Amsterdam to the
Appellant's director in Colombo ; the contract was therefore concluded in
Colombo, upon the acceptance reaching the Appellant's director. It was his
contention that by this contract Amro became the agent of the Appellant, and
undertook the obligation to deliver parcels of diamonds to Schatz from time to
time, obtaining from Schatz the stipulated documents. The evidence as to the
existence of any such contract, its formation and its terms and conditions,
was quite vague and indefinite. In particular, as to the place of contract,
there was no evidence as to whether the alleged telephone conversations
constituted a straight forward acceptance by Amro of an offer made by the
Appellant, or whether, instead, counter-proposals by Amro were accepted by the
Appellant - in which event, Mr. Kadirgamar's submission as to the place of
contract becomes untenable. He sought to overcome all these difficulties by
pointing to Amro's failure to lead any evidence from Amsterdam to rebut the
Appellant's evidence. Mr. Eric Amarasinghe, P.C., on behalf of Amro replied
that the absence of such evidence was entirely because the first reference to
any such discussion and contract was made after the trial commenced, and that
there was neither pleading nor issue upon that matter. He contended that the
contract sued upon, as pleaded and put in issue, was not a contract (whether
of agency or otherwise) concluded by means of discussions directly between the
Appellant and Amro, but a contract evidenced by the documents referred to at
the commencement of this judgment, constituted by the acts of the Bank of
Ceylon and Amro ; it was further pleaded that these acts took place between
25.9.80 and 1.10.80 - long after the discussions referred to by Mr. Kadirgamar
and that acceptance was (not by telephonic communication to the Appellant),
but by intimation to the Bank of Ceylon and by performance. This submission is
undoubtedly entitled to succeed in view of the pleadings and issues. It was
averred in the plaint that on or about 25.9.80 the Appellant consigned a
parcel of diamonds by air to Amro, for delivery to Schatz, in accordance with
the Appellant's instructions, and that ;

263

(a) On or about 25.9.80 Amro accepted a collection order issued by the Bank of
Ceylon, and undertook for valuable consideration to act as agent of the
Appellant and the Bank of Ceylon ; to have custody of the parcel of diamonds
until delivery to Schatz, and to deliver the parcel and shipping documents ;
and to present the relative bill of exchange for acceptance and/or payment to
Schatz, in accordance with the instructions of the Appellant and the Bank of
Ceylon ; and to notify the Appellant in regard to delivery, honour or
dishonour of the bill, and payment or failure of payment by Schatz ; and

(b) Amro agreed to, undertook and accepted the performance of those
obligations by intimating at Colombo to the Bank of Ceylon its acceptance, and
by performance of the aforesaid instructions.

**5\. JURISDICTION**

The Appellant pleaded that

" 2\. The Defendant is a corporate body duly incorporated and carrying on
business in Sri Lanka.

3\. The Defendant is a company incorporated in Holland and is a Banking
Company.

4\. The Defendant has its established place of business in Sri Lanka at No.
90, Chatham Street, Colombo 1\.

5\. The Defendant has a registered office in Sri Lanka at No. 90, Chatham
Street, Colombo 1.

6\. The Defendant carries on a business of banking in Colombo and is deemed to
be resident in Colombo within the jurisdiction of this Court.

7\. The cause of action hereinafter set out arose at Colombo within the
jurisdiction of this Court.

8\. The contract herein sought to be enforced was made at Colombo within the
jurisdiction of this Court.

Amro answered these averments thus

264

" 1\. This defendant denies all and singular the several averments contained
in the plaint save and except such as are hereinafter admitted.

2\. Answering paragraphs 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the plaint, this defendant states
that it is a Bank duly incorporated in Holland and presently carrying on
business inter alia in Sri Lanka at its registered branch office at No. 90,
Chatham Street, Colombo 1. The said branch office commenced business in Sri
Lanka on 3rd December 1981 and was not functioning as on the date and time set
out in the plaint.

3\. Answering paragraph 7 and 8 of the plaint, this defendant denies that a
cause of action has accrued to the plaintiff to sue this defendant, and
further denies that there was any agreement enforceable by the plaintiff
against this defendant entered into at Colombo within the jurisdiction of this
Court or another.

Sufficiency of pleas of jurisdiction

Section 45, C.P.C, requires a statement of the facts setting out the
jurisdiction of the court to try and determine the claim ; the necessary
averments must appear in the body of the plaint in the form of distinct
averments (Bisset v. Loftus (5), Sulaiman v. Ibrahim (6). Here jurisdiction
based on cause of action and contract has been duly pleaded. It is neither
necessary nor customary to add a further averment to the effect that
accordingly the Court has jurisdiction to entertain, hear and determine the
action. However, the plea as to residence in paragraph 6 is ambiguous. Section
9, C.P.C., confers jurisdiction on the District Court within whose
jurisdiction the defendant " resides " ; the Code does not define or specify
circumstances in which a defendant who does not actually " reside " is
nevertheless " deemed " to reside. " Resides " has been interpreted in the
case of a natural person, to refer to the place where he has his family
establishment and home (Mendis v. Perera (7) ),and as not including the place
where he carries on business (Chetty v. Saibo (8) . If the same restricted
meaning is given in relation to artificial persons, section 9 will be
imperative in those cases. In the case of corporate bodies, the Code elsewhere
refers to a " registered office " (section 471) ; it provides for service of
summons at a " place

265

of business " (section 64 and 65). But section 9 does not include either of
these expressions. In India, section 17 of the 1882 Code, and section 20 of
the 1908 Code, provided that the place where a defendant was carrying on
business would determine jurisdiction, and explained that a corporation shall
be deemed to carry on business at the sole or principal office. The Civil
Courts Commission recommended that a similar explanation be enacted (Sessional
Paper No. XXIV of 1955, Draft Code section 3 (1) (a)), but this has not been
done despite numerous subsequent amendments to the Code.

Assuming that section 9 can be liberally interpreted to achieve a similar
result, the further question is whether a corporate body " resides " at every
one of its places of business - so that if a resident of Colombo enters into a
contract at the head office of a corporation in Colombo, performance being due
in Colombo, a District Court 150 miles away will also have jurisdiction if
that corporation has a place of business there. That problem becomes even more
acute in the case of a foreign corporation, which establishes a place of
business in Sri Lanka (and complies with the requirements of registration
under Part XIII of the Companies Act, No. 17 of 1982) : does the fact that
summons can validly be served at the address registered under Part XIII mean
also that the corporation " resides " at that address for the purposes of
section 9, C.P.C.? If so, can a corporation be served in this country in
respect of a contract which had no connection whatsoever with Sri Lanka ? Or
only if some part of its superior or directing authority is in Sri Lanka ?
Section 9 appears to need legislative clarification. It is unneccessary for me
to decide these questions, since I hold that the plea based on residence was
insufficient. Paragraph 6 does not amount to an unequivocal assertion that
Amro " resides " within jurisdiction ; the use, of the word " deemed "
suggests that Amro did not in fact reside within the jurisdiction (cf.
Marimuttu v. Commissioner for Registration of I & P Residents (9). That
averment did not even state that Amro was deemed to be so resident for the
purposes of section 9. Mr. Kadirgamar cited English decisions (Newby v. Von
Oppen (10), Dunlop Company v. Actien-Gesellschaft (etc.) Vorm. Cudell and
Company(11), Saccharin Corporation Ltd. v Chemische Fabrik von Heyden
Aktiengesellschaft (12) The " Theodohos " (13) holding that in actions against
foreign corporations, summons can validly be served at a place of business, or
on a principal officer, even temporarily within the jurisdiction. The fact
that such service of

266

summons is proper does not mean that the test of jurisdiction set out in
section 9 is satisfied.

Traversing Jurisdiction

I have next to consider whether the answer complies with the requirements of
section 76, C.P.C. : " if the defendant intends to dispute the averments in
the plaint as to jurisdiction of the court, he must do so by a separate and
distinct plea, expressly traversing such averment." The general denial
contained in paragraph 1 is insufficient ; it is not " a separate and distinct
" plea, nor does it expressly deny jurisdiction. A proper plea of jurisdiction
commonly involves two assertions of fact : as to the place of residence,
contract etc, and also that such place is within the local limits of the
jurisdiction of the court. A general denial does not usually make it clear
that both assertions are being denied : it may indicate, for example, that
although the defendant denies that he resides at the place specified, he does
not deny that place is in fact within the jurisdiction of the court. The
parties, and the court, must be able upon a reading of the pleadings to
ascertain, without ambiguity, whether the jurisdiction of the court is
disputed. Thus even a specific denial - e.g. " the defendant denies the
averments in paragraph 8 of the plaint " \- would generally be insufficient,
if this plea could not indicate whether the defendant -

(1) was denying that a contract had been entered into, and asserting that even
if there had been such a contract, it had not been entered into at Colombo ;
or

(2) was denying such a contract, but was conceding that if such a contract was
proved, it had been entered into at Colombo : or

(3) While admitting that a contract has been entered into, was denying that it
had been entered into at Colombo.

Section 76 requires a plea which could makes it plain from the inception what
the defendant's case actually was, so that the plaintiff would know what he
was called upon to prove. In (1) above, the plaintiff would have to prove the
contract, and that it had been entered into at Colombo ; in (2) he would only
have to prove the contract, and not the place ; in (3) proof would be
necessary, not of the contract, but only of the place of contract.

267

In my view, what section 76 requires by a plea traversing the averment of
jurisdiction, is a specific denial of jurisdiction ; by a plea which, however
construed, necessarily involves a denial of jurisdiction. Odgers on Pleadings
and Practice (Principles of Pleading and Practice 19th ed, p. 128) defines a "
traverse " as -

" the express contradiction of an allegation of fact in an opponent's
pleadings ; it is generally a contradiction in the very terms of the
allegation. It is as a rule, framed in the negative because the fact which it
denies is, as a rule, alleged in the affirmative."

Thus to deny that a cause of action has arisen, is not a traverse of
jurisdiction ; but to deny that a cause of action has accrued at Colombo
within the jurisdiction of the court, is a sufficient traverse of
jurisdiction, for that involves a denial of the accrual of a cause of action,
and also of accrual within jurisdiction.

Mr. Kadirgamar cited the dictum in _Le Mesurier v. Le Mesurier_ (14) .

" I would express my doubts as to whether the mere inclusion of such
objections [to jurisdiction], though in separate paragraphs, in what is called
the answer of the defendant is a fulfilment of the requirements of [section
76], that it must be done by a separate distinct plea. In itself the objection
may often be one which it is all-essential to prefer and maintain, without any
semblance of waiver, to the end, so that even the act of appointment of the
proctor for the defence ought to be. limited to this purpose lest an
authorisation to do aught else should be construed as an acknowledgement of
jurisdiction, and he be concluded by section 73 of the Courts Ordinance. That
section 76 does not direct or leave the dispute of the averment of the
jurisdiction to be made in one of the duty numbered paragraphs of the answer
which are directed by section 75 (d), but in a 'plea' that is to be separate
and distinct, which would fall to be first tried under section 147."

He did not submit that a traverse of jurisdiction must be by a plea which is -

268

(a) separately numbered, and/or

(b) isolated from other averments.

As far as I am aware, that has not been the practice, and the principle
underlying section 76 does not require such a technical rule. It is clear that
any such contention is not tenable, for even in the case he relied, on the
Privy Council upheld the objection to jurisdiction, despite this alleged
infirmity in pleading to jurisdiction Le Mesurier v. Le Mesurier (15), Mr.
Kadirgamar submitted that a proper " traverse " requires an express averment
to the effect that the court has no jurisdiction to entertain the action. When
it was pointed out to him that section 45 imposes no duty on the plaintiff to
make a positive averment as to jurisdiction, and that, correspondingly,
section 76 ought not to be interpreted to cast a heavier burden on a
defendant, his reply was that a plaintiffs plea of jurisdiction involves an
implied assertion that the court has jurisdiction, which the defendant must
expressly deny ; and that there could be no implied denial of this implied
assertion. Having regard to the purpose of sections 45 and 76, and the meaning
of " traverse ", I must unhesitatingly reject this contention ; no particular
formula is required, and a plea which ex facie and unambiguously involves a
denial of jurisdiction would suffice.

I therefore hold that the plaint adequately pleaded jurisdiction on the basis
of contract and cause of action, but not of residence. Although the answer did
not adequately deny jurisdiction on the ground of residence, this does not
amount to an admission of jurisdiction, because the plaint was defective in
that respect. The answer contained an adequate denial of jurisdiction on the
basis of the place of contract, because it denies any agreement " entered into
at Colombo within the jurisdiction of this court." In regard to jurisdiction
based on the accrual of a cause of action, the answer did not adequately
traverse jurisdiction, because it contained only a denial of the accrual of
such cause of action, and was silent as to jurisdiction ; the phrase " 'within
the jurisdiction of this court " paragraph 4 of the answer, qualifies only the
second limb of that paragraph, and not the first limb. That the District Court
of Colombo had jurisdiction, on the basis that the alleged cause of action
arose within its limits, was not denied, and had therefore to be treated as
admitted by Amro. I cannot accede to Mr. Amarasinghe's contention \- or,
rather, plea - that declining standards and lax practices in regard

269

to pleadings should induce this Court to give a more " lenient "
interpretation to section 76. Condoning such laxity results in obscuring the
real issues for determination, and adds to the cost and delays in litigation,
and this is amply illustrated by this very case. Since the jurisdiction of the
court (based on place of accrual of the cause of action) was admitted, it was
unnecessary to consider whether the District Court of Colombo had jurisdiction
on the basis of residence or place of contract. However, despite the absence
of issues as to jurisdiction on those grounds, three courts have spent an
inordinate amount of time in hearing arguments and determining questions
involving jurisdiction and submission to jurisdiction.

Submission to jurisdiction

The requirements of section 76 are reinforced by section 39 of the Judicature
Act, No 2 of 1978:

" Whenever any defendant or accused party shall have pleaded in any action,
proceeding or matter brought in any Court of First Instance neither party
shall afterwards be entitled to object to the jurisdiction of such court, but
such court shall be taken and held to have jurisdiction over such action,
proceeding or matter."

It is settled that if the defendant fails to plead a latent want of
jurisdiction, at the first opportunity, he will not be permitted to take that
plea later. However, Mr. Kadirgamar made a more far-reaching submission : if
having taken that plea, the defendant participates in the trial on the merits,
or on other issues besides jurisdiction, then there is a waiver of the
objection to jurisdiction, or a submission to jurisdiction. He cited Harris v.
Taylor (16), Dulles v. Vidler (17), Henry v. Geoproso (18). For this reason
too he contended that the courts below could not have decided 'the question of
jurisdiction against the Appellant. Since by its pleadings Amro must be taken
to have admitted that the cause of action arose within the jurisdiction, it is
not strictly necessary to consider this submission. However as it was argued
at length, I will shortly state my views thereon. The decisions cited deal
with situations where a judgement obtained in one country was sought to be
enforced in another. It may well be that the principle contended for by .Mr.
Kadirgamar does apply in that situation. We are faced with a situation without
that foreign element. The rules of procedure for the trial of civil actions
are inconsistent with any

270

such principle. Section 147, C.P.C., does not permit an issue of jurisdiction
to be tried as a preliminary issue, unless two conditions are satisfied : it
must be an issue of law (and not of fact, or mixed fact and law), of such
nature that the entire case may be disposed of on that issue only ; here the
place of contract and of breach had to be determined on evidence. Further if
Mr. Kadirgamar's contention is upheld, it would mean that a defendant who
objects to jurisdiction must stand or fall by that issue ; in order to get the
court to decide that issue, he must refrain from contesting the merits ; if
ultimately he fails on jurisdiction he will lose on the merits, without a
contest. Litigation is already costly and protacted enough, without making it
a gamble as well. That contention has therefore to be rejected as being
totally inconsistent with practice as well as precedent. Thus in Le Mesurier,
an objection to jurisdiction was upheld, after a trial which was contested on
the merits without the faintest suggestion of a submission to jurisdiction. In
Arnaldo da Brescia, (1922) 23 N.L.R. 391, a similar submission was rejected.

Burden of proof of jurisdiction and issues

Where jurisdiction is admitted, or deemed to be admitted, no question arises
as to the burden of proof on the framing of issues. Where the defendant duly
traverses jurisdiction, if the plaintiff fails to prove jurisdiction, his
action will have to be dismissed ; section 150, explanation 2, C.P.C. makes it
clear that the plaintiff must establish so much of the material part of his
case as is not admitted by the defendant. Accordingly it is for the plaintiff
to ensure that an appropriate issue is framed, so that he would be entitled to
lead evidence. Where, however, the defendant while conceding jurisdiction in
terms of section 9, pleads other matters depriving the court of jurisdiction
(e.g. that the Conciliation Board Act was in operation in an area, precluding
the institution of action without the certificate of the Board) : Gunawardene
v. Jayawardane (10) , the burden is on the defendant to raise the necessary
issue and to prove the relevant facts. In the present case, residence was not
duly pleaded as the basis of jurisdiction ; there was in any event no proper
traverse ; and there was no issue. Hence neither of the courts below could
properly have considered that question. Jurisdiction on the basis of the
accrual of the cause of action was admitted ; there was no issue on that
question ; neither court should have embarked on an inquiry into that matter ;
in view of the admission and the absence of an

271

issue, the court was not deprived of jurisdiction even though it subsequently
transpired that the alleged cause of action arose in Amsterdam. Although the
burden on the issue of jurisdiction based on the place of contract lay on the
Appellant, that issue was raised by Amro, the defendant ; it was correctly
held that the contract had been entered into in Amsterdam, and hence not
within the jurisdiction of the District Court of Colombo, yet that did not
deprive that court of jurisdiction, because it had jurisdiction on another
basis - namely, the accrual of the cause of action. A similar situation arose
in Perera v. Chelliah (21) . Since jurisdiction on one basis was admitted,
challenging jurisdiction of a different basis was a futile exercise.

**6\. THE MERITS**

Mr. Kadirgamar cited a long series of decisions, of high authority, for the
proposition that Amro was obliged to carry out its instructions strictly, and
was not entitled to look into questions of adjustment, settlement, or payment,
as between buyer and seller : Rayner & Co., Ltd. v. Hambro s Bank, Ltd., (22)
Bank Melle Iran v. Barclays Bank (23), Midland Bank v. Seymour (24), Edward
Owen Ltd. v. Barclays Bank Ltd. (25), Richardson Scale Co. Ltd. v. Polimex
Cekop (26), Siporex Trade v. Banque Indosuez (27), United City v. Royal Bank
(28).

Undoubtedly the Appellants instructions to Amro were that the parcel of
diamonds should be delivered to Schatz, only upon obtaining a trust receipt
for 180 days, and upon acceptance of a bill of exchange payable 180 days after
sight. This was not part of some theoretical or academic exercise to test the
precision with which a banker conformed to instructions, but rather to give
effect to a commercial transaction between seller and buyer - where a seller
desired an effective assurance of payment, subject to agreed credit terms,
before the goods were delivered to the buyer. The Appellant seeks to treat two
matters as constituting breaches of instructions : that a reduced price had
been accepted from the buyer, and that the specified documents had not been
obtained. The fact that Amro, as a banker, obtained immediate payment from the
buyer and remitted it to the seller cannot per se be regarded as a breach.
Receiving the purchase price 180 days before it was due, without any discount,
was favourable to the seller. No businessman or exporter would complain. A
court which held that this was a breach would be acting contrary to the

272

interests of the parties. Indeed the evidence of the Appellant's director was
that the agreement with Amro was to send diamonds through Amro and for them to
obtain payment or the documents, failing which the diamonds should be
returned. Hence the only question is whether Amro had acted correctly in
accepting US $ 41,892/71 instead of US $ 50,742/95. I am unable to treat the
instructions given in the course of a business transaction as being
necessarily unalterable; adjustments, variations, negotiations and compromises
are an inevitable and continuing part of business transactions. Here the
documentary evidence establishes that the parties agreed to new terms :
reduced price and immediate payment. Immediate payment necessitated the
cancellation of the prior instructions regarding the trust receipt and the
bill of exchange ; the Appellant's telex P14 required Schatz to communicate
the new instructions to Amro, and Amro's telex P4 to the Appellant confirmed
such communication ; the need to cancel the inchoate bills of exchange was
referred to ; the conduct of the Appellant is consistent with acquiescence if
not acceptance. Thus the instructions originally given were effectively
varied. Amro substantially complied with the new instructions. The Appellant's
telex P14 indicates that the revision of prices was being considered prior to
9.10.80, and some adjustment had been agreed to and recorded on the invoice
relating to the previous contract. There is no evidence as to the date of
delivery of the parcel ; if delivery was after the instructions had been
varied Amro was clearly not in breach. If delivery was before, Amro was
technically in breach, but not only did this cause no loss, but the Appellant
ratified and adopted Amro's conduct, by agreeing to accept immediate payment
without the documents, with knowledge (from the telex P4) that Amro had not
presented the bill of exchange for acceptance.

The documents do not support the existence of any agreement regarding the
sharing of profits on re-sale of the various parcels of diamonds. Exchange
Control authorisation for such transactions have not been produced. There was
some oral evidence to the effect that the telexes were in a business code, and
that " revised ' values " invoice prices " and " prices " referred to amended
re-sale prices, but particulars of the code were not disclosed. Everything in
the telexes, other than the word " melle ' is perfectly plain and simple ; it
stretches one's credulity to assume a code the effect of which was only to
substitute " re-sale prices " in place of the several

273

expressions actually used. A court cannot be called upon to depart from the
plain meaning of a document upon an assertion that it meant something else in
an undisclosed secret code. There are other reasons why this story of a
profit-sharing argument cannot be accepted. If there had been such an
agreement to which the telexes P13 and P14 applied, the telex P4 should have
evoked a prompt response not to cancel the drafts, as the drafts related to
the sale, and not the resale ; there was no need to inform Amro, because Amro
was not involved in that transaction ; and it is most unlikely that payments
would have been made, both prior to P13 and P14 and immediately thereafter, in
respect of re-sale profits, without first paying the purchases price. I have
no hesitation in rejecting the re-sale profit version.

Mr. Kadirgamar submitted that the Appellant was at least entitled to nominal
damages for breach. The Appellant refrained from producing its books of
accounts, but there is nothing to support the submission that the various
amounts due and the payments made could not be properly indentified. The
documents produced (particularly the telexes) clearly show the original and
the revised prices, and the payments made, and it is obvious that the
Appellant suffered no loss whatsoever ; in fact it received US $ 1,000 more
than it was entitled to. It would be a travesty of justice to award the
Appellant any damages whatsoever.

For these reasons, I hold that the District Court of Colombo had jurisdiction,
but the Appellant has failed to establish any cause of action. I dismiss the
appeal with costs in a sum of Rs. 10,000.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J. -** I agree.

  
**DHEERARATNE, J. -** I agree.  
  
_appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1980/5.html_  

