##  Ratnayake and Others Vs Kumarihamy and Others - SLR - 303, Vol 1 of 2005
[2005] LKSC 5; (2005) 1 Sri LR 303 (2 February 2005)

**303**

**RATNAYAKE AND OTHERS  
VS  
KUMARIHAMY AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
S.N. SILVA, C.J  
UDALAGAMA,JAND  
FERNANDO, J.  
SC APPEAL 14/2002  
CA No. 693/93 (F)  
D. C. KURUNAGALA CASE No. 5548/P  
10TH DECEMBER 2004  
  
_Partition - Extent of land claimed according to kurakkan sowing extent - Plan
No. 426 - Challenge to the extent of corpus - Decision of court required to be
on_

**304**

_a balance of evidence including boundaries shown on previous deeds - Burden
of challenging the extent of corpus on defendant's witnesses._  
  
In the above action, the plaintiff claimed a land 4 Lahas Kurakkan sowing
extent. As per preliminary Plan No. 426 (Lots 1,2 and 3) the extent of the
corpus was 8A 1R 16P.  
  
The defendants claimed that the corpus should be limited to Lot 3 only and
amount to 4 acres. The relevant deeds P1, P2, P3 and'P5 showed that some
boundaries of the land had been trees which probably disappeared in course of
time. Hence the defendants attempted to limit the extent by referring to the
names of adjoining owners. Further, children of the 1st defendant (now
deceased) claimed only Lot 2 as being outside the corpus.  
  
**HELD:**

> 1\. The trial court had decided the extent of the corpus correctly as being
> 8A, 1 Ft, 16 perches on the basis of the oral and documentary evidence on a
> balance of evidence. The burden of controverting the extent of the corpus as
> claimed by the defendants they had failed to do. It was also not
> specifically put to the plaintiffs that the corpus considered of only Lot 3.  
>  
>  2\. It is difficult to proceed on the basis that 4 Lahas Kurakkan sowing
> extent amounted to 4 acres as claimed by the defendants as the Kurakkan
> sowing extent would vary from district to district depending on the
> fertility of the soil and the quality of grain etc.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal reported in (2002)1 SLR 65  
  
_Lakshman Perera for 1st, 4th and 5th defendants - appellants  
G. R. D. Obeysekera for 2nd defendant - respondent  
D. M. G. DlSSANAYAKE with C. G. Liyanage for plaintiffs - respondents._

_Cur.adv.vult_

February 2, 2005  
**UDALAGAM A, J  
**  
The plaintiff instituted D. C. Kurunegala case No. 5548/P to partition the
land called Hapugaspitiya watte morefully described in the schedule to the
amended plaint and depicted in plan No. 426 dated 12.12.1975 made by W. C. S.
M. Abeysekera, Licensed Surveyor, marked X.

**305**

Admittedly, the extent vide the aforesaid schedule to the amended plaint was 4
Lahas of Kurakkan sowing and the land depicted in the aforesaid plan showed
the extent to be 8A, 1R, 16P. Also admittedly the amended plaint filed on
28.09.1988, after the amended statement of claim filed by the 1st, 4th and 5th
defendants on 07.08.1987, contained a 2nd schedule stating therein that the
extent of the corpus sought to be partitioned was 8A, 1R, 16P.  
  
The claim of the 1st, 4th and 5th defendants in the District Court vide the
aforesaid amended statement of claim appeared to be that the corpus  sought to
be partitioned was only lot 3 of plan No. 426 referred to above and that lots
1 and 2 formed a separate land called Rawana ella alias Hapugahapitiya Hena
and the 1st, 4th and 5th defendants prayed for a dismissal of the action.  
  
The learned District Judge by his judgment dated 23.04.1993 whilst _inter
alia_ holding that lots 1, 2 and 3 of plan No. 426 referred to above comprised
the corpus sought to be partitioned, decreed that the corpus be partitioned as
prayed for by the plaintiff.  
  
Aggrieved by the said judgment the 1A, 4A and 5th defendants - appellants
appealed to the Court of Appeal.  
  
The substantial issue for decision in the Court of Appeal, vide paragraph 4(b)
of the petition of appeal to the Court of Appeal bearing No. C. A. 693/ 93 (F)
was as to whether the corpus sought to be partitioned was the land belonging
to Kiri Banda as stated by the plaintiff or whether it was the land belonging
to Tikiri Banda as stated by the contesting defendants.  
  
At the hearing of the appeal in the Court of Appeal the contention of the
learned Counsel for the defendants - appellants was that the plaintiff -
respondent failed to prove the identity of the corpus at the trial court and
that the extent of the land shown in the preliminary Plan No. 426 referred to
above was 8A, 1R., 16P which was far in excess of the extent described in the
schedule to the amended plaint and that the boundaries as stated in the title
deeds produced at the trial differed from those as shown in the aforesaid
plan.  
  
The Court of Appeal by its impugned judgment dated 09.11.2001 for the reasons
stated therein dismissed the appeal with costs.

**306**

Aggrieved, the 1A, 4A and 5th defendants - appellants - petitioners sought
inter alia special leave to appeal against the judgment of the Court of Appeal
dated 09.11.2001 referred to above.  
  
This court on 05.03.2002 granted special leave to appeal on the question as to
whether the Court of Appeal erred in law in concluding that the land surveyed
and depicted in the preliminary plan 'X' was the same land sought to be
partitioned as described in the schedule to the plaint.  
  
At the argument before this court learned Counsel for the appellants drew the
attention of this court to Issues settled at the trial court and adverted to
the fact that the extent given in the schedule to the plaint was 4 Lahas of
Kurakkan sowing and that 1 Laha of Kurakkan sowing was equivalent to 1 acre.
It appears to be the submission of the learned Counsel for the appellants that
4 Lahas of Kurakkan sowing is equivalent to 4 acres but that as the extent
shown in the preliminary plan referred to above comprising lots, 1,2 and 3
therein, refers to an extent of 8A, 1R., 16P, that a larger land in fact was
surveyed.  
  
Admittedly, the plaintiff - respondent claimed rights to the corpus inter alia
on deed of transfer bearing No. 5671 dated 14.12.1975 marked P5 wherein the
vendor of the latter deed, S. R. M. Wijesundara Banda Katupitiya, sold to the
plaintiff - respondent an extent of 4 lahas of Kurakkan sowing of the land
called Hapugahapitiya Hena bounded on the North by Murutha tree and
Ketakalagahamula, East by a ditch, south by Mahakongaha Thotilla tree and West
by Oya.  
  
Deed No. 71 dated 12.09.1922 (P3), a deed on which the earlier predecessor of
the plaintiff - respondent is said to have acquired title significantly had
the same boundaries as those in P5 referred to above. The same appears to be
true of the boundaries as given in the 2 other deeds upon which the plaintiff
- respondent traces title, to wit. P1 and P2.  
  
On a perusal of the boundaries as stated in P1, P2, P3 and P5 the Northern and
Southern boundaries are described with reference to trees, it is reasonable
therefore to assume that with the advent of time that the trees so named which
described the two Northern and Southern boundaries would have been non
existant at a later period and the names of owners of the adjoining lands
would have been inserted in place of the names of trees, resulting in the
title deeds having different boundaries to that of the preliminary plan'X'

**307**

The contention of the learned Counsel for the defendants - appellants on the
matter of identity of the corpus sought to be partitioned also appeared to be
that the trial court had erred in deciding the matter on evidence ignoring the
deeds and that the court ought to have in fact decided the matter on a
consideration of the contents of the deeds and not by oral evidence (page 4 of
the written submissions of the appellants)  
  
I would disagree with the above submission as oral evidence under oath and
subject to cross examination, is equally important to arrive at a finding.  
  
Perusing the evidence led before the trial court it is abundantly clear that
while only the plaintiff - respondent testified in support of the averments in
the plaint the defendants - appellants who are now before this court
contesting the decision as to the identity of the corpus to be partitioned had
on their behalf led the evidence only of one Nimal Ratnayake the substituted
1A defendant. Significantly even in cross examination of the plaintiff -
respondent no question had been forthcoming to challenge the testimony of the
plaintiff as to the identity of the corpus nor was it specifically put to the
plaintiff that the corpus sought to be partitioned consists only of lot 3 in
plan X. Also significantly the 2 children of the contesting 1 st defendant
(now deceased) had claimed only lot 2 before the Surveyor at the preliminary
survey. They appeared to have been remiss in their duty, at the first
opportunity available to them, to point out the correct corpus to be
partitioned, as claimed by them.  
  
Nimal Ratnayake the aforesaid 1A defendant - appellant under oath in his
evidence at page 212 of the brief significantly and specifically states that
the land as described in the plaintiffs title deeds P6 and P7 comprises the
corpus as shown in plan X. The 3rd defendant who testified after the aforesaid
1A defendant confirmed the plaintiff's evidence in respect of the corpus to be
partitioned and the aforesaid testimony taken in its entirety which also
refers to the contents of the plan X and its report when considered on a
balance of probability, conclusively establishes the fact that the land sought
to be partitioned was in fact Lots, 1,2 and 3 of plan X.  
  
I would also reiterate the observations of the President of the Court of
Appeal in the impugned judgment that land measures computed on the

**308**

basis of land required to be sown with Kurakkan vary from district to district
depending on the fertility of soil and quality of grain and in the said
circumstances difficult to correlate the sowing extent with accuracy. Thus
there cannot be a definite basis for the contention that 1 Laha sowing extent
be it Kurakkan or even paddy would be equivalent to 1 acre.  
  
In Paragraph 3 of the statement of claims of the 1st, 4th and 5th defendants
filed on 07.08.1987 (page 137 of the brief) they sought to identify lots 1 and
2 in the aforesaid plan marked X as Rawana ella alias Hapugahapitiya Hena
which land was said to have been morefully described in the schedule to the
statement of claim referred to above of the contesting defendants, importantly
with reference to Plan No. 1119 dated 18.05.1929 made by D. H. de Silva
Wickrematillaka, Licensed Surveyor, However admittedly no steps have been
taken by the appellants to superimpose the said plan upon the preliminary plan
marked, X, which procedure would have convincingly cleared any doubt, if any,
as to the true identity of the corpus sought to be partitioned. There also
appears to be no explanation or reason given as to the failure on the part of
the appellant to have done so.  
  
In the aforesaid circumstances I am inclined to the view that the trial court
and the Court of Appeal on a balance of probability and on a  consideration of
evidence together with documents marked and led at the trial court came to a
correct finding as to the corpus sought to be partitioned and on the single
question to be decided by this court when special leave was granted, I would
hold that the Court of Appeal was not in error in concluding that the land
surveyed and depicted in the preliminary Plan No. 426 marked X referred to
above was in fact the corpus sought to be partitioned, as claimed by the
plaintiff - respondent.  
  
This appeal is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs. 5000  
  
**S. N. SILVA, C. J**     -    I agree.  
  
**RAJA FERNANDO, J.**      -    I agree  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2005/5.html_  

