##  Weerasekara v. Director General of Health Services and Others - SLR - 295,
Vol 1 of 2003 [2003] LKSC 5; (2003) 1 Sri LR 295 (4 April 2003)

**295**

**WEERASEKARA** ****

**v** ****

# DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF HEALTH SERVICES

**AND OTHERS** ****

SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

YAPA, J. AND

J.A.N. DE SUVA, J.

SC FR APPLICATION No. 86/2002

30 JANUARY AND 14 FEBRUARY, 2003



_Fundamental Rights - Appointment in the Health Department as trainee
pharmacist - Applications limited to employees serving in the department Doubt
regarding the construction of a criteria of selection for appointment
-Interpretation of the criteria in legitimate expectation of appointment -
Article 12(1) of the Constitution._

_ _

The petitioner, a dispenser in the Department of Health Services applied to
sit an examination for selection and appointment as a trainee Pharmacist. At
the closing date of applications he was subject to a five year scholarship
bond of which she had to serve a balance period of one and a half months. The
advertisement said that the prospective applicants should have served the full
bond period.



The petitioner's application was misplaced in the office of the Director
-General of Health Services. The petitioner submitted a fresh application and
she was issued an admission card to sit the examination. She was, however, not
called for interview on the ground that at the time she made her application
she had not completed the full period of her bond. Candidates who had secured
less marks than the petitioner had been appointed to the post.



**Held :**

1\. There was doubt as to the point of time for completing the bond service,
viz., whether it was at the time of the closing of applications or at the date
of the written test or at

296

the date of appointment.



2\. In view of the above doubt and the legitimate expectation created by the
acceptance of the petitioner's application and permitting her to sit the test,
the petitioner was entitled to an appointment. The denial of an appointment
was, in the circumstances unreasonable and arbitrary and violative of Article
12(1) of the Constitution.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Saliya Peiris_ with _Upul Kumarapperuma_ for petitioner

_Harsha Fernando,_ State Counsel for respondents.

##  

## Cur. adv. vult

April 4, 2003.

**J.A.N. DE SILVA, J.**

The petitioner is a dispenser attached to the base hospital, Kahawatta. When
her application alleging violation of fundamental rights was supported in this
court, leave to proceed was granted under Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

The petitioner was appointed to the post of dispenser with effect from 3rd
July 1995 subject to a probationary period of three years. She had been
trained at the cost of the government for two years and in view of the said
training her appointment has been subjected to a bond for a period of five
years _i.e._ from the 3rd of July 1995 to 3rd of July 2000. Subsequently the
petitioner has been confirmed in her post with effect from the 3rd of July
1995.

By an internal notice dated 24th April 2000 (P5) applications were called from
the employees of the Health Department for train­ing programmes in several
health sector services including training programmes for the posts of
pharmacists. The notice stated that applications are called from those
employees who have the neces­sary qualifications and satisfy the conditions as
set out in the notice. Paragraph 4 of P5 specifically stated that prospective
appli­cants;

297

    (a) should have completed three years in the Department;  
  
     (b)                  been confirmed in their post;  


(c)        and should have served the full bond period (for those who are
bonded).  
  
In terms of the bond the petitioner had signed, after training it was
obligatory for the petitioner to:

(a)                  serve the Republic for a period of five years from the
date of appointment;

(b)                  to be attached to the Department of Health;

(c)                  as a dispenser.



The selections for trainee pharmacists were to be made upon a written test
followed by an interview. The notice calling for appli­cations was not
specific whether the criteria as to the completion of the period of mandatory
service should be as at the date of closing the applications (19th of May
2000)or as at the date of the written test or as at the date of appointment.



The petitioner submitted two applications and the circum­stances under which
it was done had been explained by her in her affidavit. The first application
had been submitted through the District Medical Officer of Kahawatta. The
written tests were sched­uled for the 30th of July 2000. Since the petitioner
had not received her admission card she had written to the 2nd respondent
(Deputy Director of Health (Administration)). The 2nd respondent informed her
that her application was forwarded to theist respondent but had been misplaced
in the 1st respondent's office. Subsequently the petitioner submitted a fresh
application and she was issued an admission card to sit the examination, which
was held on the 30th of July 2000.



The petitioner was not called for the interview and had not been appointed to
the post of pharmacist on the basis that she had not completed the 5 years of
compulsory service stipulated in the bond signed by her at the time she made
the application. It is to be noted that several others who had secured less
marks than the petitioner had been appointed to the said post but the sole
reason for not appointing the petitioner had been that as at the closing date
of the applications she had yet to complete one and a half months out of the
period in the bond.

298

The main issue in this application is to determine the relevant date on which
the eligibility criteria of the applicant need to be eval­uated.



The primary contention of the petitioner was that on the date that she made
the application she was under a bond but by the time she sat the examination
and when the selection was done the bond period had expired. The respondents
on the other hand have taken up the position that the notice (P5) specifically
stated that the closing date was to be on 19.05.2000, by that date the
petitioner had not completed serving the bond period and therefore she was
disqualified even to apply to be a trainee phar­macist. As stated earlier the
notice calling for applications was not specific whether the criteria as to
the completion of the period of mandatory service should be as at the date of
closing of the appli­cations or as at the date of the written test or as at
the date of appointment. The 1st respondent in his affidavit has admitted that
this lacuna is there in the notice (P5).



The petitioner contended that it was the duty of the respon­dents to
specifically state the date on which the mandatory period of five years should
be calculated when calling for applications for trainee pharmacists in the
Health Department.



Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that in terms of the
Establishments Code there was a duty cast on the respondents to scrutinize the
applications and to be satisfied of their eligibility. By accepting the
petitioner's application and permitting her to sit for the written test they
have given her a legitimate expectation that upon her being successful at the
examination and the interview, she will be selected to undergo the course of
trainee pharmacists. It was further pointed out that the respondents could
have verified the qualifications stated in the application of the petitioner
and could have even rejected the application before calling for the writ­ten
test, if the requirement was that the petitioner should have completed the
required five years bond period as at the closing date of the application.



The 1st respondent in his affidavit has taken up the position that the
applicants were allowed to sit the examination on the assumption that the
applicants have submitted the applications as

299

they in their opinion had fulfilled and satisfied the necessary eligi­bility
criteria.



The 1st respondent has also taken up the position that due to "administrative
reasons" and "time constraints" he could not con­sider all the applications in
detail prior to the written examination.



The explanation given by the 1st respondent to say the least is not worth
putting down in writing. It is unsatisfactory and unac­ceptable. The mess in
the administrative section of the Health Department is clearly demonstrated
when the respondents say that the petitioner's first application had been
misplaced in the office and an admission card was issued to the petitioner on
her second application.



The 1st respondent cannot rely on what the petitioner ought to have assumed
but should necessarily state specifically the requirements in the notice
calling for the eligibility criteria that would apply. By permitting the
petitioner to sit the examination, it is the respondents who led the
petitioner to believe that the relevant date for meeting the criteria as to
the bond was not earlier than the date of examination.



During the course of the argument it was made known that in terms of the
agreement (Bond P5), the petitioner could be dis­charged from the bond by
repaying any amount then due to the government on account of expenses borne by
the government in the event of the resignation or change in her appointment.
The Establishments Code which is applicable to government servants too
recognizes this principle. Apart from the provisions in the Establishments
Code the documents submitted by the petitioner together with her further
affidavit in December 2002 indicate that there had also been a practice in the
Health Department of adding the undischarged period of the bond to the period
of the second bond.

The petitioner was not going to leave the government service or the Health
Department and join another private institution. She was seeking to further
her prospects within the government service thus fulfilling the purpose for
which the bond had been entered into. In these situations authorities should
take a realistic view and adopt a practical approach. The requirement that an
applicant should

300



have served the full bond period was not a condition relating to suit­ability,
(such as qualifications, experience, past performance, seniority, examination
performance etc.). It did not affect the com­petitiveness of one applicant
_vis a vis_ another, it was a bar to appointment, arising from an agreement
between an applicant and the State as employer, which could have been (a)
waived by the State (b) recovered by payment as provided in the bond itself
and (c) recovered by the substitution of an alternate obligation in a
dif­ferent capacity as evidenced by practice. While generally eligibility
criteria must be satisfied as at the closing date of applications, in the
circumstances of this case the failure to make express provi­sion to that
effect, permitting the petitioner to sit for the written examination and
proved practice would have led the petitioner to believe that the condition of
service had been satisfied or waived or substituted. Therefore I hold that by
failing to select the petitioner to follow the pharmacist training course the
1st respondent acted arbi­trarily and unreasonably and thereby acted in
violation of the equal protection of the law guaranteed under Article 12(1) of
the Constitution. The court is informed that the training course is scheduled
to proceed till the end of the year. In the circumstances I direct the 1st
respondent to permit the petitioner to follow the said pharmacist course
immediately if the petitioner so wishes. However the State is directed to pay
Rs. 25,000/- (Rupees Twenty Five Thousand) as cost to the petitioner.



**FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree



**YAPA, J.** \- I agree



_**Relief granted.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/5.html_  

