##  Southern Group Civil Construction (Pvt) Ltd. v. Ocean Lanka (Pvt) Ltd. -
SLR - 190, Vol 1 of 2002 [2002] LKSC 5; (2002) 1 Sri LR 190 (25 February 2002)

**190**

**SOUTHERN GROUP CIVIL CONSTRUCTION (PVT) LTD  
v.  
OCEAN LANKA (PVT) LTD**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA, CJ.,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 69/99  
HC NO. ARB/39/97  
24 MAY AND 14 JUNE, 2001  
  
_Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995 - Application for setting aside arbitral
award -Section 32 of the Act - The need to set out in the application the
grounds for setting aside the award - Period for making the application -
Whether grounds set out in written submissions after the lapse of that period
can be considered.  
_  
The appellant applied to the High Court in terms of section 31(1) read with
section 40 of the Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995 (the Act) for enforcement of
an arbitral award made against the respondent. The respondent applied in terms
of section 32 of the Act to set aside the award. Under section 32 such
application has to be made within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the award.
The High Court consolidated both applications.  
  
In his written submissions filed beyond the requisite period of sixty (60)
days, the respondent urged that the award should be set aside on the ground
set out in section 32 (1) (b) of the Act that it is in conflict with the
public policy in Sri Lanka, a ground which he had not set out in his petition.
Counsel for the appellant took up a preliminary objection to that ground that
the same had not been set out in the petition but in his written submissions
filed beyond the period of sixty (60) days for making the application.  
  
**Held :  
  
**(1) The High Court has no power ex mere motu to set aside an award on the
ground stated in section 32 (1) (b) of the Act, in the absence of material
supporting such a finding being contained in the application.  
  
(2) The time bar of sixty (60) days contained in section 32 (1) should be
strictly applied and all grounds of challenge with supporting material on the
basis of which a party wishes the High Court to come to a finding

**191**

in terms of section 32 (1) (to) should be adduced by an applicant in the
application under section 32.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court.  
  
_K. Kanag-lswaran, PC_ with _Chandaka Jayasundera_ for appellant.  
  
_Shibly Aziz, PC_ with _P. Wimalachanthiran, A. P. Niles_ and _Rohana
Deshapriya_ for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

February 25, 2002  
  
**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
**  
The appellant is a company engaged in the business of civil 1 construction
work, heavy equipment hiring, earth moving and filling and metal industries.
The appellant also undertakes work in the nature of rock blasting, crushing
the blasted rock into specified sizes and quarrying. The respondent carries on
business of manufacturing knitted fabrics. By an agreement made and entered
into on 01. 06. 1995, the appellant and the respondent entered into a contract
for the appellant to provide services to clear the rock out cropping situated
in the respondent's land in EPZ Zone B. This was to be done by drilling,
blasting and crushing the blasted rock boulders and piling the crushed rock at
the project site. In terms of the agreement, the parties agreed to refer to
arbitration all disputes or differences that would arise between the appellant
and the respondent.  
  
Disputes arose between the appellant and the respondent and the sole
arbitrator delivered the arbitral award on 04. 06. 1997 (X2). The appellant in
terms of section 31 (1) of the Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995 (hereinafter
referred to as the Act), read with section 40 of the Act, made an application
for the enforcement of the said award in the High Court (X3). The respondent
made an application in terms of section 32 of the Act to set aside the said
award in the High Court (X4). The High Court consolidated the two actions in
terms of section 35 of the Act.

**192**

The appellant objected to the respondent's application in the High Court on
several grounds which are as follows :  
  
(a) in order to set aside the award, specific grounds given in section 32 have
to be urged within 60 days of award. This has not been done by the respondent;  
  
(b) respondent's ground to set aside the award on the basis of section 24 is
misconceived in law as it is not a ground enunÂ­ciated in terms of section 32;  
  
(c) section 26 of the Act makes the award final and binding on the parties to
the arbitration agreement and does not permit any challenge on the merits of
the award.  
  
The respondent contended in the High Court that the award was fundamentally
flawed and submitted that it should be set aside on the ground that it is in
conflict with the public policy of Sri Lanka in terms of section 32 (1) (b).
The respondent's position is that, although section 32 (1) of the Act requires
an application to set aside an award to be made within sixty (60) days of the
receipt of the award, this requirement does not apply to section 32 (1) (b) of
the Act.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the appellant took up a preliminary objection
that one of the grounds on which the respondent sought to set aside the award,
relating to the conflict with the public policy of Sri Lanka, has not been set
out in the petition, but only contained in the written submissions filed
beyond the period of 60 days after the award was made. The learned High Court
Judge overruled the preliminary objections raised by the appellant and fixed
the case for further inquiry.  
  
The appellant sought leave to appeal from the order of the High Court dated
29. 06\. 1999 (X9).

**193**

Leave to appeal was granted by this Court on 20\. 08. 1999 on the following
questions :  
  
'Was the learned Judge of the High Court in error in holding:  
  
(i) that section 32 (1) entitled the Court ex mere motu to set aside the award
whether such grounds were included in the petition or not;  
  
(ii) whether the learned Judge of the High Court was in error in concluding
that a party may seek to have an award set aside under section 32 either by
way of oral or written submissions, not necessarily within 60 days of the
receipt of the award.  
  
An overall examination of the provisions of the Arbitration Act, clearly
indicates that the grounds on which an arbitral award could be set aside are
contained only in section 32. In terms of this provision, a party seeking to
set aside an award should make an application to the High Court within sixty
(60) days of the receipt of the award. Section 32 (1) is subdivided into
paragraphs (a) and (b). Paragraph (a) imposes limitations on the finality of
the award by setting out the specific grounds on which a party may challenge
the validity of an award.  
  
Section 32 (1) (a) reads as follows :  
  
"Where the party making the application furnishes proof that -  
  
(i) a party to the arbitration agreement was under some incapacity or the said
agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it
or, failing any indication on that question under the law of Sri Lanka; or  
  
(ii) the party making the application was not given proper notice of the
appointment of an arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise
unable to present his case; or

**194**

(iii) the award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within
the terms of the submission to arbitration, or contains  decisions on matters
beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration :  
  
Provided, however, that, if the decision on matters submitted to arbitration
can be separated from those not so submitted, only that part of the award
which contains decisions on matters not submitted to arbitration may be set
aside; or  
  
(iv) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was
not in accordance with the agreement of the parties, unless such agreement was
in conflict with the provisions of this Act, or in the absence of such
agreement, was not in accordance with the provisions of this Act : or ..."  
  
Sub paragraph (b) of section 32 (1) provides for setting aside an arbitral
award on the finding of the High Court on one of the grounds set out therein.
This paragraph reads as follows :  
  
" Where the High Court finds that -  
  
(i) the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by
arbitration under the law of Sri Lanka ; or  
  
(ii) the arbitral award is in conflict with the public policy of Sri Lanka."  
  
In terms of the provisions of the Act, the arbitral tribunal is vested  with
the power to 'decide the dispute' submitted for arbitration. The High Court is
vested with the jurisdiction for the enforcement and recognition of an award
or in the alternative to set aside such an award. In terms of section 31 of
the Act, a party to an arbitration agreement, pursuant to which an arbitral
award is made, may apply to the High Court within one year after the expiry of
14 days of the

**195**

making of the award for its enforcement. However, according to section 32 (1),
in order to set aside an arbitral award, an application has to be made within
sixty (60) days of the receipt of the award.  
  
A plain reading of section 32 (1) reveals clearly that the opening no
paragraph applies to both sub paragraphs (a) and (b) of section 32 (1). The
difference between the two sub paragraphs (a) and (b) is that the former
requires an applicant to furnish proof of four situations, whereas the latter
permits the High Court to find and arrive at a conclusion on the two
situations which would enable an arbitral award to be set aside. However, for
the High Court to find that the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable
of settlement by arbitration under the law of Sri Lanka or that the arbitral
award is in conflict with the public policy of Sri Lanka, as stated in sub
paragraph (b), it would be necessary for the party making an application for
setting aside an arbitral award, to adduce necessary material for this purpose
in his application filed in terms of section 32 (1).  
  
The words in sub paragraph (b) of section 32 (1), 'where the High Court finds'
are clearly referable to the application made in terms of section 32 (1) and
the material adduced in such application. A finding cannot be made by the High
Court in terms of sub paragraph (b) of section 32 (1) other than on the
averments of the application and the material contained therein. Therefore, I
am of the view that the High Court was in error when it came to the finding
that it has the power 'ex mere motd to set aside an award on the grounds
stated  in sub paragraph (b) of section 32 (1) even in the absence of material
supporting such a finding being contained in the application.  
  
The next question that has to be considered relates to the application of the
time bar contained in the opening paragraph of section 32 (1). I have at the
commencement of this judgment adverted to the distinction between the
respective time periods with which applications could be made for recognition
and enforcement on the one hand and to set aside an award on the other. The
clear legislative

**196**

intent in having a shorter time period for setting aside an arbitral award is
to ensure that a challenge to the validity of the award should be made early
and the party having the benefit of the award may take a longer time to
enforce it. Such a distinction is not uncommon to our procedure regulating
civil action. Even in the case of a decree of the District Court in a regular
action, a party seeking to challenge the validity of the decree has to file
the notice of appeal within 14 days and the petition within 60 days, whereas
in terms of section 337 of the Civil Procedure Code an application for
enforcement could be made within 10 years. Therefore I am of the view that the
time bar of sixty (60) days contained in section 32 (1) should be strictly
applied and all grounds of challenge with supporting material including the
material on the basis of which a party wishes the High Court to come to a
finding in terms of section 32 (1) (b), be adduced by an applicant in terms of
section 32 in the application.  
  
For the aforementioned reasons, the appeal is allowed and the order made by
the High Court dated 29. 06. 1999, is set aside. This matter is referred back
to the High Court for inquiry de novo.  
  
There will be no costs.  
  
**S. N. SILVA, CJ. -** I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.  
  
Inquiry de novo ordered.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/5.html_  

