##  Balasingham and Another v. Puranthiran(A Minor) By His Next Friend
Sivapackiam (Perera,J.) - SLR - 163, Vol 1 of 2000 [2000] LKSC 5; (2000) 1 Sri
LR 163 (16 February 2000)

**163**

**BALASINGHAM AND ANOTHER  
V.  
PURANTHIRAN (A MINOR) BY HIS NEXT FRIEND SIVAPACKIAM **

SUPREME COURT  
PERERA, J.,  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
SC APPEAL 41/98  
CA (REV) APPLICATION NO.545/97 WITH  
CA LA NO 12/97  
D.C. JAFFNA L/ 16/A2  
20th SEPTEMBER. 1999  
  
_Appeal - Supreme Court Rules. 1990 - Failure to file written submissions of
appellant - Rule 30 of the Supreme Court Rules - Inordinate delay in filing
written submissions without reasonable excuse - Order declaring the appeal to
stand dismissed for non-prosecution \- Rule 34 of the Supreme Court Rules.  
_  
The appellants failed to file their written submissions in terms of Rule 30 of
the Supreme Court Rules 1990, within 6 weeks of the date on which special
leave to appeal was granted. The written submissions were filed approximately
one year from that date. The respondent in his counter-submissions took an
objection on the ground of such default and moved that the appeal be declared
dismissed for non-prosecution. in terms of Rule 34. The appellants also failed
to give an acceptable excuse for the default on their part.  
  
**Held:**  
  
On the facts of the case. the preliminary objections raised on behalf of the
respondent that the appeal be declared dismissed for non-compliance, must be
sustained.  
  
**Cases referred to:**  
  
1\. Coomasaru v. Leechman Ltd SC Applications Nos. 217/72 and 307 /72 SC
minutes 26th May 1976  
2\. Samarawickrama v. Attorney-General Sriskantha's Law Reports Vol 1 P47  
3\. Mendis v. Abeysinghe (1989) 2 Sri LR 262  
4\. Kiriwanthe and another v. Navaratne and another (1990) 2 Sri LR 393 at 0.
404

**164**

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_P. Nagendran, P.C. with P. Silvaloganthan_ for appellants.  
  
_S. Mahenthran_ for substituted - respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult_

February 16, 2000  
**PERERA, J.  
**  
This is an appeal by the 2nd Defendant-Petitioner against the Order of the
Court of Appeal in Revision Application No CA 545/97 with CA LA 12/97.  
  
The original action was filed by the next friend of a minor seeking ejectment
of the defendants and recovery of peaceful possession of the premises in suit.  
  
The Plaintiff in that action claimed the following reliefs against the
Defendants  
  
(a) that the defendants, their agents, servants, dependants and others
claiming from the defendants be ejected from the land and premises described
in the schedule to the plaint:  
  
(b) that the plaintiff be kept in peaceful possession thereof;  
  
(c) that an injunction be issued restraining the defendants from keeping open
the doors of the shop forcibly opened by them: and  
  
(d) for damages and costs.  
  
Along with the plaint, the Plaintiffs in this action filed a petition and an
affidavit and prayed for an interim injunction restraining the Defendants from
keeping open the doors of the premises described in the schedule to the
petition and for costs and such other relief as to the Court may deem
necessary.  
  
The District Court upon this application of the Plaintiff issued an enjoining
order on 26. 5. 1997.

**165**

Thereafter, on 26. 5. 1997 the Defendants filed answer and objections together
with an affidavit and prayed for:  
  
(a) dissolution of the enjoining order purported to be issued in the case;  
  
(b) rejection of the application for interim injunction: and  
  
(c) dismissal of the plaintiff's action.  
  
The learned District Judge having heard Counsel for the Petitioners and
Counsel for the Defendants reserved his order on this application of the
Defendants. and delivered the order on 6. 6. 1997 dismissing the Defendant's
application and made a further order extending the enjoining order for a
further period of 14 days. The Defendant-Petitioners then filed papers in
revision in the Court of Appeal (CA 545/97) and sought leave to appeal (CA LA
126/97) against this order of the learned District Judge dated 6. 6. 1997
dismissing the Defendant's application.  
  
The Court of Appeal having heard Counsel on behalf of the Defendant-
Petitioners and the Plaintiff-Respondents made the following order "that at
the end of the period of the existing enjoining order already granted by the
learned District Judge before he extends such enjoining order, if that be the
case. that he makes further inquiry to ascertain whether in fact the enjoining
order should be extended or not, and then make an appropriate order." The
Court of Appeal also directed that the inquiry into the issue of an injunction
be concluded early, if necessary, even by advancing the date already fixed
after giving notice to parties and re-fixed the application for leave to
appeal.  
  
The Defendants then sought Special Leave to Appeal to the Supreme Court
against this order and on the 7th day of May. 1998 this Court granted Special
Leave to Appeal against the judgment of the Court of Appeal and further
directed the District Judge that no further extensions of the enjoining order
be granted until the final determination of this appeal. Of consent, hearing
of this appeal was fixed for the 20th of August,

**166**

1998\. On this day, this matter was not taken up for hearing and the Court
listed this matter for hearing on the 101h of December, 1998\. On the 10th of
December, 1998, the hearing of this appeal was once again postponed for the
12th of May, 1999. On the 12th of May, 1999, this appeal was once again listed
for hearing on the 20th of September. 1999.  
  
When this matter was taken up for hearing on the 20th, of September, 1999, Mr.
Mahenthiran, Counsel for the Plaintiff Respondent raised a preliminary
objection to the hearing of the appeal. It was Mr. Mahanthiran's contention
that Rule 30 of the Supreme Court Rules mandated the appellant to tender
written submissions within 6 weeks of the date on which Special Leave to
Appeal was granted. However, the appellant has failed to comply with this
Rule. Counsel submitted that the appellant has filed his written submissions
only on the 4th of May, 1999 which was almost one year after the date on which
-Special Leave was granted.  
  
It was Counsel's contention that this matter had been listed for hearing on
two previous occasions, namely. 20th of August, 1998 and 10th of December,
1998 and it was only thereafter that written submissions were filed by the
Appellant. Counsel further submitted that having regard to the fact that an
essential step in the prosecution of the present appeal had not been taken by
the Appellants, this appeal stood dismissed for non-prosecution in terms of
Rule 34 of the Supreme Court Rules 1990.  
  
Counsel also invited the attention of the Court to the fact that the District
Court and the Court of Appeal had undoubtedly appreciated the necessity to
retain the status quo and upheld the continuation of the enjoining order.  
  
We have heard Counsel for the Appellants and Counsel for the Plaintiff-
Respondent who made both oral and written submissions on this preliminary
objection. The main submission of Counsel for the Plaintiff-Respondent Mr.
Mahenthiran was that the present appeal must stand dismissed in terms of Rule
34 of the Supreme Court Rules as written submissions of the Appellants though
filed on the 4th of May, 1999 were not filed in terms of the said Rule.

**167**

Rule 34 of the Supreme Court Rules 1990 reads as follows  
  
**" Where an appellant or a petitioner who has obtained leave to appeal, fails
to show due diligence in taking all necessary steps for the purpose of
prosecuting the appeal or application, the Court may, on an application on
their behalf by a respondent, or of its own motion, on such notice to the
parties as it shall think reasonable in the circumstances, declare the appeal
or the application to stand dismissed, for non-prosecution, and costs of the
appeal or application and any security entered into by the appellant shall be
dealt with in such manner as the Court may think fit."  
  
**In Coomasaru us Leechman Ltd.,(1), the former Supreme Court dismissed an
appeal for failure to file written submissions in terms of certain Rules of
the Appeal Procedure Rules in the absence of any excuse for such failure. In
Samarawickrema us Attorney General(2), this Court dismissed an appeal for
failure to serve a copy of the written submissions on the Respondent as
required by Rule 35(e). In that case, the Court observed that no valid excuse
for such non-compliance had been shown. However, in Mendis us Abeysinghe(3),
it was held that the failure to comply with Rule 35(e) can be excused at the
discretion of the Court.  
  
Under the present Rules, the specific Rule which is applicable to this case is
Rule 30, and in particular Rule 30(1) which provides thus  
  
**" No Party to an appeal shall be entitled to be heard unless he has
previously lodged 5 copies of his written submissions .... complying with the
provisions of this Rule."  
**  
It is further provided in Rule 30(6) that the Appellants shall within 6 weeks
of the grant of Special Leave to Appeal or Leave to Appeal, as the case may
be, lodge their submissions in the Registry and shall forthwith give notice
thereof to each Respondent by serving on him a copy of such submissions.

**168**

It is, therefore, clear that in respect of all appeals to the Supreme Court,
the appellant is required to tender written submissions within 6 weeks of the
grant of Special Leave or Leave to Appeal.  
  
In Kiriwanthe and another us Navaratne and another(4), the question of failure
to comply with the Rules of the Supreme Court was considered and this Court in
that case observed thus .  
  
**" The weight of authority thus favours the view that while all these rules
must be complied with, the law does not require or permit an automatic
dismissal of the application or appeal of the party in default.  
  
"The consequence of non-compliance (by reason of impossibility or for any
other reason) is a matter falling within the discretion of the Court, to be
exercised after considering the nature of the default, as well as the excuse
or explanation therefor, in the context of the objection of the particular
ruling."  
**  
The Court further observed that "even if non-compliance had not been
explained, the discretion of the Court to make an order of dismissal should
have been exercised only after considering the gravity of default in relation
to the issue arising in the case." (Vide ps. 405 & 406)  
  
I am, therefore, of the view that the tendering of written submissions is a
mandatory requirement in respect of appeals in terms of Rule 30 of the Supreme
Court Rules and it would be open for this Court where an appellant or a
petitioner who has obtained leave to appeal fails to show due diligence in
taking all steps for the purpose of prosecuting the appeal, declare the appeal
to stand dismissed for non-prosecution under the provisions of Rule 34.  
  
The Rules of the Supreme Court set out above require the Petitioner:

**169**

**(a) to file his written submissions within 6 weeks of the grant of leave to
proceed; and  
  
(b) he petitioner is directed to give the Respondent notice of it by serving a
copy on the Respondent to enable him to file his submissions in reply before
the hearing commences.  
**  
Having regard to the cases decided by this Court relating to this matter, it
would be safe to act on the basis that while all these Rules (30 & 34) must be
complied with, the law does not require or permit an automatic dismissal of
the appeal of the party in default. The consequence of non-compliance is a
matter falling within the discretion of the Court to be exercised after
considering the nature of the default and the excuse or explanation tendered
by the defaulting party: and even where the non-compliance has not been
explained, only after considering the gravity of default in relation to the
issue arising in the case.  
  
In the aforesaid circumstances, I propose to consider the reason given by the
appellants to justify the non-compliance with Rule 30\. Admittedly, the
appellants had failed to file written submissions within 6 weeks stipulated in
Rule 30(6). Counsel for the appellants in his endeavour to explain the
inability on the part of the appellants to comply with this Rule submitted
that when Special Leave to Appeal was granted by this Court on the 7th of May,
1998, this Court made inter alia the following order  
  
**" Of consent, hearing on 20th August 1998. Counsel agreed to use Court of
Appeal briefs. Mr. Mahenthiran requests that he be allowed to file additional
material from the District Court records with translations and with a copy to
the petitioner."  
**  
It was Counsel's submission that having regard to this passage in the order,
the appellants had formed the impression, (mistaken though it may be) that
this Court had acted in terms of Rule 16(1) and "had dispensed with compliance
with the provisions of the rules in regard to the steps preparatory

**170**

to the hearing of such appeal" and that such dispensation included the
requirement set out in Rule 30(6). Counsel strenuously urged that although the
Rules of the Supreme Court must be complied with, the law does not require or
permit an automatic dismissal of the appeal of the party in default.  
  
I am in entire agreement with the submission of Counsel that the weight of
authority favours the view that while all rules must be complied with, the law
does not require or permit an automatic dismissal of the appeal of the
defaulting party.  
  
However, in this case there are certain matters which this Court must
necessarily take cognizance of:  
  
Firstly, the appellants were granted Special Leave to Appeal by this Court on
the 7th of May, 1998 and this matter was fixed for hearing on the 20th of
August 1998.  
  
Secondly, on that date fixed for the hearing, this matter was postponed for
the 10th of December, 1998. This appeal was not taken up for argument on that
date as well and it was re-fixed for hearing on 12. 5. 1999.  
  
It would, therefore, be clear that the appellants had failed to comply with
Rule 30 for a period of approximately one year from the date on which Special
Leave to Appeal was granted.  
  
While this matter stood fixed for hearing on the 12th of May, 1999 the
appellants proceeded to file their written submissions on the 4th of May,
1999.  
  
The Respondent filed counter-submissions on the 11th of May 1999, and Counsel
for the Respondent in his written submissions filed shortly thereafter had
taken the objection that the appellants had failed to comply with the
provisions of Rule 30 in that the written submissions of the Appellants have
been tendered approximately one year of the date on which Special Leave to
Appeal was granted and that too after this appeal had been listed for argument
on two occasions. The Respondent has in the aforesaid circumstances moved that
this appeal be declared dismissed for non-prosecution.

**171**

I have very carefully considered the explanation given by the Respondent for
non-compliance with Rule 30. But I regret to state that it is most
unreasonable for the Appellants to have presumed that the Court on the date
Special Leave to Appeal was granted, had acted in terms of Rule 16(1) and "had
dispensed with compliance with the provisions of the rules in regard to the
steps preparatory to the hearing of such Appeal" and that this dispensation
included the requirement set out in Rule 30(6). The excuse furnished by the
Appellants in this case for failing to comply with Rule 30 of the Supreme
Court Rules is both unacceptable and unconvincing and is conduct that cannot
be condoned by this Court.  
  
In my view, failure to comply with Rule 30 is indeed a failure to show due
diligence. It is to my mind quite clear from the facts that I have set out in
this judgment that the Appellants had ample opportunity of becoming aware of
the failure to file written submissions. The Appellants have also failed to
give an acceptable excuse for this default on their part.  
  
For the reasons aforesaid, I am of the view that the preliminary objection
raised by Counsel for the Respondent, must be sustained. This appeal is
accordingly dismissed. There will be no costs. The learned District Judge is,
however, directed to conclude the inquiry into the issue of an injunction in
this case as expeditiously as possible.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J**. - I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/5.html_  

