##  Board of Governors, St. Thomas' College, Mt Lavinia v. Jathika Sevaka
Sangamaya (On Behalf of Dayasena Fernando and G. G. Sumanadasa) - SLR - 371,
Vol 2 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 5; (1999) 2 Sri LR 371 (23 September 1999)

**371**

**BOARD OF GOVERNORS, ST. THOMAS' COLLEGE, MT LAVINIA  
v.  
JATHIKA SEVAKA SANGAMAYA **

**(ON BEHALF OF DAYASENA FERNANDO AND G. G. SUMANADASA)**  

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.,  
WEERASEKERA, J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 101/95 H.C.  
WESTERN PROVINCE  
NO. H.C. ALT 574/92  
LT. NO. 8/3463  
LT. NO. 8/3464  
AUGUST 20, 1999.

_Industrial Dispute - Termination of services - Decision of a Labour Tribunal
- Grounds for interfering with the decision in appeal._

The services of two workmen were terminated by the appellant-employer on a
charge of having made 'false allegations of a grave nature against the
management'. They and 22 other fellow-workmen signed a petition addressed to
the Warden alleging that he and the Sub-Warden had threatened a sanitary
labourer named Kannan and forced him to sign a letter giving an undertaking to
vacate his quarters on 20.06.87. ft was pointed out that Kannan who had
occupied the quarters with his wife and child had difficulty in finding
alternative accommodation. The workmen pleaded that in the circumstance,
Kannan be granted a minimum of 3 months' time to vacate his quarters. The
applications of the workmen to the Labour Tribunal for relief were dismissed
on the ground that there was no evidence that Kannan was threatened to place
his signature on the said document and that Kannan himself was not called as a
witness at the inquiry.

**Held:**

The question at issue was not whether on the evidence led before the Labour
Tribunal, Kannan had, in fact, been threatened and forced to sign the written
undertaking but whether the applicant workmen genuinely believed in the
veracity of his statement to them that he had signed it in the circumstances
set out by him. The Labour Tribunal had in dismissing the applications of the
workmen misconstrued the question at issue and directed its attention to an
irrelevant matter.

372

Hence, the workmen were entitled to relief in respect of the termination of
their services.

**Case referred to**

_1\. The Colombo Apothecaries Co., Ltd. v. Ceylon Press Workers' Union 75 NLR
182, 188._

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court of the Western Province.

_Sanath Jayatileke for the appellant._

_Daya Guruge for the respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult_

_  
_ September 23, 1999  
**ISMAIL, J.**

The applicant-respondent trade union above-named filed two applications
bearing Lt No. 8/3463/87 - (2/421/87) and LT No. 8/3464/ 87 \- (2/422/87) on
behalf of the workmen P. G. Sumanadasa and H. Dayasena Fernando alleging that
their services were wrongfully terminated on 1.9.87 and sought reinstatement
with back wages. The employer-appellant, by an amended answer filed on 2.3.90,
averred that the services of the workmen were terminated after they were found
guilty at a domestic inquiry on a charge of having made 'false allegations of
a grave nature against the management'.

The two workmen had signed a petition dated 10.6.87 (R1) addressed to the
Warden alleging that he and the Sub-Warden had threatened a .sanitary labourer
named Kannan and had forcibly obtained from him his signature to a letter
giving an undertaking that he would vacate his quarters on 20.6.87. The said
petition was also signed by 22 other fellow-workmen who belong to the same
trade union. It was also pointed out that Kannan had initially refused to sign
the letter in view of his difficulty in finding alternative accommodation
immediately for

**373**

him to move in to with his wife and child. They pleaded that in the
circumstances that Kannan who had occupied the quarters for the past 4 years
be granted a minimum period of 3 months time to vacate his quarters.

The inquiry into both applications was taken up together and for the reasons
set out in his order dated 22.7.92, the learned President has dismissed both
applications. He has held that there was no evidence that Kannan was
threatened into placing his signature on the said document. Kannan was not
called as a witness at the inquiry. It was held to be a baseless allegation
that tarnished the good name and reputation of the Warden and the Sub-Warden
and consequently that it would have an adverse effect on the administration of
the College by them.

Being aggrieved by this order, the applicant trade union preferred an appeal
on 18.8.92 to the Provincial High Court, Colombo. It was urged that the
contents of the petition R1 were based on what Kannan had stated to them and
that the Tribunal had failed to appreciate that his fellow-workmen had acted
together as a body of a registered trade union. The submissions on behalf of
the employer was that the appeal should be dismissed as it was based solely on
questions of fact.

Both appeals were allowed by the High Court for the reasons set out in the
judgment dated 31.3.95. The workman P. G. Sumanadasa was ordered to be
reinstated with full back wages. An order was made in the case of the workman
Dayasena Fernando that if he were to be reinstated that he would be entitled
to 1 /4th back wages and if the employer opted not to re-employ him that he
would be entitled to be paid 1/2 back wages plus six months salary.

The present appeal is by the employer against the aforesaid order of the High
Court. Counsel for the employer-appellant submitted that the High Court erred
in proceeding to hear the appeal as it was based on mere findings of fact.

The High Court Judge has held that the Labour Tribunal had misconstrued the
question at issue; it was not whether Kannan had,

**374**

in fact, been threatened and forced to place his signature on the written
undertaking, but whether the applicant-workmen genuinely believed in the
veracity of his statement to them that he had placed his signature in the
circumstances set out by him. The petition R1 was sent on 10.6.87, the day
after Kannan had given a signed undertaking that he would quit the quarters 11
days later on 20.6.87. He had occupied the quarters for four years with his
wife and child. It transpired that he had not vacated his quarters either on
20.6.87 or even on the extended date on 20.7.87. The High Court Judge was
justified in taking the view, in the circumstances, that it was likely that
Kannan would have complained to, at least some, of his fellow-workmen that he
was coerced into giving a signed undertaking to vacate his quarters. There was
also no basis for the finding by the Labour Tribunal that the letter R1 was
not sent to the Warden by the workmen in good faith with a view to helping
Kannan and that it was an act in excess of their trade union activity.

Although there is no appeal from the order of the Labour Tribunal on questions
of fact, a question of law does arise when the Tribunal has misconstrued the
question at issue and has directed its attention to an irrelevant matter -
vide Colombo Apothecaries Co., Ltd. v. Ceylon Press Workers' Union(1). The
High Court was, in this instance, justified in interfering with the order of
the Labour Tribunal.

The appeal is accordingly dismissed. We make no order for costs.

**DHEERARTNE, J.** \- I agree.

**WEERASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed.  
 _

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/5.html_  

