##  Singer Industries (Ceylon) Ltd. v. Ceylon Mercantile Industrial And
General Workers Union And Others - SLR - 66, Vol 1 of 2010 [2010] LKSC 5;
(2010) 1 Sri LR 66 (7 October 2010)

**66**

**SINGER INDUSTRIES (CEYLON) LTD., VS.  
CEYLON MERCANTILE INDUSTRIAL AND GENERAL  
WORKERS UNION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
J. A. N. DE SILVA,C. J.  
TILAKAWARDENA,J.  
EKANAYAKE,J.  
SC 78/08  
SC SPL LA 121/08  
CA (WRIT)1192/2005  
JULY 17,2009  
SEPTEMBER 1,3,2009  
  
_Payment of gratuity - in excess of that provided in the payment of Gratuity
Act 12 of 1983 - Referred for arbitration - Award - No final agreement between
Company and Union? Reference valid? Contract of Industrial Employment -
General Principles of Law of Contract applies?    Offer - counter offer -
acceptance - principles applicable? Approach by an arbitrator?  
_  
The petitioner sought to quash the arbitral award which ordered the petitioner
to pay % of monthly salary as gratuity for each years of service to its
employees with more than 20 years of service. It was contended that, the lot
respondent Union made a proposal for the payment of gratuity in excess of that
provided by the payment of Gratuity Act. The Appellant Company then made an
offer to pay % of monthly salary as gratuity to employees with more than 20
years for each completed year of service beyond the 20th year. This was
rejected by the lot respondent Union, who made a counter proposal that
employees with more than 20 years be paid one month's salary for each year of
service. This was rejected by the appellant Company. The Arbitrator ordered
the appellant company to pay % as gratuity for each year of service to its
employees with more than 20 years of service - on the basis that the employer
had shown its willingness to pay, the amount  ordered by the 4th respondent.  
  
The employer company sought to quash the order on the basis that there was no
agreement reached.

**67**

The Court of Appeal upheld the arbitral award.  
  
Special leave was granted by the Supreme Court  
  
**Held  
  
    **(1) There is overwhelming evidence before the arbitrator to conclude that no agreement existed at any time with regard to enhanced gratuity.   
  
   (2) In industrial relations the principles of offer and the acceptance
should not be strictly followed is not the correct proposition of the law. For
a contract to be concluded there should be an offer and acceptance - only then
a conscience will exist in the minds of such contracting parties.  
  
    (3) Ordinary Principles of Law of Contract such as 'offer' and 'acceptance' and 'consideration' apply to the formation of a valid industrial contract.  
  
Per Chandra Ekanayake, J.

"However with the objective of 'adjusting' and 'declaring' the rights of
parties consistent with the need to ensure fairness and equity, the State has
brought in legislative regulations to restore the balance of power between the
parties. Therefore industrial contracts unlike normal contracts are partly
contractual between the employer and employee and also partly non contractual
in that the State by means of legislature or through industrial adjudication
may prescribe many of the obligations that an employer may owe its employees."

    (4) Agreements arising from collective bargaining between employer and trade unions on behalf of employees also can have an impact on industrial contracts. However such agreements do not ipso factor become part of individual contract of employment, unless terms agreed and acted upon by the parties and incorporated as terms in such contract of employment or specifically included in a collective agreement.    
  
    (5) A counter offer is an alternative proposal made by the offer in substitution for the original offer when the purported acceptance of an offer contains a counter offer it is not accepted at all, and is equivalent to a rejection by the original offer, such a counter offer may however in its turn be accepted by the original offer or, and 

**68**

this result in a contract. In the case at hand there was no evidence that the
counter offer by the 1st respondent was accepted by the offeror.  
  
Chandra. Ekanayake, J.  
  
        "Payment of gratuity is regularized by the provisions of the Gratuity Act. Thus unless there is an existing scheme or collective agreement or award of an Industrial Court Providing more favorable terms of gratuity, he would not be entitled to claim such benefits. The burden of proving the existence or a valid collective agreement with regard to gratuity in excess of what is mandated by law fairly  and squarely rests on the employee who assets same.» In the assessment of evidence, an arbitrator appointed under theIndustrial Disputes Act must act judicially. Where his finding is completely contrary to the weight of evidence, his award is liable  to be quashed by way of  certiorari.  
  
Chandra Ekanayake, J.  
  
        "It is a cardinal principle of law that in making an award by an arbitrator there must be a judicial and objective approach and more importantly the perspectives of both employer as well as the employee should be considered in a balanced manner and undoubtedly just and equity must apply to both these parties.» APPEAL from the judgment of the Court of Appeal. 

**Cases referred to :-  
**  
        (1)Mut1w.kuda us. Sumanawathie - 1964 65 NLR205 at 208-209  
  
        (2)Municipal Council of Colombo us. Marasinghe - 71 NLR223 at 225  
  
        (3)Health and Co (Ceylon) Ltd. us. Kariyawasam - 71 NLR382  
  
        (4)All Ceylon Commercial and Industrial Workers Union us. Nestle Ltd  
\- 1999 - 1 Sri LR 343  
  
Sanjeewa Jayawardena with Senani Dayaratne for petitioner appellant  
.  
Stanley Fernando PC with D. V. Dias and Palitha Perera for 1st respondent-
respondent.  
  
M. N. B. Fernando DSG for 2nd and 3rd respondent-respondent.

Cur.adu. vult.

**69**

October 07th, 2010  
**CHANDRA EKANAYAKE, J.**  
  
        The Petitioner - Appellant (hereafter referred to as the appellant) by petition dated 05.06.2008 (filed together with an affidavit) has sought special leave to appeal from the Judgement of the Court of Appeal dated 29.04.2008 pronounced in CA (Writ) Application No. 1192/2005 (annexed to the petition marked P9). By the aforesaid application the Petitioner has sought the following other reliefs also in addition to special leave:  
  
        (i) to set aside the aforesaid judgement of the Court of Appeal marked P9. and/or in the alternative thereto,  
  
        (ii) vary the same in such a manner and subject to such terms as to this Court shall seem meet in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction of this Court and to issue a mandate in the nature of writ of certiorari quashing the impugned arbitral award dated 29.04.2005 annexed to the petition marked P2 - (XI0 in PI) and the gazette notification produced marked P2(a).

         Further interim reliefs too had been sought as per sub paragraphs (f) and/or (g) of the prayer to the petition.

         The appellant had instituted C. A. (Writ) Application No. 1192/2005 in the Court of Appeal, seeking inter alia, to quash the purported arbitral award of the 4th respondent-respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the 4th respondent) dated 29.04.2005, which ordered the petitioner to pay 3/4 ths of a month's salary as gratuity for each year of service to its employees with more than 20 years service. It is the contention of the appellant that, in the year 1991 during the course of negotiations aimed at reaching a collective agreement 

**70**

between the petitioner and its manual workers and supervising staff, the 1st
respondent union (CMU) made a proposal for the payment of gratuity in excess
of that  provided for by the Payment of Gratuity Act, 12 of 1983 - i.e., in
excess of 1/2 month's salary _for each completed year of service_. In response
to the said proposal the appellant had made an offer to pay 3/4 th of a
month's salary as gratuity to employees with more than 20 years service, for
each completed year of service beyond the 20th year of service (vide A18 in
PI). The said offer made by the appellant was rejected by the 1st respondent,
who made a counter proposal that employees with more than 20 years service, be
paid one month's salary for each year of service - (vide A19 in PI). The
appellant Company in turn had rejected the said counter proposal and
specifically stated that the said initial offer made by the appellant could
not be varied (vide A20 in PI). The stance taken by the appellant in the
present petition is that no  agreement or consensus was reached in respect of
enhanced gratuity payments, but a formal collective agreement was executed in
1994 in pursuance of a process of collective bargaining including a salary
increase and other financial benefits and same did not specifically provide
for the payment of gratuity in excess of that is provided by the Payment of
Gratuity Act No. 12 of 1983 - i. e. half a month's salary for each completed
year of service - (P 1).  
  
It was further argued that thereafter in 1996 during the negotiations aimed at
revising the 1994 collective agreement (A3 in PI) the 1st respondent had made
the following proposals with regard to payment of gratuity in excess of that
provided for by the Payment of Gratuity Act No. 12 of 1983;

i. employees' with 10 to 20 years' service be given 3/4ths of a month's salary
as gratuity for each year of service;

**71**

ii. employee with 20 to 25 years' service be given one month's salary as
gratuity for each year of service;  
  
iii. employees with 25 to 30 years' service be given 1 and 114th of a month's
salary as gratuity for each year of service; and,  
  
iv. employees with more than 30 years' service be given one and half months'
salary as gratuity for each year of service. (vide A4 in PI)

 When the appellant company rejected the said proposal by A5 the 1st
respondent had submitted an amended proposal (vide A6 in PI) to the following
effect;  
  
1\. employees with less than 20 years' service be given 3/4 th of a month's
salary as gratuity for each year of service and  
  
2\. employees with more than 20 years' service be given one month's salary as
gratuity for each year of service.

The aforesaid amended proposal too being rejected by the appellant (vide A7 in
PI) the lst respondent ordered its members to strike work with effect from
20.05.1997 and after 6 weeks the members of the 1st respondent resumed work on
28 I06 I 1997, upon referral of the said dispute with regard to enhanced
gratuity, to arbitration by the 4th respondent arbitrator. The statement of
the matter as referred to arbitration was as follows: "Whether the demand of
the Ceylon Marcantile Industrial & General Workers' Union (CMU) for a gratuity
on the basis of 3/4 of a month's salary for each year of service to the
employees who have more than 20 years of service at M/S. Singer Industries
(Ceylon) Ltd. is

**72**

justified and if not, to what relief the said employees are entitled."  
  
At the conclusion of the arbitral proceedings the 4th respondent proceeded to
make the impugned award P2 dated  29.04.2005 purporting to hold as follows:  
  
"Going through the proceedings the statements and the documents marked by both
parties, I hold the view that the respondent had shown its willingness as far
back as 1991 to give a maximum of 3/4 th salary as gratuity for those who
serve for more than 20 years in the company. For the last 14 years ir seems
that the members of the CMU had been living with that expectation.&quot ;

Thereafter the appellant sought to quash the said arbitrator's award in CA
(WR) Application No. 1192/2005 and the Court of Appeal by its judgment dated
29.04.2008  
dismissed the application for a writ of certiorari and upheld the arbitrator's
award. Being aggrieved with the aforesaid Court of Appeal judgment the
appellant sought special leave to appeal upon the questions of law set out in
paragraph 14 of the aforementioned Petition dated 05.06.2008.  
  
When the application was supported on 11.09.2008 this Court had proceeded to
grant special leave to appeal only upon the questions set out in paragraph
14(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (h) and (0) of the said petition which read as
follows:  
  
        (a) Did the Court of Appeal err by failing to appreciate that no agreement had ever been finally reached between the CMU and the. Petitioner in respect of any enhanced gratuity payments in excess of that mandated by the Gratuity Act No. 12 of 1983?

**73**

        (b) Accordingly, did the Court of Appeal err by failing to appreciate that the learned arbitrator had erred in law by holding that the petitioner company could be compelled .. to make gratuity payments to its employees in "excess of that mandated by the Payment of Gratuity Act No. 12 of 1983?  
  
        (c) Did the Court of Appeal err by failing to appreciate that the arbitrator had erred by holding that the petitioner had made a binding and enforceable offer to make enhanced gratuity payments to its employees in excess of that mandated by the Payment of Gratuity Act No. 12 of 1983?  
  
        (d) Did the Court of Appeal fail to take cognizance of the significant fact that neither the collective agreement signed in 1991, nor the collective agreement signed in 1994, provided for any enhanced gratuity payments?   
  
        (e) Did the Court of Appeal err by not appreciating the fact that the CMU had in fact rejected the offer made by the Petitioner in 1991 to pay 3/4 ths of a month's salary as  gratuity to employees with more than 20 years' service, for each competed year of service beyond the 20th years of service?   
  
        (h) Without prejudice to the foregoing, in any event, did the Court of Appeal err by failing to appreciate that the petitioner's proposal made in 1991 (which was firmly in the realm of an offer), was in any event, to pay only 3/4 ths of month's salary as gratuity to employees with more than 20 years service, for each completed year of service beyond the 20th year of service, and not for each completed year of service?

**74**

        (0) Did the Court of Appeal fail to consider the effect of the substantial passage of time between 1991 and the strike in 1997?  
  
        Counsel for the appellant is seeking to assail the judgement of the Court of Appeal amongst other grounds inter alia, mainly on the basis that the Court of Appeal was in error when it failed to appreciate that in the absence of a finally reached agreement between the 18t respondent (CMU) and the petitioner Company in respect of any enhanced gratuity payments in excess of that is mandated by the Gratuity Act No. 12 of 1983 holding that the petitioner Company could be compelled to make gratuity payments in excess of that is mandated by the said Act.  
  
        It is common ground that the terms of reference to arbitration were the terms enunciated in paragraph 5 above. The pivotal question that had to be determined by the arbitrator was whether an agreement was finally reached between the 18trespondent (CMU) and the appellant company in respect of enhanced gratuity payments meaning:- in excess of what has been awarded by the Gratuity Act No. 12 of 1983.  
  
        In view of the above necessity has now arisen to examine the .arbitrator's (4th respondent's) award dated 29.04.2005. The arbitrator had made order to be effective from 10.06.1997, (which being the date on which the industrial dispute was referred to arbitration by the Minister), that the first respondent company to pay 3/ 4th8of a month's salary as gratuity for each year of service to the employees who have more than 20 years service at the appellant company. It appears further that the arbitrator had acted on a wrong premise namely that the appellant company had shown its willingness as far back

**75**

as 1991 to give such enhanced gratuity. Thus this leads to examination of
evidence on record had in this regard. On behalf of the present 1st respondent
namely the CMU, one Senadheera Pathirage Lee1aratne had testified. His
uncontradicted position had been that discussions between the company and the
1st respondent-CMU for enhancement of gratuity commenced from 08.10.1996, and
several proposals and amendments were suggested but no agreement was arrived
upon with regard to the same. It is observed that the arbitrator had based the
above finding heavily relying on the premise that the appellant company had
shown its willingness as far back as 1991 to give 3/ 4ths of a month's salary
as gratuity for those who had served for more than 20 years in the company and
the expectations the employees had for the same. What becomes clear from A7 -
more particularly under sub head 'Gratuity' - is that the company is unable to
consider a deviation of the formula stipulated by law for this purpose. The
above witness's position had been that since the discussions failed the
18trespondent (CMU) directed the employees to launch a strike by letter dated
16.04.1997 (A 12) after the expiry of 2 weeks from the date of A12 and
accordingly the workers of the appellant company launched a strike. The said
strike had been concluded on the agreement to refer the dispute for
arbitration and same had given rise to the making of the arbitral award P2.  
  
It would be important to stress here that the above witness of the 18t
respondent had commenced cross-examination by admitting that the appellant
company was already paying the gratuity as required by law and their claim is
for a higher amount than that is mandated by law. This is amply clear by
evidence given by him in cross- examination (as appearing at pages 86 and 87
of the brief:-

**76**

However, it appears that he had taken up the position that the company agreed
to pay a higher gratuity than what is mandated by the said Act. He has
attempted to substantiate his above position by relying on a letter dated
21.10.1991 marked as A18 addressed to the pt respondent by the Employers'
Federation of Ceylon. Perusal of A18 makes it clear that the appellant company
had firmly stated that it cannot better the offer it had already made on this
point of gratuity. i.e. - to pay a maximum of 3/4 ths of a month's salary for
those who served for more than 20 years i. e. from the 21st year, and further
this offer, as mentioned at the discussion is tied down to agreement being
reached on the following matters:  
  
(a) Guarantors for hire purchase contracts,  
  
(b) Housing loans,

**77**

(c) Designations in electronic department,  
  
(d) Presence of foremen during overtime.  
  
        Further it goes on to say that these are the matters on which the 1strespondentwanted finality with the management. Thus what has to be inferred from A18 is - it was nothing more than an offer made by the appellant company. By letter dated 31.10.1991 (AI9) the aforesaid offer in A18 was rejected by the 1st Respondent (CMU) who made a counter proposal as per clause 3 of the same under sub head 'gratuity' - to the following effect:   
  
        "We propose that the demand for one month's salary for each year of service be limited to those who serve  for a minimum period of 20 years, having regard to the Company's proposal."  
  
        This is well established by the testimony of the 1st Respondent's witness's cross-examination. As appearing at Page 90 of the brief, his evidence was that what was embodied in A 18 was a suggestion subject to other conditions and it was not a promise. Further his evidence was that there was no agreement in A 18 and even with regard to A19 (which being the reply to A18) his specific position had been that there was nothing to indicate that they had agreed to the above conditions. The item 3 'Re-gratuity' appearing in A19 clearly indicates that it was only a proposal.  
  
        The only witness who testified on behalf of the appellant company was Wasantha Wijemanna. His uncontradicted position in evidence was that the stance taken in the letter of Employers' Federation of Ceylon sent on behalf of the appellant - [A20] was a proposal of this member (meaning the appellant) was already conveyed by their letter of 21.10.1991

**78**

    (A 18) and same cannot be varied. Further it is clear from his evidence that there was no agreement to pay any gratuity in excess of what is mandated by the law in any of the existing Collective Agreements marked by the 1st respondent as A2 - one in 1991, A3 -one in 1994, A 23 - one in 1997 and A24 - one in 2000. On the other hand it has to be noted that the Collective Agreements signed by this same Union (1st respondent) and several other companies which were marked in evidence as A15, A16 and A21 in fact have made specific provision for the payment of enhanced gratuity. Having considered the above evidence I am inclined to hold the view that there had been overwhelming evidence before the arbitrator to conclude that no agreement existed at any time with regard to enhanced gratuity as claimed by the 1st respondent.  
  
At this point it becomes relevant to examine the reasons given by the
arbitrator for his award. As appearing at page 9 of his award under item 11 he
goes no to state that:

        "In the field of industrial relations the principles of offer and acceptance should not be strictly adhered to. In the law of contracts a counter offer can destroy an offer but in labour relations I hold the view that a counter offer or a counter proposal can keep the original offer alive. I therefore reject the contention of the respondent company, that there was no understanding between the parties to pay an enhanced gratuity although an enhanced gratuity was not embodied in the Collective  
Agreement A2 and A3."  
  
Further goes on to say:  
  
"It appears that the respondent had indicated its willingness to consider the
gratuity question favourably which

**79**

gave the employees of the company an expectation in that regard but when the
respondent repeatedly delayed the matter the membership of the union had
become restless and finally gone on strike."  
  
        It is needless to say that as held by the arbitrator viz: - 'in industrial relations the principles of offer and the acceptance should not be strictly adhered to' - is not the correct proposition of law. For a contract to be concluded there should be an offer and acceptance \- only then a consensus will exist in the minds of such contracting parties. In this context it is apt to quote the following observations of Weerasooriya, SPJ, in Muthukuda us Sumanawathie(l) at 208 and 209 with regard to the requirement of offer and acceptance in a contract: "It is an elementary rule that every contract requires an offer and acceptance. An offer or promise which is not accepted is not actionable, for no offer or promise is binding on the person making the same unless it has been accepted."  
  
Further per C. G. Weeramantry in his treatise on - 'The  Law of Contracts'
Vol. I at page 109, (paragraph 105):

        "Most agreements are reducible to an offer by one party and its acceptance by other. The search for offer and acceptance is convenient and adequate as an aid to determining with precision the moment at which agreement is reached, and perhaps the exact terms of the contract." At page 123 (paragraph 124) author further goes on to say that:   
  
"A counter offer is an alternative proposal made by the offeree in
substitution for the original offer. When the

**80**

purported acceptance of an offer contains a counter offer, it is no acceptance
at all, and is equivalent to a rejection of the original offer. Such a
counter-offer may, however, in its turn be accepted by the original offeror,
and thus result in a contract."

         In the case at hand there was no evidence that the counter offer by the 1strespondent was accepted by the offeror. It has to be borne in mind that 'Industrial Contract' or 'Contract of Employment' is not defined in the Industrial Disputes Act and/or any other labour law in Sri Lanka unlike in United Kingdom where there is Contract of Employment Act. In the absence of such laws, the general principles of law of contract apply to the creation of a contract of industrial employment. Thus the ordinary principles of law of contract  such as 'offer' and 'acceptance' and 'consideration 'therefore apply to the formation of a valid industrial contract. A contract of service in industrial relations therefore can be entered into by the parties having capacity to do so and for a consideration. Then what is it that makes an industrial contract different from an ordinary contract?  
  
        The general presumption is that parties to a contract have equal bargaining power thus the terms of the contract are mutually negotiated. However in the industrial contracts, it is regarded that the employer has superior bargaining power over the employee. Thus such a contract is referred to as a contract between unequal partners where the employer is considered the economically stronger party and the employee the weaker partner. With the objective of adjusting and declaring the rights of parties consistent with the need to ensure fairness and equity, the state has brought in legislative regulations to restore the balance of power between the parties. Therefore industrial contracts unlike the normal contracts, are partly contractual between the employer

**81**

and employee, and also partly non contractual, in that the State by means of
legislature or through industrial adjudication, may prescribe many of the
obligations that an employer may owe to his employees. In Sri Lanka,
Industrial Disputes Act, Payment of Gratuity Act, EPF & ETF Acts are some of
the legislation introduced in this regard. Per O. P. Malhotra in his book
titled "The Law of Industrial Disputes" \- 5th Edition - Vol. I at page 188:  
  
        "One of the recurring problems in the industrial law is, how far the relationship between an industrial employer and his employees is explicable in terms of contract. The relation is partly contractual in that mutual obligation may be created by an agreement made between the employer and workman. For instance the agreement may create an obligation on the part of the employer to pay a certain wage and corresponding obligation on the workman to render services. The relation of industrial employment is also partly non-contractual, in that the State, by means of legislation or through industrial adjudication, may prescribe many of the obligations that an  employer may owe to his employees."  
  
        Agreements arising from collective bargaining between employers and trade unions on behalf of employees also can have an impact on industrial contracts. However such  agreements do not ipso facto become part of individual contract of employment, unless terms agreed and acted upon by the parties and incorporated as terms in each contract of employment or specifically included in a collective agreement.  
  
        What has to be noted in this case is that there had been no evidence to conclude that there was an agreement with regard to enhanced gratuity in excess of that is  mandated

**82**

parties were negotiations to arrive at a satisfactory agreement with regard to
enhanced gratuity. This is what is popularly known as 'Collective Bargaining'.
S. R. de Silva in his famous book on - 'The Legal Framework of Industrial
Relations in Ceylon' \- has opted to define (at page 66) 'collective
bargaining' as -  
  
"negotiations about working conditions and terms of employment between an
employer, a group of employers or one or more employers' organizations, on the
one hand, and one or more representative workers' organizations on the other,
with a view to reaching agreement." In other words collective bargaining is
another term for settling industrial disputes through mutual negotiations
between an employer on the one hand, and one or more representative workers
organizations on the other, with a view to arriving at an agreement.  
  
        However the question of payment of gratuity to a workman is regulated by the provisions of the Gratuity Act. Thus unless there is an existing scheme or collective agreement or award of an Industrial Court providing more favourable terms of gratuity to a workman, he would not be entitled to claim such benefits. Thus the burden of proving the existence of a valid collective agreement with regard to gratuity in excess of what is mandated by law fairly and squarely rests on the employee who asserts the same. The general principles of contract law would necessarily apply to the creation of a collective agreement. For the above reasons I am inclined to hold the view that the arbitrator was in grave error when he concluded that -  
  
'In the law of contracts a counter offer can destroy an offer out in labour
relations a counter offer or a counter proposal can keep the original offer
alive."

**83**

What has to be examined now is the impugned judgement of the Court of Appeal
in CA/WR/1192/200S dated 29.04.2008 (P9). The learned Judge of the Court of
Appeal by the aforesaid judgement has proceeded to conclude as follows - (as
appearing at page 8 of P9):-  
  
        "(a) The findings and the decision of the arbitrator is in accordance with the evidence led in the inquiry.   
  
        (b) The petitioner had shown its willingness to give a maximum of 3/ 4ths of a month's salary as gratuity for those who served for more than 20 years in the company and in their expectation of the gratuity particularly the 1st respondent has agreed and has undertaken to abide by some conditions detrimental to them.  
  
.        (c) Considering all the relevant facts the arbitrator has correctly
concluded that the respondent company (the petitioner in this application) has
to pay 3/ 4ths of a month's salary as gratuity for each year of service to the
employees who have more than 20 years at Singer Industries Limited."  
  
          On the above footing the learned Court of Appeal Judge had dismissed the application for writ of certiorari without costs.  
  
         The arbitrator had concluded that the respondent company had shown its willingness as far back as 1991 to give a maximum of 3/ 4th of month's salary as gratuity for those who had served more than 20 years. Having considered the evidence that had been available before the arbitrator I am unable to agree with the above conclusion that the respondent had shown such willingness as far back as 1991. That appears to be a finding which was not supported by 

**84**

evidence led in the arbitration and in fact appellant's only witness,
Leelaratne's evidence had been totally contrary to the above. In the light of
the above the only legitimate conclusion one could arrive upon the evidence is
that there had been no final agreement between the 1st respondent, (CMU) and
the appellant company in respect of enhanced gratuity payments. From the
evidence available on record there is nothing to infer that the petitioner
company had shown its willingness to give 3/ 4ths of a month's salary as
gratuity for those who have more than 20 years service as concluded by the
learned Court of Appeal Judge.

 It is a cardinal principle of law that in making an award by an arbitrator
there must be a judicial and objective approach and more importantly the
perspectives both of employer as well as the employee should be considered in
a balanced manner and undoubtedly just and equity must apply to both these
parties. In the case of Municipal Council of Colombo us Munasinghe.2), His
Lordship the Chief Justice H. N. G. Fernando, held that:  
  
"When the Industrial Disputes Act confers on an Arbitrator the discretion to
make an award which is Just and equitable', the Legislature did not intend to
confer on an Arbitrator the freedom of a wild horse. An award must be Just and
equitable' as between the parties to a dispute; and the fact that one party
might have encountered 'hard times' because of personal circumstances for
which the other party is in no way responsible is not a ground on  which
justice or equity requires the other party to make undue concessions. In
addition, it is time that this Court should correct what seems to be a
prevalent misconception. The mandate which the Arbitrator in an industrial
dispute holds under the law requires him to make an award which is just and
equitable, and not necessarily

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2010/5.html_  

