##  Gnanapandithen and Another v. Balanayagam and Another - SLR - 391, Vol 1
of 1998 [1998] LKSC 50; (1998) 1 Sri LR 391 (27 April 1998)

**391**

**GNANAPANDITHEN AND ANOTHER  
v.  
BALANAYAGAM AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 42/95  
CA NO. 296/92  
DC BADULLA NO. 62/P  
3RD AND 5TH MARCH, 1998  
  
_Revision - Partition decree - Conduct of parties - indicative of a collusive
partition action - Failure of court to add an interested party - S. 69 (1) of
The partition Law - Failure to investigate title - Miscarriage of Justice -
Relevance of delay in seeking relief.  
_  
The appellants were joint executors of the last will and testament of Rasammal
Gnanapandithen. The 2nd appellant who claimed an interest in the land which
was the subject matter of the partition action between the plaintiff and his
brother the defendant, sought to intervenue in the action before judgment.
This application was refused by the District Judge in breach of S. 68 (1} of
the Partition Law The defendant did not file a statement of claim nor did he
appear in court. The deeds on which title to the land in dispute was claimed
by the parties had no prior registration reference. The action was filed
within 2 weeks of the execution of the deed. No satisfactory evidence of title
was led. Neither the vendors nor their predecessors in title gave evidence. On
that material the District Judge gave judgment and entered the interlocutory
decree.  
  
**Held :**  
  
1\. There was a total want of investigation of title. The circumstances were
strongly indicative of a collusive action. In the result, there was a
mis­carriage of justice in the case, and the appellants were entitled to a
revision of the judgment of the District Judge notwithstanding delay in
seeking relief.  
  
2\. The question whether delay is fatal to an application in revision depends
on the facts and circumstances of the case. Having regard to the very special
and. exceptional circumstances of the case the appellants were entitled to the
exercise of the revisionary powers of the Court of Appeal.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
1\. _Wijeratne v. Samarakoon_ 71 CLW 87.  
  
2\. _Mather v. Thamodharam Pillai_ 6 NLR 246.  
  
3\. _Biso Menike v. Cyril de Alwis_ 1982 SLR 368.  
  
4. _Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohamed_ 68 NLR 36 at 38.  
  
5\. _Somawathie v. Madawala and others_ (1983) 2 Sri LR 15 at 30 and 31.

**392**

**AN APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_P. A. D. Samarasekera P.C with S. Mahenthiran and A. R. Surendran_ for
petitioners-appellants.  
  
_A. K. Premadasa P.C with L S. Ponrajah and C. E. de Silva_ for plaintiff-
respondent.  
  
_T. B. Dillimuni_ for defendant-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

April 27, 1998.  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.  
**  
This is an application in revision and restitutio in integrum filed by the 2
petitioners who are the joint executors of the last will and testament of Mrs.
Gnanapandithen. The application was filed in the Court of Appeal on 15. 4. 92
seeking to set aside the judgment dated 17. 10. 89 and the interlocutory
decree based thereon in case number P/62 of the District Court of Badulla. The
petitioners further sought an order directing the District Court, Badulla, to
add the petitioners as party defendants in the said partition action and to
permit them to file a statement of claim and participate at the trial.  
  
In the application the petitioners averred, inter alia, (a) that Mrs.
Gnanapandithen died on 14. 8. 87 and that the last will was admitted to
probate in the District Court of Mt. Lavinia in case No. 2295/T; (b) the
deceased was the owner of the property sought to be partitioned in DC Badulla
case No. P/62; (c) the premises had been leased to the Motor Service Station
Ltd., and that after the expiry of the lease, the Company continued in
occupation and paid rent to the deceased and thereafter to the 2nd petitioner
; (d) unknown to the petitioners the plaintiff had filed action against his
brother the defendant to partition the property; (e) the 2nd petitioner having
come to know that judgment was to be delivered in the said partition case on
17, 10. 89 filed papers in the District Court of Badulla on 16. 10. 89 and
moved to intervene in the case; the application for intervention was
disallowed and the District Court proceeded to pronounce the judgment on 17.
10. 89; (f) the plaintiff had thereafter negotiated with the petitioners and
offered to withdraw the partition case and to purchase the land which was the
subject matter of the partition action from the petitioners; (g) pursuant to
these negotiations the plaintiff

**393**

deposited with the lawyers a sum of Rs. 600,000 as the purchase price and that
the said money was still lying with the petitioners; the plaintiff, however,
failed to withdraw the partition action and the action proceeded to the stage
of the final plan being prepared, but the final decree had not been entered;
(n) there has been a complete failure on the part of the District Court to
investigate the title of each party as required by the partition law.  
  
The application for revision and restitutio in integrum however, was dismissed
by the Court of Appeal mainly on the grounds of undue delay (which remained
unexplained) and the failure on the part of the petitioners to establish that
there was a miscarriage of justice in the partition case or that the
petitioners suffered "actual loss". The petitioners have now preferred an
appeal to this court against the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
The first matter that arises for consideration is the validity of the order
dated 17. 10. 89 made by the District Court refusing the application of the
2nd petitioner "to intervene" in the partition action. The application was
made by way of petition and affidavit. In the petition dated 16. 10. 89 it was
averred -  
  
(a) that the petitioner is a joint executor of the last will and testament of
Mrs. Gnanapandithen (the deceased);  
  
(b) the deceased was the owner of the subject matter of the partition action
and the husband of the deceased had previously let the premises to the Motor
Service Station, Badulla; that the lessee continued to pay rent to the
deceased and a photocopy of the letter in proof of the payment of the rent was
annexed to the petition;  
  
(c) the partition action was instituted in fraud of the rights of the
deceased, her heirs, executors and administrators claiming title on deeds
executed after the death of Mrs. Gnanapandithen. It is accordingly necessary
for the intervenient petitioner to intervene in the action to satisfy the
court "on the title of the said deceased and if interlocutory decree is
entered without the title of the said property which forms the subject matter
of this action being investigated, serious prejudice will be caused to the
deceased's heirs, executors and administrators" :

**394**

(d) the intervenient petitioner accordingly asked that the court be pleased to
defer the delivery of the judgment until he is heard and the court is
satisfied of the rights of the estate of the deceased in the property sought
to be partitioned. In the prayer the petitioner prayed - (i) that the delivery
of judgment be deferred until the intervenient petitioner is heard, (ii) that
the intervenient petitioner be granted two months' time to take necessary
steps and satisfy the court of the rights of the estate of the said deceased
in and to the property sought to be partitioned.  
  
In regard to the above application the Court of Appeal has noted: "that there
is no mention of the provisions of law under which this application was made.
Nor is there a specific prayer for the addition of the 2nd petitioner as a
defendant in the case". It seems to me that these are not material omissions
which affect the validity of the application made by the 2nd petitioner to
intervene in the partition action. The reason is that there is express
provision in section 69 (1) of the Partition Law, No. 21 of 1977 which permits
the court "at any time before the judgment is delivered in a partition action"
to add "as a party to the action . . . any person who, claiming an interest in
the land, applies to be added as a party to the action." On a reading of the
petition and the affidavit it is clear that the 2nd petitioner has set out
sound and cogent grounds for intervention in the partition action. However,
the District Court in its order dated 17.10. 89 refusing the application for
intervention has failed to give **any reason what­soever** for refusing the
2nd petitioner's application. In a very brief order the District Court
conclusions on the submissions made by counsel. It is clearly an order which
cannot stand a moment's scrutiny. Unfortunately, this was not a matter which
received the attention of the Court of Appeal. I hold that the District Court
was in grave error in refusing the application. [Wijeratne v. Samarakoon, (1)
)  
  
Mr. Samarasekera for the petitioners-appellants submitted that the gravamen of
the complaint of the petitioners was that the partition action itself was a
collusive action. On a consideration of the material on record, it seems to me
that the following crucial matters tend to support the complaint of the
petitioners:  
  
(1) The plaintiff and the defendant are brothers. The plaintiff filed the
partition action on 30. 6. 88 claiming one half share of the land on Deed of
Transfer 1811 dated 15. 6. 88. It is to be

**395**

noted that the action was filed within 2 weeks of the execution of the deed.  
  
The defendant claimed the other half share on deed No. 1814 dated 19. 6. 88,
that is within 4 days of the execution of the deed in favour of the plaintiff.
In the deeds the address of the 1 st vendor, the address of the plaintiff and
the address of the defendant are all the same. The deeds had no prior
registration reference. The lis pendens of the action would be connected only
to the folio where the 2 deeds are registered. The result is that the
declaration under section 12 of the Partition Law would not reveal to court
the other instruments registered under the Registration of Documents
Ordinance.  
  
The defendant did not file a statement of claim, nor has he appeared in court.  
  
The report of the surveyor shows that there has been no compliance with
section 17 (2) of the Partition Law, No. 21 of  
1977.  
  
Moreover, the nature of the evidence led at the trial was altogether
unsatisfactory. The plaintiff gave evidence and stated that the ownership of
the land had been acquired by K. P. Rajanayagam and S. Sinnasamy (the
predecessors in title) "by long possession". There was no reference to
'adverse' possession nor even a claim to possession for a period of ten or
more years in the evidence. Neither of the vendors (the predecessors in title)
gave evidence in regard to the nature of their possession. No other documents
were produced to establish prescriptive possession although the property was
situated in an urban area. It seems to me that this is not a case where the
investigation of title by the trial Judge was merely inadequate. In my opinion
there was **total** **want** of investigation of title. Mr. Samarasekera cited
several decisions which have, over the years, emphasized the paramount duty
cast on the court by the statute itself to investigate title. It is
unnecessary to repeat those decisions here. For present purposes it would be
sufficient to refer to the case of Mather v. Thamotharam Pillai (2) decided as
far back as 1903, where Layard, CJ. stated the principle in the following
terms :- "Now, the

**396**

question to be decided in a partition suit is not **merely matters between
parties which may be decided in a civil action** ; . . . The court has not
only to decide the matters in which the parties are in dispute, **but to
safeguard the interests of others who are not parties to the suit** , who will
be bound by a decree for partition . . . "Layard, CJ. stressed the importance
of the duty cast on the court to satisfy itself "that the plaintiff has made
out a title to the land sought to be partitioned, **and that the parties
before the court are those solely entitled to such land**." (emphasis added).
This the trial Judge in the case before us completely failed to do. On a
consideration of all the matters set out above I am satisfied that a
miscarriage of justice has actually occurred in the present case. The Court of
Appeal has not addressed itself to these relevant matters which vitiate the
judgment and the interlocutory decree based thereon.  
  
On the other hand, the Court of Appeal focused on the undue delay on the part
of the petitioners in filing the present application for revision and
restitutio in integrum. It is true that there was a delay of 2 1/2 years and
the petitioners have also failed to avail themselves of the right of appeal.
These objections were strongly urged by Mr. A. K. Premadasa for the plaintiff-
respondent. Mr. Premadasa further argued that the long period of inaction and
failure to seek relief on the part of the petitioners was fatal to an
application in revision or an application for restitutio in integrum.  
  
According to the petitioners, shortly after judgment was entered for the
partition of the land (one half share each to the plaintiff and the defendant)
the plaintiff negotiated with the petitioners and their lawyers "and offered
to withdraw the partition action and to purchase the land forming the subject
matter of the partition action from the petitioners" (Para. 13 of the
affidavit of the 2nd petitioner dated 15. 2. 92). Pursuant to the negotiations
the plaintiff deposited with Messrs. Murugesu and Neelakandan, Attorneys-at-
Law a sum of Rs. 600,000/- as the purchase price. The plaintiff, however,
failed to withdraw the partition action as agreed and it was only at that
point of time, the petitioners filed the present application. The plaintiff,
however, denies that he ever agreed to withdraw the partition action. Mr.
Premadasa stressed the fact that there was no document to prove the alleged
agreement to withdraw the partition action. Mr. Premadasa contended that for 2
1/2 years the petitioners were concerned with the sale of the land, having
received Rs. 600,000/- from the plaintiff

**397**

as "full consideration" and that they had deliberately abandoned the remedies
available to them in law to challenge the order disallowing the application
for intervention, the judgment for the partition of the land and the
interlocutory decree based thereon. In these circumstances, counsel urged that
the Court of Appeal rightly dismissed the application.  
  
The question whether delay is fatal to an application in revision depends on
the particular facts and circumstances of the case. Dealing with the question
of delay in relation to a writ of certiorari, Sharvananda J. (as he then was)
in Biso Menika v. Cyril de Alwis (3) stated: "when the court has examined the
record and is satisfied the Order com­plained of is manifestly erroneous or
without jurisdiction the court would be loathe to allow the mischief of the
order to continue and reject the application simply on the ground of delay,
unless there are **very extraordinary reasons** to justify such rejection",
(emphasis added). The plea of undue delay relied on strongly by Mr. Premadasa
has to be considered in the light of the very special facts and circumstances
of this case. As stated earlier, there are several suspicious circum­stances
strongly indicative of a **collusive partition action.** The refusal of the
application of the petitioners for intervention in the partition action is
manifestly erroneous, considered particularly in the light of the duty imposed
by the statute on the court to ensure that the rights of persons claiming
title to the land are not placed in jeopardy by the decree sought from court.
The claim of the 2nd petitioner was that the property belonged to the estate
of a deceased person. The matter does not rest there. The judgment entered for
the partition of the land is **clearly** **contrary to law** as there has been
a **total failure** by the court to investigate the title of each party.  
  
On a consideration of the proceedings in this case, I hold that there has been
a miscarriage of justice. The object of the power of revision as stated by
Sansoni CJ. in Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohamed (4) "is the due administration
of justice. . .". In the words of Soza, J. in Somawathie v. Madawala and
others (5). "The court will not hesitate to use its revisionary powers to give
relief where a miscarriage of justice has occurred . . . **Indeed the facts of
this case cry aloud for the intervention of this court to prevent what
otherwise would be a miscarriage of justice.** " The words underlined above
are equally applicable to the present case. I am accordingly of the view that
the Court of Appeal was in serious error when it declined to exercise its

**398**

revisionary powers having regard to the very special and exceptional
circumstances of this partition case.  
  
The appeal is accordingly allowed and the judgment of the Court of Appeal is
set aside. The judgment dated 17.10.89 of the District Court and the
interlocutory decree are also set aside. The District Court is directed to add
the petitioners-appellants as defendants to the partition action, to permit
them to file a statement of claim, and participate at the trial. In all the
circumstances, I make no order for costs.  
  
**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J. - I agree.  
  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. - I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/50.html_  

