##  Sooriya Enterprises (International) Limited. v. Michael White & Company
Limited. - SLR - 13, Vol 1 of 1997 [1995] LKSC 50; (1997) 1 Sri LR 13 (27
January 1995)

13

SOORIYA ENTERPRISES (INTERNATIONAL) LIMITED

**v.**

**MICHAEL WHITE & COMPANY LIMITED**

  
SUPREME COURT.

G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. (SPL.) LEAVE TO APPEAL

APPLICATION NO. 367/94

C.A. REVISION APPLICATION

D.C. COLOMBO CASE NO. 4036/SPL.

JANUARY 23, 1995.



Interim injunction - Section 54 of the Judicature Act - Application for
special leave to appeal - Prayer for interim order, pending inquiry, for
restoring the interim injunction granted by the District Judge.



The Court of Appeal acting in revision, set aside the interim injunction
granted to the plaintiff by the District Judge.



**14  
 **

**Held:**

** **

The Court will not pending inquiry into the application for special leave to
appeal against the court of appeal judgment, grant an interim order having the
effect of restoring the. interim injunction granted by the District Judge for
the reason that (a) the facts did not show that the conduct of the defendant
was such as would render the ultimate judgment ineffectual, (b) an injunction
is equitable relief.



**Cases referred to:**

** **

_1\. Richard Perera v. Albert Perera_ 67 NLR 445, 447-448  


_2\. Ceylon Hotels Corporation v Jayatunga_ 76 NLR 443, 446.





**Special leave** to appeal against the judgment of the Court of Appeal.



S. Sivarasa, P.C. with S. Mahenthiran and Sampath Udugampola for petitioner.

_ _

_Ikram Mohamed_ for respondent. _  
 _

_Cur. adv vult.  
 _

January 27, 1995.  


**KULATUNGA, J.**

** **

The Court heard Counsel on the prayer (c) in the plaintiff's petition for the
grant of an interim order restraining and prohibiting the defendant from using
the trade mark "Badreg" till the hearing and disposal of this matter.



The District Judge by his order dated 01.06.94 granted an interim injunction
to the above effect pending the hearing and determination of this action. The
Court of Appeal set aside that order on the ground that this was not a case of
unfair competition by the defendant in that both the plaintiff and the
defendant were supplying tea to one Badreg of Jeddah, Saudi Arabia at Badreg's
request in cartons with Badreg's name. Court accepted the submission that the
plaintiff had failed to establish a legal right.



The District Judge had altogether failed to consider the question decided by
the Court of Appeal although the defendant had clearly raised it in his
objections and submissions before the District Court. The defendant in his
objections not only resisted the grant of an interim injunction but also
prayed that the plaint be rejected.

**15**



Notwithstanding the existence of such objection, the District Judge without
considering it, held that there was a prima facie case of unfair competition,
based purely on the fact that the mark used by the defendant was similar to
that used by the plaintiff. Section 142(1) of the Code of Intellectual
Property Act No. 52 of 1979 states -



"Any act of competition contrary to **honest practices** in industrial or
commercial matters shall constitute an act of unfair competition".



The Plaintiff has made an application for special leave to application l
against the judgment of the Court of Appeal. That application stands fixed for
support on 08.02.95 pending which, the plaintiff is seeking an order for the
restoration of the interim injunction which the District Judge granted. In my
view, no such order should be granted.



In Richard Perera v Albert Perera(1) the Court considered S.86 of the Courts
Ordinance which corresponded to S.54 of the Judicature Act on injunctions. A
condition precedent to the issue of an injunction under these sections is the
commission of an act or nuisance in violation of the plaintiff's rights
respecting the subject matter and tending to render the judgment ineffectual.
H. N. G. Fernando J. (as he then was) said -



"It seems to me that in this context . . . there must be some apparent
violation of rights to which the plaintiff appears to entitled and not merely
of rights which he claims ... the conduct of the defendant must be such as
would tend to render the ultimate judgment ineffectual".



He also observed -



"It the material actually pleaded before the Court reveals that there is
probably no right of the plaintiff which can be violated, it would be
unreasonable to issue the injunction".



In the instant case, the ultimate relief sought in the action is a permanent
injunction restraining the defendant using a mark similar to the mark being
used by the plaintiff. It is not a mark which has been registered in the
plaintiff's name. If at the end of the trial the



**16**



District Judge were to grant such permanent injunction, it would be quite
effectual even if an interim injunction is not granted.



The question also arises as to whether the grant of an interim injunction, in
these circumstances, would have the effect of granting the ultimate relief
itself, before adjudication in view of the issues involved and the fact that
an injunction is equitable relief Ceylon Hotels Corporation v Jayatunga(2). I
refuse the application for the interim order prayed for; no costs.



**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree.

** **

**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.



_Application for interim order refused_.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/50.html_  

