##  Ehelepola v. Officer In Charge, Police Station, Kandy and Another - SLR -
295, Vol 1 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 51; (1998) 1 Sri LR 295 (3 April 1998)

**295**

**EHELEPOLA  
v.  
OFFICER-IN-CHARGE, POLICE STATION, KANDY AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
PERERA, J.,  
ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 62/97  
H.C. KANDY NO. 61/95  
DECEMBER 19, 1997.  
JANUARY 10, 1998.  
  
_Offences against Public Property Act, No. 12 of 1982 - Theft of Public
Property - meaning of 'Public Property " \- Sections 3 and IS of the Act -
Section 366 of the Penal Code - Evidentiary value of the dock statement of
accused.  
_  
Five accused including the appellant were convicted of theft of an underground
cable drum belonging to Sri Lanka Telecom, an offence punishable under section
3 of the Offences against Public Property Act, No. 12 of 1982. In his
judgment, the Magistrate observed that the dock statement made by appellant
had no evidentiary value. In appeal, the High Court set aside the conviction
and sentences imposed on the accused and ordered a retrial before another
Magistrate.  
  
**Held:  
**  
1\. The cable drum which was the subject matter of the charge of theft was
"public property* within the purview of section 12 of the Offences against
Public Property Act.  
  
2\. The Magistrate had misdirected himself when he stated that the dock
statement made by the appellant had no evidentiary value.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
1\. _King v. Sittamparam_ 20 NLR 257.  
  
2\. _The Queen v. Kularatne_ 71 NLR 529.  
  
3\. _The Queen v. Mapitigama_ _Buddharakhita_ 63 NLR 433.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court, Kandy.  
  
_Mohan Peiris with Ms. Nuwanthie Dias_ for the appellant.  
  
_Buwaneka Aluvihare,_ S.S.C for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**296**

April 3, 1998.  
  
**PERERA, J.  
**  
The petitioner and four others were charged in the Magistrate's Court of Kandy
on the following counts :-  
  
(a) That the petitioner with four others did on or about 6.4.1994 fraudulently
remove from the possession of Ariyaratne Serasinghe of Werallagama an
underground cable drum valued at Rs. 125,000/- belonging to the Department of
Telecom and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 3 of the
Protection of Public Property Act as amended by Act No. 76 of 1988.  
  
(b) That the aforesaid persons did on or about the 6th of April, 1994,
fraudulently dispose of the said underground cable drum belonging to the
Department of Telecom which was in the possession of Ariyaratne Serasinghe and
thereby committed an offence punishable under section 3 of the Protection of
Public Property Act as amended.  
  
After trial, the learned Magistrate found all five accused guilty on the 1 st
count and sentenced the accused to serve a term of six months rigorous
imprisonment and imposed on each one of them a fine of Rs. 5,000/- in default
six months' rigorous imprisonment.  
  
All the accused appealed against the conviction and the sentences imposed to
the High Court of the Central Province holden in Kandy. At the conclusion of
the argument of the said appeal, the learned High Court Judge set aside the
convictions and sentences imposed on the accused-appellants and ordered a
retrial on the same charges against the accused-appellants before another
Magistrate (vide P2).  
  
The appellant-petitioner - hereinafter referred to as the appellant (the 2nd
accused-appellant in the High Court appeal) has lodged the present appeal
against the judgment of the High Court ordering a retrial in this case. No
appeals have been filed by the other four accused to this Court.

**297**

Both counsel for the appellant and counsel for the State agreed that this was
a fit matter to be decided upon the written submissions filed in this case.  
  
This Court granted special leave to appeal to the appellant on the 9th of May,
1997 on the following questions :-  
  
(1) Can the conviction for theft of public property be sustained in the
absence of evidence that the subject matter of the transaction was public
property?  
  
(2) Can the conviction of the 2nd appellant for theft be sustained in the
absence of evidence of any participation by him in the theft?  
  
(3) Did the learned Magistrate misdirect himself when he held that the unsworn
statement of the appellant from the dock was of no evidentiary value?  
  
(4) Did the learned High Court Judge act correctly in sending the case for
retrial, having held that the learned Magistrate was-

(a) wrong in disregarding the dock statement,  
  
(b) the insufficiency of evidence to hold that the subject matter was public
property, and

(c) the absence of the 2nd accused-appellant at the time the theft took place
on 6.4.1994 in Kandy?  
  
The first question arises for determination by this Court therefore is whether
there is evidence to establish that the underground cable drum which was the
subject matter of the theft constituted public property within the meaning of
the definition set out in the Offences against Public Property Act, No. 12 of
1982.  
  
 The aforesaid Act defines **Public** **Property** as follows:-  
  
**" Public Property** means the property of the government, any department,
statutory board, public corporation, bank, co-operative society or a co-
operative union."

**298**

Further this Act defines a Public Corporation in the following terms:-  
  
"Public Corporation means any corporation, board or other body which was or is
established by any written law other than the Companies Ordinance with funds
or capital wholly or partly provided by the government by way of grant, loan
or otherwise-It would also be relevant to advert to the preamble to the Sri
Lanka Telecommunications Act, No. 25 of 1991, which reads thus:  
  
"To provide for: transfer of property, rights and liabilities of the
Department of Telecommunications to the Corporation named Sri Lanka Telecom
established by Order under section 2 of the State Industrial Corporations Act,
No. 49 of 1957 . . ."  
  
At the trial, the Deputy General Manager of the Sri Lanka Telecom, Merril
Perera has testified to the effect that the Telecommunications Department was
converted into a State Corporation in September, 1991. He has also identified
the cable drum in question as the property of the Sri Lanka Telecom. It is his
evidence that the Sri Lanka Telecom is a State Corporation which was
previously a department of government. The testimony of Merril Perera stands
uncontradicted on this matter.  
  
Having regard to the evidence set out above and the definition of the term
"Public Property" in section 12 of the offences against Public Property Act,
No. 12 of 1982, I hold that sufficient evidence has been adduced to establish
that the cable drum which was the subject matter of the charge of theft was
indeed public property and falls within the purview of the said Act.  
  
The next question on which leave has been granted by this Court is whether the
conviction of the appellant on the charge of theft could be sustained in the
absence of evidence of any physical participation on the part of the appellant
in the actual theft itself in Kandy. It is the petitioner's contention that at
all times material to the commission of the "alleged theft" he was in Colombo.
The allegation is that the theft of this cable drum was committed at No 360,
Werallagama, Padeniya in Kandy.

**299**

It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the offence of theft under
the provisions of Offences against the Public Property Act has been given the
same definition as in the Penal Code in terms of the amendment. It was
counsel's submission that having regard to the evidence in this case, the
prosecution has failed to prove a charge of theft against the appellant as
there was no material to establish any participation on the part of the
appellant in the commission of the alleged theft on 6.4.94.  
  
The offence of theft is defined in section 366 of the Penal Code as follows :  
  
The following ingredients have thus to be proved to establish the offence of
theft:-  
  
(a) an intention to take dishonestly  
  
(b) any movable property

(c) out of the possession of any person  
  
(d) without that person's consent  
  
(e) moves that property  
  
(f) in order to such taking.  
  
The essential feature of the offence of theft undoubtedly is that it is an
offence against possession as opposed to ownership.  
  
Hence it is imperative to identify the person against whom the offence of
theft has been committed or the possessor. Then if the evidence discloses that
any person with the requisite intention moves any movable property out of the
possession of the possessor in order to taking such property he commits the
offence of theft.  
  
" **Salmond** in his book on **Jurisprudence** " (12th ed. pp. 270-273) states
thus:  
  
"I possess, roughly speaking, those things which I have; the things which I
hold in my hand, the clothes which I wear, and the objects which I have by me.
To possess them is to have them under my physical control."

**300**

"Now to say that something is under my control is not to assert that I am
continuously exercising control over it. I can have a thing in my control
without actually holding or using it at every given moment of time."  
  
**" All that is necessary is that I should be in such a position as to be able
in the normal course of events to resume actual control if I want."  
**  
"The test then for determining whether a man is in possession of anything is
whether he is in **general control** of it." at p. 273.  
  
It would be necessary in the circumstances to briefly refer to the evidence
adduced in this case. On 6.9.94 when witness Wijeratne, a driver attached to
the Sri Lanka Telecom (who had been assigned the lorry 43-4949) has reported
to the Telecom Office in Kandy after work, Wijeratne had been instructed by
the first accused to proceed to Wattegama and collect a cable drum from the
Telecom warehouse at Wattegama. He had complied with those instructions and
when he brought the drum to Kandy, the 1st accused-appellant had instructed
Wijeratne to transport this drum to Colombo on the following day -7.4.94 and
to meet another Sri Lanka Telecom employee Ehelepola (the present appellant)
near the Sugathadasa Stadium.  
  
Accordingly when he reached Colombo on 7.4.94, he had met the appellant
Ehelepola near the Sugathadasa Stadium. Ehelepola had been waiting there in a
Hiace Van belonging to the Sri Lanka Telecom. The appellant had walked up to
Wijeratne's vehicle and had inquired from him whether there was any message
from Wickremasekera (the 1st accused) and Wijeratne had1 replied that the 1st
accused had instructed him to hand over the drum to the appellant Ehelepola.
The lorry had been driven to a place at Bloemendhal Road and the drum had been
shifted from Wijeratne's lorry and loaded into a private lorry which was
brought there by the appellant. Wijeratne had thereafter returned to Kandy.  
  
According to Liyanawaduge, the Storekeeper of Sri Lanka Telecom warehouse at
Wattegama, he was directed by the 1st accused on the telephone to issue a
cable drum when witness Wijeratne's lorry calls for it at the stores, and as
instructed by the 1st accused, he had ordered the release of the cable drum to
Wijeratne.

**301**

The virtual complainant in this case is one Ariyaratne Serasinghe who at the
time of the alleged theft held the office of Telecommu­nications Engineer,
Central Province. It is his testimony that both the 1st accused and the ware
housekeeper were answerable to him in regard to any issues from the warehouse.
As regards all requisitions made by the 1st accused, it was Serasinghe who had
immediate authority to sanction the same. The storekeeper was permitted to
dispatch goods only in respect of such requisitions as had been duly
authorised by the complainant. The complainant however was answer­able to the
Deputy General Manager who was also the head of the North-Central Branch of
the Sri Lanka Telecom. Requisitions could also be sanctioned by the Deputy
General Manager, but it is therefore, clear that no movement of goods in the
warehouse was possible without the sanction of the complainant being first
obtained.  
  
On the evidence adduced at the trial therefore it is manifestly clear that the
complainant was in general control of the goods in the warehouse and therefore
may rightly be said to have been in possession of the said goods.  
  
According to the evidence, the ware housekeeper was answerable to the
complainant. In point of fact the position of the warehouse-keeper in relation
to the complaint would be that of a clerk, agent or servant. The position is
the same in regard to witness Wijeratne who transported the cable drum to
Colombo.  
  
Section 25 of the Penal Code provides thus:  
  
"When property is in the possession of a person's wife, clerk or servant on
account of that person, it is in that person's possession within the meaning
of the Penal Code".  
  
Therefore, the ware housekeeper and subsequently, the driver Wijeratne had
only custody in respect of the goods entrusted to him. In regard to this
aspect of the matter, namely, the interpretation of section 25 of the Penal
Code, Dr. G. L Peiris observes thus:  
  
"The purpose of this provision is to obviate an anomaly which could otherwise
have characterised the law governing theft. Where the master's property was in
the keeping of his servant and the servant dishonestly converted the property
to his own use, a

**302**

conviction of theft would not be possible against the servant if possession of
the property was held to be with the servant. To eliminate this difficulty,
the law construes the situation as involving merely custody in the servant,
where the master retains the possession of the property derivatively through
his servant".  
  
 (Vide offences under the Penal Code - Dr. G. L Peiris, p. 372.)  
  
In the present case, the movement of the movable property to wit the cable
drum was caused as follows:  
  
On the 6th of April, 1994, the 1st accused informed the warehouse-keeper of
the Wattegama warehouse to despatch the impugned property to a team headed by
the 3rd accused. The 1st accused was a District Telecommunications Inspector
whose work came under the supervision of the complainant. Being an officer, he
was vested with the implied authority to requisition goods from the Wattegama
ware­house in the event of an emergency. The evidence however, discloses that
there was no such emergency on the 6th of April, 1994, which necessitated the
dispatch of impugned property. Therefore, there was no 'source' from which the
1st accused could derive the implied authority to requisition goods. He
nevertheless held out to the ware housekeeper that he did so properly
possessing the implied authority to do so.  
  
The ware housekeeper acting in good faith in accordance with the implied
authority vested in him by the complainant despatched the goods according to
the wishes of the 1st accused believing the latter to be duly authorised to
requisition the impugned property. The impugned property was received by
Wijeratne on the instructions of the 1st accused.  
  
The ware housekeeper by virtue of his office was a servant of the complainant
and therefore had only the custody and not possession in respect of the goods
entrusted to him. Since the 1st accused had by his act of requesting the
impugned property from the ware housekeeper held out to the latter that he was
acting with due authority, the ware housekeeper proceeded to despatch the same
on the premise that he had the implied consent of the complainant so to do.

**303**

Inasmuch as the transfer of the impugned property was executed with the
consent and co-operation of the ware housekeeper, though wrongfully procured,
the said transfer is a 'delivery' as opposed to a taking'.  
  
The person who took receipt of the impugned property, namely, witness
Wijeratne (3rd accused) too was by virtue of his employment, answerable to the
complainant, his acquisition of the impugned property can in no way amount to
an acquisition of possession, but merely amounts to an acquisition of custody.
Accordingly, despite the transfer of the property from one person to another,
the complainant, at this juncture still retained possession of the subject
property. It must also be observed that the impugned property was loaded onto
a lorry which belonged to the complainant's office. In my view, therefore, in
the absence of 'a moving out of the possession of the possessor1 and 'a
dishonest taking1 by a recipient as well as the presence of the implied
consent of the possessor, the aforesaid '1st movement' of the subject property
cannot amount to a theft. According to the evidence, it was on the
instructions of the 1st accused that the impugned property was moved, by a
team headed by the 3rd accused from Kandy to Colombo on the 7th of May, 1994,
in the same lorry belonging to the Sri Lanka Telecom - Central Province used
for the purpose of transporting the said property from Wattegama to Kandy.  
  
Inasmuch as the 3rd accused and his party, by virtue of their employment were
all answerable to the complainant and therefore could only claim custody of
the impugned goods, and by virtue of the fact that they were acting under the
instructions of the 1st accused who had held himself out to have been
authorised by the complainant, this '2nd movement1 of the impugned property
too like the '1 st movement1 referred to above does not suffice to constitute
a theft. This is clearly illustrated in illustration 'N' to section 366 of the
Penal Code. " 'A' asks charity from 'Z' 's wife. She gives 'A' money, food and
clothing. Which 'A' knows to belong to T, her husband. Here it is probable
that 'A' may conceive that 'Z1 's wife is authorised to give away alms. If
this was W 's impression, 'A' has not committed theft."  
  
The evidence discloses that when the impugned property reached Colombo, it was
transferred from the 3rd accused's custody to the 2nd accused on the
instructions of the 1st accused.

**304**

As has been observed earlier, the 3rd accused and his party by virtue of their
employment were answerable to the complainant. Accordingly, they merely had
custody in respect of the subject property. Furthermore, since they were
acting solely on the instructions of the 1st accused, who held himself out to
have been authorised by the complainant to do so, they, in good faith believed
themselves to have had the implied consent of the complainant to deliver the
custody (as opposed to possession) of the impugned property to the 2nd
accused.  
  
The 2nd accused (the present appellant) however though an employee of the Sri
Lanka Telecom, was not be virtue of his em­ployment answerable to the
complainant, nor to the 1st accused. Therefore, he could not, at any time be
considered a clerk, agent or servant of the complainant or the 1st accused.
Therefore, when the impugned property was transferred from the 3rd accused to
the 2nd accused, the 2nd accused was not obliged to recognize the superior
right of the complainant, and accordingly acquired possession of the impugned
property as opposed to mere custody.  
  
In so acquiring the possession of the impugned property, the 2nd accused had
done so without the consent of the former possessor, namely, the complainant.  
  
Further, according to the evidence, the impugned property was loaded onto a
private vehicle which had been procured for this purpose by the 2nd accused on
the instructions of the 1st accused.

The '3rd movement could not have been effected without the participation of
both the 1 st and 2nd accused. While the 1st accused, by his display of
apparent authority caused the subject property to be released from the
possession of the complainant, the 2nd accused by his act of procuring the
same, acquired possession anew on behalf of both himself and the 1st accused.
The said '3rd movement1 resulted in the impugned property being moved out of
the possession of the possessor, namely, the complainant without his express
or implied consent. Therefore, in my view the actus reus of the offence of
theft was properly constituted by this '3rd movement'.  
  
Having regard to the facts stated above, I am unable to agree with the
submission that there was no participation by the appellant in the alleged
offence of theft.

**305**

The third matter on which leave to appeal has been granted is on the question
whether the learned Magistrate misdirected himself when he observed that the
dock statement of the appellant had no evidentiary value. I have examined the
judgment of the learned Magistrate and find that the Magistrate has indeed
stated that the dock statement made by the appellant had no evidentiary value.
On this matter the learned Magistrate has clearly misdirected himself. It is
indeed well settled law that when an unsworn statement is made by an accused
from the dock, that such statement must be looked upon as evidence subject
however to the infirmity that the accused had deliberately refrained from
giving sworn testimony. Though there is no statutory provision for it, the
right of an accused to make an unsworn statement from the dock has been
recognized by our Courts for many years. (See The King v. Sittamparam (1) )
and is now part of the established procedure in our Criminal Courts. If such
statement is believed, it must be acted upon, if it raises a reasonable doubt
in their minds about the case for the prosecution, the defence must succeed.
However, it should not be used against another accused. (Vide The Queen v.
Kularatne (2) ). In the instant case, the learned Magistrate had admittedly
given no consideration whatsoever to the unsworn statement made by the
appellant from the dock and has specifically stated that such statement had no
evidentiary value. In The Queen v. Mapitigama Buddharakhita Them and two
others (3), the Court of Criminal Appeal has observed that the right of an
accused person to make an unsworn statement from the dock is recognized in our
law. That right would be of no value, unless such a statement is treated as
evidence on behalf of the accused, subject however to the infirmity it
attaches to statements that are unsworn and have not been tested by cross-
examination.  
  
I am in respectful agreement with this view and I am of the opinion that such
a statement must be looked upon as evidence subject to the infirmity that the
accused had deliberately refrained from giving sworn testimony.  
  
Having regard to the evidence adduced in this case, I am of the view that
there was sufficient evidence before the Magistrate upon which the appellant
might reasonably have been convicted, but for the erroneous view taken by the
Magistrate that an unsworn statement from the dock made by an accused person
has no evidentiary value. The conduct of the Magistrate in disregarding
altogether the unsworn statement made by the accused from the dock, in my
view, has caused

**306**

prejudice to the appellant. I therefore hold that the learned High Court Judge
has rightly ordered a retrial in this case. In the circumstances, I affirm the
judgment of the learned High Court Judge directing a trial de novo in this
case before a different Magistrate. The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.  
  
**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J. - I agree.  
  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. - I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/51.html_  

