##  Somasunderam Vanniasingham v. Forbes and Another - SLR - 362, Vol 2 of
1993 [1993] LKSC 51; (1993) 2 Sri LR 362 (25 May 1993)

362

SOMASUNDERAM VANNIASINGHAM **  
v.  
FORBES AND ANOTHER **

SUPREME COURT.

BANDARANAYAKE, J.

PERERA J. AND

WIJETUNGE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL 2/90.  
CA APPLICATION 1658/84.  
MAY 25TH 1993.

_     Certiorari and Mandamus - Arbitration award under Industrial Disputes
Act - Statutory right to repudiate Award under s. 20(1) of the Industrial
Disputes Act - Right to move for Certiorari without exhausting alternative
remedies. _

A party to an arbitration award under the Industrial Disputes Act is not
required to exhaust other available remedies before he could challenge
illegalities and errors on the face of the record by an application for a writ
of certiorari. This is so even though he had the right to repudiate the award
under section 20 (1) of the Industrial Disputes Act.

The difference between review as to the legality of the matter and an
administrative appeal on the facts must be borne in mind.

Delay in securing an effective other remedy has been considered
unsatisfactory. The mere existence of some power to resist the binding effect
on an unacceptable

363

settlement order should not itself be hastly regarded as a satisfactory
alternative remedy to the Court's discretionary powers of review. There is no
rule requiring the exhaustion of administrative remedies.

The case of Obeysekera v. Albert and others (1978 - 79) 2 Sri LR (CA) 220 was
wrongly decided as also were cases like E S. Fernando v. United Workers Union
et-al CA appl. 444/80 (CA Minutes of 17.5.86) and United Workers Union v. W.
H. Navaratne et al CA Application No. 2260/80 CA Minutes of 7.5.86) and are
not binding and should not be followed.

**Per Bandaranayake J.**

As I have said there is no rule requiring alternative administrative remedies
to be first exhausted without which access to review is denied. A Court is
expected to satisfy itself that any administrative relief provided for by
statute is a satisfactory substitute to review before withholding relief by
way of review.

**Cases referred to**

_1\. Obeysekera v. Albert and others (1978 - 79) 2 Sri LR 220 (CA)._  
_  
2\. Baldwin & Francies Ltd. v. Patents Appeal Tribunal et-al (1959) 2 all ER
433 (HL). _  
_  
3\. E S. Fernando v. United Workers Union et-al, CA application 444/80 - CA
Minutes of 17.5.1986._  
_  
4\. United Workers Union v. W. H. Navaratne et-,al, CA Application 2260/80 CA
Minutes of 7.5.1986._  
_  
5\. R. V. Patents Appeal Tribunal et al, Exparte J. R. Geigy, Societey Anonyme
(1963) 1 all ER 85 (QBD)._  
_  
6\. Linus Silva v. University Council of Vidyodaya University (1961) 64 NLR
114, 116, 117._  
_  
7\. Colombo Commercial Co. v. Shanmugalingam 66 NLR 26._  
_  
8\. Virakesari Ltd. v. P. O. Fernando 66 NLR 145._

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

Motilal Nehru, P.C. with S. Sivapathan watching the interests of the 2nd
respondent University of Jaffna, Sri Lanka.

_Cur. adv. vult._

October 26, 1993\.  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

Upon an oral application for leave to appeal on a question of law, leave was
granted to the appellant by the Court of Appeal from its order dismissing the
petitioners application for writs of Certiorari and Mandamus to quash an order
and award made by the arbitrator under the provisions of the Industrial
Disputes Act. The questions of law discernible from the matters adverted to by
Counsel before the Court of Appeal and adopted by that Court are

(i) Is a party to an arbitration award under the Industrial Disputes Act
required to exhaust other available remedies before

364

he could challenge illegalities and errors on the face of the record by an
application for a writ of Certiorari ;

(ii) Is the right to repudiate an Award available to a party under Section 20
(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act a remedy equally appropriate and expedient
as a Writ of Certiorari quashing an Award would be.

The Minister of Labour by Order dated 17.7.81 referred the following dispute
for settlement by Arbitration to the 1st Respondent, viz; whether the Jaffna
Campus of the University of Sri Lanka and its successor the University of
Jaffna, Sri Lanka (2nd Respondent) is under obligation to employ Mr. S.
Vanniasingham (Appellant) from the date of the takeover of the undergraduate
department of the Jaffna College by the Government for the purpose of
establishing the Jaffna Campus of the University of Sri Lanka.

If so (a) On what terms and conditions he should have been employed ;

(b) To what relief is he entitled?

After enquiry, the Award of the Arbitrator 1st Respondent was published on
23.4.84. The terms of the award in summary were

(i) The Jaffna Campus and its successor were under no obligation to employ the
applicant from date of takeover by Government in 1974 ; The Appellant had
reached retiring age in 1979.  
  
 (ii) The 2nd respondent to make an exgratia payment of Rs. 10,000/- to the
applicant.

The Appellant was dissatisfied with the award. He did not however exercise his
statutory right to repudiate the award under Section 20 (1) of the Industrial
Disputes Act. Instead the appellant filed Writ application before the Court of
Appeal supported on 17.1.85 for a writ of Certiorari seeking to quash the
award on the grounds of ultra vires and error on the face of the record. The
Court of Appeal is now vested with jurisdiction in this area of the law by the
Constitution - Article 140.

365

Notice was issued returnable on 4.3.85. The 1st Respondent did not appear on
notice. The 2nd Respondent appeared and informed Court it was not filing
written objections. When the matter was taken up for support on 22/11/89, the
2nd Respondent took a preliminary objection that the appellant could not
maintain an application for a writ of Certiorari without having first
exhausted his statutory remedy of repudiation of the award after due notice
afforded him by section 20 (1) of the Industrial Disputes Act.

The Court of appeal upheld the preliminary objection and dismissed the
application. It is from this order of dismissal that the matters of law raised
come before us.

It was argued on behalf of the Petitioner that in the ordinary course the
Petitioner awaited the award. The award did not give him the relief sought
regarding the dispute. It merely provided for an ex gratia payment. It was
submitted the statutory provision in the Act enabling repudiation merely means
that the award is not binding on the parties once repudiated. But it leaves
the award intact. Repudiation does not afford any alternative just and
equitable relief. No further relief is available from the Minister after an
award. The Petitioner cannot revive the dispute and it cannot be adjudicated
upon again. The Petitioner remains aggrieved. Counsel complained that the
Court of Appeal in the instant case adopted the finding of the Court of Appeal
in the case of Obeysekera vs. Albert and others (1) which held that "
Certiorari being a discretionary remedy will not ordinarily be granted........
unless and until other remedies reasonably available and equally appropriate
have been exhausted ". The Court had not given any reasons as to why it
considered repudiation to be a satisfactory alternate remedy to the remedy of
review. The Court had failed to consider this most important aspect whilst
withholding the remedy of review. It was submitted that the case of Obeysekera
vs. Albert et.al. (Supra) was wrongly decided in this respect. It was
submitted that that case was in respect of an application to quash an award of
an arbitrator. That Court had merely applied the minority dictum of Lord
Denning in Baldwin & Francis Ltd. vs. Patents Appeal Tribunal et al (2), which
was the only case referred to in the argument. It may be noted that the
majority had found no error whereas Denning J. had found an error but
refrained from giving discretionary relief for reasons, to wit : that even
where there is an error on the face of the record (as was evident in that
case) that when the party aggrieved has another remedy open to him (in that
case to sue for infringement of patent rights which at best is a futuristic
event) the Court in its discretion should refuse Certiorari. So it was that in
the case of

366

Obeysekera vs. Albert the Court of Appeal held that a party to an award if
aggrieved has to proceed under S 20 (1) to repudiate it (instead of seeking
Certiorari). That Court has also stated that when the right of appealing to
the Commissioner of Labour is available, a petitioner cannot seek a
discretionary remedy like Certiorari. It is not clear from the judgment, as to
the circumstances or the provision of law in that case which created a right
of appeal to the Commissioner of labour. No right of appeal to the Commission
of labour was available in the instant case. It was submitted that the dicta
of Lord Denning should not have been extended. That dicta should have been
confined to the facts of that case and should not be extended in any general
way. Consequent to the misapplication of the dicta as aforesaid, a stream of
cases had been wrongly decided by the Sri Lankan Courts without realising the
difference between review as to the legality of the matter and an
administrative appeal on the facts. It had merely been assumed that
repudiation was a satisfactory remedy.

Petitioners Counsel further submitted that the decisions of the Court of
Appeal in E S. Fernando vs. United Workers Union et at (3) of 17.5.86 and
_United Workers Union vs. W. H. Navaratne et al_ (4) which followed the
decision in Obeysekera vs. Albert et al was followed by the Court of Appeal in
the instant case, the Court's decision that it was bound by those decisions
was wrong in law and should not be followed. It was submitted repudiation of
the award could never be considered as being an alternative remedy to
obtaining a Writ of Certiorari to quash the award.

R. V. Patents Appeal Tribunal et al, Ex parte J. R. _Geigy, Societe Anonyme_
(5) (Parker C. J., Winn And Lawlor J. J.) which held that an order of
Certiorari should issue as there was no satisfactory alternative relief
available, was itself a case which raised an issue under Section 9 of the
Patents Act as in the earlier case of Baldwin vs. Francis (supra). Their
Lordships in R. V. Patents Appeal Tribunal whilst differing from the opinion
of Denning J had this to say about the minority decision of Lord Denning

(a) there had been no argument placed before Lord Denning as to the principles
on which the Court's discretion should be exercised apart from a general
proposition made by Counsel that in the case of an aggrieved person the order
of Certiorari should be made ;

(b) Lord Denning gave another reason for his refusal to exercise the
discretion of issuing writ namely that the party mayÂ

367

have gone back to the tribunal and indicated that it had overlooked the matter
of making a special reference under Section 9 (1) of the Patents Act 1949 the
material parts of which read ; " If in consequence of investigations
required.................. under the Act......... it appears to the Controller
that an invention in respect of which application for a patent has been made
cannot be performed without substantial risk of infringement of a claim of any
other patent he may direct that a reference to that other patent shall be
inserted in the applicants complete specification by way of notice to the
public. " (the application for Certiorari was to have this reference
inserted.)

(c) the alternative remedy Lord Denning had in mind was an infringement action
if the time came where a person aggrieved could find evidence of an
infringement. The aggrieved would have to await an infringement and obtain
evidence of it. An aggrieved is not bound to wait. Accordingly the Court in R.
V. Patents Appeal Tribunal Ex Parte J. R. Geigy (supra) did not apply the
dicta of Lord Denning.

Counsel for the Petitioner also referred us to Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th
Edition, Vol 11 p. 805 : para 1528 : - " There is no rule in certiorari as
there is in mandamus, that it will lie only where there is no other equally
effective remedy, and provided the requisite grounds exist, certiorari will
lie although a right of appeal has been conferred by statute. "

Professor Wade in his book Administrative Law 5th Edition p593 states

" There is no rule requiring what is called the exhaustion of administrative
remedies .................. one aspect of the rule of law is that illegal
administrative action can be challenged in the Court as soon as it is taken or
threatened. There is therefore no need to pursue any administrative procedure
or appeal in order to see whether the action in the end will be taken or not.
An administrative appeal on the merits is something quite different from
judicial determination of the legality of the whole matter. This restates the
essential difference between review and appeal ............ The Court may
(however) withhold discretionary remedies where the most convenient step is to
appeal. Certiorari being a discretionary remedy the Court may withhold it if
it thinks fit. "

368

S. M. Mehta in his book Indian Constitutional law 1990 Edition at page 334 has
this to say : quote : " The existence of an alternative remedy may be a ground
for refusing a writ of certiorari, where the defect of jurisdiction is not
patent on the face of the record and fundamental rights are not involved. This
is a rule of convenience and not a rule of law and hence certiorari may be
issued even when an alternative remedy is available. Thus an alternative
remedy that is not speedy, effective or adequate is no ground for refusing a
writ of certiorari.

S. A. de Smith in ' Constitutional and Administrative Law ' edited by Street
and Brazier. 4th Edition p. 599 puts it this way : " The principles governing
the discretion of the Court to award certiorari have partly crystallized
............... The application for certiorari may exceptionally be refused
because there is a more appropriate alternative remedy. "

Of interest is the Supreme Court decision in Linus _Silva vs. University
Council of Vidyodaya University_ (6). In that case the services of the
petitioner who was employed by the University (Professor and Head of the
Department of Economics and Business Administration at the University) were
terminated by the Council. The petitioner made a direct application to the
Supreme Court for a writ of Certiorari to quash the order of termination. It
was argued for the Respondents that a statutory remedy was available under
Section 31 B of the Industrial Disputs Act and that therefore Certiorari was
inapplicable. It was in this context that T. S. Fernando J held that going
before a Labour Tribunal and thereafter possibly appealing to the Supreme
Court was not an adequate remedy as the writ application already before Court
was (by comparision) a more convenient, speedy and effective remedy. However
the Privy Council - Vide (1964) 66 NLR 505, allowing an appeal from the
Supreme Court judgment was of the view that as the dispute was upon an
ordinary contract between master and servant, there was no failure to comply
with statutory provisions enforceable by certiorari and mandamus. A remedy
would be damages for wrongful dismissal/breach of contract. The grant of
certiorari was therefore misconceived. The Privy Council did not however touch
on the aspect of how one should deal with alternative remedies contained in
the Supreme Court judgment no doubt as in their view it was no longer
relevant. The Supreme Court judgment is mentioned to indicate consistency in
requiring effective satisfactory alternative statutory remedies which has been
the law in Sri Lanka, if they were to take the place of review.

369

It may be mentioned in passing that wherever there is an infringement of
fundamental right, the Supreme Court is obliged to afford just and equitable
relief for such infringement even though there may be other remedies available
in public or private law as the right to relief is itself a fundamental right.

The instant case poses the question as to whether the right to repudiate an
unacceptable award under Section 20 (1) of the Industrial Disputes Act is in
the nature of a sufficient administrative remedy. There has been no due
repudiation of the award within time so that the award remains binding on the
scheme. Repudiation results in the award ceasing to bind the parties. Once
repudiated the award no longer regulates or determines the rights or duties of
the parties in respect of the dispute. But though rendered ineffective it
remains part of the record. The dissatisfied party complains he has had no
relief in relation to the dispute. There is no other relief he can have access
to under the statute. In no sense therefore could it be said that repudiation
of the award could have afforded him an equally appropriate and effective
remedy as the discretionary remedy of certiorari which could strike down the
award if illegality is present. The appellant complains of errors on the face
of the award. The appellant seeks review of the award to correct those errors.
There are no words in the statute suggesting exclusion of ordinary remedies
either expressly or by implication. In any case, review is a remedy within his
rights to seek. He challenges illegalities in the award. This he can do in the
circumstances. The Court of Appeal should have enquired into his application
and in the exercise of its discretion made an order on the merits. This the
Court failed to do.

On the other hand there may be instances where the law provides for
satisfactory relief under the statute. A Court may in the exercise of its
discretion withhold review in such situations. But it is the duty of the Court
to consider whether certiorari is more appropriate in the circumstances.

Where overlapping remedies exist for identical purposes a question may arise
as to whether the statutory remedy is exclusive or concurrent. The language of
the enactment must first be examined. If concurrent the Court's decision may
be determined by deciding whether the statutory remedy provides a sufficient
satisfactory alternative to the discretionary remedy by way of writ. As we
have seen in the cases discussed, an alternative remedy may be available only
upon the existence of other factors which are hard to find and difficult to
establish which then does not render that remedy satisfactory.

370

Delay in securing an effective other remedy has been considered
unsatisfactory. The mere existence of some power to resist the binding effect
of an unacceptable settlement order should not of itself be hastily regarded
as a satisfactory alternative remedy to the Court's discretionary powers of
review. Therefore the fact that the appellant did not repudiate the award does
not make a difference. It may be that even though the statute provides for an
administrative appeal either to an administrative tribunal or a Minister, the
Court may not regard such an arrangement as impliedly excluding review if the
applicant is entitled as a matter of law to have the order quashed as it is
pointless then to have him pursue an administrative appeal on the merits.
There is thus no rule requiring the exhaustion of administrative remedies. A
statutory remedy may be for a different purpose being usually an appeal on the
merits whereas the ordinary discretionary remedy of review is for prevention
of illegality. There. could be situations where rights of appeal in a statute
may legitimately restrict review by the Court (ie) where the language of the
statute expressly or impliedly excludes recourse to ordinary discretionary
remedies (eg) where a power is expressly conferred by statute on a named
authority or the statutory remedy is the only available remedy as in tax
matters. Upon an examination of the reported judgement of the Court of Appeal
in the case of Obeysekera vs. Albert et. al. (CA) aforesaid which held that
Certiorari will not be granted........ until other remedies available and
equally appropriate have been exhausted it is found that there has been no
examination of the nature of the power of repudiation or its consequences and
no evaluation of its effectiveness as an alternate satisfactory remedy to that
of review. That decision does not set out the law correctly in this area and
should not be followed. As I have said there is no rule requiring alternative
administrative remedies to be first exhausted without which access to review
is denied. A Court is expected to satisfy itself that any administrative
relief provided for by statute is a satisfactory substitute to review before
withholding relief by way of review. Those decisions adverted to in the
judgement which followed the decision in Obeysekera vs. Albert et al. in this
area of law have also been wrongly decided and should not be regarded (as was
done in the instant case) as having a binding effect on the Court of Appeal.
They should no longer be followed.

In this area of the law, where there is no illegality, the Court should first
look into the question whether a statute providing for alternative remedies
expressly or by necessary implication excludes judicial review. If not, where
remedies overlap, the Court should consider whether the statutory alternative
remedy is satisfactory in all the

371

circumstances....... If not, the Court is entitled to review the matter in the
exercise of its jurisdiction. Of course if there is an illegality there is no
question but that the Court can exercise its powers of review. Vide Colombo
Commercial Co. vs. _Shanmugalingam_ (7), _Virakesari Ltd vs. P. O. Fernando_
(8).

The appeal is allowed. The order of the Court of Appeal dated 05/12/89
upholding the preliminary objection taken on behalf of the 2nd respondent and
dismissing the application before it with costs is set aside. The Court of
Appeal is directed to proceed to enquiry into the application of the Applicant
and decide the matter on its merits. No costs.

**P. R. P. PERERA, J. -** I agree.

  
**WIJETUNGA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/51.html_  

