##  Gamini Atukorale v. Dayananda Dissanayake, Commissioner of Elections and
Others - SLR - 206, Vol 3 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 52; (1998) 3 Sri LR 206 (28
October 1998)

**206**

**GAMINI ATUKORALE  
v.  
DAYANANDA DISSANAYAKE, **

**COMMISSIONER OF ELECTIONS AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT

G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,

WIJETUNGA, J. AND

BANDARANAYAKE, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 175/97

C.A. APPLICATION NO. 259/97

SEPTEMBER 17, 18, 21, 1998

_Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus \- Grounds for invalidating the result of
election to a Municipal Council - Local Authorities Elections Ordinance -
Section 69 -Failure to comply with the provisions of the Ordinance._

At the election of members to the Negombo Municipal Council held on 02.03.1997
People's Alliance obtained a majority of 534 votes over the United National
Party. It was common ground that at least at 10 of the 45 polling stations,
during the poll, gangs of person broke in, drove the UNP polling agents out,
seized ballot paper books from the officers, perforated and marked ballot
papers and inserted them into the ballot boxes. However, at the counting, the
ballot papers so introduced were identified with reference to the serial
numbers and excluded from the counting. The appellant sought writs of
certiorari and mandamus, relying on section 69 of the Local Authorities
Elections Ordinance, for invalidation of the result of the said election and
for an order to hold a fresh election, on the ground that by reason of the
alleged incidents the election was not conducted in accordance with the
provisions of the Ordinance and with the principles laid down in such
provisions and the result of the election was thereby affected.

**Held:**

That the acts complained of by the petitioner form no part of the conduct of
the election. They were the acts of third parties who had no legitimate role
to play ' in the conduct of the impugned election. The petitioner, therefore,
cannot succeed on the ground that there had been a failure to comply with the
relevant provisions of the Ordinance; and the evidence adduced was
insufficient to determine that the incidents complained of did affect the
result of the election.

Held further, that the declaration of the result by the Returning Officer in
terms of s. 65 of the Ordinance is not a decision which attracts the
jurisdiction exercisable by way of a writ of certiorari.

207

Per Wijetunga J.

As mentioned above, provision has been made in statutes such as the
Parliamentary Elections Act, No. 1 of 1981, Presidential Elections Act, No. 15
of 1981, and the Provincial Councils Elections Act, No. 2 of 1988 for an
election to be challenged appropriately, but not so in the case of the Local
Authorities Elections Ordinance.

... If that be the case, the time is ripe for this court to draw the attention
of the legislature to the crying need for appropriate provisions to be made
for the invalidation of impugned elections under this Ordinance on grounds
similar to those contained in the other statutes aforementioned. Otherwise,
the concept of a free and fair election and the citizen's right to elect
representatives of his choice to the local authority of his area would not
merely be a myth but a farce.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Martin Perera v. Madadombe 73 NLR 25._

_2\. Perera v. Wickramatunga 69 NLR 176._

_3\. Piyadasa v. Gunasingha 42 NLR 339._

_4\. Silva and Others v. Sadique and Others (1978.79.80) 1 Sri L.R 166._

_5\. Morgan v. Simpson (1974) 3 All ER 722._

**_APPEAL_** _from the judgment of the Court of Appeal._

_K. N. Choksy, P.C with Ronald Perera and Ms. K. Wijetunga for appellant._

_K. C. Kamalasabeyson, P.C A.S.G, with A. Gnanadasan SSC and N. Pulle, SC for
1st, 2nd and 28th respondents_.

R. K. W. Goonesekera with Asoka Gunasekera and Gaston Jayakody for 6th
respondent.

Cur. adv. vult.

October 28, 1998.

**WIJETUNGA, J.**

The petitioner, as General Secretary of the United National Party (UNP), filed
an application in the Court of Appeal seeking a mandate in the nature of a
Writ of Certiorari quashing the declaration of the final result of the
election held on 21.3.97 for the purpose of electing members to the Negombo
Municipal Council and for a Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st and 2nd
respondents to hold an election to the said

208

Municipal Council in due compliance with the provisions of the Local
Authorities Elections Ordinance, as amended.

Candidates from the United National Party (UNP), the People's Alliance (PA),
the Nava Sama Samaja Party (NSSP) and the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP)
contested the said election. The particulars regarding the poll and the votes
received by the four political parties aforesaid are as follows:

People's Alliance

|

23,456  
---|---  
  
United National Party

|

22,922  
  
Nava Sama Samaja Party

|

1,201  
  
Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna

|

638  
  
Total polled

|

51,230  
  
Total valid votes

|

48,217  
  
Rejected votes

|

3,013  
  
Registered number of electors

|

67,622  
  
The PA thus obtained a majority of 534 votes over the UNP.

Accordingly, the PA was declared entitled to 12 seats (including 2 additional
'bonus' seats) and the UNP to 10 seats. The NSSP and the JVP were not entitled
to any seats. The Negombo Municipal Council has a total of 22 members.

It was alleged that, out of the 45 polling stations, there were incidents of
intimidation, thuggery and violence in 13 polling stations. The 1st
respondent, the Commissioner of Elections has conceded that his officers have
reported such incidents in 10 polling stations.

The appellant alleges that by reason of the incidents referred to in paragraph
17 of the petition filed in the Court of Appeal, the election was not
conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Local Authorities Elections
Ordinance and the principles laid down in such provisions and the result of
the said election was thereby affected. He further pleaded that accordingly
the conduct of the said election by the 1 st and 2nd respondents is illegal
and a nullity and of no legal effect, and the purported result thereof liable
to be quashed in pursuance of the provisions of section 69 of the Local
Authorities Elections Ordinance. It is on this basis that the appellant sought
mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus from the Court of
Appeal.

209

The Court of Appeal in a well considered judgment, held inter alia that the
court was constrained to hold that the petitioner has failed to establish that
the 1st respondent or his officers failed to comply with the provisions of the
Ordinance. It follows therefrom that there was no breach of the principles
underlying those provisions and referring to the submission of counsel that
the incidents referred to may have prevented the supporters of the UNP from
casting their votes observed that apart from the speculative nature of the
submission, there is absolutely no evidence to establish that the majority of
534 votes in favour of the PA over the UNP would have been the other way
round, even if the elections officers were able to prevent the incidents that
took place at the polling stations. The application was accordingly dismissed
without costs. It is from this order that the petitioner has appealed to this
court.

As correctly submitted by learned President's Counsel for the petitioner at
the hearing before us, the focal point of the case is section 69 of the Local
Authorities Elections Ordinance, as amended, which states that:

No election shall be invalid by reason of any failure to comply with the
provisions of this Ordinance relating to elections if it appears that the
election was conducted in accordance with the principles laid down in such
provisions, and that such failure did not affect the result of the election.

There is no provision in the Ordinance for the invalidation of an election on
grounds such as general intimidation, undue influence, and bribery. However,
they are made punishable offences under section 79 and 81.

Learned counsel for the appellant stated that what was sought from the Court
of Appeal was an order in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari to quash the
declaration made by the Returning Officer in terms of section 65 of the
Ordinance. He submitted that Certiorari would lie to quash a decision or
declaration made under a statute if the statutory process or procedure by
which the decision or declaration is made is not in compliance with the
prescribed procedure; and that the declaration made under section 65 is the
culmination of such a statutory process. Such a determination cannot stand if
there has been non-compliance.

210

The procedure relating to such elections is contained in Part IV of the
Ordinance. Counsel submitted that the provisions relevant to the grounds of
complaint are contained in sections 24, 27, 37 (3) (a) and 44 (e) of the
Ordinance. Sections 49 (1) and (4) (polling agents), 50 (3) (maintenance of
law and order), and 59 (1) (procedure on closure of poll), it was further
submitted, should also be effectually complied with.

Learned President's Counsel for the appellant stated that although the
petition contained allegations in respect of incidents at 13 polling stations,
he was content to accept the version of the 1st respondent that such incidents
had been reported only in respect of 10 polling stations. The allegations were
to the effect that gangs of persons broke into these polling stations, drove
the UNP polling agents out, forcibly took ballot paper books from the hands of
the officers, marked such ballot papers, perforated them and inserted them
into the ballot boxes. It was also alleged that the 6th respondent, who is the
present Mayor of the Negombo Municipal Council, led the gangs and his presence
was specifically mentioned by at least one Presiding Officer, viz that of
Polling Station No. 42, where a UNP candidate was able to pick up one such
ballot paper marked for the PA, with the preferences marked for the 6th
respondent. These incidents are alleged to have taken place between 1 p.m. and
4 p.m. resulting in the polling stations being abandoned and the voters having
dispersed. The Presiding Officers' reports confirmed the alleged incidents but
the persons responsible for such incidents were not identified by the officers
concerned.

It is the position of the 1st respondent that where it was reported that gangs
of persons had forcibly entered the polling stations and had forcibly taken
ballot papers from the officers, had marked and perforated them and had
'stuffed' them into the ballot boxes, he gave specific instructions to the
Counting Centre and removed such ballot papers by identifying ballot papers
which had not been cast by the registered electors, with reference to the
serial numbers given by the Senior Presiding Officers and thus invalidated and
excluded those ballot papers from the count, thereby ensuring that only those
ballot papers which were validly issued by the elections officers to the
registered electors were taken into account at the stage of the count. These
averments are supported by the affidavits of the Counting Officers who state
that having correctly identified such ballot papers

**211**

with reference to the serial numbers, they were invalidated and excluded from
the count, in the presence of the Counting Agents who were at the counting
centres.

While the court unreservedly condemns the actions of those who attempted to
disrupt the poll, thus interfering with the voter's right to a free and fair
election, their identity has unfortunately not been sufficiently established
in these proceedings. It must, however, be emphasized that the officers on
duty at these polling stations were not to blame for such, incidents.

Learned counsel for the appellant pointed out that the Court of Appeal had
taken the view that the transgressions of or non-compliance with the
provisions of the law should be brought home to the culpability of the
officers conducting the election and that the result cannot be vitiated by
reason of wrongful acts done by outsiders. Further, it had been held that the
onus was on the petitioner to prove that the result was in fact affected,
which the Court of Appeal itself recognizes is well nigh impossible. It was
his submission that the affectation of the poll cannot be established with
mathematical precision. But, there was a serious doubt as to whether the
result would have been the same if there were no such incidents. He pointed
out that about 1/4th of the polling stations had been invaded by these gangs.
It was also relevant that the majority obtained by the PA was only about 1% of
the valid votes cast and the voters who had by then not cast their votes had
been unable to do so, due to the acts complained of. He, therefore, submitted
that the election had not been conducted in accordance with the principles
laid down in the provisions of the Ordinance and that such failure did affect
the result of the election. He further submitted that in the absence of
specific provisions in the Ordinance to invalidate such an election, a Writ of
Certiorari was the appropriate remedy to have the result of such an election
quashed.

Learned counsel for the 6th respondent, on the other hand, submitted that in
other enactments dealing with elections such as the Parliamentary Elections
Act and the Presidential Elections Act, specific provision has been made in
regard to the procedure to be adopted for the invalidation of such elections.
But, in regard to Local Authorities, the Legislature has refrained from making
similar provisions, though this Ordinance has been amended as recently as in
1990. Although the petitioner sought to base his case on non-compliance with
the

**212**

provisions of the statute, he was in fact relying on acts of general
intimidation, which though punishable insofar as the perpetrators of such acts
were concerned, was not a ground on which such an election could be avoided
under the Ordinance.

Out of 45 polling stations, alleged non-compliance was only in respect of 10.
Even in regard to those 10 polling stations, the complaints come under the
rubric of general intimation. There had thus been compliance with the law in
regard to the other 35 polling stations. There is no provision other than
section 69 of the Ordinance to challenge an election in respect of a local
authority and that section deals with non-compliance with the provisions of
the Ordinance, in consequence of which the result must be affected. He pointed
out that under section 83 of the Ordinance, any person convicted of an offence
under sections 77 to 82 shall, in addition to any other penalty to which he
may be liable for such offence, be disqualified for a period of five years
reckoned from the date of such conviction from being elected or from sitting
or voting as a member of any local authority. It is significant, he said, that
section 79 deals with acts of bribery, and section 81 with intimidation and
related acts. Transgressions of those sections may result in penal sanctions
insofar as the persons culpable are concerned; but their individual or
collective actions have not been made the basis for the avoidance of such
elections. Thus, section 69 is the only section available to the petitioner.
What the law contemplates is that the election be conducted in accordance with
the principles laid down in the several provisions of the Ordinance, so as not
to affect its result. It was counsel's submission that the election had indeed
been conducted in accordance with those provisions and section 69 therefore
has no application to the facts and circumstances of this case.

He further submitted that these proceedings could not have been properly
brought by way of an application for a Writ. Having regard to the grounds
alleged to quash the result, he submitted that a Writ of Certiorari is wholly
inappropriate and the petitioner cannot convert what he referred to as a Writ
Court' into an 'Election Court'. Is it conceivable, he asked, that these
allegations can be substantiated merely by affidavit and not by oral evidence?
Complaints of this nature are triable before a properly constituted 'Election
Court1 where oral evidence could be led and the witnesses subjected to cross-
examination. The elaborate procedure laid down for challenging a

213

Parliamentary election, etc., is a clear indication that once an election is
held, it is not easily set aside.

Counsel further submitted that what the petitioner sought to quash was the
final result of the said election which was merely a declaration of the result
of such election by the Returning Officer, in terms of section 65 of the
Ordinance. He had no discretion in regard to the declaration of the result, in
that he had merely to add up and determine the number of votes cast for each
recognized political party or independent group, from the statements of votes
cast at each polling station. That is not a 'decision' but merely the
proclamation of the result and as such it cannot be the subject of an
application for a Writ of Certiorari.

The learned Additional Solicitor-General for the 1st and 2nd respondents
submitted that he defends the declaration made under the relevant section of
the Ordinance. He pointed out that while certain sections of the Ordinance
relate to purely ministerial acts, others involve a discretion and a decision,
such as in section 31. Under section 65 (1) (a), he submitted, that upon the
receipt of the necessary documents, the Returning Officer has no choice but to
declare the result. As non-compliance naturally implies a duty to perform a
statutory function, it is necessary to ascertain whether the 1st and 2nd
respondents have not complied with the provisions contemplated by section 69.
Clearly the answer is 'none'.

An election contemplated by section 69 can be conducted only by the 1st
respondent and his officers, and non-compliance with the provisions of the
Ordinance referred to therein necessarily envisages the acts of the officers
concerned with the conduct of such election. Adverting to the incidents
alleged by the petitioner, he stated that the 1st respondent has admitted all
the incidents except three; but, significantly he has made reference to
'persons unknown', since the identity of the persons responsible for such
incidents was not within the knowledge of the 1st respondent or his officers.

He submitted that the issue before the court being a contested one, it could
not have been adequately dealt with in proceedings by way of Writ. He referred
to the several provisions in the Presidential Elections Act, the Parliamentary
Elections Act, and the Provincial Councils Elections Act, which provide for an
election to be annulled

214

 according to the procedure laid down in those enactments. Such provisions are
not available under the Local Authorities Elections Ordinance.

Learned President's Counsel for the petitioner submitted in reply that the
decision in Martin Perera v. Madadombe(1) has no application to the facts and
circumstances of this case and the ratio decidendi of that case therefore does
not apply. (Fernando, CJ. had referred there to the decision in Perera v.
Wickramatunga(2), with acceptance, while Piyadasa v. Gunasinha(3) had been
overruled.) He laid emphasis on the fact that the! acts complained of in
Martin Perera's case were committed during the whole campaign, (not on polling
day), before the commencement of the poll and outside the precincts of the
polling station. There was no complaint of general intimidation on polling
day.

In Perera v. Wickramatunge (Supra) also, the general intimidation complained
of was during the polls campaign.

As regards Piyadasa v. Gunasinghe (Supra) he pointed out that the present
section 69 of the Ordinance was then not in existence.

He observed that in the instant case, the court is dealing with acts of
intimidation on polling day, at the polling stations, when sections 24 to 68
were in operation. The control of the election at that time was in the hands
of the Officers of the Commissioner of Elections. He submitted that the fact
that there was general intimidation on polling day makes a fundamental
difference in regard to the operation of section 69.

As the will of the majority must prevail at the close of the poll and by the
declaration of the results the Returning Officer decides who has been elected,
such acts of general intimidation affect the rights of the subject. The
declaration by the Returning Officer must evidence the will of the majority,
as expressed through the procedure laid down in sections 54 to 68, which is
within the field of public law. The Commissioner and the Returning Officers
are statutory functionaries and if the final determination is flawed by a
failure to observe any relevant step in the procedure, then the declaration of
the result too is flawed and cannot stand in law. The purpose is to enable the
voter to exercise his right effectively and without hindrance. It was his
submission that this election was not conducted in accordance

215

 with the principles laid down in the relevant provisions of the Ordinance and
section 69 mandates that such an election shall be invalid.

As regards the submission of the respondents that Certiorari is in any event
not the appropriate remedy, it was his contention that these being statutory
provisions and the officers being statutory functionaries, the public law
element necessary for the issuance of such a Writ is satisfied. In the past,
when the courts had recourse to the Writ of Quo Warranto, the system of
election to local authorities was entirely different. The election of a member
at that time was to a particular ward of a local authority and such an
election could appropriately be challenged through a Writ of Quo Warranto, but
under the Proportional Representation system, the entire local authority area
is taken together and only one declaration is made by the Returning Officer in
respect of such local authority. Certiorari, he submitted, is therefore the
appropriate remedy, as one has to attack the final declaration made in respect
of the entire Municipal Council.

Section 69, he said, admittedly does not provide a remedy. He therefore
contended that the petitioner must necessarily have recourse to the Writ of
Certiorari, that being the only available remedy in the circumstances. He
referred us to Silva & Others v. Sadique & Others in that connection.

Learned counsel for the 6th respondent, on the other hand, submitted that what
is sought is the cancellation of the entire election which affects the rights
of persons against whom there are no allegations whatsoever. He pointed out
that as Martin Perera's case does not refer to the facts but discusses only
the law relating to the subject, there is no material to indicate whether the
general intimidation complained of in that case was on polling day or
otherwise. The broad issue there, he said, was whether Quo Warranto could be
used in those circumstances, which under the Proportional Representation
system has no relevance.

In any event, it was for the petitioner to establish that the failure, if any,
to comply with the provisions of the Ordinance did affect the result of the
election and in the instant case he submitted that the petitioner has failed
to do so.

216

The learned Additional Solicitor-General drew our attention to the legislative
pattern between non-compliance and general intimidation, etc. He referred us
to the provisions of the Ordinance which deal with offences relating to
elections (section 77 et seq.) and the penal consequences resulting from the
contravention of such provisions. He submitted that the attempt on the part of
the petitioner to introduce general intimidation as an ingredient of non-
compliance under section 69 is not permissible. The fact that it is alleged
that there was general intimidation within the polling station, he said, would
not convert such an act to non-compliance within the meaning of section 69.
The alleged acts are those of third parties who had no hand in the, conduct of
the election, which was essentially within the province of the officers
concerned. As section 69 speaks of the election being conducted in accordance
with the principles laid down in the relevant provisions, it necessarily
refers to the role of the officers who conduct such election and not to that
of third parties. The Legislature, he submitted, does not contemplate the
setting aside of an election to a local authority on the grounds urged by the
petitioner, as is evidenced by the fact that no provision has been made
therefor in the Local Authorities Elections Ordinance unlike in other statutes
such as the Presidential Elections Act, the Parliamentary Elections Act and
the Provincial Councils Elections Act where specific provision has been made
and the necessary legislative machinery installed for the annulment of such
elections, where appropriate.

The main question with which the court is concerned in these proceedings is
whether a Writ of Certiorari is available in these circumstances or is the
appropriate remedy to invalidate such an election, where admittedly there is
no specific legal provision therefor. But, before one gets to that question,
it is necessary in the instant case to consider whether there has been non-
compliance with the provisions of the Ordinance relating to Local Authorities
Elections.

Lord Denning, MR in Morgan v. Simpson (5) dealing with the question of the
validity of a local government election which was challenged on the ground
that it had not been conducted 'substantially in accordance with the law as to
elections' and alternatively that the omissions of the polling clerks had
affected the result, declared the election invalid on the alternative ground
aforementioned. In that

217

connection, he considered a number of decisions of the English courts relevant
thereto. But those cases too dealt with non-compliance with the law by
elections officers and not with matters concerning third parties whose acts
may affect the ultimate result of the election. Thus, those decisions would
not be of assistance in regard to the matter before us.

Fernando, CJ., in Martin Perera's case (supra) has subjected section 69 to
very careful scrutiny. He states (at page 29) that: having regard to the sense
in which the expression failure to comply' has been used by the Legislature of
this country for a hundred years, I greatly doubt whether in s. 69 of Cap. 262
that expression was used to connote anything other than breaches of statutory
duties.

He goes on to state (at page 30) that: it is perfectly clear that sections 24
to 68 of Cap. 262 deal with the conduct of an election, and entrust various
officers at different stages with the duty of conducting elections. If
therefore any such officer does not comply with some provisions of those
sections, it may properly be said that the election was not conducted in
accordance with the principles which underlie those provisions. It is thus
manifest that s. 69 was intended to apply in such a case. But can it properly
be said that the giving and taking of bribes to and by voters forms part of
the conduct of an election?

Again (at page 31) His Lordship observes that: the language of the section
leads clearly to the inference that the contemplated reason for invalidity is
that the election was not conducted by the proper officials in accordance with
the principles of ss. 24 to 67. Once that inference is reached, a court must
hesitate to institute a search for some further hidden intention.

Applying these dicta, with which I am in respectful agreement, to the facts of
this case, it is crystal clear that the acts complained of by the petitioner
form no part of the conduct of the election, however reprehensible they may
be. They were undoubtedly the acts of third parties who had no legitimate role
to play in the conduct of the impugned election. Though they may have
committed penal offences, they surely could not have been in breach of
statutory duties, as they had none to perform.

218

To my mind, the fact that the alleged acts were committed on election day or
at the polling booths makes no difference in law as far as the applicability
of section 69 is concerned. The election process proper commences at least
from the stage when steps are taken by elections officers under part IV of the
Ordinance (section 26 et seq.). From then onwards, the officers of the
Commissioner of Elections are in sole charge of the conduct of the election
Specific provision has been made in the Ordinance prohibiting certain acts not
only on the date of the poll, but during the period commencing on the first
day of the nomination period and ending on the day following the day on which
the poll is taken (sections 81 A, 81B, etc.). But the acts so specified do not
even include incidents of the nature referred to in paragraph 17 of the
petition. The distinction sought to be drawn by learned counsel for the
petitioner in that regard is thus not tenable.

The petitioner, therefore, cannot succeed on the ground that there had been a
failure to comply with the relevant provisions of the Ordinance.

In the instant case, even though the PA gained control of the Council by a
slim majority over the UNP, the evidence adduced is insufficient to determine
that the incidents complained of did affect the result of the election, in the
sense that had it not been for those incidents, the decision would have been
in favour of the UNP. The Court of Appeal, in my view, rightly observed that
the petitioner will be faced with the well nigh impossible task of proving
beyond reasonable doubt ... or at a high degree of probability . . . the
allegations in the petition, solely on supporting affidavits and documents.

Unlike the proceedings in an election petition case where oral evidence is led
and the witnesses are subjected to cross-examination, thereby providing an
opportunity to the parties as well as the court to come to grips with the true
nature of the acts complained of and the consequences thereof, the procedure
in an application for a Writ of Certiorari where the matters are decided on
affidavits and documents, to say the least, is a very poor substitute for the
procedure followed at the hearing of an election petition. Evidence tendered
through affidavits, etc., cannot, in these proceedings, be adequate,

219

even if tested by cross-examination of the deponents of such affidavits. Nor
is such a court equipped to effectively deal with the validity of an impugned
election through the usual procedure applicable to the grant of a Writ of
Certiorari. Such a Writ is therefore not merely not the ideal remedy, but, in
my view, is quite an inappropriate remedy.

As regards the question whether in any event a Writ of Certiorari would lie to
quash the declaration of the result of an election by the Returning Officer in
terms of section 65 of the Ordinance, one must necessarily examine the nature
of the Returning Officer's functions in respect thereof. The Returning Officer
does not have to exercise a discretion or make a 'decision' at that stage, in
that he has merely to declare the result on the basis of the total number of
valid votes cast for each political party or independent group, as reflected
in the returns sent by the relevant officers of each polling station. This is
no more than a ministerial act and by its very nature does not attract the
jurisdiction exercisable by way of a Writ of Certiorari.

Jain & Jain, Principles of Administrative Law, 4th Ed., states at page 325
that: functions dischargeable by the administration may either be ministerial
or discretionary. A ministerial function is one where the relevant law
prescribes the duty to be performed by the concerned authority in certain and
specific terms leaving nothing to the discretion or judgment of the authority.
It does not involve investigation into disputed facts or making of choices.
The authority concerned acts in strict obedience to the law which imposes on
it a simple and definite duty in respect of which it has no choice.

The case of Silva & Others (supra) cited by learned counsel for the appellant
has no application to the facts and circumstances of this case, as the court
was there considering an objection in limine on the ground, inter alia, that
Certiorari did not lie to quash Reports made to the President of the Republic
pursuant on inquiries held upon Warrants issued under the Commissions of
Inquiry Act and the binding effect of such orders or decisions.

Undoubtedly there is a serious lacuna in the law as regards impugned elections
under the Local Authorities Elections Ordinance, as amended. If the
legislative intent is to be gathered by reference

**220**

to the several amendments to that Ordinance, which has been in existence since
1946, and the last such amendment being as recently as in 1990, it does not
appear that the failure to provide the necessary machinery to annul such an
election was a mere omission or oversight on the part of the Legislature. As
mentioned above, provision has been made in statutes such as the Parliamentary
Elections Act, No. 1 of 1981, Presidential Elections Act, No. 15 of 1981, and
the Provincial Councils Elections Act, No. 2 of 1988 for an election to be
challenged appropriately, but not so in the case of the Local Authorities
Elections Ordinance.

Therefore, one cannot but conclude that the failure to make such provision in
respect of elections to local authorities was deliberate on the part of the
Legislature. If that be the case, the time is ripe for this court to draw the
attention of the Legislature to the crying need for appropriate provisions to
be made for the invalidation of impugned elections under this Ordinance on
grounds similar to those contained in the other statutes aforementioned.
Otherwise, the concept of a free and fair election and the citizen's right to
elect representatives of his choice to the local authority of his area would
not merely be a myth, but a farce.

The acts of general intimidation complained of in these proceedings should be
an eye-opener to those vested with the responsibility of good governance to
take appropriate steps to prevent such occurrences in the future, lest it be
thought that even after fifty years of Independence, the oft lamented but
hitherto unradicated scourge of election violence has become part of our
election culture'.

For the reasons aforesaid, the court, though reluctantly, is obligated to hold
that the appellant cannot succeed in this appeal.

The appeal is accordingly dismissed, but without costs.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.** \- I agree.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

Appeal dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/52.html_  

