##  Premaratne v. Kodituwakku Arachchi - SLR - 17, Vol 1 of 2000 [1999] LKSC
52; (2000) 1 Sri LR 17 (26 October 1999)

**17**  

**PREMARATNE  
 v.  
KODITUWAKKU ARACHCHI**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
SC APPEAL 55/96  
CA 926/82 (F)  
DC KANDY 1416/RE  
6th OCTOBER, 1999  
  
_Landlord and tenant - Subletting of premises - Right of purchaser of premises
to sue tenant- Defendant's plea of using premises for a business.  
_  
The plaintiff-respondent (the respondent) who purchased the premises in
dispute in 1979 from the Ceylon Insurance Corporation filed action on
17.07.1980 for ejectment of the 15' defendant - appellant (the appellant) and
the 2"d defendant (one Ranasinghe) from the premises. The first ground of
ejectment was arrears of rent and the second was that the appellant had sublet
the premises to the 2"d defendant without the written permission of the
landlord. The original landlord was the Ceylon Insurance Corporation. The
evidence led at the trial showed that there was an ongoing business of a hotel
being run on the premises at the time it was handed over to the 2nd defendant.
The respondent admitted that at the time he purchased the premises the 2"
defendant was running a business there. There was also a notarially executed
document IV 10 by which the appellant gave the management of running an
"eating house" in the premises to the 2nd defendant. At the trial it was
proved that the appellant was not in arrears of rent. As regards the 2nd
ground of ejectment, the District Judge held that no subletting had been
proved.  
  
**Held :  
**  
Per Dheeraratne, J.  
  
(1) "The proposition that where a tenant of any premises sublets them in
contravention of the Rent Act and the premises are thereafter sold by the
landlord to a 3rd party, the purchaser is entitled to maintain an action for
the ejectment of the tenant and the subtenant, is amply covered by authority
and there is no dispute about that"

**18**

(2) There is no evidence to show that the document IV 10 is a sham and not the
document that it purported to be.  
  
**Cases referred to:**  
  
1\.  Rathnasingham v. Catheraswamy (1956) 58 NLR 476  
  
2\. Thaha v. Sadeen (1968) 72 NLR 142  
  
3\. Sumanasena v. Herft (1991) 2 Sri LR 342  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgement of the Court of Appeal  
  
P. A. D. Samarasekera P. C. with G. L. Geethananda and Keerthi Sri Gunawardena
for substituted 1st defendant - appellant.  
  
A. K. Premadasa P. C. with C. E. de Silva for plaintiff - respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

October 26, 1999  
**DHEERARATNE, J.  
**  
The plaintiff - respondent (respondent) as landlord, filed action against the
original 1st defendant - appellant (appellant) and the 2nd defendant one
Ranasinghe, to have them ejected from premises bearing assessment no. 23/16
Dalada Veediya, Kandy. The Is' ground of ejectment was arrears of rent and the
2nd was that the appellant had sublet the premises to the 2nd defendant
without the written permission of the landlord. The original landlord of the
appellant in respect of the demised premises was the Ceylon Insurance
Corporation. The respondent purchased the premises in 1979 and filed the
present action against the defendants on 17.07.1980. The respondent thus based
his 2nd cause of action on the alleged subletting of the premises by the
appellant during the time he was a tenant of the former landlord. The
proposition that where a tenant of any premises sublets them in contravention
of the Rent Act and the premises are thereafter sold by the landlord to a 3`d
party, the purchaser is entitled to maintain an action in ejectment of the
tenant and the subtenant, is amply covered by authority and there is no
dispute about that. See Rathnasingham Vs. Catheraswamy(1) and Thaha Vs.
Sadeen(2).  
  
At the trial it was proved that the appellant had duly paid all rent in
respect of the premises to the local authority and that he was not in arrears
of rent. The learned trial judge held that no subletting had been proved.
However, the Court of Appeal reversed that finding reached by the learned
trial judge. The only reasoning given by the Court of Appeal in its somewhat
brief judgment to reverse the finding, was as follows - "There is evidence to
show that the 15' defendant-respondent sublet the premises to the 2nd
defendant-respondent, for otherwise there is no reason for the 2nd defendant-
respondent to pay the 1st defendant-respondent. If as said by the defendants
(the) 2nd respondent was the manager of the 1st respondent - defendant's
business he should have monthly paid the 2nd defendant - respondent".  
  
At the trial evidence was led to the effect that in January 1974 by a
notarially executed document IV 10 the appellant gave the management of
running an "eating house" carried on in the premises in question to the 2nd
defendant on a commission basis at the rate of Rs. 15/= a day. The learned
trial judge considered the evidence led that there was an ongoing business of
a hotel being run in the premises at the time it was handed over to the 2nd
defendant. The respondent admitted that at the time he purchased the premises
in 1979 the 2nd defendant was running a hotel there. The learned trial judge
considered the evidence given by the appellant that at some point of time a
carpentry shop was carried on at the premises. However, on the evidence led he
was satisfied that what was handed over by the appellant to the 2nd defendant
was an ongoing business of a hotel. The evidence given by the appellant that
as he fell ill about 1974, he was compelled to go to his sister who lived at
Kantale, leaving the management of the business in the hands of the 2nd,
defendant, was accepted

**20**

by the learned trial judge. It is clear, although not said so expressly by the
trial judge, on the evidence led, he considered the occupation of the premises
by the 2nd defendant was subordinate to the rights conveyed by document IV 10.
(see Sumanasena v. Herft(3).  
  
Learned counsel for the respondent relied strongly on the Business Names
Registration Certificate for the year 1979 in respect of the business run in
the premises. This document in my view is also consistent with the position of
the management of the business having being handed over to the 2nd defendant.
There is no evidence led or elicited in cross examination to show
circumstances pointing to the fact that the document IV 10 is a sham and not
the document that it purported to be.  
  
For the above reasons I set aside the judgement of the Court of Appeal and
affirm the judgement of the District Court. The appellant is entitled to a sum
of Rs. 10,000/= as costs of this appeal.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/52.html_  

