##  Yasodha Holdings (Private) Ltd. v. People'S Bank - SLR - 382, Vol 3 of
1998 [1998] LKSC 53; (1998) 3 Sri LR 382 (22 October 1998)

**382**

**YASODHA HOLDINGS (PRIVATE) LTD.  
v.  
PEOPLE'S BANK**

SUPREME COURT

AMERASINGHE, J.,

PERERA, J.,

BANDARANAYAKE, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 129/97

H.C. COLOMBO (CIVIL) NO. 92/97 (1)

SEPTEMBER 15, 1998

_Civil Procedure - Action for accounting - Interim Injunction and Enjoining
Order._

The appellant instituted an action in the High Court against the People's Bank
for an accounting and sought, inter alia , an interim injunction and enjoining
order restraining the Bank from -

(a) transferring the appellant's facility in the Bank to the non-performing
category; and

(b) reporting the plaintiff to the Sri Lanka Credit Information Bureau until
final determination of the action instituted in the High Court.

The High Court refused this relief and the appellant appealed to the Supreme
Court.

**Held:**

The claim that the appellant does not owe the Bank anything is not borne by
the evidence on record. A prima facie case had not been made out in the sense
that there is a bona fide contention between the parties on the question of
indebtedness. The balance of convenience lies in allowing the normal banking
laws and procedures to operate. The equities are in favour of the Bank. The
submission that the Bank would not stand to lose anything is untenable having

383

regard to the fact that the loan portfolio, liquidity and profitability have
been and will continue to be affected if it cannot take such measures as it is
entitled in law to take to protect its interests. Moreover the appellant has
failed to show that irreparable harm would be sustained unless the injunction
was granted.

If the Bank, acting in accordance with the law, takes certain steps that might
eventually harm the appellant's business, the harm sought to be prevented does
not relate to acts that are unlawful or wrongful. The harm, if any, that might
be caused would be that which the appellant has brought upon itself by failing
to liquidate its debts.

Per Amerasinghe, J.

The power which the court possesses of granting injunctions should be very
cautiously exercised and only on clear and satisfactory grounds. An
application for an injunction is an appeal to an extraordinary power of the
court and the applicant is bound to make out a case showing a clear necessity
for its exercise.

**APPEAL** from order of the High Court of Colombo.

_L. C. Seneviratne, PC with Desmond Fernando, PC, Suren Peiris, R. Y. D.
Jayasekera and H. V. Situge_ for appellant.

_E. D. Wickremanayake with Gomin Dayasiri, Kushan de Alwis and Ms. Priyanthi
Gunaratne_ for respondent.

Cur. adv. vult.

October 22, 1998.

**AMERASINGHE, J.**

The appellant instituted an action in the High Court against the People's Bank
for an accounting relating to transactions between the appellant and Bank. The
appellant sought, inter alia, an Interim Injunction and an Enjoining order
restraining the Bank from -

(a) transferring the appellant's facility in the Bank to the non-performing
category; and

384

(b) reporting the plaintiff to the Sri Lanka Credit Information Bureau until
the final determination of the action instituted in the High Court.

The High Court in its Order dated the 3rd of July, 1997, refused to grant the
relief prayed for.

The appellant then applied for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court from that
Order of the High Court. On 18.09.97, this court granted leave on the question
whether the learned Judge of the High Court was in error by refusing to grant
an Order that the plaintiff was eligible to the grant of facilities from the
Bank in the normal course of business and in refusing the grant of the Interim
Injunction and Enjoining order prayed for.

The appellant was an importer of sugar, cement and other items, and between
December, 1991 and April, 1996, had been advanced very large sums of money,
from time to time, by the Bank, in addition to being afforded the facility of
opening Letters of Credit. At several meetings between the Chairman of the
appellant and the Board of the Bank, it was agreed by the Chairman of the
appellant to repay some of debts owed to the Bank by the appellant. By his
letter dated 3rd January, 1997, the Assistant General Manager of the Bank
pointed out that the appellant had failed to comply with the undertakings
given with regard to the settlement of interest accruals and the finalization
of securities. He also stated as follows:

It is needless to mention that a sum of Rupees 3,383.5 million lent to your
group of companies by way of short-term advances are blocked, together with
the interest due thus creating an immense problem to our branch.

From about February, 1997, the appellant was warned by the Bank, from time to
time, that the Bank would be compelled to transfer the appellant's facility
out of the performing category and to inform the Sri Lanka Credit Information
Bureau of the situation. On the 12th of February, 1997, the General Manager of
the Bank informed the Chairman of the appellant that the Central Bank of Sri
Lanka had

385

refused to grant covering approval for the credit facilities extended by the
Bank to the appellant, since the Single Borrower Exposure Limit in terms of
the Banking Regulations, had been exceeded. The Chairman of the Bank on the
20th of February, 1997, reiterated the fact that the Central Bank had refused
to grant covering approval for exceeding the prescribed amount of
accommodation. He drew attention to the fact that the Chairman of the
appellant had agreed to pay a sum of rupees 800 million initially and that the
total facility outstanding had not been brought down to the agreed limit of
Rs.1,100 million. The Chairman pointed out that the appellant's failure to
comply with these undertakings had a direct impact on the loan portfolio,
liquidity and profitability of the Bank, and called upon the Chairman of the
appellant company to discharge the obligations he had undertaken. The
appellant was sent a detailed statement showing the liabilities of the
appellant On the 20th of March, 1997, the Chairman of the Bank wrote to the
Chairman of the appellant observing that the appellant had failed to
regularize matters and stated that if it did not do so by the 10th April,
1997, the Bank would be compelled to transfer the appellant's facilities to
the non-performing category and that it would inform the Sri Lanka Credit
Information Bureau of the position.

However, on 7th May, 1997, the Chairman of the Bank informed the Chairman of
the appellant that, having regard to what the appellant had stated in his
letter dated 2nd April, 1997, the Bank would neither transfer facilities of
the appellant to the non-performing category nor report the matter to the
Credit Information Bureau. The Bank agreed to accede to the appellant's
request to extend the period for the payment of Rs. 810 million up to 30th
June, 1997. However, the Chairman of the Bank drew attention to the fact that
the non-payment of capital as well as interest amounting to Rs. 500 million
had badly affected the profitability and liquidity of the Bank. As such we
will be compelled to take action to recover dues to the Bank by realizing the
securities offered by the group of companies, and initiating legal action
under the Debt Recovery Laws and report outstanding dues to the Credit
Information Bureau, if you will fail to adhere to the proposals made in para 3
of this letter on or before 30th June, 1997.

386

The appellant maintains that if the Bank had granted credit facilities in
excess of permitted limits, the appellant should not be penalized in any way.
The appellant maintains that on a balance of convenience the relief prayed for
should be granted for the defendant Bank would suffer no hardship either
financially or in any form of restriction to its banking activity if the
interim relief prayed for was granted; whereas the appellant would suffer
grave and irreparable harm if the Injunction and Enjoining order were not
granted.

The learned Judge of the High Court considered the question of balance of
convenience. He stated that permitting the appellant to utilize several
billions of rupees which it admits it owes the defendant Bank without any
security, thereby adversely affecting the loan portfolio, the liquidity and
profitability of the Bank, placed the Bank in a superior position as far as
balance of convenience was concerned.

I am of the view that the balance of convenience in this case lies in allowing
the normal banking laws and procedures to operate. The equities are in favour
of the Bank. The submission that the Bank would not stand to lose anything is
an untenable proposition having regard to the fact that its loan portfolio,
liquidity and profitability have been and will continue to be affected if it
cannot take such measures as it is entitled in law to take to protect its
interests. Moreover, the appellant has failed to show that irreparable harm
would be sustained unless the injunction was granted. The letter of 26
February, 1996, from the Chairman of the (appellant to the General Manager of
the Bank makes it abundantly clear that the appellant had persuaded other
Banks to assist it in its business. If the Bank, acting in accordance with the
law, takes certain steps that might eventually harm the appellant's business,
the appellant should not be restrained, for the harm sought to be prevented
does not relate to acts that are unlawful or wrongful, whatever the
appellant's preference might be in the matter. The harm, if any, that might be
caused would be that which the appellant has brought upon itself by failing to
liquidate its debts.

The appellant contended that it did not owe the Bank anything and that the
accounts of the Bank were unacceptable. This is a strange position to take at
this stage having regard to the fact that

387

 the appellant has never disputed the correctness of the accounts which he
received on a daily basis. The letter of the Chairman of the Bank to the
appellant dated 14th August, 1996, indicates the fact that the appellant owed
substantial sums of money to Bank. The appellant had accepted the fact that it
was indebted at discussions at Board meetings referred to in the letter of the
Chairman of the Bank to the Chairman of the appellant dated 20th February,
1997. Its indebtedness is also accepted by the letter of the Chairman of the
appellant in his letter dated 26th February, 1996, referred to above. The
basis of the main action is that the appellant does not owe the Bank any sum
of money.

This is not borne out by the evidence in the record and therefore the
application for an injunction must also fail on the ground that a prima facie
case had not been made out in the sense that there is a bona fide contention
between the parties on the question of indebtedness. Of course a different
view might well be necessary at the end of the trial when all the evidence has
been let in. However, for the limited purpose of deciding whether an
injunction should be granted, I hold that a prima facie case has not been made
out and that an injunction should not be granted.

The power which the court possesses of granting injunctions should be very
cautiously exercised and only on clear and satisfactory grounds. An
application for an injunction is an appeal to an extraordinary power of the
court and the applicant is bound to make out a case showing a clear necessity
for its exercise. The appellant has failed to do so, and the appeal is
therefore dismissed with costs. The decision of the learned Judge of the High
Court dated 3rd July, 1997, is affirmed.

**PERERA, J**. - I agree.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

Appeal dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/53.html_  

