##  Ranchagoda v. Viola - SLR - 1, Vol 2 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 53; (1999) 2 Sri
LR 1 (18 January 1999)

**1**

**RANCHAGODA  
v.  
VIOLA**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 133/96  
C.A. NO. 129/88 (F)  
D.C. BALAPITIYA NO. 2076/L  
DECEMBER 07, 1998

_Rei vindicatio action - Misdirection by the District Court on the primary
facts - Order for retrial._

In an action for declaration of title to lots 1 and 2 of the Survey Plan filed
of record, it was the case for the plaintiff that her father Pelis Appuhamy
''asweddumized'' and cultivated the said lots for a continuous period of 40
years and acquired a prescriptive title thereto. Those lots which constituted
the subject matter of the action were cultivated with cinnamon and vegetable.
Lot 3 in the same plan was a paddy field cultivated by Pelis Appuhamy as a
tenant cultivator. The District Judge who dismissed the action stated ''the
petitioner's father was a tenant cultivator. A tenant cultivator cannot
acquire title by prescription'.

**Held:**

The District Judge had failed to appreciate that according to the plaintiff,
lots 1 and 2 which formed the subject-matter of the action were not paddy
lands. This was a serious misdirection on the primary facts which vitiates the
judgment of the District Court. The interests of justice demand a fresh trial.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_Rohan Sahabandu_ for the 1st defendant-appellant.

_R. K S. Sureshchandra_ for the plaintiff-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult.  
  
_**2**

January 18, 1999.  
**  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.**

The plaintiff instituted these proceedings against the original defendant for
a declaration of title to the land described in the schedule to the plaint,
ejectment therefrom, and damages. According to the plaintiff, the subject-
matter of the action is shown as lots 1 and 2 plan No. 200 made by D. G.
Mendis, Licensed Surveyor and filed of record marked "X". It is important to
note that lot 3 in plan "X" does not form a part of the subject-matter of the
action.

It is the case for the plaintiff that her father Pelis Appuhamy cultivated
lots 1 and 2 in plan "X" for a continuous period of over 40 years in his own
right, and had thus acquired a prescriptive title thereto. Lots 1 and 2 were
unoccupied and uncultivated land which Pelis Appuhamy "asweddumized" and
cultivated with cinnamon and vegetables. On the other hand, lot 3 in plan "X"
was a paddy field and was cultivated by Pelis Appuhamy as the tenant
cultivator of one Samaranayake and his predcessors in title.

The original defendant denied the plaintiff's claim of prescriptive possession
and sought to claim title, inter alia, on two deeds marked V7 and V8. I do not
wish to make any comments on the merits of the case of either the plaintiff or
the defendant in view of the order I propose to make.

After trial, the District Court dismissed the plaintiff's action. The
plaintiff preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal against the judgment of
the District Court. The Court of Appeal held that the District Court had
failed to analyse the oral evidence on prescriptive possession and sent the
case back for a trial de novo. The present appeal to this court is by the
defendant against the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

On a reading of the judgment of the District Court I find that besides the
failure to adequately consider the oral evidence in regard to the claim of
prescriptive possession, the District Judge has misunderstood

3

the case for the plaintiff as presented at the trial. In the course of his
judgment he states that the extracts of the Paddy Lands Register for the
period 1966 to 1971 do not show that the plaintiff's father was the "owner
cultivator" of any part of the subject-matter of the action. He further states
that "the plaintiffs father was a tenant cultivator. A tenant cultivator
cannot acquire title by prescription". The District Judge has failed to
appreciate that according to the plaintiff lots 1 and 2 which form the
subject-matter of the action were not paddy lands. These two lots were
cultivated with cinnamon and vegetables. The entries in the Paddy Lands
Register therefore have no relevance at all to lots 1 and 2. There is here a
serious misdirection on the primary facts.

This alone, in my view, vitiates the judgment of the District Court.

In the facts and circumstances of this case, the interests of justice demand
that the case be remitted to the District Court for a fresh trial. The
judgment of the Court of Appeal is accordingly affirmed and the appeal is
dismissed, but without costs.

I direct the District Court to give priority to the hearing of this case and
to ensure that the trial is speedily concluded.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

_Case remitted to the District Court for a fresh trial._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/53.html_  

