##  Ismath v. Selladurai - SLR - 353, Vol 1 of 1995 [1995] LKSC 54; (1995) 1
Sri LR 353 (28 September 1995)

**353**

**ISMATH** **  
v.**  
**SELLADURAI**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO, J  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
S.C. 26/94  
CA 502/91  
D.C. COLOMBO 7336/RE  
AUG UST 25, 1995.

_     Landlord Ten n(- Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972 - Sections 22(i) (b), 22(i)
(bb) and 18 - Meaning of the words "premises which have been let to the tenant
on or after commencement of this Act" \- Attornment - When the premises have
been let._

In 1941 the plaintiff's mother let the premises in suit to the defendant's
father. The Premises Were gifted to the plaintiff by her mother in 1986.
Defendants father, the original tenant, did in 1965 and her mother succeeded
to the tenancy. Upon her death in 1982, the defendant succeeded. After the
premises were gifted to the plaintiff the defendant attorned to her on
1.9.1986. The plaintiff filed action to eject the defendant on the ground of
reasonable requirement in terms of subsection 22(1) (b) on the basis that the
premises were let to the defendant after the commencement of the Rent Act
(1.3.1972). The question arose as to the applicability of that subsection. The
District Court held that the subsection applied but the Court of Appeal held
that it did not.

**Held:**

1\. The wording of the subsection 22(1) (b) unequivocally suggests that the
tenant whose ejectment is sought and the tenant to whom the premises have been
let, is one and the same person.

2\. Words "which have been let to the tenant" are descriptive of the
premises". This description is made in relation to the tenant and not in
relation to the landlord; therefore the attornment of the tenant to the
landlord in 1986 has no relevance.

3\. The ordinary meaning of the word "let" is "to grant to a tenant or hirer".
That word cannot mean anything other than creation of the tenancy in respect
of the premises with the tenant whose ejectment is sought; it is rather
artificial to colour the meaning of that word with reference to a contract of
letting which subsisted with the original tenant.

354

4\. The premises have been let to the defendant-tenant in 1982, that is after
the commencement of the Rent Act and the plaintiff-appellant is therefore
entitled to succeed.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Weerasuriya v. Manamperi (1992) 1 Sri LR 31  
_  
_2\. Sriyani Peris v. Mohamed (1986) 2 Sri LR 384  
_  
_3\. Fernando v. Wijesekera (1969) 73 NLR 10  
_  
_4\. Justin Fernando v. Abdul Rahaman (1951) 52 NLR 463.  
_  
_5\. Miriam Lawrence v. A. V. Arnolda; 1984 Bar Association Law Journal Vol. 1
Part IV 136, (1981) 1 Sri LR 232.  
_  
_6\. Chinnamma v. Dewan Harish AIR 1972 (Delhi) 182 at 189._

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_A. A. M. Marleen With Ms. R. Lamahewa and M. Fawzin for appellant.  
_  
_S. Mahenthiran for respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 28, 1995.  
**DHEERARATNE J.**

In 1941 the plaintiff's mother let the premises which is the subject matter of
this action to the defendant's father. The plaintiff became owner of the
premises in 1986 by virtue of a deed of gift from her mother. Defendant's
father, the original tenant, died in 1965 and her mother succeeded to the
tenancy upon her death in 1982, the defendant succeeded as the tenant of the
premises. After the premises were gifted to the plaintiff, the defendant
attorned to her as her tenant. In 1989 the plaintiff filed this action against
the defendant in terms of subsection 22(1) (b) of the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972,
on the ground of reasonable requirement of the premises for her occupation as
a residence. At the trial it was recorded as an admission that the defendant
became a tenant of the plaintiff from 1.9.1986 (that being the date of
attornment).

The learned trial judge gave judgment: in favour of the plaintiff, but the
Court of Appeal reversed that judgment and made order

355

 dismissing the plaintiff's action. The plaintiff h s now appealed, to this
court.

The only question canvassed before us is the applicability or otherwise of the
wording of subsection 22(1) (b) to the facts of the present case and there is
no doubt that if the words are inapplicable, the plaintiff's action was
rightly dismissed. The words of that subsection relevant to the facts are as
follows:-

Not withstanding anything in any other law, no action or proceeding for the
ejectment **of the tenant** of any premises... shall be instituted in or
entertained by any court, unless where - such premises, being premises which
have been **let to the** tenant on or after the date of commencement, of this
Act, are... reasonably required for the occupation as a residence for the
landlord...

Subsection 22(1) (bb), similarly worded, refers to premises let to the tenant
prior to the commencement of the Act. The date of the commencement of the Act
is 1.3.1972. The contention on behalf of the defendant, which found,
acceptance with the Court of Appeal, was that inasmuch as the premises were
**not let to the tenant** on or after the commencement of the Act, the
plaintiff's action cannot be founded on subsection 22(1) (b). This contention
is based on the hypothesis that there was only one contract of letting of the
premises and that was between the plaintiff's mother on the one hand as the
landlord and the defendant's father on the other as the tenant; the
defendant's mother and later the defendant merely succeeded to the tenancy
rights of the original tenant of the premises; the premises were not let
either to the defendant or to her mother; they succeeded to the tenancy by
operation of law.

Support for this view principally came from the judgment-of the Court of
Appeal in _Weerasuriya v. Manamperi_ (1) where the Court was called upon to
interpret the words "Premises **let to the tenant** prior to the commencement
of the Act" in the subsection 22(1) (bb). In that case the original tenant
took the premises on rent in 1968 and his son, the defendant, succeeded to the
tenancy on his father's death in 1980 by operation of law. The Court of Appeal
held that there was no

356

fresh contract-of the tenancy and it could not be said that the premises were
let after the commencement of the Act; therefore the action was properly
brought under subsection 22(1) (bb). I Shall advert to this case again later
in this judgment.

In a case decided by the Court of Appeal earlier viz. _Sriyani Peris v.
Mohamed_ (2), the Court held that subsection 22(1) (bb) refers to the current
landlord and a fresh tenancy was created under the current landlord to whom
the tenant had attorned [See Fernando v. Wijesekara (3) & Justin _Fernando v.
Abdul Rahaman_ (4)] and on that basis the premises have been let after the Act
came into operation. In Fernando v. Wijesekera (Supra) Weeramantry ,J. summed
up,

"We see that the notion of attornment contains no element which points to the
continued existence of the prior contract - a meaning which is often
mistakenly supposed to be in the term."

Learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant in the instant case too advocated
the same line of reasoning. The Court of Appeal failed to consider this aspect
of the case because It was under the misapprehension that the plaintiff
succeeded as the landlord at the death, of her mother, whereas her mother was
still alive when the District Court action was proceeding according to the
evidence led. Learned counsel contended that the question whether a fresh
letting took place after the date of commencement of the Act in on sequence of
the attornment should haven" been answered in the affirmative and the
plaintiff was entitled to succeed on that ground.

It would seem that in Weerasuriya's case (supra) the Court of Appeal accepted
the submission of learned counsel for the respondent that the case of Sriyani
Penis (supra) could be distinguished on the basis that there is no statutory
provision in the Rent Act for succession of a tenant where specific provision
is made But the decision in Weerasuriys's case (supra) was primarily based on
the dicta of Ismail, J. in the case of _Miriam Lawrence v. A.V. Arnolda_ (3);
the Court of Appeal said that the dicta, which it quoted, were binding on it,
being a pronouncement of the Supreme Court . Ismail, J. stated

357

in that case (with Samarawickrama, J. and Wanasundara, J. agreeing)-

"Section 22(1) (bb) of Act, No. 7 of 1972 clearly indicates that, an action
under this law can only be maintained if the premises had been let to the
tenant prior to the date of commencement of the Act. The Act had come into
operation on 1.3.1972. Therefore, it was the duty of the trial judge to have
determined whether the premises had been let prior to 1.3.1972 or, subsequent
to that date. If the premises had been let after that date clearly the
provisions of the Act would not apply.

It is also in evidence that the defendant's father was the original tenant of
the premises since 1941 and the defendant had become the tenant of this
premises only after the father's death in August 1972. Therefore, it was
necessary for the Court to have considered whether the defendant became a
statutory tenant of the premises in suit on the death of the father under the
provisions of the Rent Restriction Ordinance (sic) or he became a tenant on a
fresh contract of tenancy".

It does not appear to me that Ismail, J. ventured to express an opinion that
the concept of continuation of a contract of letting under a deceased tenant
by his successor should be used as an aid to interpret the word "let" in that
subsection. If he did so it was only inferentially, for, the case was remitted
to the District Court for further trial on additional issues indicated by
Court, one being - "Did the defendant become the tenant of the plaintiff as
from 1.9.1972 on a fresh contract of tenancy?" It is correct to say then, with
great respect to Ismail, J. that his observations made are clearly obiter.

Learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant contends that upon attornment in
1986, a new contract of tenancy came into being [citing Fernando v. Wijesekera
(supra)] between the new landlord and the present tenant; that the letting
under that contract took place in 1986, and was thus after 1.3.72; that it is
the letting by the current landlord that is relevant [ _Sriyani Peiris v.
Mohamed_ (supra)] and hence section 22(1) (b) applied. But it seems to me that
this is not the real issue,

358

because even though the letting under the present contract occurred in 1986,
what is relevant under the statutory provision is when the premises were let
to the tenant, whether by the present landlord, or under the subsisting
contract of tenancy, or otherwise.

It was submitted on behalf of the defendant-respondent, on the other hand,
that attornment does not create a new contract; that admittedly there was a
contract of tenancy between landlord and tenant in 1941: that despite
subsequent devolution of rights and/or succession to the interests of the
original parties to the contract, these did not give rise to a new contract,
and that the successors merely stepped into the shoes of their respective
predecessors; and that, therefore, the same contract continued to operate, so
that for the purposes of section 22(1) (b) the premises had been let to the
present tenant, the defendant-respondent, in 1941. It was pointed out to him
that this interpretation could result in an obvious absurdity that premises
may then have to be regarded as having been let to a person at a date even
prior to his birth.

Neither of these contentions afford a satisfactory basis for interpreting
section 22(1) (b). We have to determine the meaning of the phrase "premises
which have been let to the tenant on or after the date of commencement of this
Act.",

It is clear that "tenant" means the present tenant, namely the particular
individual whom the landlord wishes to eject from the premises, and does not
mean or include any former tenant, even if the present tenant is the successor
to such tenant. Section 22(1) (b) contemplates an action for the ejectment of
**the tenant of any premises** and the, premises are described as being
premises which **have been let to the tenant.** The wording therefore,
unequivocally suggests that the tenant whose ejectment is sought and the
tenant to whom the premises: have, been let is one and the same person.
Reasonable requirement cannot involve the need of any former occupant of the
premises.

This phrase gives rise to no difficulty where subsequent to the contract of
tenancy between a landlord and a tenant, there has been

359

 neither a change of landlord occurring upon an attornment consequent upon a
transfer or devolution of title of the landlord, nor a change of tenancy
occurring by reason of succession upon the death of the tenant. In such cases,
if the contract created a tenancy on or after 1:3.72, this necessarily meant
that the premises were "let" to the tenant on or after 1.3.72.

Difficulties do arise, however, where such changes have taken place. The
question then is whether this phrase means-

(a) premises let-to the present tenant, under a contract of tenancy entered
into on or after 1.3.72; and if so, whether in cases of attornment and/or
succession to tenancy, the contract of tenancy between the present landlord
and the present tenant is the identical contract which subsisted between the
original landlord and the original tenant (and not a different contract though
in terms similar to the original contract); or

(b) premises which the present tenant had commenced to occupy, qua tenant, on
or after 1.3.72

The phrase in question refers only to the nexus between the tenant and the
premises; the relevant issue thus is whether the premises in suit were let to
the present tenant on or after 1.3.72. This phrase makes no reference to the
nexus between the tenant and the landlord, and hence the question whether such
letting was by the present landlord or by a former landlord does not arise.

If the construction sought to be given by learned counsel for the defendant-
respondent for the word "let" is correct, no premises referred in subsections
22(1) (b) or 22(1) (bb) could ever be recovered by a landlord on the ground of
reasonable requirement once the original tenant dies and he is succeeded by a
person specified in terms of the Act, as such person will not be the person to
whom the premises have been let. If the legislature ever contemplated imposing
such a drastic fetter on the landlord's rights of recovering premises on the
grounds of reasonable requirement, it could have been done not indirectly as
suggested, but directly, as

360

 done with reference to the date of acquisition of ownership of the premises
by the landlord, by enacting subsection 22(7).

Let me demonstrate the mischief likely to be caused to a tenant if the
interpretation advanced by the defendant to the word. "let" is applied to
another section of the Rent Act. Section 18 of the Act reads -

"Where any building used for residential purposes which is **let to a tenant**
is demolished on an order made under the provisions of the House and Town-
Improvement Ordinance, the owner of the land on which the demolished building
stood shall not construct any building or buildings on such land except with
the permission of the board. The board in granting such permission may by
order fix the number of residential units that shall be constructed in such
land. Such owner shall let one of the residential units so constructed to
**the tenant** of the demolished building, if **such tenant** makes a request
therefor"

Can the owner of the residential units so constructed be heard to say that a
particular tenant is disentitled to make a request for a new unit, because the
demolished building was not let to him, but to his dead ancestor, whose
successor the tenant became by operation of law? The absurdity is obvious.

It seems to me that in the context in which the word "let" appears in the
subsection, it cannot mean anything other than creation of the tenancy in
respect of the premises with the tenant whose ejectment is sought. If the
question is asked, "to whom are the premises let", the obvious answer is they
are let to the defendant tenant; and if it is asked "from when have they been
let to the defendant tenant"?, the answer is equall obvibus from 1982. The
ordinary meaning of the word "let" as given in the Chambers 20t Century
Dictionery is grant to tenant or hires. "It would be rather artificial to
colour the meaning of the world "let" with reference to a contract of letting
which subsisted with the original tenant. AS expressed by Deshpande, J. in,
the of _Chinnamma v. Dewan Harsh_ (6). "the word let is an ordinary word and
is not a term of art. It has, therefore, to be

361

construed in its ordinary sense. It simply means creation of a tenancy, On
this group the plaintiff is entitled to succeed.

After reaching the decision of this case, I have had the occasion to refer to
the published official Sinhala version of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972. The
subsection 22(i) (b) reads as follows:-

The Sinhala version accords with the construction I have given to the
subsection.

For the above reasons the appeal is allowed, the judgment of the Court of
Appeal is so aside and the judgment of the District Court is affirmed. The
plaintiff-appellant is entitled to recover costs of the Court of Appeal and of
this Court fixed at Rs. 5000. The defendant is given time till 1.03.1996 to
quit the premises and deliver possession to the plaintiff. The-plaintiff will
be entitled to take out writ of ejectment without notice to the defendant
after 1.03.1996.

**FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/54.html_  

