##  Dissanayakage Malini v. Mohamed Sabur - SLR - 4, Vol 2 of 1999 [1999] LKSC
54; (1999) 2 Sri LR 4 (18 January 1999)

**4**

**DISSANAYAKAGE MALINI  
v.  
MOHAMED SABUR**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
PERERA, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 124/97  
C.A. NO. 490/92 (F)  
D.C. KEGALLE NO. 2798/L  
DECEMBER 10, 1998

_Prevention of Frauds Ordinance \- Section 2 of the Ordinance - Transfer of
land by deed - Informal agreement to retransfer the property \- Relevance of
such agreement where fraud is established._

The plaintiff alleged that as a result of a fraud practised by the 1st
defendant and her father (the 2nd defendant), he transferred to the 1st
defendant by a deed (P1) 3 acres of rubber land for Rs. 6,000. In his evidence
the plaintiff stated inter alia, that on the day the transfer was executed,
the 1st defendant also executed informal writing (P2) witnessed by her father
agreeing to retransfer the land to the plaintiff upon the plaintiff tendering
the sum of Rs. 6,000 within a period of 4 years. The 1st defendant refused to
retransfer the property as agreed; and that the actual value of the land was
Rs. 30,000. The plaintiff alleged that the deed P1 was invalid on the ground
of fraud.

**Held:**

P2 being a non-notarial document was of no force or avail in law in view of
section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance. However, in a case where
fraud is pleaded, put in issue and is established by the evidence on record,
it is open to the court to take into consideration such document.

_Per_ G. P. S. de Silva, CJ.

''The rigour of the provisions of section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds
Ordinance may, on proof of fraud as in the present case, be relaxed on the
principle that 'the Statute of Frauds may not be made an instrument of fraud."

**5**

**Cases referred to:**

1. _Setuwa v. Ukkuwa_ \- 56 NLR 337.  
  
2. _Fernando v Cooray_ \- 59 NLR 169.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_Surath Piyasena_ for 1st defendant-appellant.

_D. A. E Thewarapperuma_ with _Mrs. S. Rajoo_ for plaintiff-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

January 18, 1999.  
**  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.**

The plaintiff by deed of transfer No. 185 dated 15th March, 1975, attested by
S. Wickremasuriya, Notary Public, (P1) transferred the land in suit to the 1st
defendant for a sum Rs. 6,000. The 2nd defendant is the father of the 1st
defendant. On the same day (15. 3\. 75), the 1st defendant executed an
informal writing by which he agreed to retransfer the said land to the
plaintiff upon the plaintiff tendering the sum of Rs. 6,000 within a period of
4 years. The informal writing dated 15. 3. 75 was marked as P2 at the trial.
The 2nd defendant was one of the witnesses to P2.  
  
The plaintiff instituted these proceedings against the 1st and 2nd defendants
seeking, inter alia, an order directing the retransfer of the land conveyed on
P1 on payment of the sum of Rs. 6,000 by the plaintiff to the 1st defendant,
and a declaration that P1 is null and void on the ground of fraud.

At the trial the plaintiff raised, inter alia, the following issues (as
translated) :

1\. Did the deed bearing No. 185 dated 15.3.75 which stated that the
consideration was a sum of Rs. 6,000 reflect the true nature of the
transaction between the parties?

2\. If issue No. 1 is answered in the negative, has the plaintiff been
fraudulently deceived?

6

3\. If so, is the plaintiff entitled to a retransfer of the land morefully
described in the schedule to the plaint and the aforesaid deed dated 15.3.75?

After trial, the District Court answered issue No. 1 in the negative and
issues Nos. 2 and 3 in the affirmative and entered judgment in favour of the
plaintiff. The appeal of the defendants to the Court of Appeal was
unsuccessful; hence the present appeal by the 1st defendant to this court
against the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

The plaintiff in his evidence stated inter alia -

i. That in January, 1975, he was in urgent need of a sum of Rs. 10,000 to
redeem a mortgage and for some other purpose.

ii. He contacted a broker named Dias Abeysinghe and had told the broker that
the only land he had was a rubber land of 3 acres in extent.

iii. The broker had contacted the 2nd defendant who told the plaintiff that
his daughter, the 1st defendant, had the required money, but the money cannot
be given on a conditional transfer of the land. The 2nd defendant insisted on
an outright transfer of the land.

iv. The plaintiff was reluctant to execute an outright transfer of the land
but the 2nd defendant had informed the plaintiff that the 1 st defendant would
retransfer the property to the plaintiff within a period of 4 years provided
the plaintiff repaid the consideration of Rs. 6,000.

v. The aforesaid promise to retransfer the property was set out in the
informal writing P2 which was signed by the 1st defendant with the 2nd
defendant being one of the witnesses.

vi. As agreed by P2, the plaintiff has within the stipulated period of 4 years
requested the 1 st defendant to retransfer the property; the 1st defendant
refused to accede to this request.

vii. Although the consideration set out in P1 was only Rs. 6,000, the actual
value of the land was Rs. 30,000.

7

The crucial issue in the case was whether the 1st defendant together with her
father, the 2nd defendant, had practised a fraud upon the plaintiff. On this
issue the District Court, upon a careful consideration of the evidence,
accepted the plaintiff's evidence. The finding of the District Court was that
the defendants together have acted with a fraudulent intention in avoiding the
plaintiff's repeated attempts to tender the sum of Rs. 6,000 within the
stipulated period of 4 years. At the trial the 1st defendant who was the
vendee on P1 did not give evidence. It was only the 2nd defendant who gave
evidence and his evidence that the plaintiff failed to tender the sum of Rs.
6,000 within the stipulated period of 4 years was rejected by the trial Judge.
The Court of Appeal affirmed the finding of the trial Judge that the
defendants have together committed a fraud upon the plaintiff. On a
consideration of the totality of the evidence, I am of the opinion that the
concurrent findings on the issue of fraud must remain undisturbed.

Mr. Piyasena for the 1st defendant-appellant relied strongly on the case of
_Setuwa v. Ukkuwa_ (1), as well as the case of _Fernando v. Cooray_ (2). It is
to be noted that no fraud was alleged in these two cases and hence these
judgments are of little assistance in deciding the present appeal. (see
Fernando v. Cooray (supra) at 173, 2nd paragraph).

It is true as submitted by Mr. Piyasena for the appellant that P2 is a non-
notarial document and is of no force or avail in law in view of section 2 of
the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance. However, in a case where fraud is pleaded,
put in issue, and is established by the evidence on record it is open to the
court to take into consideration the non-notarial document P2. The rigour of
the provisions of section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance may, on
proof of fraud as in the present case, be relaxed on the principle that "the
Statute of Frauds may not be made an instrument of fraud". It seems to me that
on the proved facts and circumstances of this case the application of this
principle is warranted.

For these reasons the appeal fails, and is dismissed with costs.

**PERERA, J.** \- I agree.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/54.html_  

