##  Wigneswaramoorthy and Another v. Singham - SLR - 339, Vol 1 of 1995 [1995]
LKSC 55; (1995) 1 Sri LR 339 (25 January 1995)

**339**

**WIGNESWARAMOORTHY AND ANOTHER**

**v.**

**SINGHAM**

  
SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S .DE SILVA, C.J.

KULATUNGA, J.  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 12/59  
C.A. 54/85(F) COLOMBO 5931/RE  
D.C. COLOMBO 5931/RE  
JANUARY 25, 1995.

_Landlord and Tenant - Notice to quit - Sections 22(2) (bb) (ii) and 22(6) of
the Rent Act - Test of validity of notice "ut res magis valeat quam pereat" \-
Construction._

Under Section 22(6) of the Rent Act six months notice, in writing of the
termination of the tenancy had to be given prior to institution of the action
for ejectment. Notice of termination of tenancy was given by letter dated 27
August 1983 requiring the tenant to vacate the premises on or before 28
February 1984. This notice was received by the tenant on, 30 August 1983 The
tenancy had commenced on the 1st of the month. Therefore the period of 6
months has to be computed from 01 September 1983. The period of six months
ends on 29 February 1984 as 1984 was a leap year. As the notice required the
tenant to vacate on 28 February 1984 there was a shortfall in the notice by
one day.

340

**Held:**

The proper approach to the question of the validity of the notice is to
consider the intention of the person giving the notice. A reasonable tenant
reading. the notice in a reasonable way could not arrive at any other
conclusion than that the intention was to terminate the tenancy by the end of
February 1984. The clear intention of the landlord was to terminate the
tenancy at the end of February 1984; the fact that February had 29 days was
overlooked. This is a fit and proper case to construe the notice "ut res magis
valeat quam pereat". The notice was valid in law.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Warwick Major v. Fernando IV CWR 221._  
_2\. Loku Menike v Charles Sinno V CWR 281._  
_3\. Hankey v. Clavering (1942) 2 All ER 311._  
_4\. Haniffa v. Sellamuthu 70 NLR 200._  
_5\. Sidebotham v. Holland (1895)1 QB 378,383._  
_6\. Carradine Properties Ltd. v Aslam (1976) 1 All ER 573._

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_S. Mahenthiran for the plaintiff-appellants._  

_P. A. D. Samarasekera, P.C. with Palitha Kumarasinghe for the defendant
respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

April 28, 1995.  
**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

The plaintiffs instituted these proceedings on 6th April 1984 for the
ejectment of the defendant (tenant) from the premises in suit under the
provisions of section 22(2) (bb) (ii) of the Rent Act, as amended. After
trial, the District Court entered judgment for the plaintiffs. The defendant
successfully appealed to the Court of Appeal and the judgment of the District
Court was set aside and the plaintiffs' action dismissed. Hence the appeal by
the plaintiffs to this court.

Special Leave to Appeal to this court was granted only on the following
question:-

341

"Is the notice to quit marked P1 valid in law?"

The Court of Appeal held against the plaintiffs solely on the ground that "the
notice to quit is bad in law and it has no force or effect and validity."

It is a peremptory requirement postulated in the proviso to section 22(6) of
the Rent Act, as amended, that the landlord should give the tenant "six months
notice in writing of the termination of the tenancy" prior to the institution
of the action. Mr. Samarasekera for the defendant-respondent rightly submitted
that such notice was a condition precedent to the institution of the action
for ejectment.

The notice P1 was dated 27th August 1983 and it required the defendant to
vacate the premises on or before "the 28th day of February 1984." The notice
was in fact received by the defendant on 30th August 1983. It is common ground
that the tenancy commenced on the 1st of the month. Therefore the period of 6
months has to be computed from 1st September 1983 ( _Warwick Major v. Fernando
Loku Menike v Charles Sinno_ (2)).

The period of 6 months expires at the end of February 1984. The point to be
noted is that 1984 is a **leap year** and there are 29 days in the month of
February. The notice P1 calls upon the defendant to vacate the premises by
28th February and thus there is a shortfall by one day. The defendant was
entitled to occupy the premises till the expiry of 29th February 1984.

Citing _Hankey v. Clavering_ (3) Mr. Samarasekera stressed that notices to
determine a tenancy are "documents of a technical nature,.... They are not
consensual documents;" Counsel strongly urged that if there is any defect in
the notice of termination of tenancy the action for ejectment must fail; a
valid notice of termination of tenancy is a condition precedent to the
institution of the action. Mr. Samarasekera further pointed out that the
witness (an Attorney-at-Law) called on behalf of the plaintiffs admitted that
6 months notice of termination of tenancy has not been given to the defendant
in this case.

It is clear that the notice of termination of tenancy (P1) falls short of the
requisite period of 6 months by one day. On a careful consideration of the
facts, it would appear that the writer of the notice P1 overlooked the fact
that 1984 was a leap year and accordingly there were 29 days in the month of
February. The defendant did not give evidence at the trial nor were any
witnesses called on her behalf. There was no evidence whatsoever to suggest
that she was in anyway misled by the requirement that she should vacate the
premises by the 28th and not by the 29th of February. The opinion expressed by
the witness called by the plaintiff is not relevant, as the construction of P1
raises a question of law. The fact that the witness for the plaintiff
maintained in his evidence that there was no mistake in P1 does not advance
the case for the defendant.

In my view, the proper approach to the question of the validity of P1 is to
consider the intention of the person giving the notice. This was the principle
laid down by T S. Fernando, A.C.J. (with whom _Siva Supremaniam, J. agreed) in
Haniffa v. Sellamuthu_ (4). The learned Judge expressed himself in the
following terms: "The substantial question in all cases of this kind is the
intention of the person giving the notice as expressed therein." The judgment
cites with approval the following dictum of Lindley, L.J. in _Sidebotham v.
Holland_ (5). "The validity of a notice to quit ought not to turn on the
splitting of a straw". if I may be permitted to say so, the reasoning in
Haniffa's case (supra) is refreshingly free of undue technicality and is in
consonance with a common sense point of view.

_Carradine Properties Ltd. v. Aslam_ (6) cited by Mr. Mahenthiran for the
plaintiffs respondents is another case where a somewhat similar view was taken
in regard to the validity of a notice to quit. Goulding, J. having referred to
Several cases stated thus: "I would put the test generally. applicable as
being this: is the notice quite clear to a reasonable tenant reading it? Is it
plain that he cannot be misled by it?"

In the appeal before us, could a reasonable tenant reading P1 in a reasonable
way arrive at any other conclusion than that the intention

343

was to terminate the tenancy by the end of February 1984? I think not. There
was no evidence whatever to the contrary. As stated earlier, the tenant
neither gave evidence nor called any witnesses on her behalf. Viewed
realistically, the insertion of the date February 28 in P1 was an obvious
mistake; the fact that 1984 was a leap year was overlooked. I venture to think
that the law relating to the termination of tenancy by a notice as
contemplated by the proviso to section 22(6) of the Rent Act does not compel a
court to completely shut its eyes to reality.

I accordingly hold that the clear intention of the landlord was to terminate
the tenancy at the end of February, 1984; the fact that February had 29 days
was overlooked. In my view this is a fit and proper case to construe the
notice P1 "ut res magis valeat quam pereat ". I reverse the finding of the
Court of Appeal and hold that P1 is valid in law.

Finally, Mr. Samarasekera submitted that in any event the plaintiffs are not
entitled to a decree in ejectment as they have failed to establish that the
standard rent of the premises in suit exceeds Rs. 100/- per month. Special
Leave to Appeal has been granted only on the question of the validity of P1,
and it not now open to the defendant to raise any other issue.

In the result, the appeal is allowed with costs, the judgment of the Court of
Appeal is set aside and the judgment of the District Court is restored.
However, I direct writ of ejectment not to issue till 30th April 1996. The
plaintiffs are entitled to takeout writ of ejectment and to be placed in
possession of the premises in suit after 30th April, 1996.

**KULATUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/55.html_  

