##  Puttalam Cement Company Limited v. Mutukimarana And Another - SLR - 54,
Vol 1 of 2006 [1999] LKSC 55; (2006) 1 Sri LR 54 (24 July 1999)

**54**

**PUTTALAM CEMENT COMPANY LIMITED  
VS.  
MUTUKIMARANA AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT,  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
WEERASEKERA, J.  
SC(AP) NO. 11/98  
H.C. CHILAW NO. 8/97  
L.T. CHILAW NO. 21/0277/88  
7th JUNE AND 1st JULY, 1999  
  
_Incorporation of a Public Company under section 2(1)(ii) of the Conversion of
Public Corporations or Government Owned Business Undertakings into Public
Companies Act, No. 23 of 1987, to take over the functions of a public
corporation or part of the corporation, specified in the incorporation order -
Whether in view of section 3(2)(e) of the Act, Labour Tribunal proceedings
which were pending in the High Court on the date of the incorporation of the
new company may be continued - Interpretation of statutes harmoniously for
avoiding conflict between different parts._  
  
The appellant company being a part of the 2nd respondent (Sri Lanka Cement
Corporation) was registered as a company in terms of section 2(2)(ii) of the
Conversion of Public Corporation or Government Owned Business Undertakings
into Public Companies Act, No. 23 of 1987. What property, liabilities etc., of
the corporation vest in the new company are set out in section 3(1 )(a) to (c)
and section 3(2)(a) to (g). Section 3(2)(e) refers to actions and proceedings
instituted against the original corporation and pending on the relevant date
(date of incorporation of the new company) and "specified in the order made
under section 2(2)"  
  
On the date of the order under section 2(2), there was pending before the
Court of Appeal (thereafter referred to the High Court) an appeal made by the
1st respondent against the 2nd respondent Cement Corporation seeking to vary
an order of the Labour Tribunal. The High Court noticed the new company to
appear before the court to be added as the employer in place of the 3rd
respondent Cement Corporation, to continue proceedings against the new company
(the appellant).  
  
**Held:  
**  
1\. The appellant should be substituted as the employer in proceedings before
the High Court notwithstanding a preliminary objection by the

**55**

appellant company that it could not be added as a party since the Labour
Tribunal proceedings had not been "specified" in the incorporation order under
section 2(2) of the Act.  
  
2\. The words of a section of a statute should be interpreted harmoniously to
avoid conflict between two provisions of an enactment on a proper construction
thereof.  
  
3\. Section 2(2) which enables incorporation of a new company of a corporation
or a part of a corporation and the relevant provision of section 3(1) and 3(2)
do not necessarily require that proceedings pending on the date of
incorporation must be specified in the incorporation order.  The question is
whether the words of section 3(2)(e) "and specified in the order made under
section 2(2)" refer to action or proceeding or to the "corporation". That is
not free from ambiguity.  
  
**Case referred to :  
**  
1\. Distilleries Company of Sri Lanka Ltd. vs. Fernando SC (AP) 36/94 SCM
20.03.95 (not followed)  
  
**APPEAL** against the Order of the High Court.  
  
Tilak Marapana, PC. with Anil Tittawela and A. Rodrigo for appellant.  
  
Daya Guruge with Samantha Vithana for respondents

_Cur. adv. vult._

July 24, 1999  
**JUDGMENT OF COURT  
**  
Special leave to Appeal was granted by this Court on the following questions:  
  
* Whether an action instituted against a Public Corporation whose functions have been taken over by a company incorporated under the provisions of the Conversion of Public Corporations or Government owned Business Undertakings into Public Companies Act, No. 23 of 1987, which action is not specified in the order made under S. 2(2) of the said Act, could be deemed to be an action initiated against the Company. 

**56**

The 1st Applicant-Respondent (1st Respondent) was an employee of the 2nd
Employer-Respondent (2nd Respondent) until his services were terminated on
31.07.88. The 1st Respondent made an application to the Labour Tribunal dated
17.08.1988 seeking relief in terms of section 31(b) of the Industrial Disputes
Act, No. 43 of 1950, against the 2nd Respondent. After inquiry, the Labour
Tribunal, Negombo, dismissed the application of the 1st Respondent by order
dated 15.03.1991. The 1st Respondent appealed to the Court of Appeal on or
about 08.04.1991 against the order of the Labour Tribunal. On or about
09.01.1997, the Court of Appeal referred that appeal to the Provincial High
Court of the North Western Province holden in Chilaw. When this matter came up
before the Provincial High Court, Chilaw, it was submitted on behalf of the
2nd Respondent that by operation of the provisions of the Conversion of Public
Corporations or Government Owned Business Undertakings into Public Companies
Act (Conversion Act) No. 23 of 1987, the Appellant should be substituted as
Employer instead of the 2nd Respondent and the 2nd Respondent should be
discharged from the proceedings, Pursuant to this application, the Provincial
High Court Chilaw issued notice on the Appellant to appear before the High
Court on 12.05.1997. The Appellant took a preliminary objection that it should
not be substituted as the Employer because the schedule of the order made
under Section 2 of the Conversion Act published in the Gazette Extraordinary
No. 770/1 dated 07.06.1993, fails to refer to the Labour Tribunal case filed
by the 1st Respondent. The objection was  overruled and the appellant has now
appealed to this Court from that order.The order made under Section 2 reads:  
  
"J. C. de Alwis, Registrar of Companies, acting under paragraph (ii) of sub
section (2) of Section 2 of the Conversion of Public Corporations of
Government Owned Business Undertakings into Public Companies Act, No. 23 of
1987, do by this order declare that a Public Company is incorporated in the
name of "Puttalam Cement Company Limited" to take over the functions of such
part of the Public Corporation as specified in the Schedule hereto.

Schedule

The Puttalam Cement Works of the Sri Lanka Cement Corporation situated in
Puttalam being a part of Sri lanka Cement Corporation (having its registered
office at 130, W. A. D. Ramanayake Mawatha, Colombo

**57**

2 established by the order made under Section 2 of the State Industrial
Corporations Act, No. 49 of 1957 and published in Gazette Extraordinary No.
11,634 of January, 2 1959 as amended by order made under Section 2 of that
Act, and published in the Gazette Extraordinary No. 75/5 of February, 11,
1980.  
  
It is the submission of learned Counsel for the appellant Company, that the
action filed by the 1st Respondent in the Labour Tribunal, cannot be deemed to
be an action instituted against the appellant company in terms of sub section
3(2) of the Conversion Act. He submitted that for the deeming provisions to be
applicable the action against the corporation must necessarily be pending
immediately preceding the relevant date and specified in the order made under
Section 2(2).  
  
It would be convenient, in order to consider this submission, if we set down
here so much of the wording of Sections 2 and 3 of the Conversion Act,
omitting therefrom references to Government Owned Business Undertakings and
other matters not relevant to our decision in this case. After such truncation
those sections would read as follows :-  
  
2(1) Where the Cabinet of Ministers considers it necessary that a company
should be incorporated for the purpose of taking over the functions of any
public corporation or part thereof, the Minister in charge of the subject of
finance, forward a memorandum and articles of association to the Registrar of
Companies, together with a direction to such Registrar to register such public
Corporation, or any part thereof a public company under the Companies Act, No.
17 of 1982.  
  
(2) Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Companies Act, No. 17 of 1982,
on receipt of a direction under sub section (1) the Registrar of Companies
shall-  
  
(i) (Re certificate of incorporation-omitted)  
  
(ii) Publish an order in the Gazette declaring that a public company is
incorporated in the name specified in the order to take over the functions of
the Public Corporation specified in the order or such part of the corporation
as specified  therein.

**58**

(3) (Re allotment of shares - omitted)  
  
(4) (Re stamp duty - omitted)  
  
3 (1) with effect from the date of publication of the order under subsection
(2) of section 2, in the Gazette (in this section referred to as "the relevant
date") the corporation, or part thereof, as the case may be, to which the
order relates shall vest absolutely in the company referred to in that order.  
  
(definitions of "Corporations" and "business undertaking" omitted)  
  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub section (1)  
  
(a) Re property - omitted  
(b) Re liabilities - omitted  
(c) Re officers and servants - omitted  
(d) Re contracts and agreements - omitted  
(e) all actions and proceedings instituted by or against -  
  
a. the corporation; or  
b .  
  
and pending on the day immediately preceding the relevant date, and specified
in the order made under Section 2(2) shall deemed to be actions and
proceedings instituted by or against the company;  
  
(f) (Re profits and income - omitted)  
(g) (Re losses - omitted)  
  
The words and pending on the date immediately proceeding the relevant date
"unambiguously refer to "all actions and proceedings." The question then is
whether the words "and specified in the order made under Section 2(2) in (e)
refer to actions or proceedings" or to" the corporation" That is not free from
ambiguity. A plain reading of the sub section seems to suggest, that the words
by their collocation, refer to actions and proceedings "That interpretation
commended itself to Kulatunga, J. in the case of Distilleries Company of Sri
Lanka Ltd., v. Fernando. (1) Words in a section of statute cannot be
interpreted in isolation; they must be given an interpretation to read in
harmony with other provisions of the statute. Obviously, there is no

**59**

provisions in subsection 2(2) to enable the Registrar of Companies to specify
in the order made there under "action and proceedings" on the other hand, the
sub-section mandates him to specify in the order" the public corporation"
either in whole or in part. Reference to a "part'· of a corporation in sub-
section 3(2) (a) would have been meaningless, as a  part of a corporation is
not a legal person by or against whom actions and proceedings could have
possibly been instituted and pending as at the relevant date. It is to be
noted that the words and specified in the order made under Section 2(2) appear
in sub sections 3(2) (a), (b) and (d) as well. If we were to agree with the
interpretation advanced by learned Counsel for the appellant Company, we will
render those words-superfluous and meaningless not only in sub-section 3(2)
(e) but also in sub section (a) (b) and (d) as well.  
  
Discussing the nature of conflicting provisions in a statute and how
inconsistency is to be avoided, Bindra has stated that,  
  
"A section of a statute should, if possible, be construed so that there may be
no repugnancy or inconsistency between its different portions  or members. If
it is possible to avoid a conflict between the two provisions of an enactment
on a proper construction thereof, then it is the duty of the court to so
construe them, that they are in harmony with each other. A construction that
involves reading two successive sentences as flatly contradicting each other
must be avoided if possible; all parts of a statue, should if possible be
construed so as to be consistent with the other "Bindra's Interpretation of
Statutes, Revised by Mahmood and Yudhishthira, 7th Edition, 1984, pg. 565)  
  
On a consideration of the aforesaid matters, we hold that the Appellant should
be substituted as the Employer in the proceedings before the High Court of the
North Western Province holden in Chilaw, We affirm the order made by the High
Court and dismiss the appeal. In all the circumstances we make no order as to
costs.  
  
**DHEERARATNE. J., BANDARANAYAKAJ., WEERASEKARAJ.  
  
**_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/55.html_  

