##  Halib Abdul Cader Ameer v. Danny Perera - SLR - 321, Vol 2 of 1998 [1995]
LKSC 56; (1998) 2 Sri LR 321 (27 October 1995)

**321**

**HALIB ABDUL CADER AMEER  
v.  
DANNY PERERA**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
KULATUNGA, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 41/95  
C.A. APPLICATION NO. 789/90  
D.C. COLOMBO NO. 5787/ZL  
JULY 19TH, 1995

_Vindicatory suit - Consent decree - Justus error - Jurisdiction of Trial
Court to set aside the decree - Restitutio in Integrum._

**Held:**

1\. The District Court has no jurisdiction to set aside a decree entered by
consent of parties on the basis of justus error committed by a party in
consenting to the terms of the settlement. However, restitutio in integrum can
be claimed on the ground of 'justus error' which constitutes reasonable or
excusable error.

2\. The remedy by way of restitutio in integrum is an extraordinary remedy and
is given only under very exceptional circumstances.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Cornelius Perera v. Leo Perera 62 NLR 413, 420.  
  
2\. A. K W. Perera v. G. Don Simon 62 NLR 118, 120.  
  
3\. Usoof v. Nadarajah Chettiyar 61 NLR 173, 177.  
  
4\. Menchinahamy v. Muniweera 52 NLR 409, 413.  
_**_  
APPEAL_** _from the judgment of the Court of Appeal._

_Faiz Musthapha PC with Mahanama de Silva for plaintiff-appellant.  
  
Ikram Mohamed with Ian Fernando for defendant-respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

322

October 27, 1995.  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.**

The plaintiff instituted these proceedings against the defendant for a
declaration of title and ejectment from the land described in the third
schedule to the plaint and in extent 9.72 perches. The said land described in
the third schedule to the plaint is shown as lot C in plan No. 1762 dated
24.7.87 made by P. Sinnathamby, Licensed Surveyor (P4). The plaintiff also
prayed for an interim injunction to restrain the defendant from constructing a
building on lot C in the said plan marked P4. On being served with the notice
of interim injunction, the defendant filed his statement of objections
stating, inter alia, that the land in suit is depicted as lots 1 and 2 in plan
No. 20 dated 10th November, 1948, made by G. A. H. Philipiah, Licensed
Surveyor (P6A); that premises No. 88A, Maligawatte Place, Colombo 10, belonged
to the defendant by virtue of prescriptive title; that the said premises No.
88A, Maligawatte Place, Colombo 10, fell outside lots 1 and 2 in the said plan
No. 20 made by Philipiah, Licensed Surveyor (P6A).

On 10.01.89 the application for the interim injunction was taken up for
inquiry. The plaintiffs position before the District Court was that lots 1 and
2 in P6A is shown as lots A, B and C in P4. Both parties agreed to superimpose
plan P6A and plan P4 and the defendant agreed to demolish the building or any
part thereof if it falls within lots 1 and 2 in P6A. The parties further
agreed to issue a commission to a Surveyor for the purpose of obtaining the
superimposed plan and to forward to the Surveyor P4 and P6A.

On a joint commission issued to Mr. Saliya Wickremasinghe, Licensed Surveyor,
plan No. 766 dated 10.05.89 (plan X) along with the report X1 was forwarded to
court. On 26.01.90 the plan X and the report X1 came up for consideration
before the District Court. Parties were present and were represented by
counsel. Both parties agreed to settle the case, inter alia, on the following
terms: (a) the defendant agreed to hand over to the plaintiff possession of
the strip of land (lot 3 in plan X) which the District Judge marked as A to B
in plan X; (b) the defendant agreed to demolish the temporary building on

323

the said strip of land within one month. The court thereupon entered decree in
terms of the settlement.

After the entry of decree, the plaintiff began to have reservations in regard
to the settlement arrived at in court on 26.01.90 and had consulted another
Licensed Surveyor S. Rasappah who had prepared for him plans 2330 dated
20.7.90 and 2331 dated 20.7.90 which, according to the plaintiff, show that
plan X (on which the settlement was arrived at in court) is erroneous. On the
basis of the plans of Rasappah obtained privately by the plaintiff, an
application for revision and/or restitutio in integrum was filed in the Court
of Appeal seeking to set aside the settlement and the consent decree, entered
on 26.01.90. The plaintiff failed in this application and hence the present
appeal to this court.

Leave to appeal to this court was granted on two matters:

(i) Is the District Court vested with jurisdiction to set aside a decree
entered by consent of parties on the basis of justus error committed by a
party in consenting to the terms of settlements? (ii) Is the plaintiff
petitioner entitled to invoke the revisionary powers and the power of
restitutio in integrum of the Court of Appeal to obtain relief in respect of 3
perches over and above the extent agreed upon by virtue of the consent order
dated 26.01.90?

The answer to the first question is clearly in the negative. The District
Court certainly has no power to set aside a consent decree on the basis of
justus error. Sansoni, J. (as he then was) in Cornelius Perera v. Leo
Perera(1) stated . . . . the proper remedy is an application for restitutio in
integrum. Again at page 422 in the same judgment the learned Judge stated: The
District Judge however had no power to . . . set aside the agreement entered
into . . ..

As for the second question, it is to be noted that the plaintiff in his,
petition filed in the Court of Appeal averred that he had committed a justus
error in consenting to the settlement which was totally based on the plan X.
It was on this basis that relief by way of restitutio in integrum was sought
to have the consent decree set aside. Said

324

Sansoni, J. in A. K. W. Perera v. G. Don Simon(2), restitutio in integrum can
be claimed on the ground of justus error which I understand to connote
reasonable or excusable error (The emphasis is mine).

Was the consent decree in the instant proceedings entered by reason of such an
error? The answer, I think, is in the negative. The sole basis upon which the
decree is assailed is the plans prepared by Licensed Surveyor Rasappah at the
instance of the plaintiff about 6 months after the case was settled in court.
As stated earlier, the settlement was reached in the presence of the parties,
their counsel and after due consideration.

In refusing relief the Court of Appeal expressed itself thus: The plan drawn
by Mr. Rasappah has not been produced by the petitioner in the District Court
at any stage. It is not open to the petitioner to assail the plan drawn upon
the commission for the first time in this court, on the basis of a plan which
has been privately obtained by him. With this reasoning, I am in entire
agreement.  
  
In any event, . . . the power to grant relief by way of restitutio in
integrurn is a matter of grace and discretion; (Usoof v. Nadarajah
Chettiar(3); the remedy by way of restitutio in integrum is an extraordinary
remedy and is given only under very exceptional circumstances. (Menchinahamy
v. Muniweera(4)). No such circumstances are to be found in the present case.

For these reasons, the appeal fails and is dismissed but, in all the
circumstances, without costs.

**KULATUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
**  
WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/56.html_  

