##  Thilayanadan and Others v. Capt. Thilakaratne and Others - SLR - 89, Vol 2
of 1999 [1998] LKSC 56; (1999) 2 Sri LR 89 (25 November 1998)

**89**

**THILAYANADAN AND OTHERS  
v.  
CAPT. THILAKARATNE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
WEERASEKERA J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 970/97 WITH  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 971/97  
NOVEMBER 11, 1998

_Fundamental rights - Transport of goods in breach of Emergency Regulations -
Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution._

Various goods were transported to Mannar town on permits issued by the
Coordinating Officer, Mannar, on two applications made by one Amanulla and one
application made by Gunaratnam of Ratnam Motors. The goods were stored at
Francis Stores, Mannar town. Thereafter, the Commanding Officer of the Army,
Mannar, received information that goods including motor spare parts, engine
oil, torch batteries, tyres and tubes were being transported to
Erunkulampitiya, a small village where there were no shops to market such
goods. The petitioners who were transporting the goods in lorries were
arrested and the goods seized. The petitioners were handed over to the police
who produced them before a Magistrate. The goods seized exceeded the goods
referred to in the permit. They were also excessive having regard to the
number of vehicles in use in Mannar Island. The Senior Superintendent of
Police, Mannar, stated that Erunkulampitiya was an uninhabited area visited by
the LTTE to collect items for their camps in the mainland.

**Held :**

The respondents had reasonable grounds to arrest and detain the petitioners in
terms of Regulations 32 (a) and 18 of the Emergency Regulations; and that
there was no violation of Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Mohan Peiris_ and _Nuwanthi Dias_ for petitioners.

90

_Kolitha Dharmawardana,_ DSG, with _S. Rajarathnam, SC_ and _P. P. Ratnayake,_
SC for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 25, 1998.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.**

SC Application Nos. 970/97 and 971/97 were heard together since they related
to essentially the same facts. One A. M. M. Amanulla, the proprietor of
Attanagalla Transport Agent and Distributors and the Partner of Sriharan
Traders of Mannar submitted two applications to the Co-ordinating officer of
Mannar, for the transportation of various goods. One Gunaratnam of Ratnam
Motors also submitted an application. These applications were approved. The
goods were then transported to the Mannar Island on the 22nd of October and
the 24th of October, 1997 and handed over to Francis Alphons of Francis
Enterprises, Mannar, the petitioner in SC Application No. 970/97 and kept at
his store known as Topaz Building. The 1st and 2nd respondents in SC
Application No. 971/97 arranged for the transport of the goods in two lorries
from that store to Erunkulampitiya which was about 6 kilometres away from
Topaz Building which was also situated on the Island of Mannar. One of the
lorries was driven by the 3rd petitioner in SC Application No. 970/97 and the
second lorry was driven by the 5th petitioner in SC Application No. 970/97.
The 7th and 8th petitioners were in the long driven by the 3rd petitioner and
the 2nd, 5th and 6th petitioners were in the lorry driven by the 4th
petitioner. The two lorries were stopped at a check point where the Police
permitted the lorry to proceed. However, about 50 metres away the lorries were
stopped by Army personnel.

The Commanding Officer of the Army Camp, Mannar, had received information that
a large quantity of goods was to be transported from Mannar Town to
Erunkulampitiya, including motor spare parts, engine oil, torch batteries,
tyres and tubes. Since Erunkulampitiya was a very small village which did not
have any shops to market these items,

91

the Commanding Officer had set up the check point at which the lorries were
stopped. The Commanding Officer was informed by one Charles that the goods had
been brought to Mannar Island on a valid permit. However, when he was asked to
produce the permit he stated that the permit was with Amanulla's broker.
Although it was the practice that a permit had to be obtained from the
Brigadier of Thalladi Army Camp to transport certain goods within Mannar
Island, no such permit had been obtained. The Commanding Officer was
suspicious in the circumstances and his suspicion was increased when he found
that a sum of Rs. 4,000 was to be paid for the hire of each of the vehicles to
travel the short distance of 6 kilometres. The Commanding Officer then
released the petitioners and instructed Charles to produce the permit referred
to by him on the next day. The Commanding Officer then nominated an Army party
to guard the lorries and goods and reported the incident to the Commanding
Officer. The persons who were in possession of the goods came to the Mannar
Town Army Camp on 28.10.97 and produced some photocopies of permits. It was
observed that they did not bear the two parallel lines that are usually drawn
on a permit after it has been inspected. Moreover, the quantity of goods
seized greatly exceeded the quantity of goods referred to in the permit. In
the circumstances, the lorries and the suspects were handed over to the Police
with an explanation of the circumstances in which the petitioners were
arrested and the goods seized.

The petitioners state that the goods were being transported from Mannar Town
to Erunkulampitiya because the store at which the goods were originally housed
was in a bad state of repair. It is surprising that this fact was realised at
the time the goods first arrived in Mannar Island and why it was necessary to
temporarily store them instead of being transported straight away to
Erunkulampitiya. On the other hand, the senior Superintendent of Police,
Mannar, has explained that the consignment of the goods in the two lorries
were far larger in quantity than was reasonably necessary for sale in Mannar
Island. Considering the small civilian population and the number of motor
vehicles within the island. I am inclined to agree that his view, considering
the report marked IRI on the question of the number of

92

vehicles and motor cycles on Mannar Island when compared with the items listed
in the permits marked F.1, A2 and A3 and the inventory made by the Registrar
of the District and Magistrate's Court of Mannar filed in the application.
Presumably, he suspected, therefore, that the goods might be trans-shipped.

According to the Senior Superintendent of Police, Mannar, the goods were being
transported to Erunkulampitiya, "a secluded and uninhabited area bordering a
shallow lagoon" which was "well-known among the residents of Mannar" to have
been a place visited by the LTTE to take items for their camps in the mainland
area of Vidattativu.

The petitioners were produced before the Magistrate of Mannar on 1st November,
1997 and were remanded.

Although leave to proceed was granted for the alleged infringement of Articles
11, 13 (1) and 13 (3), the petitioners confined their submissions to the
alleged violation of Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution. Having
regard to the circumstances set out above, I am of the view that the
respondents had reasonable grounds to arrest and detain the petitioners in
terms of Regulations 32 (a) and 18 of the Emergency Regulations No. 4 of 1994.
In the circumstances, I hold that there was no violation of Articles 11, 13
(1) or 13 (2) of the Constitution and dismiss the applications.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

**WEERASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Applications dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/56.html_  

