##  Ceylon Bank Employees Union v. Bank of Ceylon - SLR - 152, Vol 1 of 1998
[1998] LKSC 57; (1998) 1 Sri LR 152 (1 January 1998)

**152**

**CEYLON BANK EMPLOYEES UNION  
v.  
BANK OF CEYLON**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 73/97  
H.C. (A) LT. NO. 5/95  
LT. NO. 23/KU/336  
NOVEMBER 28TH, 1997.  
  
_Industrial Dispute - Labour Tribunal decision - Dismissal of a workman -
Variation between the charge and the ground of dismissal upheld by the Labour
Tribunal.  
_  
The applicant (workman) was employed in the Bank of Ceylon, Kuliyapitiya His
services were terminated after a domestic inquiry on the basis that he was
guilty of several charges involving cheating, misappropriation and fraud. The
President of the Labour Tribunal exonerated the applicant on every charge of
dishonesty and fraud but found him guilty of negligence and held that his
dismissal was, therefore, justified.  
  
**Held:  
**  
There was a lack of judicial evaluation of the material relevant to
negligence. In any event, negligence was not a matter which was within the
ambit of the charge levelled against the applicant. Without giving an
opportunity to meet that charge it would be unsafe to conclude that the
applicant was negligent.  
  
**Case referred to:**  
  
1\. _Bank of Ceylon v. Manivasagasivam_ 1995 - 2 SLR 79.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court.  
  
_Gomin Dayasiri with Ms. Manoli Jinadasa_ for the appellant  
  
_Asanga Gunawansa S.C._ for the respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**153**

December 17, 1997.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J.  
**  
The applicant on whose behalf this appeal is made (the applicant) was employed
by the 2nd respondent Bank (the Bank) at the time his services were terminated
and was attached to the 1 st respondent Kuliyapitiya Branch as a Grade III
Class III officer. He had an unblemished record of service counting 19 years
with the Bank, until he was interdicted on 12.6.1985. It was two and a half
years thereafter that a charge sheet was served on him; and it was over five
years after the interdiction that a domestic inquiry against him commenced. On
being found guilty at that inquiry of several charges, by letter dated 15.7.91
the Bank terminated his services with effect from the date of interdiction.  
  
The Bank justified the termination of the applicant's services on the basis
that he was guilty of several charges concerning cheating, misappropriation
and fraud alleged to have been committed between 12.7.1984 to 31.5.1985. I
shall examine these charges presently.  
  
The first of those charges was that on 17.12.84, a sum of Rs. 9,500 was
withdrawn from the savings account belonging to one Abeyratne, on a withdrawal
form wherein the account holder's signature was forged. The applicant had
approved the withdrawal. Abeyratne gave evidence at the domestic inquiry but
he was not available to give evidence at the Labour Tribunal. His positive
evidence at the domestic inquiry was that he signed the withdrawal form. There
was no loss occasioned to either him or the Bank.  
  
The second charge related to the withdrawal of a sum of Rs. 9,500 on 22.4.85
from the savings account of one Ratnawathie. It was alleged that the signature
of Ratnawathie on the withdrawal voucher was forged and that the applicant had
approved the withdrawal. Ratnawathie was not called to testify and there was
not an iota of evidence to substantiate that the voucher was forged.  
  
The third charge related to the deposit of Rs. 1,000 in the deposit account of
one Indrani Neetha on 20.2.85. It was alleged that the account holder gave Rs.
2,000 to be deposited and that the applicant

**154**

misappropriated Rs. 1,000. The evidence of the account holder was that she
gave only Rs. 1,000 to be deposited to one Wimalasena a security guard who had
correctly deposited that amount to her credit. No misappropriation on the part
of anyone was proved.  
  
The fourth charge related to withdrawal of a sum of money by one Jordhi on
12.4.85. It was alleged that the withdrawal voucher was altered from Rs. 1,000
to read Rs. 7,000 and a sum of Rs. 6,000 was misappropriated. The voucher
clearly read seven thousand in words and the ledger reflected corresponding
entry for the withdrawal of a sum of Rs. 7,000. Again no misappropriation on
the part of anyone was proved.  
  
The fifth charge related to the withdrawal of a sum of Rs. 17,000 on 17.4.85
and 26.4.85 (Rs. 8,500 each day) from the savings account of one Emalin on
forged withdrawal forms approved by the applicant. Emalin never complained
that she was defrauded. The evidence relating to this transaction came from a
co-employee of the applicant, one Sumanawathie, who was charged along with the
applicant in MC Kuliyapitiya case No. 85784. That evidence was insufficient to
bring home that charge. I may add, purely to put the record straight, that the
applicant was acquitted in that case.  
  
The sixth charge related to the savings account of one Simon Singho. It was
alleged that a sum of Rs. 6,750 was withdrawn on 23.1.85 on a forged
withdrawal form. A bank employee called Somadasa has admitted that he
misappropriated that money. There was nothing to link the applicant with that
charge.  
  
It is quite significant that evidence led at the Labour Tribunal disclosed the
fact that the applicant never maintained the ledger and that he had to approve
about 200 to 300 vouchers a day. Having exonerated the applicant on every
charge of dishonesty and fraud, the learned President found the applicant
guilty of negligence and held that his dismissal was therefore justified.
Neither in the charge sheet served on the applicant nor in the answer filed
before the Tribunal did the employer Bank rely on the applicant's negligence
to justify his dismissal. That allegation seems to have suddenly sprung up in
the submissions of counsel who appeared for the Bank at the Labour Tribunal,
as a last-ditch manoeuvre to justify applicant's dismissal.

**155**

Let me refer to all the instances where the learned President refers to
applicant's negligence. In dealing with the transaction relating to Abeyratne
(charge1), the learned President states that the applicant was negligent
because the transaction was not entered in Abeyratne's pass-book. The learned
President has not even considered at what stage should the pass-book have been
up-dated. In any event that was not a matter which was within the ambit of the
charge levelled against the applicant. Without giving an opportunity to meet
that charge it would be unsafe to conclude that the applicant was negligent.  
  
The next point at which the learned President adverts to negligence, is in his
consideration of the charge relating to Emalin (charge 5). The learned
President merely states the applicant was negligent without specifying the act
or acts of negligence on the part of the applicant. Thereafter the learned
President winds up by making the following sweeping statement: "When all the
evidence is taken into consideration it is observed that the applicant has
acted at times (emphasis added) in a negligent manner. When considering the
post occupied by the applicant and the responsibilities that go with it, the
respondent Bank cannot have any confidence in him. I therefore hold that the
termination of his employment is justified".  
  
There appears to have been a lack of judicial evaluation of not only the
"times" at which the applicant was negligent but also of the particulars and
the manner in which he was negligent, which warranted his dismissal. The
learned High Court Judge overlooked this glaring infirmity in the reasoning of
the learned President.  
  
Learned counsel for the respondents drew our attention to the case of Bank of
Ceylon v. Manivasagasivam (1) where the question of forÂ­feiture of the
confidence reposed in a bank employee was considered. I can see no parallel
with that case because there the very justification for dismissal was the
suspicious course of conduct of the employee in relation to the Bank, in the
attempt by some other persons to fraudulently transfer a large sum of money
from the Island to an account abroad.  
  
For the foregoing reasons, I allow the appeal and set aside both the judgments
of the Labour Tribunal and the High Court. I direct the 2nd respondent Bank to
reinstate the applicant with effect from

**156**

1st January 1998, with back wages from 12.6.1985. The 2nd respondent Bank will
pay the applicant a sum of Rs. 25,000 as costs.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J. - I agree.**  
  
**BANDARANAYAKA, J. - I agree.  
**  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/57.html_  

