##  Ceylon Printers Ltd. and Another v. Weerakoon, Commissioner of Labour and
Others - SLR - 29, Vol 2 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 58; (1998) 2 Sri LR 29 (6 May
1998)

**29**

**CEYLON PRINTERS LTD. AND ANOTHER  
v.  
WEERAKOON, COMMISSIONER OF LABOUR AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C APPEAL NO. 19/95 WITH 92/94  
CA APPLICATION NOS. 601/91, 642/91  
OCTOBER 27, NOVEMBER 28, 1997  
  
_Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special Provisions) Act - Complaint of
Termination - Inquiry by an Assistant Commissioner - Variation of Assistant
Commissioner's recommendation by the Commissioner of Labour - Decision based
on new material without notice to the employer - Natural Justice.  
_  
Whilst a dispute between the appellant companies and a Trade Union
representing the appellants' workmen was the subject of Arbitration under the
Industrial Disputes Act, the workmen made a new demand coupled with a threat
of strike action. The appellants informed the workmen that their conduct was
unlawful and illegal and their services will be terminated if they failed to
report for work on 20. 4. 1988. An attempt to settle the dispute with the
intervention of the Commissioner of Labour was unsuccessful. Thereafter, the
Union complained to the Commissioner under the Termination of Employment of
Workmen (Special Provisions) Act that when the workmen reported for work after
the strike, on 26. 7. 1988, they were refused work. An Assistant Commissioner
of Labour after a prolonged inquiry decided that the termination of employment
of the workmen had been for disciplinary reasons and recommended to the
Commissioner that the application of the Union be dismissed. The Deputy
Commissioner who considered the recommendation disagreed with it on the ground
that the appellants had not resorted to disciplinary procedure in terms of a
judgment of the Court of Appeal. The Commissioner of Labour agreed with the
Deputy Commissioner and ordered the reinstatement of the workmen with back
wages. Two questions arose at the hearing of the appeal;  
  
(a) Whether there was a breach of the principles of Natural Justice by the
Commissioner in departing from the determination of the Assistant Commissioner
in favour of the appellants and acting purely on the recommendations of the
Deputy Commissioner.  
  
(b) Whether the Commissioner failed to address his mind at all to the issues
involved.  
  
The state counsel conceeded that at the point of departure the appellants
should have been given an opportunity of challenging the new material on which
the Commissioner acted.

**30**

**Held  
**  
1\. It is apparent from the order of the Commissioner that he had failed to
duly consider the material produced at the inquiry before the Assistant
Commissioner or the recommendations made by the Assistant Commissioner and the
Deputy Commissioner.  
  
2\. In view of the failure by the Commissioner to give the appellants an
opportunity of challenging the new material on which he acted, the
Commissioner was under a duty to give reasons for his decision, particularly
in view of the fact that it was not he who held the inquiry and recorded the
evidence. In the result, the order of the Commissioner was in breach of the
principles of Natural Justice.  
  
Cases referred to:  
  
1\. _Crofton Trust Investment Limited v. Greater London Rent Assessment
Committee and Another_ (1967) 2 All ER 1103, 1109.  
  
2\. _Karunadasa v. Unique Gem Stones Limited and other_ (1997) 1 Sri L.R 256,
260.  
  
3\. _Ratnayake v. Fernando_ SC 52/86 SCM 20.5.1991.  
  
4\. _Minister of National Revenue v. Wrights' Canadian Ropes Ltd._ 1947 AC 109
at 123.  
  
5\. _Rex v. Civil Service Appeal Board ex p. Cunningham_ 1991 4 ALL E. R 310
at 543.  
  
6. _R. v. Home Secretary ex p. Doody_ 1993 WLR 154.  
  
7. _Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food_ 1968 AC 997.  
  
_Faisz Musthapha, P.C with S. Mahenthiran and A. R. Surenthran_ for the
appellants.  
  
_Uditha Egalahewa_ S.C for the 1st and 2nd respondents.  
  
_L. V. P. Wettasinghe_ for the 3rd respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 6, 1998.  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J.  
**  
The employees of the two petitioner-appellant companies who were engaged in
the Printing and Engineering Trades became entitled to enhanced salaries and
other benefits consequent upon the extension of two Collective Agreements Nos.
3J & 3 marked XI' and 'X2'. Whilst the said Collective Agreements were in
force the 3rd respondent Union (The Eksath Kamkaru Samithiya) on behalf of its
members by a communication dated 7th January, 1983, marked 'X4' demanded inter
alia that the monthly salaries of its members in the petitioner-appellant

**31**

companies be increased by the addition of a sum representing their monthly non
recurring cost of living gratuity payments and that each member be given an
annual increment of Rs. 210 in addition to the increments that were being paid
to them. When the petitioner-appellant companies declined to accede to the
said demands made by the 3rd respondent Union on the basis that the matter was
adequately covered by the Collective Agreements a dispute arose between the
parties and the said dispute was referred to Arbitration in terms of section 4
(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act and assigned No. 1996 A on 15th September,
1986. When the aforesaid Arbitration proceedings commenced a preliminary
objection was taken in regard to the jurisdiction of the arbitrator and the
decision of the arbitrator overruling the objection that he had no
jurisdiction was challenged by the petitioners without success before the
Court of Appeal in CA application No. 30/90 whereupon the Arbitration
proceedings in A 1996 were resumed. During the pendency of the aforesaid
Arbitration proceedings the 3rd respondent Union demanded a general increase
of the salaries of its members by Rs. 1,000 per month by 'X7' dated 12th
March, 1988\. Thereafter by letter dated 23rd March, 1988 marked 'X8' the 3rd
respondent Union notified the petitioner-appellant companies that their
members would resort to strike action with effect from 25th March, 1998 till
their demands were granted. By letter dated 14th April, 1988 ('X9') the
petitioner-appellant companies informed the workmen that their conduct by
going on strike was unlawful and illegal and that their services would be
terminated if they failed to report for work by 20th April, 1988 and although
the petitioner-appellant companies attempted to arrive at a settlement with
assistance of the Commissioner of Labour the dispute could not be
satisfactorily resolved. Thereupon the 3rd respondent Union made a complaint
to the Commissioner of Labour under the Termination of Employment of Workmen
(Special Provisions) Act alleging that its members were refused work when they
returned after the strike on 26th July, 1988. This complaint was inquired into
by the 2nd respondent Assistant Commissioner of Labour and during the course
of the said inquiry the petitioner-appellant took a preliminary objection that
the 2nd respondent had no jurisdiction to inquire into the complaint made by
the 3rd respondent Union since the members of the 3rd respondent Union were
barred from resorting to strike action during the pendency of arbitration
proceedings. When this objection was overruled the petitioners sought to
canvass the said Order in the Court of Appeal in application CA No. 45/89. The
Court of Appeal after hearing submissions made on behalf of the parties
dismissed the said application on 6th December, 1989. Special leave to Appeal

**32**

was sought by the petitioner-appellant companies against the Order of the
Court of Appeal dismissing the application of the petitioner appellant
companies in SC Special Leave to Appeal application No. 27/90. This Court by
its order dated 14th March, 1990 dismissed the application for Special Leave
reserving the right of the petitioner appellant companies to lead evidence at
the inquiry to be held by the 2nd respondent Assistant Commissioner seeking to
establish:  
  
1\. That the persons on whose behalf the application was made to the
Commissioner of Labour were not workmen on 25th July, 1988, and  
  
2\. That their termination was by reason of punishment imposed by way of
disciplinary action (vide X 15)  
  
Consequent upon the said proceedings that commenced before the 2nd respondent
Assistant Commissioner under the Provisions of the Termination of Workmen
(Special Provisions) Act and after a prolonged inquiry before the 2nd
respondent the 2nd respondent came to a decision on 30th March, 1991; that the
termination of employment of the workmen concerned had been for disciplinary
reasons and recommended to the 1st respondent that the applications made by
the 3rd respondent on behalf of its members should be dismissed (vide X 24).  
  
The recommendation of the 2nd respondent was submitted by the 1 st respondent
to his deputy for consideration and report. The Deputy Commissioner had by his
recommendation (X 25) varied the recommendation of the 2nd respondent with
which the 1st respondent had agreed and the 1st respondent had made order that
the 22 workmen on whose behalf the 3d respondent had made the application be
reinstated with back wages. Against the said findings the petitioners filed an
application in the Court of Appeal (CA No. 601/91) in order to have it quashed
by way of certiorari. After several dates of argument on 27th June, 1994 the
said application was dismissed (vide 27). The petitioners sought Leave to
Appeal against the said judgment on the following questions of law to the
Court of Appeal.  
  
1\. (a) In view of section 11 (2) of the Termination of Employment of Workmen
Act which empowers the 1st respondent to delegate to any officer of the Labour
Department any power, function or duty conferred or imposed on him under the
Act,

**33**

has the 1 st respondent conveyed in an authorised form to the 2nd respondent,
and identified sufficiently, the power, function or duty delegated to him in
respect of the present dispute?  
  
(b) If not, or in any event, is the 1st respondent empowered by law to reverse
the findings and/or recommendations of the 2nd respondent?  
  
2\. (a) Are not the findings and recommendations of the 2nd respondent sound
on the facts and in law?  
  
(b) In any event, in the peculiar circumstances of this case, could the 1st
respondent have reversed the findings of the 2nd respondent without assigning
any reasons therefor?  
  
3\. (a) Should the 1st respondent and the Court of Appeal have acted, or
relied, upon the judgment of the Court of Appeal in CA No. 45/89 in view of
the judgment of the Supreme Court in SC special leave to appeal application
No. 27/90.  
  
(b) In any event should the 1st respondent, before acting on the
recommendations of Mr. Dayaratne, Deputy Commissioner of Labour, have given an
opportunity to the petitioner to be heard on matters vital to its case
including the judgment of the Supreme Court in SC Special Leave to Appeal
application No. 27/90 regarding the applicability of the judgment of the Court
of Appeal in CA No. 45/89?  
  
(c) Since the 1st respondent did not give the petitioner such an opportunity
was there a failure of Natural Justice?  
  
4\. (a) In terms of section 40 (1) (m) of the Industrial Disputes Act, is it
lawful for a workman to commence, continue or participate in a strike after an
industrial dispute in that industry 'has been referred for settlement by
Arbitration to an Arbitrator but before an award in respect of such dispute
has been made?  
  
(b) If not, was the strike commenced by the workmen in the present case,
during the pendency of the Arbitration proceedings, an illegal strike
punishable under section 40 (1) (m)?

**34**

(c) If the said strike was illegal and punishable was it misconduct warranting
disciplinary action for the said workmen to participate in the said strike?  
  
(d) Is it correct as a matter of law that an employer must hold a domestic
inquiry before terminating the services of a workman on disciplinary grounds?  
  
(e) Was the 1st respondent's prior permission required as a matter of law for
the termination of a workman's services as a punishment by way of disciplinary
action?  
  
5\. Did the 3rd respondent engage in a strike which warranted adverse findings
against it by the 2nd respondent?  
  
Having heard the submissions of counsel for the parties and after a
consideration of the questions of law submitted, the Court of Appeal by its
Order dated 15th July, 1994, granted leave to appeal to the Supreme Court on
questions 1 (a) and 1 (b) and 4 (d) and 4 (e) only. Thereafter on 5th August,
1994 an application for Special Leave to the Supreme Court was filed and in
the said application an Interim Order was sought to stay further proceedings
and execution of the judgment of the Court of Appeal and the operation of the
purported Orders contained in the determination made by the 1st respondent in
his communication dated 24th May, 1991\. This application for interim relief
was supported on 8th September, 1994 and after hearing counsel this Court made
Order staying the execution of the Order made by the 1st respondent-respondent
till the application for Special Leave was supported (vide folio 27 of the
record). On 3rd February, 1995 when the application for Special Leave was
supported this Court having considered the submissions made on behalf of the
petitioners granted leave on the following matters as well, in addition to the
matters upon which the Court of Appeal had granted leave by its Order dated
15th July, 1994 namely  
  
1\. (a) In terms of section 40 (1) (m) of the Industrial Disputes Act is it
lawful for a workman to commence, continue or participate in a strike after an
Industrial Dispute in that industry has been referred for settlement by
Arbitration to an Arbitrator but before an award in respect of such dispute
had been made?

**35**

(b) If not was the strike commenced by the workmen in the present case during
the pendency of the Arbitration Proceedings an illegal strike punishable under
section 40 (1) (m)?  
  
(c) If the said strike was illegal and punishable was it misconduct warranting
disciplinary action for the said workmen to participate in the said strike?  
  
2\. Did the 1st respondent and the Court of Appeal misdirect itself in law in
applying the judgment of the Court of Appeal in application No. 45/89?  
  
3\. Did the 1st respondent act in breach of the rules of Natural Justice in
acting on the recommendation of Dayaratne, Deputy Commissioner of Labour?
(vide folio 58 - 60 of the record).  
  
At the hearing of this appeal it was agreed by the counsel for the parties
that the arguments and submissions would be confined to the following issues
only  
  
(a) Whether there was a breach of the principles of Natural Justice by reason
of the Commissioner departing from the findings of fact and the determination
made in favour of the petitioner companies by the Inquiring Officer, i. e. the
2nd respondent, purely on the basis of an adverse recommendation made by the
Deputy Commissioner of Labour.  
  
(b) Whether there had been a failure on the part of the 1st respondent to
address his mind at all to the issues involved.  
  
It was contended by the learned President's Counsel appearing for the
petitioner-appellants that the reversal of the 2nd respondent's recommendation
made in favour of the petitioner-appellants by the 1st respondent Commissioner
without hearing the petitioner is in violation of the principles of Natural
Justice. It was submitted that even if the 1 st respondent had the power of
reviewing the recommendation of the 2nd respondent having regard to the very
large volume of evidence and documents produced at the inquiry the question
arises as to whether the 1 st respondent could have reversed or departed from
the said recommendation without hearing the petitioner-

**36**

appellants? It was contended that the answer to the above question should be
in the negative, for Natural Justice demanded that the petitioner-appellants
should have been given a fair hearing before reversing the recommendation
which was in their favour. It was the case for the petitioner-appellants that
the 2nd respondent Assistant Commissioner of Labour who held the inquiry after
a consideration of the evidence led before him by his decision dated 3rd
March, 1991, marked X24' had recommended that the applications made on behalf
of the employees of the 3rd respondent Union to the 1st respondent be
dismissed. However, Mr. Dayaratne the Deputy Commissioner of Labour when
requested by the Commissioner to consider and report on the findings of the
Assistant Commissioner who held the inquiry, had taken into account new
material, namely the judgment of the Court of Appeal No. CA 45189 in arriving
at his conclusion that an employee can be dismissed on disciplinary grounds as
a punishment after a disciplinary inquiry is held and as it appears that no
such disciplinary procedure had been resorted to by petitioners that the
petitioners be ordered to reinstate the workmen on whose behalf the
application had been made with arrears of wages. Therefore it was submitted
that the decision of the 1st respondent to vary the recommendation of the 2nd
respondent who held the inquiry without affording an opportunity to the
petitioners to canvass the new material that had been taken into account by
the 1st respondent was bad. In this connection learned President's counsel
cited De Smith (Judicial Review of Administrative Action) 4th edition page 211
which dealt with the subject of planning inquiries where Inspectors hold
inquiries and report to the Minister who in turn makes the order. It states
that: "if the Minister has it in mind to disagree with the Inspector's
recommendation he must notify the main parties of this fact and the reason for
its disagreement. If he differs from the Inspector on a finding of fact he
must give the parties an opportunity of making further written
representations. If the reason for his disagreement is that he has received
new evidence or has taken into consideration new issues of fact which were not
raised at the inquiry he must reopen the inquiry if any of the parties so
requests". Learned counsel relied on the observations of Lord Parker in
Crofton Trust Investment Limited v. Greater London Rent Assessment Committee
and another (1) where he stated: "it is quite clear that whenever a new point
emerges something, which might take a party by surprise, or something which
the Committee has found out and of which parties would have no knowledge,
fairness would clearly dictate that they should inform the parties and enable
them to deal with the points".

**37**

Therefore it was submitted by learned counsel that when the Deputy
Commissioner of Labour Mr. Dayaratne had considered the observations of
Justice Anandacoomaraswamy at pages 4 & 5 of the judgment in CA No. 45/89
which took the petitioner-appellants by surprise and which were expressly
excluded from being used to the prejudice of the petitioner-appellants that
they should have been given an opportunity to meet the material which was
taken into consideration. It was further contended that the Deputy
Commissioner had taken into consideration extrinsic material to vary the
recommendation of the 2nd respondent made in favour of the petitioner-
appellants which he was not entitled to do. In this connection Wade -
Administrative Law 6th edition page 983 observes: "that it is fully
established that the principles of Natural Justice do not permit the Minister,
any more than the Inspector, to receive evidence as to the local situation
from one of the parties concerned in the inquiry, without disclosing it to the
others and allowing them to comment. The Minister on his part must also act
judicially. He must only consider the report and the material properly before
him. He must not act on extrinsic information which the house owner has no
opportunity of contradicting. It will be generally a denial of justice to fail
to disclose to a party specific material relevant to a decision if he is
thereby deprived of an opportunity to comment on it". Thus it was contended
that the decision of the 1 st respondent Commissioner to vary the
recommendation of the 2nd respondent Assistant Commissioner made in favour of
the petitioner-appellants without affording an opportunity to them to meet the
new material that was taken into account was bad and is vitiated on account of
an error of law.  
  
A further submission made on behalf of the petitioner-appellants was that the
Deputy Commissioner had taken into consideration the judgment of a court
namely that of CA No. 45/89 to override the factual evidence that was placed
before the Assistant Commissioner who held the inquiry and that where the
knowledge of the Deputy Commissioner was to be used to override the factual
evidence and to shape the final decision that the party affected ought to have
been given notice of the proposed finding and an opportunity to submit further
evidence or arguments. According to Whitmore (Review of Administrative Action
1978 page 120): "the rationale behind this requirement of hearing parties
before considering new material is the necessity to impose effective
procedural checks to guard against a tribunal acting upon inaccurate
information within its knowledge or misapplying its

**38**

knowledge and to ensure that the parties are permitted to know and address
submissions to all crucial issues".  
  
Learned counsel for the petitioner-appellants contended that in any event that
the 1 st respondent's order is bad in law as he has accepted and adopted the
Deputy Commissioner's recommendation without addressing his mind at all to the
evidence on record and the reasons for the recommendation of the 2nd
respondent and as such that the said Order is not an Order at all and was
therefore totally void. It was contended that the 1st respondent had purported
to grant relief to all the employees whose names appear in the Orders marked
'X17' & 'X18' which includes some of the employees who in fact and in truth
had already accepted monetary payments from the petitioners and withdrawn
their complaints having entered into fresh contracts of employment under the
petitioner-appellant companies. An examination of the recommendation of the
2nd respondent who held the inquiry namely X24' clearly bears out that he had
given his mind to the evidence that was led before him, for in paragraph 8 of
X24' he observes thus: "another matter that transpired in the evidence of
Kanagaratna who gave evidence on behalf of the companies was that some of the
employees (K. J. Perera, M. P. Upali, W. T. Fonseka, Wasantha Athukorala, R.
N. E. Nazar, A. S. Wasantha Kumara and Harischandra Athukorale) who had
complained that their services had been terminated had applied to join the
companies as new employees on fresh contracts of employment. Therefore they
had accepted the position that their services had been terminated by letter
R25 dated 14th April, 1988. Of them it appears that R. N. E. Nazar and S.
Mohamed had accepted all monetary payments due to them for their service to
the companies and are employed in the companies as new employees on fresh
contracts of employees as evident from R122 A and R129".  
  
In this state of the evidence I am unable to accept the contention of the 1st
respondent that he had carefully considered the notes of the inquiry, the
recommendations made by Mr. Wijeweera the Assistant Commissioner of Labour and
of Mr. Dayaratne the Deputy Commissioner of Labour and made the Order dated
24th March, 1991 directing the petitioner to reinstate the workmen whose names
appear in the Orders X17' & 'X18'. For had he done so, in my view, he could
not have directed the reinstatement of R. N. E. Nazar and S. Mohamed who had
withdrawn their complaints and secured re-employment in the petitioner-
appellant companies under new contracts of employment.

**39**

Learned state counsel who appeared for the 1st & 2nd respondents during the
course of his submissions conceded that at the point of departure the
petitioner-appellants should have been given an opportunity of challenging the
new material that was taken into consideration by the Commissioner when
deviating from the recommendation made by the Assistant Commissioner who held
the inquiry, but however, submitted that there was no duty on the Commissioner
to have given reasons for his Order in the absence of a statutory requirement
to do so.  
  
I am unable to agree with this contention. This question was considered in the
case of Karunadasa v. Unique Gem Stones Limited and Others(2) at 260 where
attention was drawn to the following extracts from Wade - Administrative Law
7th edition dealing with reasons for decision:  
  
"The principles of Natural Justice have not in the past included any general
rule that reasons should be given for decisions. Nevertheless there is a
strong case to be made for the giving of reasons as an essential element of
administrative justice. Unless the citizen can discover the reasoning behind
the decision, he may be unable to tell whether it is reviewable or not, and so
he may be deprived of the protection of the law. A right to reasons is
therefore an indispensable part of a sound system of judicial review. Natural
Justice may provide the best rubric for it, since the giving of reasons is
required by the ordinary man's sense of justice. It is also a healthy
discipline for all who exercise power over others ... (at 541-542 cited with
approval in Ratnayake v. Fernando (3)).  
  
Although there is no general rule of law requiring the giving of reasons, an
administrative authority may be unable to show that it has acted lawfully
unless it explains itself. . . Going still further the Privy Council held that
a Minister who had failed to give reasons for a special tax assessment had not
shown that it was correct and that the taxpayer's appeal must be allowed
(citing Minister of National Revenue v. Wrights' Canadian Ropes Ltd.(4) An
award of abnormally low compensation to an unfairly dismissed prison officer
by the Civil Service Appeal Board, which made it a rule not to give reasons,
was quashed by the Court of Appeal, holding that Natural Justice demanded the
giving of reasons both in deciding whether the dismissal was unfair and in
assessing compensation,

**40**

since other employees were entitled to appeal to industrial tribunals which
were obliged by law to give reasons (Rex v. Civil Service Appeal Board ex p.
Cunningham)(5) at 543.  
  
In a series of cases it has been held that statutory tribunals must give
satisfactory reasons in order that the losing party may know whether he should
exercise his right of appeal on a point of law ... the House of Lords held
that a life prisoner was entitled to be told the Home Secretary's reasons for
rejecting the advice of the trial judge as to the penal element in the
sentence (citing R. v. Home Secretary ex p. Doody)(6) the House of Lords has
indicated that if a Minister fails to explain a decision satisfactorily, it
may be condemned as arbitrary and unreasonable (citing Padfield v. Minister of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food(7) ).  
  
"Although the lack of a general duty to give reasons is recognised as an
outstanding deficiency of administrative law, the judges have gone far towards
finding a remedy by holding that reasons must be given where fairness so
demands; and the decisions show that may now be the case more often than not.
It has been held at first instance that English law has now arrived at the
point where the duty to act fairly imparts at least a general duty to give
reasons, subject to necessary exceptions, and this conclusion seems well
justified. (at 544 - 545)".  
  
The 1st respondent in his affidavit takes up the position that he is not
required to give reasons for his order but having regard to the above
citations I am unable to agree and I am of the view that giving reasons for
his order becomes all the more important because it was not he who held the
inquiry and recorded the evidence.  
  
On a consideration of the submissions made and for the reasons stated I am of
the view that this appeal should be allowed. Therefore I set aside the
judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 27.6.94 and quash the orders of the 1st
respondent marked 'X17' & 'X18' dated 24.5.91. There will be no costs.  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ. - I agree.  
  
WIJETUNGA, J. - I agree.  
_  
Appeal allowed; Commissioner's order quashed_**.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/58.html_  

