##  In. Re. Rule Against Attorney At Law - SLR - 25, Vol 3 of 1998 [1998] LKSC
59; (1998) 3 Sri LR 25 (25 June 1998)

**25**

**IN RE. RULE AGAINST ATTORNEY-AT-LAW**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. RULE NO. 3/94D  
FEBRUARY 06, 07, 28, JUNE 02, 03,1997  
JULY 31ST, 1997, MARCH 27TH, MAY 20, 21, 22,1998.

Rule against Attorney-at-Law - Fraudulently misleading and deceiving court
-Procedure - After institution of action upto ejectment \-
Duties/Responsibility of court, Attorney-at-Law - Judicature Act - S. 42.

The Complainant alleged that the Attorney-at-Law on behalf of one W sought
declaration of title in respect of land X, thereafter the plaint was amended
twice and the 2nd amended plaint (unstamped) contained two schedules, one
referred to land X and the other to a new land, the complainant further
alleged that the 2nd amended plaint was hot served on him. The judgment which
was entered exparte was based on the 2nd amended plaint.

It was the position of the complainant that the Attorney-at-Law fraudulently
misled and deceived the District Judge and obtained a Writ of Ejectment
against him from his land which was not the subject matter of the original
action, it was further alleged that ejectment was obtained on the basis of the
2nd amended plaint.

**Held:**

1\. The former District Judge in his evidence admitted that, the judgment was
based on the 2nd amended plaint, with two schedules, which was tendered in
open court, and prior to signing the decree he had perused it.

2\. He had emphatically and without hesitation or reservation, stated that he
was neither misled nor deceived by anyone and that he entered the decree based
on the 2nd amended plaint, although the attorney-at-law drafted the decree no
blame could be attached to him, and that he took full responsibility to what
had happened.

3\. There is no evidence to show that the then District Judge had any
intention or motive to eject the defendant or to assist the plaintiff, nor was
there any evidence to show that there was any link between the attorney-at-law
and the then District Judge.

26

In the matter of a Rule in terms of s. 42 (2) of the Judicature Act.

_Kolitha Dharmawardane, DSG, with Shavindra Fernando SSC, and Nerin Pulle_ SC
for Attorney-General.

_Rohan Sahabandu with Athula Perera_ for BASL  
  
_Sanath Jayatileke with Upali Jayatileke_ for the respondent Attorney-at-Law.

Cur. adv. vult.

June 25, 1998

**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

The complainant, P. B. Siyathu of Polonnaruwa, alleged that Priyantha
Samarasinghe, Attorney-at-Law filed DC, Polonnaruwa case No. 5118 on
27.08.1990 on behalf of W. A. Weerawardena seeking a declaration of title
against P. B. Siyathu, in respect of a land which is described in the schedule
to the said plaint. Thereafter on 20.02.1991 Priyantha Samarasinghe filed an
amended plaint in the same case containing the same schedule as in the first
plaint filed on 27.08.1990 seeking a declaration of title and an order
preventing the defendant from obstructing the possession of the plaintiff.
Subsequently, on 10.07.1991, in the same case, Priyantha Samarasinghe filed
two amended plaints. One amended plaint was stamped and bore the seal of the
court with one schedule describing the same land as that described in the
original plaint dated 27.08.1990. The second amended plaint dated 10.07.1991
was unstamped and did not bear the seal of the court. The second amended
plaint contained two schedules, one of which related to another land in
addition to the land described in the two plaints earlier referred to.

Siyathu, the complainant alleged that Priyantha Samarasinghe, Attorney-at-Law
for the plaintiff in DC, Polonnaruwa case No. 5118, fraudulently misled and
deceived the District Judge of Polonnaruwa and obtained a writ of ejectment
against the said Siyathu from his land, which was not the subject matter of
the original action filed in DC, Polonnaruwa case No. 5118. It is alleged that
ejectment was obtained on the basis of the second amended plaint which was
filed on 10.07.1991.

27

The observations of Priyantha Samarasinghe were called, for and he failed to
satisfactorily explain his conduct to this court. Therefore on 13.09.1994 a
Rule was issued directing Priyantha Samarasinghe to show cause why he should
not be suspended from practice or be, removed from the Office of Attorney-at-
Law of the Supreme Court for acts of deceit and/or malpractice he had
committed in terms of section 42 (2) of the Judicature Act.

The complainant, P. B. Siyathu and his Attorney-at-Law, M. M. Aponsu were
called to give evidence in support of the Rule. The then District Judge,
Polonnaruwa, Buddhadasa Vithanage, and the plaintiff in DC, Polonnaruwa case
No. 5118, M. A Weerawardena gave evidence for the respondent.

The Rule issued on the respondent stated as follows:

1\. The respondent on behalf of M. A. Weerawardena, the plaintiff in case No.
5118 of DC, Polonnaruwa, filed plaint as Attorney-at-Law on 27.08.1990 seeking
a declaration of title against P. B. Siyathu in respect of a land which was
described in the schedule to the said plaint;

2\. On 20.02.1991, the respondent filed an amended plaint in the same case
(No. 5118), containing the same schedule describing the same land as in the
schedule to the first plaint filed on 27.08.1990 seeking a declaration of
title and preventing the defendant from obstructing the possession of the
plaintiff;

3\. On 10.07.1991, in the same case (No. 5118), the respondent filed two
amended plaints, one bearing stamps and the court frank with one schedule
describing the same land as described in the plaint dated 27.08.1990 and the
amended plaint dated 20.02.1991, and one which does not bear stamps or court
frank containing two schedules with an extra land included in addition to the
schedule referred to in the other plaints, referred to above and thereby the
respondent has fraudulently misled and deceived court to issue a writ of
ejectment against the said P. B. Siyathu, the defendant in DC, Polonnaruwa
case No. 5118, against property which was not the subject matter of the said
action.

According to the submissions made by M. M. Aponsu, the Attorney-at-Law for the
respondent in District Court, Polonnaruwa case

28

No. 5118, the original permit holder for the land in dispute had been one
Siriyathi. This was conceded by the plaintiff in case No. 5118\. While the
plaintiff in case No. 5118 made a claim to this property, the respondent had
made an application for substitution on the basis that he was the successor to
the original permit holder. When the respondent in case No. 5118 sought
substitution, he had been in enjoyment only of the paddy land. An amended
plaint was filed on 20.02.1991 (P4) by Priyantha Samarasinghe which included a
schedule referring to the paddy land. This had been amended again on
10.07.1991 (P5) and the amendment had one schedule which referred to the paddy
land. This amended plaint was stamped and bore the seal of the court. On the
same day, viz'10.07.1991, another amended plaint had been filed. This was not
stamped and did not bear the seal of the court (P6). However, it contained two
schedules: The first schedule referred to the paddy land (P6A) which was in
the first amended plaint dated 20.02.1991 (P4); and the second amended plaint
dated 10.07.1991 (P5). The second schedule referred to a highland (P6B) with
an extent of 4 acres and 2 roods.

The position of M. M. Aponsu was that the first amended plaint (P4) and the
stamped amended plaint (P5) not only had one schedule referring to the paddy
land but that there was no prayer either for restoration of possession or
dispossession. His position was that the amended plaint dated 10.07.1991,
which did not bear any stamps or the seal of the court (P6) but had two
schedules, contained a prayer for dispossession and restoration of possession.
M. M. Aponsu, in his evidence under cross-examination, stated that this
document (P6) was never served on him and that this is the document on which
his client Siyathu, the complainant in this matter, was ejected from the
premises. Aponsu further stated that, although as a practice he always
examined the record, he saw P6 only after the judgment had been entered by the
District Judge, Polonnaruwa.

According to the record of case No. 5118 of the District Court, Polonnaruwa,
Priyantha Samarasinghe had filed the plaint in this case on 12.09.1990. The
District Judge had entertained it and had subsequently issued summons
returunable on 26.09.1990. The case record and the evidence which was led
reveals that the defendant had neither filed his answer nor had he moved for
an adjournment. Although the Judge could have fixed this for ex-parte trial,
since the petition and afidavit were filed, the then District Judge, Mr.
Vithanage, had fixed the matter for inquiry. On 31:10:1990 the case was called

29

for inquiry and as an adjournment was sought by Priyantha Samarasinghe, the
inquiry was refixed for 28.11.1990. The matter in question was taken up for
inquiry on that day and on 05.12.1990 the then District Judge had stated that
his Order would be delivered on 16.01.1991. In his Order the then District
Judge, after examining the law and entertaining the plaint, had made the
following decisions:

(a), there were certain defects in the plaint and he therefore directed the
plaintiff to file an amended plaint;

(b). the application made by Aponsu to reject the plaint was disallowed.

The next date given for the purpose of filing the amended plaint was
22.02.1991. The amended first plaint (P4) was filed on that day and the
respondent was asked to file his answer on 24.04.1991. On 24.04.1991 the
answer was not filed and a further date was given, namely 05.06.1991. On
05.06.1991, as the Attorney-at-Law for the plaintiff was sick, a further date
was given by the District Judge. Accordingly, the answer was due on
19.06.1991. On 19.06.1991, the plaintiff, his lawyer, the respondent and his
lawyer were present in court. The Journal Entry reads as follows:

according to the original order for amended plaint'.

A date was given to tender the amended plaint and on 10.07.1991, according to
the Journal Entries, it appears that the amended plaint was filed. The then
District Judge, Polonnaruwa, Mr. Vithanage, stated in his evidence that,
during his tenure at Polonnaruwa, an original plaint was usually filed in the
registry. Subsequent answers, amended plaints and replications were either
filed in court or in the registry, with a copy issued to the other party. When
pleadings were filed in the registry they would be entered in the register,
the subject clerk making a minute and sending the record to the registry. When
there were amended plaints and answers, the lawyer or his clerk entered them
in the register and the subject clerk would enter them in the register and
date stamp the record. Thereafter it would be sent to the binder, and finally
to the Judge's chamber for Orders. According to Mr. Vithanage, when an amended
plaint or any other pleadings were filed in open court, the documents would be
minuted and the Mudaliyar would send them to the subject clerk. Regarding the
amended plaint with two schedules (P6), Mr. Vithanage's evidence was that the
document was filed in open court.

30

Thereafter a date was given for filing the answer. The answer was not tendered
on 14.08.1991 and the trial was fixed for 28.08.1991. On the day of the trial
all the parties were present and the District Judge had given a date, viz
11.09.1991, for written submissions. Before the trial date, the Attorney-at-
Law for respondent, Aponsu, filed his answer in the registry. His written
submissions were filed; certain submissions were on the basis that the plaint
should be rejected and that his answer should be accepted. The District Judge
delivered his judgment on 25.09.1991. Mr. Vithanage conceded that in the first
plaint (P2) the plaintiff had asked only for a declaration and that there was
no prayer for ejectment. He also conceded that in the amended plaint with two
schedules, dated 10.07.1991 (P6), there was a prayer for ejectment.

Mr. Vithanage stated in his evidence that according to the practice during his
tenure at the District Court, Polonnaruwa, once judgment was entered, counsel
for the plaintiff prepared and tendered the decree. This was done to assist
the court and although the court had to draw the decree, the judgment creditor
prepared a draft decree and tendered it to the court. The draft was examined
by the subject clerk to see whether it was in conformity with the judgment.
Mr. Vithanage said that the following were included in his decree:

(a) the first paragraph recited the events that took place prior to the date
of the trial;

(b) the second paragraph stated that the judgment had been entered for the
plaintiff as prayed for;

(c) in the third paragraph there was a declaratory decree as far as the land
in the first schedule was! concerned;

(d) in the fourth paragraph a permanent injunction was issued with regard to
the land described in the first schedule, and an order of ejectment in respect
of the land described in the second schedule;

(e). there was an order that the plaintiff be placed in possession and a
declaration that the plaintiff had been in undisturbed possession. There was
an order of costs.

31

Mr. Vithange stated that his judgment in case No. 5118 of District Court,
Polonnaruwa, was based on the document marked P6: that is, the amended plaint
with two schedules filed on 10.07.1991, which he said was tendered in open
court. Two months after the judgment was entered, he had entered the decree;
prior to signing the decree he had checked it. Mr. Vithange in his evidence
emphatically and without hesitation or reservation stated that he was neither
misled nor deceived by anyone and that he entered the decree based on P6
according to the documents as the documents were in order. Further, he stated
that, although Priyantha Samarasinghe drafted the decree no blame could be
attached to him and that he took full personal responsibility for what had
happened.

Learned senior state counsel submitted that there was a series of errors
committed by the then District Judge at Polonnaruwa, but all those errors were
in one direction. In other words, the errors were in favour of the plaintiff
in case No. 5118. He further submitted that, taking into consideration the
events which took place, it was clear that Priyantha Samarasinghe would have
assisted the then District Judge to eject the defendant from his property in
case No. 5118. I am not inclined to accept this position. There is not an iota
of evidence to show that the then District Judge had any intention or motive
to eject the defendant or to assist the plaintiff in this case. Nor was there
any evidence to show that there was any link between Priyantha Samarasinghe
and the then District Judge, Polonnaruwa. Moreover the charge against
Priyantha Samarasinghe is that he had misled and deceived court to issue a
writ of ejectment against Siyathu. The evidence led clearly showed that there
was nothing to indicate that Priyantha Samarasinghe had either misled or
deceived court. Taking into consideration the evidence that was led by the
complainant and the respondent, I hold that there was no proof to show that
Priyantha Samarasinghe had fraudulently misled and deceived court to issue a
writ of ejectment against P. B. Siyathu, the defendant in DC, Polonnaruwa case
No. 5118. I hold that the charges against the respondent have not been proved
and I make order that the Rule issued against the respondent in these
proceedings be discharged.

**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.

**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.** \- I agree.

Rule discharged.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/59.html_  

