##  Plyadasa v. Kurukulasuriya, Attorney At Law - SLR - 410, Vol 2 of 1997
[1996] LKSC 6; (1997) 2 Sri LR 410 (22 July 1996)

410

PlYADASA  

v.  

KURUKULASURIYA, ATTORNEY-AT-LAW



SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J.,

DHEERARATNE, J.

AND WADUGODAPITIYA, J.

RULE 7/95 (D).

JUNE 17, 18 AND 21, 1996.



Attorney-at-Law - Malpractice - Judicature Act, Section 41 \- Supreme Court
(Conduct of and Etiquette for Attorneys-at-Law) Rules, 1988.



Piyadasa who was the defendant in a rent and ejectment case retained the
respondent Attorney-at-Law in an appeal before the Court of Appeal. The
Respondent failed to enter his appearance, give free dates and keep track of
the case. Consequently, the appeal was decided against Piyadasa, who was
unrepresented. Thereafter, the respondent failed to return the client's file
of documents despite many letters and reminders by the client calling for the
file.



**Held:**

** **

The respondent is guilty of malpractice.



**Case referred to:**



Daniel v Chandradeva [1994]2 Sri L.R. 1.



**PROCEEDINGS** on Rule Nisi to remove Attorney-at-Law from roll of Attorneys-
at Law.



_Aloy Ratnayake, P.C.,_ with _Siva Narendran_ for respondent.

_ _

_C. Motilal Nehru, PC._ with _M. D. Silva and Ms. Joseph_ for the Bar
Association of Sri Lanka.

_ _

_Kolitha Dharmawardena, D.S.G._ in support of the Rule

_ _

_Cur adv. vult._



July 22, 1996.  


**FERNANDO, J.**



A Rule was issued on the respondent, who had been admitted and enrolled as an
Attorney-at-Law in 1962, asking him to show cause why he should not be removed
from the office of an Attorney-at-Law of the Supreme Court, or suspended from
practice, on account of

**411**



malpractice falling within the ambit of section 42(1) of the Judicature Act,
No. 2 of 1978, in that -



(a) in November 1985 he had been retained by one Piyadasa in Court of Appeal
Case No. CA/LA 101/85, which was an application for leave to appeal against an
order made in favour of Piyadasa, who was the defendant in District Court
Tangalle Case No. 860/RE;



(b) he had been paid Rs. 4,200 by Piyadasa as fees for his appearances, for
the preparation of objections, and for Counsel for argument;



(c) he had filed the objections, together with his proxy, and also made
arrangements for Counsel to appear for Piyadasa on certain dates,



(d) however, he failed to arrange for any appearance for Piyadasa, or to
attend Court himself, on 26.7.90, 13.11.90; 9.1.91; 4.9.91, 27.11.91, 18.9.92,
30.10.92 and 24.11.92, whilst the appellant was represented on all those
dates,



(e) because of that default, the appeal was decided against Piyadasa, who was
unrepresented; and



(f) thereafter he failed to reply to any of the letters sent to him by
Piyadasa or to return Piyadasa's papers relating to the case;

  
and thereby acted in a manner detrimental and/or prejudicial to his client
Piyadasa.



The respondent said that he had cause to show, and the matter was taken up for
inquiry on 17th, 18th and 21st June 1996. In support of the Rule, the
complainant, Piyadasa, and the Registrars of the Supreme Court and the Court
of Appeal, gave evidence. The respondent gave evidence on his own behalf.



The evidence led established - and, indeed, the respondent admitted - the
truth of the matters set out in (a), (b), (c) and (f) above, and that the
appeal had been decided on 24.11.92 with Piyadasa being absent and
unrepresented.

#  

# 412

#  

# DEFAULT IN APPEARANCE

** **

The disputed question of fact was whether the respondent failed to appear, or
to arrange for an appearance, for Piyadasa on all or any of the dates set out
in (d), and if so whether it was that default which resulted in the adverse
decision of the Court of Appeal. It is not disputed that the plaintiff-
appellant in CA/LA 101/85 did not obtain a variation of the order appealed
against.



The evidence shows that Piyadasa retained the respondent in November 1985,
that Piyadasa promptly paid him the full fee of Rs. 4,200/- called for by his
letter dated 15.11.85, that letter stated that Rs. 1,050/- was for appearances
by him on the notice returnable date (14.11.85), and the date for filing
objections (4.12.85), and that the balance was for the preparation of
objections and Counsel's fee for the argument; that the respondent filed his
proxy, but did not take any steps to retain Counsel for the argument; that he
neither entered his appearance by filling and tendering an appearance slip
intended for that purpose, nor gave his free dates, to the registry in
accordance with the practice of the Court of Appeal; and that he did not check
the relevant appeal register maintained by the Court of Appeal or the monthly
lists of pending appeals exhibited and available for inspection in the Court
of Appeal registry. The journal entries in CA/LA 101/85, show that after
Piyadasa's affidavit was filed on 13.1.86, the Court of Appeal registry took
no steps to list the matter for over four years, until 26.7.90. It is not
clear how it came to be listed on that day, and for what purpose: whether for
hearing, or to fix a date for hearing; however, the respondent did not appear,
and the Court fixed it for hearing on 11.10.90; inexplicably, it was next
listed for 20.9.90, on which date the Court again fixed it for 11.10.90. On
that day, Attorney-at-Law L. Hirimutugoda, appeared for Piyadasa, and the
Court ordered that the case be listed "in due course on a date convenient to
Counsel". The case was next listed on 13.11.90, and the respondent neither
appeared nor arranged for any one else to appear; and the Court granted leave
to appeal. That was an ex parte order, adverse to Piyadasa. The Court called
for the original record from the District Court of Tangalle. Twice thereafter
the case was listed even though the record had not been received - on 3.12.90,
when Attorney-at-Law Hirimutugoda appeared, and

**413**



on 9.1.91, when no one appeared. On 9.1.91 too the Court ordered the matter
"to be listed for argument on a date convenient to Counsel". Thereafter the
record was received, and the matter came up on 4.9.91; again the respondent
did not appear, and the Court directed listing "on a date suitable to
Counsel". Despite three such orders, there is not even a suggestion by the
respondent, or on his behalf, that either Attorney-at-Law Hirimutugoda or he
informed the registry of any convenient dates at any time.



After 4.9.91, the case next came up on 27.11.91, in the respondent's absence;
the Court directed that notice be issued on Piyadasa and his registered
Attorney, naming the respondent, and again ordered listing "on a date
convenient to Counsel". Two months later, although Piyadasa's address as given
in the caption was "9, Sanghamitta Mawatha, Kandy, and presently of 9/1,
Medaketiya Road, Tangalle", notice was sent by registered post to the Kandy
address and not to Tangalle; and no notice was sent to the respondent.
Thereafter the case came up on 18.9.92 and 30.10.92, the respondent being
absent. On 30.10.92, the Court fixed the matter for 24.11.92, and directed
that notice be sent to Piyadasa; again, notice was sent by registered post to
the Kandy address. (Both notices were not returned). On 24.11.92 , the
respondent did not appear, and the Court allowed the appeal, and sent the case
back to the District Court of Tangalle. The respondent took no steps to file
an application for relisting or for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court.



There has been a series of lapses by officials of the Court of Appeal
registry, of a kind which inevitably adds to the delays, inconvenience and
cost of litigation. In those circumstances, the failure of the respondent to
appear on 26.7.90, 20.9.90, 3.12.90 and 9.1.91, cannot be regarded as
culpable.



However, had the respondent entered his appearance and given his free dates,
in all probability the case would have been listed on a date suitable to him;
and if it was not, that would have been a sufficient ground for re-listing.
There would have been no defaults on 13.1 1.90, 4.9.91, 27.11.91, 18.9.92,
30.10.92. and 24.11. 92. Despite avoidable lapses by the registry officials,
it was thus the respondent who was principally responsible for those defaults,
which resulted in

**414**



adverse orders being made on 13.11.90 and 24.11.92. His evidence indicated
that he was awaiting some intimation from the Court of Appeal, but the
practice of the Court clearly did not entitle a party or his Attorney-at-Law
to any such notice. Nor can this Court treat his responsibility as any less
simply because he retained Attorney-at-Law Hirimutugoda, for it is the
respondent's position that Attorney-at-Law Hirimutugoda was only asked to
appear on 11.10.90 and 3.12.90 and, thereafter, "to have an eye on the appeal
list" \- not that he was retained to argue the case. As the registered
Attorney, it remained the respondent's responsibility to deal with the case
(see Daniel v Chandradeva ).



Learned President's Counsel, on behalf of the Bar Association, submitted that
these defaults did not amount to malpractice, because the case had been in
"cold storage" in the Court of Appeal for over four years, and had thereafter
been listed contrary to Court orders. In those circumstances, he argued, the
respondent's lapse, if any, did not warrant any disciplinary action.



This contention ignores the facts. The defaults on six dates - namely
13.11.90, 4.9.91, 27.11.91, 18.9.92, 30.10.92, and 24.11.92 \- are not
attributable to lapses by the registry officials. What is even more serious is
that this contention wholly fails to take account of the duty of diligence
imposed on anyone who decides to practice in the Court of Appeal (and, indeed,
in any Court) to familiarize himself, and comply, with the established
practice and procedure of that Court. The respondent had been in practice for
about 25 years when these defaults occurred. The fact that he appeared mainly
in the Magistrate's Court is no excuse: he should not have agreed to accept
the brief unless he could have attended to it with due diligence. He had a
clear option - either to shoulder all the responsibilities which flowed from
the proxy in his favour (see Chandradeva, at 11) or to retain Counsel and
relieve himself of some part of that burden. He did not choose the second
alternative even though his client had entrusted to him the full amount
nominated by him (in his very first letter of 15.11.85) as Counsel's fee for
argument. Unless and until some Counsel was retained, therefore, he was
obliged to enter his appearance, give free dates, and keep track of the case:
he was not justified in waiting for notices from the Court and reminders from
his client.

**415**



The respondent was therefore in default of his basic obligation to exercise
due diligence, now expressly recognised in Rules 10 and 15 of the Supreme
Court (Conduct of and Etiquette for Attorneys-at-Law) Rules, 1988.



Learned President's Counsel, on behalf of the respondent, referred to certain
other matters, as having an exculpatory or mitigatory effect. First, he urged
that the respondent had expressed reluctance to accept the brief, because he
did not usually appear in the Court of Appeal and also because he preferred
not to appear for clients from his own area. However, it was never suggested
to Piyadasa in cross-examination that any such reluctance had been indicated.
This does not mitigate his responsibility.



Second, he contended that Piyadasa was himself guilty of defaults and delays.
Three matters were urged: not meeting the respondent prior to 4.12.85 to sign
his affidavit, not responding to a letter sent by the respondent when the
respondent felt that senior counsel should be retained, and not contacting the
respondent despite two notices from Court. Although the respondent wrote to
Piyadasa on 15.11.85, referring to the preparation of the objections, he made
no mention of preparing or signing an affidavit and Piyadasa says that the
respondent did not ask him to come to Colombo to sign an affidavit. In any
event, this had no bearing on the ultimate judgment of the Court of Appeal.
Although the respondent did testify that he had decided to retain senior
counsel after the District Court record had been called for, all he said was
that he had written to Piyadasa to come and meet him - but not that he told
him why. Further, it was not suggested to Piyadasa that any such letter had
been sent; and the respondent claimed that he neither kept a copy, nor made a
note in his file about it. Not only is the respondent's version unacceptable,
but any such letter was quite unnecessary because he had already received the
nominated fee for counsel, and should have retained one. As for the notices,
there is no reason to doubt Piyadasa's explanation that he did not receive the
notices sent by Court to his former Kandy address, because by 1991 those
premises had been forcibly seized by the Bank.



Thirdly, learned President's Counsel relied on the respondent's evidence that
he had thought the appeal would be over in three or  


**416**



four months; that after about 18 months Piyadasa met him, whereupon he told
Piyadasa not to worry about the case; and that he offered to get an order
expediting the case, but that Piyadasa wanted it dragged out as long as
possible. Piyadasa's evidence was that on three occasions before 24.11.92 he
had met the respondent in Colombo, and inquired about the case; the respondent
had reassured him, saying that he need not come for the case, that the
respondent had done everything necessary for the case, and that he had nothing
to fear. He denied the suggestion that he wanted the case dragged on, and, as
pointed out later in this judgment, the respondent failed to reply to
Piyadasa's letter of 12.12.93. But even if the respondent is believed, that
would have made no difference to his obligation to appear at the hearing,
particularly as he admitted telling Piyadasa not to worry about the case.



It was next submitted that the respondent's absence made no difference; that
the Court of Appeal had looked at the question of notices very carefully, and
had followed an unreported judgment of the Supreme Court in reaching its
decision. The respondent says that he had left Colombo on 20.11.92; that he
returned on 24.11.92 at 12.00 noon, and saw the appeal list in the "Daily
News"; that he rushed to the Court of Appeal office to verify what had
happened, and if necessary to get the case relisted; that he realised that
this was not possible as Piyadasa had been twice noticed; that the next
alternative was to file an application for leave to appeal to the Supreme
Court, but that, having read the signed judgment of the Court of Appeal, he
found that it was based on a judgment of the Supreme Court, and therefore
decided not to pursue that course of action - all this within three or four
days, and without any attempt to communicate with his client. He adds that he
made this decision after consulting a senior lawyer.



From what has already been noted, it is clear that if the Court of Appeal had
scrutinized the notices, it would have found that they had not been sent to
Piyadasa's current address. Further the Court made an observation that none of
the respondents were present, and that they were absent and unrepresented on
several previous dates notwithstanding notices issued by the Court. But the
record shows that this was mistaken; at the outset notice was sought and
issued

**417**



only on the 1st respondent (Piyadasa); and on 27.11.91 notice was ordered on
the 1st respondent, and not the others. It seems that the Court did not probe
the issue of notices. If the Court of Appeal judgment depended on notices
having been properly issued, a case might have been made for relisting on the
basis that the judgment was procedurally flawed. As for the argument that the
judgment was correct on the merits, and that the respondent's lapses made no
difference, that would allow counsel to play the part of the Judge. On
27.11.91, the Court of Appeal referred to the (unreported) judgment of this
Court, and expressed the view "that the respondent to this appeal should be
heard." When the Court itself considered assistance necessary, can an
Attorney-at-Law seek to excuse his default in appearance by saying that his
appearance was not needed? The respondent's professional obligation was to
appear, and default cannot be excused or mitigated by such speculation about
the result of litigation. If he had really believed that the unreported
Supreme Court judgment was conclusive, then between 27.11.91 and 24.11.92 he
should have informed his client that that was his view and advised him not to
contest the appeal.



Further, it is not likely that a signed copy of the Court of Appeal judgment
was available so soon; the judgment of the Supreme Court which the Court of
Appeal followed was then not reported. But even assuming that he was able to
peruse the two judgments, and to make them available to senior counsel, yet he
took the decision not to pursue the matter without any communication to and
discussion with his client. Even thereafter, he did not inform his client: in
answer to a leading question in evidence-in-chief, whether he had informed
Piyadasa about what had happened, all he said was that he had sent a letter
asking Piyadasa to come and meet him. He said that he had no copy of this
letter, and in cross-examination President's Counsel did not even suggest to
Piyadasa that any such letter had been sent.



The respondent said that in March 1993, quite by chance, he had met Piyadasa,
and told him what had happened; he asked why, despite two notices from the
Court, Piyadasa had not contacted him, but that Piyadasa seemed unconcerned.
This, too, had not been

**418**



put to Piyadasa in cross-examination, and I cannot accept that evidence.



Counsel's fifth argument was that Piyadasa had suffered no damage, because he
continued to remain in occupation of the premises from 1985 to 1992, and even
thereafter, as the proceedings continued in the District Court. However, there
was never any risk that the Court of Appeal proceedings could result in an
order for Piyadasa's ejectment, and so his continuing occupation cannot
mitigate the respondent's default. In fact, the respondent's defaults resulted
in the alteration of a finding in his favour, and thus he did suffer some
disadvantage in the subsequent District Court proceedings.



Lastly Counsel submitted that Piyadasa complained to this Court through
improper motives in the mistaken belief that the respondent had acted in
collusion with the other party, and also in an endeavour to extort some
payment from the respondent.



This allegation of collusion arose from Piyadasa's evidence that in September
1993 he met the respondent, and again inquired about the case, whereupon the
respondent said "Oh, you are coming from Ampara, isn't it?", and undertook to
send him particulars about the case within a fortnight, but failed to do so.
Thereafter in November 1993, Piyadasa learned from his Attorney-at-Law at
Tangalle that the record had been sent back to Tangalle, and found that the
appeal had been allowed. He then wrote to the respondent on 12.12.93 referring
to this (as well as the three meetings before 24. 11.92) and stated that the
respondent's question about Ampara gave rise to a serious suspicion. In his
letter he did not state what that suspicion was, but his evidence shows that
he suspected that the respondent had acted in collusion with his opponent
because the plaintiff-appellant was from Ampara, while Piyadasa was from
Tangalle. In that letter, Piyadasa also threatened to take legal action
against the respondent for the loss he had suffered. The respondent says he
did not reply to this letter because of this serious allegation of collusion.
In the result, Piyadasa's version of this meeting (and of the previous
meetings) was not denied by the respondent at the earliest

**419**



opportunity, but only after these proceedings commenced. While I accept
Piyadasa's evidence, I must observe that even if Piyadasa was wholly
unjustified in inferring collusion, that did not vitiate his complaint in
other respects.



As for the allegations of extortion, learned President's Counsel suggested in
cross-examination to Piyadasa that he had discussed his grievance with Mr.
Ronnie de Mel and had wanted a sum of money to settle the dispute. This
Piyadasa stoutly denied. The respondent neither testified that Mr. de Mel had
given him any such information nor called Mr. de Mel to give evidence. I hold
that none of the matters relied on by the learned President's Counsel for the
Respondent excuses or mitigates his default. His failure to inform his client,
and to file an application for relisting or for leave to appeal aggravates his
default.

** **

# FAILURE TO RETURN PAPERS

** **

Piyadasa further testified that he needed the file or papers (which admittedly
had been handed over to the respondent in November 1985) for the purpose of
the District Court proceedings. He says he first made a telephone call and
left a message with a member of the respondent's household (whom he did not
identify); he followed this up with a polite, reply-paid, telegram on 1.3.94,
asking for an appointment to collect the fife; and when there was no response,
he sent a strongly worded letter dated 23.3.94 \- specifically alleging
collusion with his opponent, demanding the return of his file, and threatening
legal action. This was copied to various officials.



On the directions of this Court, by letter dated 25.8.94 the Registrar called
for the 'Respondent's observations' on that letter; on 23.9.94 the respondent
asked for time "as the file relating to the subject has been misplaced" by
him. He sent a reply, dated 24.10.94, which made no reference to the file, and
on being reminded, he replied on 18.11.94 that the papers were with
Attorneyat-Law Hirimutugoda and that when he received Piyadasa's telegram, he
asked Attorney-at-Law Hirimutugoda to trace it, so that he could return it,
but that so far the latter had failed to do so.

**420**



In his evidence in this Court, he said that Attorney-at-Law Hirimutugoda had
returned the file to him after appearing on 3.12.90, but that he gave the file
again to Attorney-at-Law Hirimutugoda after the order of 24.11.92. However,
quite inconsistently, he stated that he wanted to get Piyadasa down and to ask
why Piyadasa had insulted him; and that if Piyadasa had spoken cordially to
him, he would have returned the file. But even when giving evidence he said he
did not have the file.



I hold that the respondent wilfully refused to return the file of documents
which was his client's property and which he had no right to retain, and that
this constituted malpractice.



# CONCLUSION



I hold that the charge of malpractice has been established beyond reasonable
doubt. The Rule is therefore made absolute.



The respondent's evidence discloses other unsatisfactory features in regard to
his professional work. He failed to keep a record of the disbursements made
out of the fee paid to him for various purposes, and of the communications
with his client. Further by his letter dated 6.12.85 he asked Piyadasa to
place his signature on an affidavit, and to return it for signature thereafter
by a Justice of the Peace in Colombo. Taking all the circumstances into
consideration, in the interests of the administration of justice, the public,
and the profession, I order that the respondent be suspended from practice
until 31.12.97. The Registrar is directed to inform the Registrar General of
this order.



**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.

** **

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.



_Rule made absolute,_

_Respondent suspended from practice._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/6.html_  

