##  Suren De Silva v. The Commissioner General of Inland Revenue - SLR - 130,
Vol 2 of 1997 [1995] LKSC 6; (1997) 2 Sri LR 130 (23 August 1995)

130

  
SUREN DE SILVA

v.  

THE COMMISSIONER-GENERAL OF INLAND REVENUE



SUPREME COURT

G. B. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

KULATUNGA, J.

AND RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 35/95.

C.A APPLICATION NO. 448/94 (REV).

D.C. COLOMBO NO. 56060/TAX.

JUNE 20, 1995.



Income Tax - Income from lands owned by Assessee's wife - Assessee's liability
to pay tax - Effect of settlement in appeals against the Assessment - Section
117 of the Inland Revenue Act.



On a certificate filed by the Commissioner-General of Inland Revenue against
the assessee the District Court ordered that a sum of Rs. 868,730/- being
income tax be recovered from the assessee as a fine. The assessee applied to
have the said order revised on the ground that the Agricultural lands which
produced the income which was assessed belonged to his wife. Hence it was his
wife who was legally liable to pay tax, even though she had permitted him to
enjoy the income.

**131**



**Held:**



The submission of the assessee has no relevance to the case as the claim of
the Commissioner of Inland Revenue was based on a settlement of the appeals
preferred by the petitioner in terms of section 117 of the Inland Revenue Act.
In any event, it was not a fit matter for the exercise of revisionary
jurisdiction.



**Cases referred to:**

** **

1\. Pondicherry Railway Co., Ltd. v. C.I.T. (1931 AIR P.C. 165).  


2\. Sassoon and Co. Ltd. v. C.I.T. (26 I.T.R. 27).



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



Faisz Musthapha, P.C. with R. G. L. de Silva, for petitioner-appellant.

_  
K. Sripavan, S.S.C._ for respondent.



_Cur adv vult._





August 23, 1995.  


**G. R S. DE SILVA, C.J.**  


The respondent (the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue) filed in the
District Court of Colombo a certificate in terms of section 130 (1) of the
Inland Revenue Act No. 28 of 1979 for the recovery of a sum of Rs. 868,730/-
as income tax, wealth tax and penalty due from the petitioner. The relevant
years of assessment were 1982/83, 1983/84, 1984/85. The assessments were made
partly in respect of agricultural income. The petitioner disputed only the
component of tax in respect of the agricultural income which amounted to Rs.
80,392/-. He did not dispute his liability to pay the balance sum of Rs.
588,338/- due in terms of the aforesaid certificate.



At the inquiry before the District Court the petitioner objected to the
recovery proceedings under section 130 of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 28 of
1979 on the ground that he was not "duly assessed". The submission was that he
was assessed in respect of agricultural income from an estate called "Drunkin
Estate" which was not owned by him. The owners were his wife and his mother.
In short, the contention advanced on behalf of the petitioner was that he was
assessed in respect of agricultural income which he did not earn and which did
not accrue to him.



The District Court, however, overruled the objection and imposed the said sum
of Rs. 868,730/- as a fine on the petitioner. The

**132**



petitioner moved the Court of Appeal by way of revision to set aside the order
of the District Court. The application in revision was dismissed and hence the
present appeal to this court.



It is not disputed that the petitioner is not the owner of "Drunkin Estate"
which was the source of the agricultural income. The petitioner's wife by her
letters R 1 and R2 addressed to the respondent categorically stated that it
was the petitioner who enjoyed the income from the estate for the relevant
period.



The principal submission of Mr. Musthapha for the petitioner was that under
our tax law the income must be earned by a person or the income must arise or
accrue to him in order to attract tax in his hands. The mere receipt of income
by a person will not attract tax. The fact that the petitioner's wife
permitted the petitioner to enjoy the income did not in law make any
difference as to the tax liability of his wife who was the owner of half share
of the estate. The income still remained the income of his wife and it was she
who was liable to tax on the income. It was only if she had "alienated" or
"assigned" the **source** of her income so that it was no longer her income
that she would not be liable to tax. In the instant case there was no such
"alienation" or "assignment" of the source of the income. In support of these
submissions Mr. Musthapha cited the case of Pondicherry Railway Co. Ltd., v.
C.I.T.(1) and the case of Sassoon and Co. Ltd. v. C.I. T.(2).



It seems to me that the submissions of Mr. Musthapha though not without
attraction, have little or no relevance, having regard to the **proved facts
and circumstances of the instant case**. The affidavit of the respondent filed
of record makes it clear (a) that the increase in the net wealth of the
petitioner indicated that he had been in receipt of an income in excess of
what he had declared in his returns; (b) that the assessment for the year
1982/1983 was computed on the basis of the net wealth and assessable income
**agreed** upon by the petitioner and his auditor with the assessor; (c) that
the assessments for the years 1983/1984 and 1984/1985 were made in settlement
of the appeals preferred by the petitioner in terms of section 117 of the
Inland Revenue Act, No. 28 of 1979. The appeals were settled on the

**133**



basis of the agreements entered into by petitioner and his auditor with the
assessor. The notes of interview at which the agreements were reached were
signed by the petitioner. These notes were produced marked R3 along with the
affidavit of the respondent.



It is not suggested that the agreements entered into by the petitioner were
vitiated by mistake, duress or by any other circumstance. The agreements were
ex facie authorized by the statute. In this view of the matter, I hold that
the contention of Mr. Musthapha that the agreements with the assessor were
entered into without jurisdiction, is untenable. In any event, this is not a
fit matter for the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of
Appeal.



For these reasons, the appeal fails and is dismissed but without costs.



**KULATUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

** **

**RAMANATHAN, J**. - I agree.



_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/6.html_  

