##  Volanka Ltd. v. All Ceylon Commercial and Industrial Workers' Union and
Others - SLR - 359, Vol 3 of 2002 [1994] LKSC 6; (2002) 3 Sri LR 359 (25 July
1994)

**359**

**VOLANKA LIMITED  
v.  
ALL CEYLON COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL  
WORKERS' UNION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
PERERA, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
SC (SPL) APPEAL NO. 62/93  
CA NO. 393/88  
ARBITRATION NO. A 1824  
JULY 25, 1994  
  
_Decision of the secretary of the workers " union to hold the meeting -
Dismissal of the secretary - Whether conduct qua secretary is a mitigating
factor - Error of law on the face of the record.  
_  
The services of the 2nd respondent, the secretary of the 1st respondent union
were terminated by the employer for holding a meeting of workers on the
employer's premises without the employer's permission contrary to a collective
agreement. The said termination of services was included in the terms of
reference in an arbitration under section 4 (1) of the Industrial Disputes
Act. The Arbitrator (3rd respondent) held that the 2nd respondent acted qua
secretary of the union, and that the 2nd respondent's conduct was mainly in a
representative capacity which was a mitigatory factor. Hence, the termination
of his services was unjustifiable.  
  
**Held:  
**  
(I) The 2nd respondent himself was a workman on whom the collective agreement
imposed an obligation not to participate in unauthorized meetings and that his
representative capacity was not a mitigatory factor.  
  
(II) No distinction can be made between an error of law on the face of the
record by inadvertence and an error made in consequence of reasoning.

**360**

The order of the Arbitrator constituted an error of law on the face of the
record which the Court of Appeal had the jurisdiction to correct by the writ
of certiorari.  
  
**Case referred to :  
**  
1\. _Ramaswamy Padayachi v. Shanmugha Padayachi -_ (1959) 2 Madras LJ 201.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_H. L. de Silva, PC_ with _F. Musthapha, PC_ for appellant.  
  
_B. Weerakoon_ with _Chamantha Weerakoon_ and _Ramani Muththetuwegama_ for
respondent.  
  
July 25, 1994  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
A Collective Agreement dated 31. 07. 1971 was entered into between  the
Employers' Federation of Ceylon and three trade union federations: the Ceylon
Federation of Labour, the Ceylon Federation of Trade Unions and the Sri Lanka
Independent Trade Union Federation. The appellant company was a member of
Employers' Federation of Ceylon, while the 1st respondent union was a member
of one of the trade union federations. Under that Collective Agreement, trade
unions were given certain rights in respect of union meetings. If a union
desired to hold a meeting on the employer's premises, it was required to make
an application for permission to the employer, and if the employer decided to
grant permission, he was entitled to impose certain conditions.

**361**

Certain disputes between the appellant and the 1st respondent union were
referred for settlement by arbitration, under section 4 (1) of the Industrial
Disputes Act, to the 3rd respondent. The dispute which is relevant to the
present appeal was whether termination of the services of the 2nd respondent
(who was the secretary of the 1st respondent's branch union at the employer's
factory) was justified, and to what relief he was entitled.  
  
The 3rd respondent held that the termination was not justified and ordered the
reinstatement of the 2nd respondent but without back wages. The appellant
unsuccessfully applied for a writ of certiorari to the Court of Appeal, and
thereafter appealed to this court with special leave. According to the 3rd
respondent's order the workmen in the appellant's factory had resumed work on
04\. 06. 1979, after a strike which had lasted about 2 1/2 months. The
Assistant Factory Manager of the appellant testified that on 05. 06. 1979 the
2nd respondent had requested permission to hold a meeting from 8.45 am to 9.00
am which was the tea break; he refused permission, whereupon the 2nd
respondent said he would hold the meeting, with or without permission. The 3rd
respondent concluded that unauthorised meetings were held on 05. 06. 1979, 19.
06. 1979 and 23\. 06. 1979. In his order, he stated that he found "the
evidence of the witnesses for the employer more acceptable than the evidence
given by the (2nd respondent)"; that the evidence of the Assistant Factory
Manager in particular "was quite convincing"; that "his demeanour and the
forthright manner in which he gave his evidence. . . (made him) accept his
evidence"; that the 2nd respondent's "demeanour and the vacillating and
evasive manner in which he gave his evidence was in direct contrast to the
forthright evidence given by the witnesses for the  employer". The 3rd
respondent therefore accepted the evidence of the appellant's witness that
these three meetings were held by the 2nd respondent workman, without
permission.

**362**

Having come to this finding, the 3rd respondent correctly observed that the
main question which remained to be decided was whether the termination of the
2nd respondent was justified. In coming to the conclusion that termination was
not justified, a matter to which the 3rd respondent gave great importance was
that the 2nd respondent's "misconduct (was) in relation to union activities",
that his conduct was "mainly in his representative capacity as secretary of
the union". In assessing the seriousness of that misconduct, the 3rd
respondent observed that the 2nd respondent "has failed in his duty as
secretary, and it is the union that must take the rap more than the workman in
his personal capacity as a workman. The 3rd respondent found himself unable to
hold that these unauthorised meetings justified such a serious punishment as
dismissal" when considering the importance and sacred position held by trade
unions in guaranteeing social justice".  
  
Mr. H. L de Siiva, PC submitted that the order was vitiated by an error of law
in that the 3rd respondent has treated the 2nd respondents representative
capacity as an exculpatory factor, which clearly it was not. Assuming,
however, as Mr. Weerakoon contended, that it was a mitigatory factor, Mr. de
Silva submitted that it could be so regarded only if the 2nd respondent's
conduct in holding these meetings was completely bona fide. He urged, however,
that the 3rd respondent had failed to take into consideration the attitude of
defiance which the 2nd respondent had displayed when refused permission by the
Assistant Factory Manager. This was a circumstance which the 3rd respondent
did not even mention in coming to the conclusion that dismissal was not
justified. Even if that is ignored, it seems to me that the 3rd respondent has
given undue weight to this as a mitigatory factor, in observing that in some
way the union must take the rap "more" than the 2nd respondent as a workman.
The 2nd respondent was first and foremost an employee, and the Collective
Agreement imposed an

**363**

obligation on him not to participate in unauthorised meetings; if he did so
his liability would not significantly diminish because he was a trade union
officer. Mr. H. L. de Silva further submitted that the conduct of the
respondent could not be viewed in isolation; it had to be considered in the
context of its effect on other employees, as for instance that it had induced
collective acts of indiscipline on the part of other employees, namely
participation in unauthorised meetings in violation of the Collective
Agreement,  
  
In these circumstances, I hold that the 3rd respondent's conclusion that
termination was not Justified was vitiated by an error of law apparent on the
face of his award in that he regarded the 2nd respondent's representative
capacity as being an exculpatory factor, or attached undue importance to it as
a mitigatory factor, while failing to take into account relevant material
which established Sack of good faith as well as aggravation of the misconduct.  
  
White the Court of Appeal regarded the conduct of the 2nd respondent as being
in defiance of the employer, its reluctance to interfere appears to have been
occasioned by the decision in Rarnaswami Padayachi v. Shanmugha Padayachi on
the basis of which it held that the power to review mistakes or errors
apparent on the face of the record is confined to errors which had been
committed by inadvertence, and does not include errors of law arrived at after
a process of conscious reasoning. That decision had nothing to do with the
scope of the writ of certiorari, but related to Order 47 Rule 1 of the Indian
Civil Procedure Code which provides for the correction of inadvetant errors,
of the kind which section 189 of our Civil Procedure Code deals with. However,
the jurisdiction to correct errors of law on the face of the record, by the
writ of certiorari, has always been recognised as including errors of law made
after a conscious process of reasoning.

**364**

I hold that the award of the 3rd respondent is vitiated by errors of law
apparent on the face of the order, and should have been quashed by the Court
of Appeal by certiorari. The appeal is allowed, the judgment of the Court of
Appeal is set aside, and the order dated 02. 11. 1987 made by the 3rd
respondent (published in the Gazette of 01. 01. 1988) is quashed. There will
be no costs.  
  
**PERERA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/6.html_  

