##  Packiyanathan v. Singarajah - SLR - 205, Vol 2 of 1991 [1991] LKSC 6;
(1991) 2 Sri LR 205 (2 September 1991)

**205**

_  _

**PACKIYANATHAN**

**v.**

**SINGARAJAH**





SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J., AMERASINGHE, J. AND KULATUNGA, J.

S. C. APPEAL NO. 2/89.

C. A. NO. 151/80F.

D. C. Vavuniya 2477/RE.

September 02, 1991.



Appeal ‑ Application for re‑hearing ‑ Civil Procedure Code, section 771 ‑
Grounds which warrant a re‑hearing ‑ Negligence of Attorney‑at‑Law and client.



Relief will not be granted for default in prosecuting an appeal where –



(a)                the default has resulted from the negligence of the client
or both the client and his attorney‑at‑law



(b)               the default has resulted from the negligence of the
attorney‑at‑law in which event the principle is that the negligence of the
attorney‑at‑law is the negligence of the client and the client must suffer for
it.



            As the applicant's default appeared to be the result of his own negligence as well as the negligence of his attorney‑at‑law the conduct of the appellant and his attorney‑at‑law cannot be excused. The appellant had failed to adduce sufficient cause for a re‑hearing of the appeal.



It is necessary to make a distinction between mistake or inadvertence of an
attorney‑at‑law or party and negligence. A mere mistake can generally be
excused; but not negligence, especially continuing negligence. The decision
will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. The Court will in
granting relief ensure that it's order will not condone or in any manner
encourage the neglect of professional duties expected of Attorneys‑at‑Law.



**Cases referred to:**

**  **

1.                  _Kalawana Dhammadassi Thero v. Mawella Dhammavisuddhi Thero_ 57 NLR 400 

2.                  _Pakir Mohideen v. Mohamadu Casim_ 04 NLR 299 

3.                  _Carolis Appuhamy v. Singho Appu_ 05 NLR 75



### 206



4\.         _Scharenguivel v. Orr_ 28 NLR 302  

5\.         _Kathiresu v. Sinniah_ 71 NLR 450

1.                  _Gianchand v. Hyder_ 74 NLR 300 

2.                  _Jandi v. Pinidiya_ 74 NLR 433 (D.B.)



**APPEAL** from order of Court of Appeal refusing to re‑list appeal for
hear­ing.



_R.E. Thambiratnam_ with _Mr. Bazar_ for Appellant.



_S. Mahenthiran_ for Respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._

SEPTEMBER 25, 1991.



**Kulatunga, J.**



This is an appeal from an order of the Court of Appeal refusing an application
by the appellant on 22.09.1988 in terms of s. 771 of the Civil Procedure Code
to rehear the appeal in the above action which had been decided ex parte
against him. Section 771 empowers the Court to rehear an appeal on grounds
specified therein or for other "sufficient cause". The Court was of the
opinion that there were no reasonable grounds warranting an order for
rehearing the appeal.



The appellant was a sub‑tenant of certain premises under the respondent who
had leased it from one Govindapillai. The respondent sued the appellant to
have him ejected therefrom. On 23.01.80 the District Judge dismissed the
action on the ground that the notice to quit given to the appellant
(defend­ant) is not a valid notice. The respondent appealed to the Court of
Appeal. The appellant instructed Mr. Vilvarajah his Attorney‑at‑Law in the
District Court to take necessary steps in connection with the appeal and to
retain Counsel to resist the appeal. He used to periodically visit Mr.
Vilvarajah to



### 207



inquire about the appeal and was told that necessary steps had been taken and
that he would be informed when the appeal was taken up for hearing.



The appellant had taken the said premises on a monthly rental of Rs. 25/‑ and
was carrying on the business of cycle repairs there. Pending the appeal the
lease of the premises to the respondent appears to have expired whereupon the
owner Govindapillai leased it to the appellant on 01.01.1982. The appellant
states that he received no information from Mr. Vil­varajah regarding the
appeal; that Mr. Vilvarajah died at the hands of an assassin in April 1988
after which he visited Mr. Vilvarajah's office and collected the appeal brief
and other documents in the case; he also caused inquiries to be made about the
appeal and learnt in September 1988 that the appeal had been heard ex‑parte
and judgment delivered on 23.10.1985 setting aside the judgment of the
District Judge and entering judgment for the respondent as prayed for with
costs in both Courts.



The appellant complains that the order of the Court of Appeal was not
communicated to him by the District Court of Vavuniya nor were any steps taken
by that Court to eject him from the premises in suit; but that prior to his
becoming aware of the order in appeal, the respondent with the assistance of
some unknown persons forcibly evicted him from the premises on 18.01.1988; and
that an attempt by his lawyers to file a plaint in the District Court was
unsuccessful for the reason that the Court had ceased to function.



The above facts show that the immediate reason for the appellant to make
inquiries about the appeal was probably his ejectment from the premises in
suit which occurred on 18.01.1988 whilst Mr. Vilvarajah was yet alive. However
neither Mr. Vilvarajah before his death in April 1988 nor the appellant until
late that year had obtained a copy of the judgment in appeal.



### 208



According to the date stamp of the Court of Appeal on P3, copy of the judgment
, it had been obtained on 15.08.1988. Had the appellant taken the trouble to
obtain it earlier he could have applied to the Court of Appeal for rehearing
the appeal much earlier than September 1988.



In refusing his application the Court was of the view that no reasonable
grounds exist to relist the matter. As reasons for its order the Court said
that the appellant's Attorney‑at‑Law had died in April 1988 while the appeal
had been decided on 23.10.1985, the 3rd occasion when it had been listed for
argu­ment. The facts set out above indicate that after the execution of a
lease in his favour in 1982 the appellant probably lost interest in the appeal
and left it entirely to his Attorney‑at-­Law, possibly for the reason that he
felt secure in the posses­sion of those premises as he was no longer a
sub‑tenant under the respondent. His affidavit does not indicate whether apart
from obtaining the appeal brief either of them did anything else regarding the
appeal. It is silent as to whether Counsel were retained to argue the appeal
and whether lawyer's fees were paid. It is also silent as to whether there was
any attempt to check from the Registry of the Court of Appeal regarding
listing. The inference from this is that they took no steps to ascertain the
progress of the appeal which was concluded in 1985 and continued to be
negligent thereafter and failed to take prompt steps even after the forcible
ejectment of the appellant in January 1988.



At the hearing before us Mr. Thambiratnam learned Coun­sel for the appellant
submitted that the default of the appellant to be represented at the appeal
before the Court below occurred entirely due to the negligence of his
Attorney‑at‑Law; that the appellant had taken all the steps within his
compe­tence; and that in the circumstances of this case he should not be
deprived of a hearing and as such is entitled to an order for a rehearing of
the appeal.



### 209



            On the facts of this case the appellant's default appears to be the result of his own negligence as well as the negligence of his Attorney‑at‑Law. Even if it was the negligence of his Attorney‑at‑Law alone the decisions of this Court which I shall presently discuss are against him, the principle being that "the negligence of the proctor is in law the negligence of the client" and "the client must suffer for his proctor's negli­gence". The case of _Kalawana Dhammadassi Thero v. Mawella Dhammavisuddhi Thero_ (1) cited by the learned Counsel for the appellant has no application. In that case the proctor for the respondent to the appeal had falsely informed the respondent that he had retained Counsel to represent him; further during the pendancy of the appeal, the proctor had been suspended from the practice of his profession for a cer­tain period. Gratiaen J. held that there was "sufficient cause" within the meaning of s.771 of the C.P.C. to rehear the appeal. The instant case is different.



In view of the fact that applications for rehearing are being made on an
increasing scale we think it appropriate to make a brief survey of the
previous decisions in the matter and to state the law in the light of those
decisions. I have already referred to one such decision. Some of the other
decisions which are relevant relate to applications made to the District Court
for relief against ex parte orders entered by reason of default by the
defendant or the plaintiff. Default in the Dis­trict Court is curable by
showing "reasonable grounds" there­for whilst in appeal the defaulting party
must adduce "suffi­cient cause" for relief. The duties of legal advisers
representing clients and the legal consequences of negligence on their part
are the same in the original and appellate Courts.



In _Pakir Mohideen v. Mohamadu Casim_ (2) the defendant had noted the trial
date incorrectly when his proctor's clerk gave it to him, took no steps to get
ready for trial and was absent at the trial. His proctor appeared and stated
that he had no instructions and withdrew from the case. After ex parte



### 210



proceedings decree nisi was entered against him. An applica­tion to set aside
the judgment on the ground that the defend­ant had mistaken the date of trial
was refused by the District Judge. The Supreme Court refused to revise that
order observ­ing that the proctor had been forgetful or neglectful of the
interests of his client in particular in failing to ask for instruc­tions in
the matter.



Bonser C.J. said –



"If the Proctor did not do his duty, he is to blame for the absence of the
defendant and the defendant must suffer for the fault of his Proctor".



In _Carolis Appuhamy v. Singho Appu_ (3) the Supreme Court set aside a decree
dismissing the plaintiff's action for non‑appearance where the plaintiff's
absence which led to the dismissal of his action was due to his continuing
illness for some months. In _Scharenguivel v. Orr_ (4) when the trial was
fixed neither the plaintiff nor his proctor was present in Court. On the trial
date proctors for both parties were present but the proctor for the plaintiff
stated that he had no instructions from his client whereupon the case was
dismissed.



The District Judge disallowed an application to set aside the decree on the
ground that the plaintiff was not ignorant of the date of trial. In appeal
Lyall Grant J. found that there was negligence on the part of the proctor and
not personal negli­gence on the part of the plaintiff and said __



"That, however is immaterial. The plaintiff must suffer for his proctor's
negligence. This is clearly laid down by Bonser CJ in _Pakir Mohideen v.
Mohamadu Casim_ " (2).



Lyall Grant J. thought that the relevant circumstances of _Pakir Mohideen's_
case appear indistinguishable from those in the case before him. To my mind,
however, the circumstances in these cases are distinguishable to the extent
that in the ear­lier case both the client and the proctor were negligent
whereas in the later case only the proctor was negligent.



**211**



In _Kathiresu v. Sinniah_ (5) the plaintiff and his proctor were both absent
on the trial date because the proctor had taken down the date of trial
incorrectly. Fernando CJ set aside the decree nisi entered on account of the
plaintiff's non­appearance following a case reported in 16 Times of Law
Reports p.119 in which the only reason for non‑appearance was a mistake by the
parties' proctor.



In _Gianchand v. Hyder_ (6) Queen's Counsel failed to appear for the
plaintiff‑respondent at the hearing of the appeal because his clerk had
inadvertently failed to notify the Regis­trar of the Court of the fact that he
had been retained. The appeal was heard ex parte, the judgment was reserved on
06.06.1970 and the order was delivered on 16.07.1970 against the
plaintiff‑respondent. The Supreme Court accepted Queen's Counsel's explanation
for his absence but refused to reopen the appeal in the absence of an
explanation by the junior Counsel why he failed to appear. Alles J. also
observed that had the plaintiff‑respondent's legal advisers been alert they
would have been aware that the appeal had been listed, heard and the judgment
reserved soon after 06.06.1970.



In _Jandi v. Pinidiya_ (Divisional Bench) (7) the proctor who appeared for the
petitioners in a partition case desired to have his proxy revoked as he was
not able to appear and told them that the statement of claim had been fixed
for 07.04.1968 a date which he had obtained from the Court Mudaliyar who
submitted the record to the Judge for orders with a minute specifying the date
which the District Judge would have ordi­narily adopted according to a
practice in that Court. Later the petitioners appealed to the proctor to
appear for them but on inspecting the record of the case the proctor found
that the Judge had ordered 02.02.1968 for the statement of claim. No statement
of claim having been filed on that date he fixed the trial for 23.03.1968 on
which date interlocutory decree was entered. Fernando CJ (with Silva SPJ
agreeing) observed that the proctor had neglected the interests of the client
and on a



### 212



strict application of precedent the application to set aside the interlocutory
decree will have to be dismissed as the client must suffer for his proctor's
negligence on the ground that the fault of the agent has to be attributed to
the client. He added that the justification for this principle is that under
the Com­mon Law a client has a right of action against his proctor for damages
sustained as a result of the negligence of the proctor. However, the Chief
Justice distinguished the case before him from others in which questions of
default had been considered. He said that if for a long period officers of the
District Court have customarily given information as to dates fixed for steps
in an action, a proctor may perhaps have some excuse for thinking that
information thus furnished is correct. He also noted that the reason why the
proctor for the petitioners desired to cancel the proxy given to him by the
petitioners was that another proctor was personally interested in the
partition action and thought that there are circumstances in the case which
might lend support to the criticism that the conduct of petitioners and Court
officers has deprived the petitioners of their right to be heard in the
partition action.



Upon those considerations Fernando CJ felt that the prin­ciple "justice must
not only be done but must also appear to be done" should be applied and
directed that subject to the deposit of Rs. 500/‑ payable to the respondents
and the pay­ment of costs in the District Court, the interlocutory decree will
be set aside but with a warning that the Court "will not in future be inclined
to grant relief when practitioners fail to carry out their responsibilities".



Weeramantry, J. (dissenting) was unable to excuse the con­duct of the proctor
in failing to verify the' date on the record and preferred to dismiss the
application applying the principle that the negligence of the proctor is in
law the negligence of the client.



To sum up the position in the light of the above decisions, it seems that
relief may not be granted __



### 213



(a)        where the default has resulted from the neligence of the client or
both the client and his Attorney‑at‑Law;



(b)        where the default has resulted from the negligence of the
Attorney‑at‑Law in which event the principle is that the negligence of the
Attorney‑at‑Law is the negligence of the client and the client must suffer for
it.



However, it is necessary to make a distinction between mis­take or
inadvertence of an Attorney‑at‑Law or party and neg­ligence. A mere mistake
can generally be excused; but not neg­ligence, especially continuing
negligence. The decision will depend upon the facts and circumstances of each
case; and where the conduct of Counsel is involved the Court will, in granting
relief, ensure that its order will not condone or in any manner encourage the
neglect of professional duties expected of Attorneys‑at‑Law.



Applying the above principles to the facts of this case, I am of the view that
the conduct of the appellant and his Attorney­at‑Law cannot be excused and the
appellant had failed to adduce sufficient cause for a rehearing of the appeal.



The learned Counsel for the respondent also raised a pre­liminary objection
that the special leave to appeal was filed out of time. The application for
relisting was refused on 29.09.1988, but the special leave application was
lodged on 27.10.1988. This Court has granted special leave to appeal ex pane
subject to any objections that the respondent would take at the hearing of the
appeal. Learned Counsel for the appel­lant submitted that the delay in filing
the application for spe­cial leave strictly within time should be excused for
the reason that the order appealed from had been made in chambers and hence
the appellant was not aware of it for some time.



The order appealed from has been produced marked P2. According to an entry
therein it had been certified on 05.10.1988. As the date stamp of the Court of
Appeal thereon indicating its issue is not decipherable I had the records of
the



### 214



Court of Appeal checked and find that it has been issued after 4.20 p.m. on
05.10.1988. If so, the delay would be just one day which if not excused will
bar this appeal; but as the appellant was not heard on these facts and in view
of my finding above, I do not consider it necessary to decide the preliminary
objec­tion.



For the foregoing reasons, I affirm the order of the Court of Appeal and
dismiss the appeal with costs.



**Fernando, J. __** I agree.



**Amerasinghe, J.** **__** I agree.



_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/6.html_  

