##  Mahinda Rajapaksa v. Kudahetti and Others - SLR - 223, Vol 2 of 1992
[1990] LKSC 6; (1992) 2 Sri LR 223 (11 September 1990)

**223**

**MAHINDA RAJAPAKSA** **  
v.** **  
KUDAHETTI AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
AMERASINGHE J. AND  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
18 AND 19 JUNE, 1992.

_     Fundamental Rights - Articles 13(1) and 14(1) (a) of the Constitution -
Freedom of speech -Arrest._

In September 1990 the petitioner went to Katunayake airport to board an
aircraft bound for Geneva where the 31st session of the working group on
Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances was being held from 10-14 September. At
the airport 1st respondent disclosing the fact that he was an Assistant
Superintendent of Police informed the petitioner that he wished to examine his
baggage for fabricated documents which were likely to be prejudicial to the
interests of national security, and which were likely to promote feelings of
hatred or contempt to the Government, an offence under Regulation 33 of the
Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations. The petitioner
refused to permit the search and wanted to contact a lawyer. The first
respondent did not object to this. The petitioner then spoke on the telephone
to Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike the leader of the opposition and thereafter
threw the bags at the first respondent and asked him to examine them. The
first respondent examined the bags and recovered 533 documents containing
information about missing persons and 19 pages of photographs and issued a
receipt for them which was countersigned by the petitioner. The petitioner
however refused to make a statement to the police..

The petitioner's complaint was that he was invited to address the "Working
Group" but that he was not able to present his case fully before that group.
The invitation to him was as Secretary of the Committee of Parliamentarians
for Fundamental and Human Rights (which is an informal group of opposition
members of Parliament and not a committee of the House) to submit information
for consideration in the preparation of the Working Group's annual reports.

**Held:**

1\. The invitation was neither an invitation to "address' the Working Group
nor was it an invitation to attend the meeting, nor was there any evidence
that he had even

224

an appointment to meet the Group. There was no evidence that the petitioner
had spoken at all at the meeting quite apart from the fact he was unable to
present his case **fully**.

What the Working Group sought was information which would be an important
contribution to its efforts to reflect in its report the allegations and
evaluations, made by non-governmental organizations or general problems and
situations related to disappearances; what was sought was information of a
**general nature** and not of a particular nature relating to individual
cases.

The invitation clearly and without ambiguity set out the limited and special
purpose for which the meeting was called. The meeting was concerned with
general issues and, if the petitioner did speak at all, he made no attempt to
show how the giving up of material prevented him from delineating the issues
relevant to the meeting and presenting the factual contentions in an effective
and meaningful manner. On the other hand, in terms of the carefully structured
procedures of the Working group, the material which he was unable to take with
him was of no relevance to the business of the meeting' of the kind held in.
Geneva, its deliberations and its deliberative process. The material which the
petitioner could not take with him was of evidential value only. As such it
was irrelevant as it was not an evidentiary hearing that took place at the
meeting. Neither the presentation, distribution or publication of the material
given over, namely information on individual cases, was necessary (if indeed
permissible at all for the exercise of his right of free speech **at that
meeting**. Even material of a **general nature** , which was the subject-
matters of the meeting, was requested, in terms of the invitation, to be
submitted before August 20, 1990 about three weeks before the meeting. The
material was taken by the 1st respondent on 11th September 1990, a day after
the meeting had commenced.

The material given by the petitioner to 1st respondent was important and
valuable and even relevant **at other times** and in other ways and not on the
occasion of the meeting of 10-14 September. All of the materials, but two
forms, were returned to the petitioner on 14 October 1990. The other two forms
were returned, after reference to the Attorney-General for advice in February
1991\. The material given over could have been sent to the Working Group **at
any time** , unlike the general observations called for inclusion in the
preparation of the annual report.

**_Per_ Amerasinghe, J. **"in my view, if the expression of thoughts and
beliefs, though not absolutely prohibited or prevented, is directly,
definitely and distinctly, in a real, concrete and sufficiently palpable way,
and not merely fancifully or inconsequentially, chilled or impaired or
inhibited, without lawfully warranted

225

justification, I should hold that Article 14(1) (a) of the Constitution is
violated, and grant appropriate relief and redress. However, the right to
speak must be tailored to the occasion. It cannot be considered in the
abstract or in a vaccum. One may be entitled to speak but only on a particular
subject on a given occasion. One maybe permitted to speak but only at an
appointed time. One may be only permitted to orally say certain things on one
occasion but permitted to table or publish certain written material only on
another. One may speak but only during the time allocated. These limitations
and other constraints are accepted without demur, so that the exercise of the
right of free speech might at all serve its purposes. Statements that meet the
test of admissibility and relevance qualify for utterance. But not all that
comes into the brain of a speaker. Every speaker is familiar with the
procedure of being cut down by the chair upholding a point of order."

2\. As for the question of arrest, there was no imprisonment or forced
confinement or durance or restriction of movement by reason of being placed in
the custody of the law. He was not forced to abandon his journey and ordered
to go elsewhere, to Police Stations and other designated places under
surveillance and to remain under the control and coercive directions of law
enforcement personnel or any other authority. He was not required to be in the
presence or control of the first respondent or other officers of justice or
law enforcement at any time even at the Airport. He was not in their keeping.
There was no restraint of his freedom of movement by actual or threatened
coercion. He was by no means coerced physically or by word or deed into a
state of submission. Admittedly he complied with the proposal to leave the
documents behind, not spontaneously but because it was suggested or prompted
by the 1st respondent. The petitioner gave up the documents choosing between
his options without duress or intimidation and without fear of losing his
liberty by being placed in custody of the law. He did not have to choose
between giving up the document or being imprisoned, confined or placed in the
custody of the law. After giving up the suspicious documents in his possession
he went on his way to Geneva as planned. Although the detention may have been
irritating and irksome there was no arrest within the meaning of Article 13(1)
of the Constitution and therefore the question of giving reasons for arrest
did not arise.

It is not every detention or delay in going on, nor the imposition of
conditions including the requirement to hand over or leave behind certain
things, nor even the prevention of going on that constitutes an arrest in the
relevant sense. **Per Amerasinghe, J**. "However, in my view, in order to
sustain the petitioner's claim that his fundamental right of freedom from
arrest granted by Article 13(1) of the

226

 Constitution has been violated, he must establish that there was an
apprehension of his person by word or deed and an imprisonment, confinement,
durance or constraint by placing him (such apprehension and placing having
been signified by physical action or by words spoken or by other conduct from
which it might have been inferred) in the custody, keeping, control or under
the the coercive directions, of an officer of justice or other authority,
whether the purpose of such arrest was to enable the petitioner to be
available and ready to be produced to answer an alleged or suspected crime or
to assist in the detection of a crime or in the arrest or prosecution of an
offender or some such or other purpose of the officer making, or authority
ordering, the arrest. I do not intend this to be a definition of arrest. A
definition, I suppose, must await the wisdom of the future."

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Namasivayam v. Gunawardena (1989) 1 Sri LR 394.  
_  
_2\. Piyasiri and Others v Nimal Fernando, A.S.P. and Others (1988) 1 Sri LR
173.  
_  
_3\. Grainger v. Hill (1838) 5 Scot 561 575.  
_  
_4\. Warner v. Riddiford (1858) 4 CB (N5) 180._

  
_5\. Somawathie v. Weerasinghe and Others[1990] 2 Sri LR 121.  
_  
_6\. Withanage Sirisena and Others v. Ernest Perera and Others [1991] 2 Sri LR
97.  
_  
_7\. Youngstown Sheet and Tube Co. V. Sawyer (1952) 343 US 579._  
  
_8\. Goldwater v. Carter (1979) 444 US 996.  
_  
_9\. Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Chadda (1983) 462 US 919._

  
_10\. Dames and Moore v. Regan (1981) 453 US 654.  
_  
_11\. Haig v Agee (1981) 453 US 280._

**APPLICATION** for relief for violation of fundamental rights under article
14(1) (a) and 13(1) of the Constitution.

_R. K. W. Goonesekera for the petitioner.  
_  
_Upawansa Yapa, Deputy Solicitor-General for respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

227

28th July, 1992.  
**AMERASINGHE, J.**

In this matter, leave to proceed had been granted to the petitioner in respect
of the alleged infringement of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles
12, 13(1), 13(2) and 14(1) (a) of the Constitution.

Articles 12 and 13(2)

At the hearing, learned Counsel for the petitioner informed the Court that he
did not wish to proceed with the matters pertaining to Articles 12 and 13(2)
and that he wished to confine himself to seeking relief and redress in respect
of the alleged violations of Articles 13(1) and 14(1) (a) of the Constitution.
This application in respect of the alleged violations of Articles 12 and 13(2)
of the Constitution is, therefore, dismissed.

Articles 14(1) (a)

According to paragraph 2 of his affidavit, the petitioner is a Member of
Parliament belonging to the main opposition group, an "active campaigner for
the protection of human rights", and the Secretary of the Committee of
Parliamentarians for Fundamental and Human Rights.

On 11th September, 1990, the petitioner went to Katunayake Airport to board an
aircraft bound for Geneva where the 31st session of the Working Group on
Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances was being held from 10 -14 September.
When the petitioner arrived at the Airport, the first respondent, after
disclosing the fact that he was an Assistant Superintendent of Police,
informed him that he wished to examine his baggage. The first respondent
wished to examine the bags because, as he explained in his affidavit, he had
information that the petitioner was attempting to take with him "fabricated
documents which were likely to be prejudicial to the interests of national
security and which were likely to promote feelings of hatred or contempt to
the Government, an offence under Regulation 33 of the Emergency (Miscellaneous
Provisions and Powers) Regulations." The petitioner informed the first
respondent

228

 that he had certain documents, photographs and forms pertaining to the deaths
or disappearance of, and injuries caused to, certain persons which he was
taking to be produced at a conference in Geneva, which were not "offensive or
subversive", but intended to be used to "promote the protection of human
rights in Sri Lanka." (Paragraph 7 of the petitioner's affidavit). The
petitioner refused to permit a search of his bags and wanted to contact a
lawyer. The first respondent did not object to this. The petitioner then spoke
on the telephone to Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike, the Leader of the Opposition,
and threw the bags at the first respondent and asked him to examine them. In
the words of the first respondent (Paragraph 6(b) of his affidavit):

"I searched the leather bag in his presence and on top of the leather bag were
some rice, dhal, chillies, dried fish and some tins of salmon. Underneath were
some clothes and at the bottom of the bag there were 11 bundles of papers
which the petitioner informed me, contained photographs and particulars of the
missing persons. Among these bundles was a bundle with pictures of dead
bodies."

The petitioner was asked to make a statement. However, no statement was
recorded because, the petitioner refused to make a statement. The first
respondent then took charge of 533 documents containing information about
missing persons and 19 pages of photographs. A receipt (P2) was issued by the
first respondent, countersigned by the petitioner, for the documents and
photographs.

What was the result? In paragraph 10 of his affidavit the petitioner states as
follows:

In consequence of the 1st respondent taking into custody the said documents, I
was prevented from presenting, distributing and or publishing them at the
Conference in Geneva, thus violating my fundamental right of freedom of speech
guaranteed by Article 14(1) (a) of the Constitution. As a result, I was not
able to present my case fully before the Committee.

Article 14(1) (a) of the Constitution provides that "Every citizen is entitled
to the freedom of speech and expression including publication"

229

This case is somewhat different to those in which petitioners have complained
that they were absolutely prohibited from speaking or expressing themselves in
writing. The petitioner was not, like Viola in the Twelfth Night, faced with
the possibility of casting away his speech, perhaps "excellently well-penned"
and prepared with "great pains" like Viola's piece. There was no complaint
that the text of his speech or notes for his speech for the business of the
meeting were taken from him. That might have been an altogether different
matter. The complaint in this case is that the taking away of certain (one
might for the time being say "less critical") documents prevented the
petitioner from expressing himself fully in delivering an address he made. In
my view, if the expression of thoughts and beliefs, though not absolutely
prohibited or prevented, is directly, definitely and distinctly, in a real,
concrete and sufficiently palpable way, and not merely fancifully or
inconsequentially, chilled or impaired or inhibited, without lawfully
warranted justification, I should hold that Article 14(1) (a) of the
Constitution is violated and grant appropriate relief and redress. However,
the right to speak must be tailored to the occasion. It cannot be considered
in the abstract or in a vacuum. One may be entitled to speak but only on a
particular subject on a given occasion. One may be permitted to speak but only
at an appointed time. One may be only permitted to orally say certain things
on one occasion but permitted to table or publish certain written material
only on another. One may speak but only during the time allocated. These
limitations and other constraints are accepted without demur, so that the
exercise of the right of free speech might at all serve its purposes.
Statements that meet the test of admissibility and relevance qualify for
utterance. But not all that comes into the brain of a speaker. Every speaker
is familiar with the procedure of being cut down by the chair upholding a
point of order. There is no novelty. For instance, one recalls that in 1593,
in reply to the usual petition of the Speaker, Sir Edward Coke, (Parliamentary
History of England from the earliest period to the year 1803, 1862), said :

"Liberty of speech is granted you, but you must know what privilege you have;
not to speak everyone what he listeth or what cometh in his brain to utter;
but your privilege is "aye" or "no"... Wherefore, Mr. Speaker, Her Majesty's
pleasure is, that if you perceive any idle heads that will not stick to hazard
their

230

own estates; which will meddle with reforming the Church, and transforming the
Commonwealth, and do exhibit any bills to such purpose, that you receive them
not, until they be viewed and considered by those who it is fitter should
consider of such things and better judge them."

Whether the petitioner's expressive activity was so interfered with as to
violate his right of speech would depend on the context established in this
case, including the nature and methods and carefully structured procedures of
the Working Group of the Commission on Human Rights on Enforced and
Involuntary Disappearances, evolved over a number of years, after much
discussion and deliberation, by those who had considered such matters and
judged them; and the terms of the notice he received, setting out the business
to be transacted, as determined by the Group in accordance with its
objectives, principles and practices.

According to the evidence placed before us by the petitioner, special
international concern with the problem of the "enforced or involuntary
disappearance" of persons dates back to 1978, when the General Assembly of the
United Nations adopted Resolution 33/173 entitled "Disappeared Persons", inter
alia, calling upon the Commission on Human Rights to consider the matter and
make appropriate recommendations. On 29 February 1980, the Commission on Human
Rights adopted Resolution 20 (xxxvi), in terms of which a Working Group of
five of its members were appointed as experts in their individual capacities
to examine questions relevant to the enforced or involuntary disappearance of
persons by way of promoting the implementation of General Assembly Resolution
33/173. The Resolution of 1980 embodied the decision that the Working Group,
in carrying out its mandate, should seek and receive information from
Governments, intergovernmental organizations, humanitarian organizations and
other reliable sources. Governments were requested to co-operate with and
assist the Working Group in the performance of its tasks and to furnish all
requested information. The Working Group was requested to submit to the
Commission on Human Rights a report on its activities together with its
conclusions and recommendations.

231

Although the Working Group had been originally appointed for one year, its
mandate was extended, and meetings of the Group were held from time to time at
various places. According to a letter from the Chief of the Special Procedures
Section dated 12 July 1990, addressed to the petitioner (P1), the 31st Session
of the Working Group was to be held in Geneva from 10-14 September 1990.

The petitioner's complaint is that he was invited to address the Working
Group" but that he was not able to present his "case fully" before that Group.
P1 (which the petitioner submitted as the only evidence of an invitation to
attend and address the meeting) was a letter inviting him as Secretary of the
Committee of Parliamentarians for Fundamental and Human Rights - which learned
Counsel for the petitioner explained was not a Committee of the House, but an
informal group of opposition members of Parliament \- to submit information
for consideration in the preparation of the Working Group's annual report. The
petitioner was also informed by P1 that, should he "or his organization be
interested in meeting with the Group during" the session, he should contact
the Centre for Human Rights "in order to arrange a mutually convenient date
and time." There was no evidence that the petitioner had spoken at all at the
meeting, quite apart from the fact that he was unable to present his case
fully. We are to infer that he did speak from the so-called "invitation" to
speak, viz., P1. This was neither an invitation to "address" the Working
Group, nor was it an invitation to attend the meeting, nor was there any
evidence that he had even an appointment to meet the Group. No agenda was
produced. We were not told when he spoke and who he addressed. The speech at
the Geneva meeting was central to his complaint. To submit the letter P1 as
the only evidence of the fact that he was invited to address the Working Group
or that he was expected to speak or did speak or that he even had a definite
opportunity of speaking to the Group was, to say the least, to lean his case
upon a slender reed.

According to what the petitioner referred to as his "invitation" (P1), the
Working Group had decided, as it had done before, to request non-governmental
organizations to forward "all information of a general nature, or reports
providing an assessment of a situation in a

232

 given country." The information sought was regarded as an "important
contribution" to the efforts of the Working Group, at its Geneva meeting
between 10-14 September, 1990, to faithfully reflect in its report the
allegations and evaluations made by nongovernmental organizations on general
problems and situations related to disappearances." It was emphasized, and,
(as the words "of course", and "as you are aware", seem to indicate), it was
assumed to be obvious, that what was sought for the purpose of this meeting,
concerned as it was with the preparation of its annual report, was information
of a general nature and not of a particular nature relating to individual
cases. The letter (P1) said

The aforementioned, of course, does not refer to individual cases of
disappearances which, as you are aware, may be sent at any time during the
year, and, if possible, immediately after the first internal steps to locate
the missing person have been unsuccessful.

As a notice, P1, clearly and. without ambiguity, set out the limited and
special purpose for which the meeting was called. The meeting was concerned
with general issues and, if the petitioner did speak at all, he made no
attempt to show how the giving up of the material prevented him from
delineating the issues relevant to the meeting and presenting the relevant
factual contentions in an effective and meaningful manner. On the other hand,
in terms of the carefully structured procedures of the Working Group, the
material which he was unable to take with him was of no relevance to the
business of the meeting of the kind held in Geneva, its deliberations and its
deliberative process. The petitioner in paragraph of his affidavit shows that
he himself regarded the material given over to the first respondent as being
of "evidential value only". As such, it was irrelevant, for the meeting did
not approximate a judicial trial. It was not an evidentiary hearing. Neither
the presentation, distribution or publication of the material given over,
namely information on individual cases, was necessary (if indeed permissible
at all) for the exercise of his right of free speech at that meeting. Even
material of a general nature, which was the subject-matter of the meeting was
required, in terms of P1, to be submitted before August 20, 1990 \-

233

about three weeks before the meeting. The material was given by him to the
first respondent on 11th September 1990, a day after the meeting had
commenced.

I do not disparage the importance and value of the material given by the
petitioner. Reports on individual cases were certainly relevant to the work of
the Group. They were indeed essential and welcome; at other times and in other
ways, although not on this occasion for its decided and stated purposes. Human
Rights fact-finding is a specialized sphere in which standards and working
methods have been carefully evolved, having regard to the goals of a
particular fact-finding exercise at a given time. Fact-finding aimed at
clarifying disputed facts arising in the context of specific human rights
violations is carried out in conformity with formal complaint procedures:
Material relating to individual cases are prepared and submitted in a
prescribed form in accordance with the directions given in an Explanatory Note
of the United Nations Centre for Human Rights bearing the reference
CHR/WGEID/1987. The forms are designed to identify with particularity and
reliability the information relevant to the specific purpose of tracing
missing persons. It is clear enough from documents P3 A, B, C and D, filed by
the petitioner to illustrate his averment that the 533 documents referred to
by him in paragraph 8 of his affidavit and referred to in the receipt given by
the first respondent (P2) when he took them over, are reports of individual
cases in the prescribed, printed U.N. form. There are copies of photographs of
the persons concerned attached to P3 A, B, C and D. The instructions state,
inter alia, that "A photograph of the missing person and annexes, such as
habeas corpus petitions or statements of witnesses, can be sent with the
suggested form". The petitioner has referred in paragraph 8 of his affidavit
to "thirty photographs attached to nineteen" other documents. However, he has
neither explained what these were nor their relevance to the work of the
Group, then or at any other time. Mr. Goonesekere did concede, albeit somewhat
later during his submissions, that some of the material given over was of
doubtful relevance at all; while the other documents taken over were being
transmitted for consideration in response to the request for reports on
individual cases and not in response to the request for general observations
required for the meeting.

234

The time and occasion for publishing reports of individual cases was any time
during the year but not, as it was made clear in P1, at this meeting. All of
the materials, but two forms, were returned to the petitioner on 14 October
1990, receipt of which was acknowledged by the petitioner (1131). The other
two forms were returned, after reference to the Attorney-General for advice,
in February 1991. The material given over could have been sent to the Working
Group at any time, unlike the general observations called for inclusion in the
preparation of the annual report: For the purpose of the individual reports in
the prescribed form and annexed photographs in accordance with the
instructions given by the United Nations Centre for Human Rights in document
CHR/WGEID/1987, was to enable the Working Group to communicate with the
Government and others to obtain "clarification" of individual cases from time
to time during, what was called, the "Group's annual working cycle". (For a
review of the activities in relation to the processing of individual cases in
relation to Sri Lanka see paragraphs 281 - 306 of UN Document E/CN.
4/1990/13). The State was not attempting to thwart the efforts of the Working
Group by withholding information, (as the petitioner's reference to orders
from "higher ups" might imply). Learned Counsel for the petitioner, in
demonstrating the character of the body whose meeting the petitioner was to
attend, emphasized the fact that the Government of Sri Lanka had always
closely co-operated with it. Reference was made to paragraphs 12, 294 and 299
of Document E/CN. 4/1990/13, dated 24 January 1990, published by the Economic
and Social Council of the United Nations. They show the extent of cooperation
between the Working Group and other UN bodies dealing with human rights and
the Government of Sri Lanka. If the reports on individual cases did have a
bearing on the annual report under preparation, they could, in terms of the
instructions in P1, have been sent before the finalization of the annual
report in December. The petitioner was reminded how and when information on
individual cases were to be submitted, even though this was deemed to be
obvious to the initiated. The giving over of the material on 11 September,
1990 did not prevent him from submitting the reports on individual cases at
the appropriate time for due consideration, for they were returned to him
while their relevance and usefulness yet remained unimpaired and undiminished
in any way.

235

I am left with the definite and firm conviction that there was no violation of
the petitioner's freedom of speech and expression I cannot conclude that the
petitioner was unable to explain his case fully for lack of the apprehended
material when it has not been established that he spoke at all. Moreover,
having regard to what was demanded and expected of him, it has not been
established that the material was necessary for discharging his duties as a
speaker at the Geneva meeting. The petitioner has failed to show that it was
even receivable. In fact, the evidence points to the probability that the
material given up by him was irrelevant to the purposes of the meeting and
were not admissible and publishable at all at that meeting. The subsequent
release of the material enabled the petitioner, and left him free, to publish
the material, at a time and in a manner he was expected to do so, by those
with whom he wished to communicate.

I therefore, dismiss the petitioner's application in respect of the alleged
violation of Article 14(1) (a) of the Constitution.

Article 13 (1)

Article 13 (1) of the Constitution provides that "No person shall be arrested
except according to procedure established by law. Any person arrested shall be
informed of the reason for his arrest."

The petitioner in paragraphs 4 and 5 of his affidavit stated as follows

4\. When I arrived at Katunayake Airport on 11.9.90 to board the plane due to
take me to Geneva, the 1st Respondent arrested and took me into custody and
detained me in the Airport for a period of about two hours from about 9 p.m.
to 10.45 p.m. on 11.9.1990. The action of the 1st Respondent was illegal and
contrary to law and in violation of Article 13 (1) of the Constitution as
there was no reason to arrest and detain me, a person of good character and
not wanted in respect of any violation of the law of the land nor was there
any warrant or authority from a Court to take me into custody or search me.

236

5\. I was also not informed of the reason for my illegal arrest and detention
in violation of Article 13 (1) of the Constitution.

Learned Counsel for the petitioner, citing the decisions in _Namasivayam v.
Gunawardena_ (1) and Piyasiri and Others v. Nimal Fernando, _A.S.P., and
Others_ (2), submitted that the act of delaying and preventing him from
proceeding as it pleased the petitioner, constituted an "arrest" within the
meaning of Article 13 (1) of the Constitution. I do not read those cases as
supporting such a proposition.

In Namasivayam v. Gunawardena (supra), the petitioner was travelling in a bus
on his way to Nawalapitiya, when a police officer stopped him and ordered him
to accompany him to Ginigathena Police for questioning. The petitioner
complied, and was released after his statement was recorded. Sharvananda, C.J.
(Atukorale and H. A. G. de Silva, JJ. agreeing), held that an arrest in
violation of Article 13 (1) of the Constitution had taken place.

His Lordship the Chief Justice said at p. 401

"The petitioner states that he was arrested on 28.7.86 when he was travelling
in a bus, by the 3rd Respondent and that he was not informed of the reason of
his arrest. The 3rd Respondent in his affidavit admitted the incident but
stated that he did not arrest the petitioner. According to him he only
required the petitioner to accompany him to the Ginigathena Police Station for
questioning and released him after recording the statement at the station. If
this action constituted an arrest in the legal sense, implicit in the 3rd
Respondent's explanation is the admission that he did not give any reason to
the petitioner for his arrest. In my view when the 3rd Respondent required the
petitioner to accompany him to the Police Station, the petitioner was in law
arrested by the 3rd Respondent. The petitioner was prevented by that action of
the 3rd Respondent from proceeding with his journey in the bus. The petitioner
was deprived of his liberty to go where he pleased. It was not necessary that
there should have been any actual use of force; threat of force used to
procure the petitioner's submission was

237

sufficient. The petitioner did not go to the Police Station voluntarily. He
was taken to the Police by the 3rd Respondent. In my view the 3rd Respondent's
action of arresting the petitioner and not informing him the reasons for the
arrest violated the petitioner's Fundamental rights warranted by Article 13
(1) of the Constitution."

In Piyasiri and Others v. Nimal Fernando and Others (supra) the fourteen
petitioners were customs officers returning home after work. They were stopped
near the Seeduwa Police Station by a police Officer. The first respondent,
dressed in civilian clothes and without identifying himself to be the police
officer he was, questioned the petitioners as to whether they had foreign
currency or whiskey. The first respondent then ordered the petitioners to
proceed to the Seeduwa Police Station, which they did, followed by the first
respondent and other police officers in uniform. They were searched at the
Police Station and money in their possession was taken over by the Police.
They were then ordered to proceed to Colombo to the Office of the Bribery
Commissioner in Colombo, where their statements were recorded. In the words of
H. A. G. de Silva. J. (at p. 176)

"During the period during which they were in the Bribery Commissioner's
Department which was till about 10.00 p.m. that day they were kept under the
continuous control and orders of the Police whom they had no alternative but
to obey and even their friends and relations who sought to contact them were
not allowed to do so. At 10.00 p.m. they were permitted to leave only after
they had given a written undertaking to appear in the Magistrate's Court,
Colombo, the following morning."

H. A. G. de Silva, J. (Atukorale and L. H. de Alwis, JJ agreeing) at pp.
179-183 said :

"Section 23 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 states
how an arrest is made. It says

"In making an arrest the person making the same shall actually touch or
confine the body of the person to be arrested unless

238

there be a submission to the custody by word or action and shall inform the
person to be arrested of the nature of the charge or allegation upon which he
is arrested."

The explanation to that subsection states that

"Keeping a person in confinement or restraint without formally arresting him
or under the colourable pretension that an arrest has not been made when to
all intents and purposes such person is in custody shall be deemed to be an
arrest of such person."

After quoting from, Dr. Glanville Williams article on Requisites of a Valid
Arrest, (1954) Criminal Law Review 6, (an essay somewhat more concerned with
the ingredients of what constitutes an "arrest", rather than, as it has been
sometimes supposed, concerned, with the subject of jurisdiction for an
arrest), His Lordship said

. . . After the petitioners were signalled to stop by the Police Officers near
the Seeduwa Police Station, they were, till they appeared in the Magistrate's
Court the next day, under the coercive directions of the 1st respondent.
Surrounded by Police Officers, some of whom were in uniform, it would have
been foolhardy, to say the least, for any of the petitioners to have attempted
to exercise their right to the freedom of movement. Custody does not today,
necessarily import the meaning of confinement but has been extended to mean
lack of freedom of movement brought about not only by detention but also by
threatened coercion the existence of which can be inferred from the
surrounding circumstances."

Professor Glanville Williams (op.cit.) at pp. 11-15 states

"An imprisonment or deprivation of liberty is a necessary element in an
arrest; but this does not mean that there need be an actual confinement or
physical force. If the officer indicates an intention to make an arrest, as
for example, by touching the suspect on the shoulder, or by showing him a
warrant of arrest, or in any other way by making him understand that an arrest
is

239

intended, and if the suspect then submits to the direction of the officer,
there is an arrest. The consequence is that an arrest may be made by mere
words provided that the other submits. As Tindall, C.J. said ... if the
bailiff who has process against one, says to him, when he is on horseback or
in a coach, You are my prisoner, I have a writ against you, upon which he
submits, turns back or goes with him, though the bailiff never touched him,
yet it is an arrest, because he submitted to the process. ( _Grainger v. Hill_
(3)).

The same rule is shown by a case where the plaintiff, suing for false
imprisonment, showed that he was not allowed to go upstairs in his own house
except in the company of an officer; the court held that it was an arrest,
because it was meant to be conveyed to the mind of the plaintiff that he
should not go out of the presence or control of the officers. ( _Warner v.
Riddiford_ (4)).

Grainger v. Hill seems further to decide that if the officer announces that he
will arrest the other unless he gives up a certain thing, and the other
complies, this is a sufficient constraint upon the person to amount to an
imprisonment. The reason for the rule is obvious: an officer who makes such a
threat is impliedly saying that the other must not go out of his presence
until he complies with the condition. The threat therefore becomes an
imprisonment as soon as it is complied with. By a slight extension of this
reasoning, it might be held that there is an imprisonment if the officer makes
it clear that he will not let the suspect go until he answers a question, for
instance, give his name and address, and if the suspect complies under this
duress.

The rule in Warner v. Riddiford assumes that the suspect acquiesces in the
arrest. If he does not acquiesce, but persuades the officer to leave him alone
or successfully takes to flight, there is no arrest ...

If the person to be arrested plainly does not acquiesce ... it is necessary
and sufficient for the officer to touch the person to be arrested, at the same
time making it plain to him that he is arrested, and where possible stating
the act for which the arrest is made ...

240

The upshot of this discussion is that, for the purpose of putting the suspect
into the position of an arrested person, he need not be touched if he submits,
or appears to submit, but if he does not make submission he must be formally
touched.

The foregoing remarks do not mean that every request by a police constable to
a suspect to accompany him, followed by acquiescence, amount to an arrest. One
has to face the very difficult distinction between a command and a request. If
an officer merely makes a request to the suspect, giving him to understand
that he is at liberty to come or refuse, there is no imprisonment and no
arrest. If, however, the impression is conveyed that there is no such option
and that the suspect is compelled to come, it is an arrest. The distinction
does not turn merely on the words used but on the way in which they are spoken
and on all the circumstances ....

. . Obviously it is not every imprisonment or detention that constitutes an
arrest. To be an arrest, there must be an intention to subject the person
arrested to the criminal process - to bring him within the machinery of the
criminal law and this intention must be known to the person arrested. Arrest
is a step in law enforcement, so that the arrester must intend to bring the
accused into what is sometimes called "the custody of the law." But this is a
somewhat metaphysical expression and we need to try to define more precisely
what is the intention that is required.

If one thinks about the matter there can hardly be any doubt that it must be
an intention in some sense to take the first steps in charging the suspect
with a crime ... The intention certainly need not be an absolute one: the
officer may have the full intention of releasing the suspect if a satisfactory
explanation should transpire. But it is not sufficient, on this view, that he
intends to charge the suspect only in the event of extracting incriminating
admissions from him. There is a clear difference between these two situations:
between an intention to charge unless the suspect clears himself, and no
intention to charge unless he gives himself away."

Although in Somawathie v. Weerasinghe and Others (5), Kulatunga, J. said that
"deprivation of liberty is not sufficient to constitute the seizure of

241

a man an arrest in law. It would amount to an arrest usually if he is seized
for an offence", yet in Withanage Sirisena and _Others v. Ernest Perera and
Others_ (6), His Lordship altered his view and held that taking persons into
custody and detaining them for the purpose of procuring their evidence in the
circumstances of the case amounted to an arrest in terms of Article 13 (1) of
the Constitution. Fernando, J. was of the same view in Sirisena's case. I
would respectfully agree that "arrest" in Article 13 (1) might include placing
a Person in custody otherwise than as a first step in the process of bringing
criminal suspects to justice. Professor Williams was primarily concerned with
arrest in the criminal law. However, he was well aware when he said "there
must be an intention in some sense to take the first step in charging the
suspect with a crime" that this may not be applicable in other circumstances.
At p.15 he says : "There may, of course, be an arrest on civil process which
this definition would not fit : we are considering exclusively arrest as a
step in a criminal proceeding."

Although we were not given any precise definitions of "arrest" by Counsel,
there is no lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards for
resolving the matter before us. The principles and conclusions set out by
Professor Williams, mutatis mutandis, and adopted, explained and applied by
this Court in Piyasiri, in construing Article 13 (1) are clear enough and
quickly yield a result in this case without causing me difficulty.

Admittedly, there was a detention in the matter before us in the sense that
the petitioner was delayed in going on his way into the area of the Airport
where his departure formalities had to be attended to. However, was his
detention by the first respondent any more an arrest in the relevant sense
than his detention when his tickets and visas were checked and his baggage
weighed and labelled and taken over, when customs officers stopped him to look
at his declaration and examine his baggage, when Airport security staff
stopped him to screen him and put his hand luggage through the screening
machines, when he was stopped by the emigration officers to stamp his
Passport, when he was stopped by Airline ground staff to examine his boarding
card, and when he was stopped inside the aircraft for an examination of his
boarding card to ascertain what was his allocated seat ? To be sure, it would
have

242

been much nicer if he could have simply walked into the aircraft without all
or some of these detentions. But was he arrested several times before he
boarded the aircraft because he was detained in this way ? We halt and wait
when our cars are searched; we are stopped to produce our identity cards or we
wait to be personally searched before we are permitted to enter certain
premises, sadly, almost as a matter of routine today. Are we arrested ? A man
is hoping to drive to town on a certain road. A police officer halts him and
informs him that he cannot go on because a bridge ahead has collapsed. Is he
arrested because he cannot go as it pleases him ? A man is prevented from
entering a theatre because he has no ticket. Is he arrested because he is not
allowed to go in to see the play ? If the airline refused to carry the
petitioner because he had no visa or because his ticket was not valid, would
he have been arrested because he could not go as it pleased him ?.ft may
please a man to take a stroll through the President's official residence or
Parliament or come into this Court or wander through your home. Should he be
allowed to successfully complain that his fundamental rights relating to
freedom from arrest was. violated because he was prevented from going where it
pleased him ? These may, arguably, be constraints on the freedom of movement.
Whether they are justiciable and actionable in the circumstances of a
particular case is yet another matter. However, is there an arrest merely
because one is stopped from going where one pleases ? Is that the only test ?
Or are there other criteria to be satisfied ?

Nor does the need to tarry, in order to answer certain questions, or having to
give up certain possessions as a condition precedent to going on, without,
more, constitute an arrest. A person who brings in animal or plant material
which is suspected of being noxious may be required to give it up on his
arrival from abroad. The material may be inspected and tested and returned
later on, or subject to fumigation or other treatment; or the material may be
released conditionally or it may be destroyed. The importer who gives the
material up may, in time, make other claims; but may he complain that he was
arrested ? We are not allowed to enter certain premises unless we leave our
bags behind. We are required to give over our baggage to the airline attendant
and collect them later on arrival. An airline may refuse to carry you unless
you give up knives or firearms or even a can of hairspray or shaving cream
containing certain potentially explosive gasses. Are you therefore arrested ?

243

It is of much significance that no precedent sustaining the right to maintain
applications like this has been called to our attention, although thousands of
detentions do take place every day and although people are prevented from
going about as they please, taking with them what they desire to take with
them. This is not surprising, for it is not every detention or delay in going
on, nor the imposition of conditions including the requirement to hand over or
leave behind certain things, nor even the prevention of going on, that
constitutes an arrest in the relevant sense. The act of stopping, halting or
delaying a person from going on his way is to arrest his continuance in motion
and progress. However, in my view, in order to sustain the petitioner's claim
that his fundamental right of freedom from arrest guaranteed by Article 13 (1)
of the Constitution has been violated, he must establish that there was an
apprehension of his person by word or deed and an imprisonment, confinement,
durance or constraint by placing him, (such apprehension and placing having
been signified by physical action or by words spoken or by other conduct from
which it might have been inferred), in the custody, keeping, control, or under
the coercive directions, of an officer of justice or other authority, whether
the purpose of such arrest was to enable the petitioner to be available and
ready to be produced to answer an alleged or suspected crime or to assist in
the detection of a crime or in the arrest or prosecution of an offender or
some such or other purpose of the officer making, or authority ordering, the
arrest. I do not intend this to be a definition of "arrest". A definition, I
suppose, must await the wisdom of the future. Nor is it an attempt to lay down
general guidelines concerning other situations not involved here. I do not
even suggest that a bright line can be easily drawn that separates the type of
deprivation of liberty within the reach of Article 13 (1) from the type
without. Close questions undoubtedly will sometimes arise in the gray area
that necessarily exists in between. Whether an act amounts to an arrest will
depend on the circumstances of each case.

In Youngstown Sheet and _Tube, Co. v. Sawyer_ (7) (Cf per _Brennan, J. in
Goldwater v. Carter_ (8) per Powell, J. in Immigration and _Naturalization
Service v. Chadda_ (9) per _Rehnquist, J. in Dames and Moore v. Regan_ (10)
Mr. Justice Frankfurter said as follows

Rigorous adherence to the narrow scope of the judicial function is especially
demanded in controversies that arouse appeals to the

244

 Constitution. The attitude with which this Court must approach its duty when
confronted with such issues is precisely the opposite of that normally
manifested by the general public. So-called constitutional questions seem to
exercise a mesmeric influence over the popular mind. This eagerness to settle
- preferably forever a specific problem on the basis of the broadest possible
constitutional pronouncements may not unfairly be called one of our minor
national traits. An English observer of our scene has acutely described it :
"At the first round of a new argument over the United States Constitution and
its interpretation the hearts of Americans leap with a fearful joy. The blood
stirs powerfully in their veins and a new lustre brightens their eyes. Like
King Harry's men before Harfleur, they stand like greyhounds in the slips,
straining upon the start." The Economist, May 10, 1952, p. 370. The path of
duty for this court, it bears repetition, lies in the opposite direction.

It was not suggested by the petitioner that there was any actual or threatened
intention to bring him into the custody of the law and deprive him of his
liberty in subjecting him to the criminal process or otherwise. There was no
imprisonment or forced confinement or durance or restriction of movement by
reason of being placed in the custody of the law. He was not forced to abandon
his journey and ordered to go elsewhere, to Police Stations and other
designated places, as the petitioners were required to do in Namasivayam and
Piyasiri, under surveillance and to remain under the control and coercive
directions of law enforcement personnel or any other authority. He was not
required to be in the presence or control of the first respondent or other
officers of justice or law enforcement at any time even at the Airport. He was
not in their keeping. There was no restraint of his freedom of movement by
actual or threatened coercion. He was by no means coerced physically or by
word or deed into a state of submission. The petitioner certainly did not
cower: When a request was made to search his bags, he defiantly refused to
open his bags. He wanted to seek advice. He was free to do so. He telephoned
the Leader of the Opposition and then made up his mind. He threw his bags at
the first respondent when he decided that they might be examined. He refused
to make a statement, although he was requested to do so Admittedly, he
complied with the proposal to leave the documents behind, not spontaneously,
but because it was suggested or prompted by the first respondent. The
petitioner preferred

245

to take the documents. Nevertheless he gave them up, choosing between his
options without duress or intimidation and without fear of losing his liberty
by being placed in the custody of the law. He did not have to choose between
giving the documents up or being imprisoned, confined or placed in the custody
of the law, but between acquiescing in the necessity and propriety of giving
up for scrutiny, material suspected of being objectionable, and not being
allowed to proceed to Geneva. It was not announced, and he was never made to
understand, that he would be imprisoned or confined or placed under police
surveillance, or subject to coercive directions of law enforcement officers
unless he gave up the documents. He was free to return home or go elsewhere
without being subject to the control of law enforcement officers and without
being placed or under their surveillance or coercive directions. The giving up
of the material may have given rise to other claims, indeed, the petitioner
claimed that this violated his rights under Article 14 (1) (a) of the
Constitution - but not, in the circumstances of this case, a sustainable claim
based on the ground of arrest. Preventing him from proceeding may have given
him cause to complain that his fundamental right of freedom of movement
guaranteed by Article 14 (1) (h) had been violated. However, no such claim has
been made, and that is another matter. After giving up the suspicious
documents in his possession, he went on his way to Geneva as planned. I am of
the view that, although the detention might have been irritating, and irksome,
there was no arrest within the meaning of Article 13 (1) of the Constitution.
I dismiss the petitioner's application in respect of Article 13 (1) of the
Constitution.

The petitioner in paragraph 13 of his affidavit suggested that the detention
and search was occasioned by the "orders of higher-ups". There is no evidence
of this. However, if as he supposed, the Executive may not have regarded the
petitioner as a welcome traveller, and did look upon his policies and actions
with disfavour, yet, it did not use any one of the several means at its
disposal to prevent him from proceeding on the flight on which he was booked
to go to Geneva. It rather seems to have accepted and acted on the principle
that, just as popular and unpopular speech must be protected, it had likewise
to protect the rights of both popular and unpopular travellers. (Cf. per
_Brennan, J. in Haig v. Agee_ (11)).

There being no arrest, it is unnecessary for me to decide whether there was a
valid, justifiable and excusable arrest in that he was informed

246

of the reasons for his arrest, and arrested according to procedure established
by law, although we were addressed at length, and vigorously, on this matter
by learned counsel for the petitioner who was anxious that we should decide
whether the first respondent had "objectively" defensible grounds for his
conduct.

For the reasons stated in my judgment, I dismiss the petitioner's application
in respect of the alleged violations of Articles 12,13 (1), 13 (2) and 14 (1)
(a) of the Constitution.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

  
**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1990/6.html_  

