##  Martin v. Wijewardene - SLR - 409, Vol 2 of 1989 [1989] LKSC 6; (1989) 2
Sri LR 409 (27 June 1989)

**

409

MARTIN  
v.  
WIJEWARDENA

**

SUPREME COURT  
RANASINGHE. C J., JAMEEL, J AND  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
S C. REF NO 1 / 89  
C.A. NO. 43/86  
A.T. KALUTARA NO. 18 /109A  
MAY 30. 1989

_

Agrarian Services Act. No. 58 of 1979. Sections 18 (1) and (?) - Failure of
tenant-cultivator to pay rents - Forfeiture of tenancy rights_ _Right of
appeal_ - _Constitution, Article 138 Appellate jurisdiction of Court of
Appeal._

**410**

**

Held:

**

1\. A right of appeal is a statutory right and must be expressly created and
granted by statute. It cannot be implied. Article 138 is only an enabling
Article and it confers the jurisdiction to hear and determine appeals to the
Court of Appeal. The right to avail of or take advantage of that jurisdiction
is governed by the several statutory provisions in various Legislative
Enactments.

2\. Section 18 of the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979 does not provide
for nor does it create a right of appeal in a tenant cultivator who is
aggrieved by the Order of the Commissioner to pay up his arrears to the
landlord before a stipulated date. Further Article 138 of the Constitution
does not confer on such a tenant cultivator a right of appeal.

3\. While the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979 s. 5(6) provides for an
appeal (on a point of law only) from a decision of the Commissioner given at
an eviction inquiry, no such right of appeal is provided for a party aggrieved
by the Order of the Commissioner of Agrarian Services at an inquiry into the
non-payment of rent. No appeal lies from any Orders made under section 18 of
the Agrarian Services Act.

**

Cases referred to:

**_

(1) Anchapulle _v. _Baker_ 31 NLR 149

_

(2) Silva _v. _Silva_ 16 NLR 57

_

(3) I.P. Police _v. _Fernando_ 30 NLR 482

_

(4) Sudharman de Silva _v. A.G. [1986] 1 Sri LR 9

_

(5) Cassim _v. _Abdursak_ 38 NLR 428

_

(6) Culanthavelu _v. _Somasundaram 2_ Bal. 122

_

(7) Suppiah v. Lokubanda _4 CWR 127

_

(8) Shockman _v. _John_ CWR 93

_

(9) Saunders _v. _Park_ 1 Bal. 22

(10) _King_ v. _Ratnam_ 30 NLR 212

_

(11) In Re Wijesinghe _16 NLR 312

_

(12) Kanagasunderam _v. _Podihamine_ 19 CLW 53 _(V.B)

_

(13) AG. v. _Sellim_ 11 ER 1200

_

(14) King _v. _Joseph Hansom_ 106 ER 102

_

(15) In Re Albert Godamune _38 NLR 74

_

(16) Sangarapillai _v. _Chairman, Municipal Council, Colombo_ 32 NLR 92

**411**

**

REFERENCE** under Article 135 of the Constitution to the Supreme Court.

_

P.A.D Samarasekera, P.C. _with _Kanchana Abeypala_ for (tenant-cultivator)
respondent-appellant.

_

C.J. Ladduwahetty _for (landlord) complaint-respondent.

_Cur. Adv. vult._

June 27, 1989.

**

JAMEEL, J.

**

The landlord complainant-respondent had complained to the Commissioner of
Agrarian Services, Kalutara that rents properly due to him, from the tenant
cultivator respondent-appellant, are in arrears.

After inquiry, inter partes, the Assistant Commissioner (Inquiries) had issued
a notice under Section 18(1) of the Act No. 59 of 1979. By this notice The
Assistant Commissioner had directed the appellant to pay to the respondent, on
or before 31.1.1986 all the arrears that had been found to be _due.

_

The appellant had failed to make payment as directed and his rights as tenant
cultivator became forfeit, by operation of law under Section 18(2) of the Act.

Notwithstanding the absence of provisions for any proceedings to be had before
The Assistant Commissioner, the appellant had complained to the Assistant
Commissioner that he had gone to the house of the respondent on 31,1,1986 in
order to make the payment, but that he had been informed that the respondent
was not at home, and so was unable to make the payment in due time. Thereon
the Learned Assistant Commissioner had held an inquiry and had concluded that
on his own admission the appellant had forfeited his tenancy rights, it was
from this order that the appellant had filed this appeal to the Court of
Appeal. The respondent had raised a preliminary objection. Thereon the Court
of Appeal had framed and forwarded the following question for consideration
and decision by this court, namely:

**412**

"Does Article 138 of the Constitution confer any rights on any aggrieved
person to appeal to the Court of Appeal from any order made by the Assistant
Commissioner of Agrarian Services in terms of Section 18(1) of Act No. 58 of
1979, when such a right has not been specifically conferred by statute?"

Article 138 of the Constitution is an Article located in Chapter XVI and more
particularly in the portion under sub-head Court of Appeal. This chapter deals
with the Superior Courts.

Article 138 reads as follows:-

"The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise, subject to the provisions of the
Constitution or of any Law, an Appellate Jurisdiction, for the correction of
all errors in fact or in law, which shall be committed by any Court of First
Instance, Tribunal or Other Institution, and sole and exclusive cognizance by
way of Appeal, Revision and Restitutio In Integrum of all cases, suits,
actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which such High Court and Courts
of First instance, Tribunal or Other institution may have taken cognizance."

It is the contention of Learned President's Counsel for the appellant that
Article 138 not only spells out the Appellate Jurisdiction of the Court of
Appeal but that it also grants, impliedly, a right of appeal to all parties
who came before the Court of First Instance, Tribunal or Other Institution
concerned.

He further contended that, this right is an unfettered right, granted to the
litigant, with only such limitations as are included in the phrase:-

"Subject to the provisions of the Constitution or of any Law."

That is to say, Learned President's Counsel contends that, other 'Provisions
of the Constitution, if any, or any other Law' could only curtail the total
and unfettered right of appeal granted to each and every disputant before any
Court, Tribunal or Other Institution.

He thus contended for a full and unfettered right in the tenant cultivator
respondent-appellant to have filed this appeal Constitutional Right.

**413**

He illustrated his second proposition by reference to Section 5(6) of this
same Act No, 59 of 1979, wherein the right of appeal is 'Restricted to'
'Points of Law only. Mr Samarasekera also cited in support the decisions of
this Court in:-

1\. _Anchapulle v. Baker (1)

2\. Silva v. Siiva (2)

3\. I.P. Police v. Fernando (3)

_

Article 138 is an enabling provision which creates and grants jurisdiction to
the Court of Appeal to hear appeals from Courts of First Instance. Tribunals
and Other Institutions. It defines and delineates the jurisdiction of the
Court of Appeal. It does not, nor indeed does it seek to, create or grant
rights to individuals viz-a-viz appeals. It only deals with the jurisdiction
of the Court of Appeal and its limits and its limitations and nothing more. It
does not expressly nor by implication create or grant any rights in respect of
individuals. Article 139 makes it quite clear that the Court of Appeal is an
appellate tribunal in respect of the Orders, Judgments, Decrees or Sentences
of the Courts of First instance, Tribunals or Other Institutions

In the case of the Courts of First instance, referred to above, it is the
Judicature Act which creates and institutes them. {Vide Section 5 of the
Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978). Sections 13(3). 14, 15 and 16 of this Act
designated the persons who are entitled to appeal from orders and judgments of
the High Courts, in its several jurisdictions. These sections contain the
genera! limitations on those rights of appeal. Sections 23, 31 and 35
designate the persons entitled to appeal from Orders, Judgments and Decrees of
the District Courts, Magistrates Courts and the Primary Courts respectively.
These several sections of the Judicature Act expressly create the rights of
appeal in each case and invest those rights in the several persons
respectively designated in those sections. These sections enable those
designated persons to lodge appeals while Article 138 enables the Court of
Appeal to receive and entertain them. This differentiation is made explicit in
the terms of Section 13 of the Judicature Act itself. Section 13(1) vests the
High Court with Admiralty Jurisdiction while Sections 13(3) and 13(4)
respectively create and vest in the several persons mentioned therein the
right of appeal to the Court of Appeal, either directly or with -the leave of
court first had and obtained, from

**414**

the Judgments and Orders respectively of She High Court. The right of the
Court of Appeal to entertain and hear and dispose of those appeals is given by
Article 138 of the Constitution.

It is significant that the marginal to Article 138 reads. "Jurisdiction of the
Court of Appeal' while the marginals to Section 14. 15 and

16 of the Judicature Act read "Right of Appeal"- Equally significant is the
fact that the right to appeal from Orders and Judgments of the Court of Appeal
itself is contained in another Article of the Constitution, namely, Article
128, which too is included in Chapter XVI, but under a different sub-
title...."Supreme Court." The marginal to that Article too reads "Right of
Appeal" On the other hand the marginal to the enabling section in respect of
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in respect of Appeals, namely, Article
127, which reads, "Appellate Jurisdiction."

On a consideration of the several Articles of the Constitution and the several
sections of the Judicature Act, adverted to above, it is not possible to
accept the contention of Learned President's Counsel that there is implied in
Article 138 a 'Right of Appeal' to the Court of Appeal. The 'Right' of 'an
Aggrieved Party' or of 'A party dissatisfied with' an Order or Judgment of a
Court of First instance is contained in the several sections of the Judicature
Act.

The words 'Subject to the provisions of the Constitution or of any Law' are a
limitation on the powers of the Court of Appeal. They do not constitute a
limitation on the Rights of an Appellant. One such limitation placed on the
powers of the Court of Appeal is to be seen in the proviso to this very
Article. On the other hand Sections 14, 15 and 16 of the Judicature Act amply
illustrate the kind of imitations placed by law on the rights of appeal
granted to different parties to a criminal case heard by a High Court. They
also spell out the circumstances in which these rights could or could not be
exercised.

The rights of appeal granted by the Judicature Act are curtailed, in respect
of civil cases by the provisions to Section 754 of the Civil Procedure Code.
They are restricted to the parties to the suit. A further restriction on the
right of appeal is that an appeal from an Order, not being a Judgment, is
exercisable only with the leave of the Court of Appeal first had and obtained.
The Code also provides for a Notice of Appeal prior to filing the Appeal
petition itself. There are

**415**

other provisions in the Code, for instance, section 88(1) and Section 389,
which preclude an Appeal ten certain circumstances.

In respect of criminal appeals from the Magistrate's Courts, too, there are
similar restrictions - Eg. Sections 317 to 319 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act- Indeed, Section 316 provides that there shall be no appeal from
any judgment or order of a criminal court except as provided for by that Code
or by any other law for the time being in force. In this context it is
pertinent to note that while Section 14(a) of the Judicature Act grants a
right of appeal to a person convicted by a High Court after trial by Jury,
Section 14(b) grants this right of appeal, as of right, to a person convicted
at a trial without a jury- Even so, certain categories of convicted persons
are excepted. (Vide: _Sudharman de Sitva Vs._ AG.(4)).

Under the Administration of Justice Law, The Supreme Court was the only court
endowed with jurisdiction to hear and entertain appeals whether civil or
criminal. (Vide: Section 11 Part 1 - Judicature Act No. 44 of 1973.)

The rights of appeal granted, and the limitations placed thereon, by the
Administration of Justice Law are detailed in Section 316 of that Law for
criminal cases and in Section 317 for civil cases. (Chapter IV - Appeal
Procedures.)

Section 31 (D) (1) of the Industrial Disputes Act (Cap. 131 of the 1956
C.L.E.) provides that Orders made by Labour Tribunals are final and not to be
questioned in any Court. However, Sub-section (2) of the same section grants a
right of appeal to the worker, the employer or to the trade union from any
judgment of a labour tribunal. Nevertheless, the appeal could only be on a
point of law.

Section 5(6) of the Agrarian Service Act, No. 58 of 1979 provides for an
appeal, again on a point of law only, to the Court of Appeal, from a decision
of the Commissioner, given at an Eviction Inquiry. Under those provisions a
"Landlord" or "the person evicted" if aggrieved by that decision can appeal to
the Court of Appeal. Section 5(7) (b) (11) takes into account and provides for
the possibility that the eviction may have been effected by a third party and
that it could have been so done with or without the knowledge, consent or
connivance of the Landlord or the person evicted from an order of the

**416**

Commissioner under that Section no such provision is made, however, in respect
of his Order under Section 18- Neither the Landlord nor the Person Evicted is
given a right of appeal in respect of orders made under Section 18. Learned
Counsel for the respondent contends that such non-grant must be construed to
mean that, therefore, no appeal lies from any Orders made under Section 18.

The case of _Anchapulle v. Baker(1)_ cited by Learned President's Counsel for
the appellant was a case in which the accused was bound over on an order made
under Section 325(1) (b) of the Criminal Procedure Code and in that case it
was held by Lyall Grant (J) that an appeal does lie in such a case. In coming
to this conclusion, Lyall Grant (J) relied on a decision by Akbar (J) in _I.P.
Police v. Fernando(3)_ wherein it was held that when an accused is warned and
discharged by a Magistrate, the remedy open to the complainant is to appeal.
Akbar (J) himself relied on an earlier judgment of Lyall Grant (J) in P.C.
Dandagamuwa in revision No. 670 S.C.M. 31.10.1928.)

Soertsz (J) however, in _Cassim v. Abdursak (5)_ following the case of
_Culanthavelu v. Somasunderam(6)_ departed from the ruling of Lyall Grant (J)
and went on to hold that no appeal lay from an order made under Section 325(1)
of the Criminal Procedure Code. His Lordship Justice Soertsz distinguished the
cases of _Suppiah v. Lokubanda (7)_ and _Shockman v. John{8)_ both of which
cases dealt with situations that arose from the Magistrate having discharged
the accused and thereon referred the complainant to his civil remedy and
followed the decision of Montcrieff (J) _Saunders v. Park(9)._ While making
reference to all these cases His Lordship Justice Soertsz also made reference
to the Full Bench decision of the Supreme Court in _Culanthavelu v.
Somasunderam_ (Supra) wherein, it was held that from a binding over order made
under Section 88 of the Criminal Procedure Code, no appeal lay. Vide:- _King
v._ Rafnam (10) and In Re. Wijesinghe (11).

_

_

Kanagasundaram v. Podihamine (12) was a case which dealt with the right of
appeal from an Order to tax costs under Section 31 of the Land Acquisition
Ordinance. Whilst rights of appeal are specifically mentioned in respect of
Orders made under Sections 26 and 35 of

**417**

the Ordinance no mention is made of any such right of appeal in respect of
Orders under Section 31. It was held by the Full Bench that no appeal lies. In
their judgment their Lordships quoted and relied on the decision in A.G. v.
Sellim (13) in which case Lord Westbury had stated as follows:-

"The criterion of a new Right of Appeal is plainly an act which requires
Legislative Authority. The Court from which it is given and the Court to which
it is given must both be bound and that must be the act of some higher power."

Howard (C.J) has also quoted a passage from the judgment of Abbot (C.J.) in
the case of _King v. Joseph Hanson(14)_ namely:-

"For the rule of law is 'Although Certiorari lies, unless expressly taken
away, yet an appeal does not lie unless expressly given' by Statute."

The question that arose for decision was as to whether the language of
Sections 21 and 32 of Cap. 203 gives, not merely by implication, but by
express words a Right of Appeal Howard (C.J.) held that the Supreme Court had
_no_ right to entertain an appeal when that power is not expressly given by
statute.

A case which is more in accord with the facts of this case is that of _In Re.
Albert Godamune(15)._ That was a problem under the Notaries Ordinance \- Cap.
91 (1938) C.L.E..

Section 26 (1) of the Ordinance provides for the Secretary of the District
Court to issue Annual Certificates to Notaries who apply for them. The
application should be made before the FIRST of MARCH of each year.

Section 28 (1) provides that should the Secretary refuse to issue the
Certificate the notary could apply to the District Judge who could make on
Order as justice demands.

Section 28 (2) provides for an appeal to the Supreme Court from the Order made
by the District Judge.

**418**

However, Section 26 (2) which covers the situation where the application has
been made after the time granted, provides that in such a case, the District
Judge could direct the Secretary to issue the certificate if the District
Judge is satisfied that the delay in making the application had not been due
to the negligence of the Notary. Not having been so satisfied in that case the
District Judge had refused to give such a direction for the issue of
Certificate to Mr. Godamune for that year. The Notary lodged an appeal with
the Supreme Court. Justice Akbar (with Justice Koch in agreement) held:-

"unfortunately for the powers of this Court, to entertain such an appeal we
have to look to the words of Section 27 (Section 28 of Cap. 91 (1938) C.L.E).
Section 27 is clear, that the Right of Appeal is only given to the Notary only
in cases where proceedings begin by the Secretary refusing or declining to
issue a certificate and it does not apply to a case, like this, where the
Secretary has no power at all to have anything to do with the matter until the
District Judge had made his Order under the proviso to Sub-section 2 of that
section,

_

Sangarapillai v. Chairman Municipal Council, Colombo _ (16) where the Supreme
Court in a similar case held that it had no right to entertain an appeal where
the power was not expressly given by the Statute.

_

Sangarapillais case _(Supra) was a case in which the Chairman had refused to
issue a Certificate of Conformity under Section 15 of Ordinance No.19 of 1915.
The District Judge had dismissed an appeal made to him against that refusal.
On an appeal against that dismissal of his appeal by the District Judge the
party dissatisfied lodged an appeal in the Supreme Court. Dalton (J) (with
Jayawardena (A.J.) agreeing) held that no appeal lay. The only remedy, it was
held was a case stated on a question of Law as the District Judge had
functioned as an Appellate Tribunal and no appeal lies from that order unless
provided for in the Ordinance.

It is significant to note, that the Legislature appears to have taken
cognizance of the judgment in _Godamune's Case_ for, the reprint of the
Notaries Ordinance as appearing in the (1956) C.L.E. (Cap. 107) shows an
amendment to section 28 by way of an additional sentence to Section 28 (2)
which is the corresponding section in that reprint which reads as follows:-

**419**

or, by the refusal of the District Judge to direct the issue of a certificate
in any case referred to in Section 27 (2), may appeal against such Order or
refusal to the Supreme Court."

This amendment has been effected by Ordinance No. 59 of 1943.

These interpretations of the Supreme Court must be taken to have been within
the knowledge of the Legislature when it enacted Sections 5(6) and 18 of the
Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979, on 25.4.1979.

MAXWELL on the INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES (12th Edi.) at Page 159 records the
case of _A.G. Vs. Seilim_ (Supra) and goes on to state

"It is also presumed that a statute does not create new jurisdictions or
enlarge existing ones, and express language is required if an Act is to be
interpreted as having this effect."

In the light of these authoritative statements it is not possible to accept
the contention that there is implied in Article 138 an unfettered "RIGHT OF
APPEAL" to the Court of Appeal. Nor, is it possible to accept the contention
that this alleged "RIGHT OF APPEAL" under this Article 138 is only fettered to
the extent provided for in the Constitution or other Law. An Appeal is a
Statutory Right and must be expressly created and granted by statute. It
cannot be implied. Article 138 is only an enabling Article and it confers the
jurisdiction to hear and determine appeals to the Court of Appeal. The right
to avail of or take advantage of that jurisdiction is governed by the several
statutory provisions in various Legislative Enactments. That is to say, for
appeals from the regular courts, in the Judicature Act, and the Procedural
Laws pertaining to those courts. For the various Tribunals and other Quasi-
Judicial Bodies, in the respective statutes that created them, For these
reasons the question formulated by the Court of Appeal is answered in the
Negative. Section 18 of the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979 does not
provide for nor does it create a Right of Appeal in a tenant cultivator, who
is aggrieved by the Order of the Commissioner to pay up his arrears to the
Landlord before a stipulated date. Further, Article 138 of the Constitution
does not confer on such a tenant cultivator a Right of Appeal.

**420**

The Registrar is directed to transmit this determination to the Court of
Appeal.

**

RANASINGHE, C.J. **\- I Agree

**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I Agree

_No right of appeal  
from section 18 (1) of Agrarian  
Services Act to Court of Appeal.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/6.html_  

