##  Machchavallavan v. Oic, Army Camp, Plantain Point, Trincomalee and Others
- SLR - 341, Vol 1 of 2005 [2005] LKSC 6; (2005) 1 Sri LR 341 (31 March 2005)

**341**

**MACHCHAVALLAVAN  
vs  
OIC, ARMY CAMP, PLANTAIN POINT, TRINCOMALEE AND  
OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
BANDARANAYAKE.J.  
UDAULGAMA,J.AND  
FERNANDO, J.  
SC. APPEAL No. 90/2003  
HC. APPLICATIONS No. 244/90  
AND 245/94  
22nd SEPTEMBER AND 19th OCTOBER, 2004 AND 16th MARCH, 2005  
  
_Writ of Habeas Corpus - Loss of petitioner's sons after removal by Army -
Right to life - Articles 13(4) and 126(2) of the Constitution \- Duty of Court
of Appeal to have referred the entire matter to the Supreme Court - Article
126(3) of the Constitution.  
_  
The appellant sought two writs of habeas corpus from the Court of Appeal in
respect of his two sons removed after a cordon and search operation by
officers of the Army Camp, Plantain Point and who had thereafter disappeared.
These applications were referred to a Magistrate who inquired into them and
recommended to the Court of Appeal against issuing the writs as the

**342**

responsibility for the loss of the corpus could not be proved against the 1st
respondent or any other army officer individually. The Court of Appeal issued
. rule nisi and after inquiry dismissed the applications, particularly due to
the unsatisfactory evidence of the appellant after six years that he too was
removed by the army. But the appellant's version was supported by the
complaints he made to the police station, Trincomalee on 19.12.1992 (P1),
Civilian Information Office Colombo, on 21.09.1990 (P2), and to the President
on 06.07.1990(P5) regarding the corpora. They were arrested on 06.07.1990.
There is also the evidence of one Jesudasan who was arrested with the corpora.  
  
One of the questions on which leave to appeal was granted was whether the
Court of Appeal failed to refer the entire matter to the Supreme Court under
Article 126(3) of the Constitution as there was prima facie evidence of
violation of fundamental rights in view of the disappearance of corpora in the
light of Article 13(4) (right to life) and recent judgments of the Supreme
Court in the matter which gave a broad construction to Articles 11, 13(4), 17
and 126(2) granting the right of petition to the legal representatives of the
deceased person, affected by violence at the hands of a public officer.  
  
**HELD:  
  
**(1) There was prima facie evidence of violation of fundamental rights
contrary to Article13(4) of the Constitution.  
  
(2) The Court of Appeal should have referred the entire matter to the Supreme
Court under Article 126(3).  
  
(3) The burden was on the Court of Appeal to make such reference and hence the
time bar in Article 126(2) had no application particularly as the relief
sought by the appellant consisted of relief in habeas corpus applications.  
  
(4) There was sufficient evidence that the cordon and search operation was
conducted by the Plantain Point Army Camp even if the identity of the
respondents was not established.  
  
(5) As the evidence showed that the corpora had been removed by the army, the
State was liable for the acts of the army officers and the State could be
ordered to pay compensation and costs to the appellant although in the absence
of individual responsibility for the removal exemplary costs may not be
ordered against the individual respondents.  
  
**Cases referred to**  
_1\. Shanthi Chandrasekeram v D. B. Wijetunga and Others (1992) 2 Sri LR 293  
  
2\. Sebastian M Hongray v Union of India (Air) 1984 SC 1026_

**343**

_3\. Kotabadu Durage Sriyani Silva v Chanaka Iddamalgoda (2003) 1 Sri LR 14
(preliminary objection)  
  
4\. Kotabadu Durage Sriyani Silva v Chanaka Iddamalgoda (2003) 2 Sri LR 63
(merits)  
  
5\. Rani Fernando's case SC FR 700/2002 S. C. minutes of 26.07.2004  
  
6\. R v. Vrixton Prison Governor Ex-Parte walsh (1985) AC 154  
  
7\. R v. Durham Prison Governor Ex-Parte Hardial Singh (1984) 1 WLR 704_  
  
**APPLICATION** for writs of habeas corpus  
  
Dr. T. Thirunavukarasu for petitioner appellant.  
Shyamal A. Coilure 1st respondents.  
Riaz Hamsa, State Counsel for Attorney-General

_Cur.adv.vult_

March 31st, 2005  
  
**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
**  
This is an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 01.07.2003.
By that judgment, the Court of Appeal refused to grant a Writ of Habeas Corpus
as prayed by the petitioner-appellant. On an application by the petitioner-
appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant), the Supreme Court
granted Special Leave to Appeal on two questions which are set out below :

> 1\. At the time the Court of Appeal made the order in respect of which
> Special Leave to Appeal was sought, there was prima facie evidence of
> infringement of the fundamental rights of the corpus at least under Article
> 13(4) of the Constitution caused by the 1st respondent, or by another State
> Officer, for whose act the State was liable. In those circumstances, it is
> arguable that the Court of Appeal should have referred the entire matter for
> determination by this Court under Article 126(3) of the Constitution;  
>  
>  2\. Whether the 1st respondent and or the State are liable for the arrest
> and the subsequent presumed death of the corpora.

The facts of this appeal, albeit brief, are as follows :  
  
The appellant, being the father of the corpora, filed two habeas corpus
Applications (HCA 244/94 and HCA 245/94) in respect of his two sons

**344**

namely Machchavailavan Arumugam and Machchavallavan Mahendrarajah, who were
arrested at a cordon and search operation conducted by Plantain Point Army,
Trincomalee. At the time of the arrest which took place on 06.07.1990 they
were aged 22 years and 25 years, respectively.  
  
The Court of Appeal on 11.09.1995, referred the two applications to the Chief
Magistrate, Colombo to inquire into and report upon the said arrest and
alleged imprisonment or detention in terms of the 1st proviso to Article 141
of the Constitution. The learned Chief Magistrate held an inquiry and
submitted his findings to the Court of Appeal on 14.03.1997. In his report the
learned Chief Magistrate had concluded that there was no evidence to establish
that the 1 st respondent-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the 1st
respondent) either took part in the round-up operation during which the said
corpora were alleged to have been taken into custody or was in any manner
responsible for the alleged arrest and detention of the said corpora. However,
the Court of Appeal, being satisfied that the corpora were detained at the
Plantain Point Army Camp after arrest, issued a Rule Nisi on the 1st
respondent on 19.07.2000 directing him to bring up the bodies of the said
corpora before the Court of Appeal on 17.05.2001.  
  
In response to the aforementioned position, the 1st respondent filed an
affidavit dated 15.05.2001 denying the arrest and detention of the corpora by
him. He filed another affidavit on 04.10.2001, further clarifying his defense.
The Court of Appeal on 01.07.2003, delivered its judgment discharging the Rule
Nisi issued on the 1st respondent and dismissed the applications filed by the
appellant, holding that the appellant had not succeeded in discharging his
burden of proof.  
  
Having set down the factual position in this appeal, I would now turn to
examine the two questions on which Special Leave to Appeal was granted.  
  
_1. _The Court of Appeal should have referred the entire matter for
determination by the Supreme Court under Article 126(3) of the Constitution.__  
  
Article 126 of the Constitution, deals with fundamental rights jurisdiction
and its exercise and Article 126(3) specifically refers to the applications
received by the Court of Appeal and reads thus :  
  
"Where in the course of hearing in the Court of Appeal into an application for
orders in the nature of a writ of habeas corpus, certiorari, prohibition,

**345**

procedendo, mandamus or quo warranto, it appears to such Court that there is
prima facie evidence of an infringement or imminent infringement of the
provisions of Chapter III or Chapter IV by a party to such application, such
Court shall forthwith refer such matter for determination by the Supreme
Court."  
  
It is common ground that the appellant preferred his application to the Court
of Appeal seeking a mandate in the nature of a writ of habeas corpus directing
the respondents who were responsible, for the alleged arrest and the detention
of the corpora referred to in the application to produce them before Court.  
  
The 1st and the 4th respondents however were of the view that there was no
basis for the Court of Appeal to have referred the application made by the
appellant to the Supreme Court. Their position was that, the petition, or the
supporting affidavits did not contain any averment or material against any of
the respondents cited in the petition. Further it was submitted that, in
paragraph (a) to the prayer to the petition, a writ of habeas corpus was
prayed for with a direction to the responsible respondents to produce the
corpora before the Court of Appeal. In support of this position, learned
Counsel for the 1st and 4th respondents relied on the decision in Shanthi
Chandrasekeram v. D. B. Wijetunga and others (1) and submitted that, there was
no prima facie evidence of an infringement of the fundamental rights of the
corpora by a party to the said applications for the Court of Appeal to refer
the instant application to the Supreme Court.  
  
Learned Counsel for the 1 st and 4th respondents, also submitted that, the
appellant in his original habeas corpus applications has not raised the
question of any violation of fundamental rights and did not do so even in his
application for Special Leave to Appeal. Further it was submitted that no
allegations based in terms of Articles 11, 13(1), 13(2) or 13(4) were taken up
by the appellant at any stage.  
  
Learned Counsel for the 1st and 4th respondents, also took up the position
that the appellant had not made the applications within the stipulated time,
in terms of Article 126(2) of the Constitution  
.  
Article 126(3)of the Constitution, referred to earlier, does not state that
all applications in the nature of obtaining writs from the Court of Appeal be
referred to the Supreme Court. Such reference is necessary only if there

**346**

is evidence to the effect that there is an infringement or an imminent
infringement of fundamental rights. Article 126(3) of the Constitution is
quite precise in its position and the said Article states clearly that if it
appears to the Court of Appeal, while in the course of hearing an application
for orders in the nature of writs of habeas corpus, certiorari, prohibition,
procedendo, mandamus or quo warranto, that there is prima facie evidence of an
infringement or an imminent infringement of fundamental rights, such matter
should forthwith be referred to the Supreme Court for determination. In
Shanthi Chandrasekeram's case (Supra), in the course of hearing of the habeas
corpus applications filed by three petitioners, the Court of Appeal considered
that there was prima facie evidence of the infringement of Articles 11,13(1)
and 13(2) of the Constitution and made the reference to the Supreme Court.
Considering the infringements referred to above, in that case, this Court held
that the alleged infringement of Article 11 could not have been the basis of
reference under Article 126(3), firstly, because there was only an assertion
and no prima facie evidence of such infringements, and secondly because there
was no averment or evidence that the infringements, were by a party to the
habeas corpus applications. With reference to Articles 13(1) and 13(2), the
Supreme Court held that the detainee had been arrested in violation of Article
13(1) and had been detained in violation of Article 13(2).  
  
Accordingly, the notable feature in this provision is that there should be
prima facie evidence of an infringement or an imminent infringement in the
matter before the Court of Appeal. It would also be necessary that there is an
averment or evidence that the infringements were by a party to the habeas
corpus application. A question arises at this point as to whether it is
necessary that the petitioner should bring it to the notice of the Court of
Appeal of such an infringement. Article 126(3) does not refer to any such
requirement casting the onus on the petitioner to move Court with his
application. Instead, what the Article professes is that, if it appears to the
Court of Appeal, that there is prima facie infringement or an imminent
infringement in terms of fundamental rights, then the Court should forthwith
refer. such matter for determination by the Supreme Court. The burden
therefore lies with the Court of Appeal and it would be the duty of the Court
to decide, in the course of the hearing of a writ application, as to whether
there is an infringement of a fundamental right in relation to the complaint
made by the petitioner.

**347**

There is one other matter that I wish to state briefly. Learned State Counsel
had stated in his written submissions that "if every habeas corpus
application, which invariably refers to the arrest and disappearance of a
corpus, is to be referred to the Supreme Court in terms of Article 126(3) of
the Constitution, it could lead to an abuse of this provision and a mockery of
justice".  
  
It is to be borne in mind that, it is not every habeas corpus application that
would be referred to the Supreme Court in terms of Article 126(3) of the
Constitution. Provision is made in terms of Article 126(3) for the Court of
Appeal to refer to the Supreme Court the writ application only when it appears
to such Court that there is prima facie evidence of an infringement or an
imminent infringement of the provisions of Chapter Ml or Chapter IV by a party
to such application. Therefore it would not be correct to say that all habeas
corpus applications would invariably be referred to the Supreme Court by the
Court of Appeal as such reference should strictly be in terms of Article
126(3) of the Constitution.  
  
In the instant application, the complaint made by the appellant related to the
arrest, detention and the subsequent disappearance of the corpora. The
appellant, being the father of the corpora, had made a complaint to Civilian
Information Office on 21.09.1990 giving information regarding missing persons
(P2). In that, the appellant had stated that on 06.07.1990, the Army Officers
at Linga Nagar took two of his sons, referred to in his appeal, into custody
along with him and several others and later they were taken to the Plantain
Point Army Camp at Trincomalee. According to the appellant, he was released
with two others around 5.00 p.m. in the evening. The appellant had stated in
the information sheet that his sons were not released at any stage and that on
inquiring from the Plantain Point Army Camp he was informed that his sons are
not in the said Army Camp. The appellant had also sent a letter to His
Excellency the President on 21.09.1990 informing His Excellency the
disappearance of his sons. In this communique (P5) the appellant had described
how they were arrested on 06.07.1990. According to him the corpora and the
appellant were at home on 06.07.1990 when there was a cordon and search
operation around6.00 a.m. Thereafter they were taken to Palaiyoothu College
until the arrival of the Commander. The appellant had stated that the Grama
Niladhari of the area had taken down the details of the persons who were so
arrested and a copy of that document was given to the Commander. Thereafter
the

**348**

Army personnel took all of them to the Plantain Point Army Camp. The appellant
and two others were released around 5.00 p.m. on the same day, but not the
corpora. The appellant had repeated the aforementioned details in a statement
made to the Police Station, Trincomalee on 09.12.1992 (P1).  
  
The appellant had cited the Officer-in-Charge of the Army Camp at Plantain
Point Trincomalee as the 1st respondent in his appeal. At the time the Rule
Nisi was issued on the 1st respondent, requiring him to bring up the bodies of
the corpora before the Court of Appeal on 17.05.2001, he had filed an
affidavit before the Court of Appeal on 15.05.2001. In that he had averred
that he was not the Commanding Officer of the Plantain Point Army Camp during
the time material to this application claimed by the Rule Nisi, but only the
Officer-in-Charge of the Military Police Section . of the said Camp during the
said period. In a further affidavit filed on 04.10.2001, Major Channa Etipola
averred that, at the time material to this complaint, he was only a Lieutenant
attached to the Plantain Point Army Camp and the late Brigadier C. L.
Wijeyaratne functioned as the Commanding Officer. He further averred that
Plantain Point Army Camp was the Headquarters of the 22nd Brigade of the Sri
Lanka Army and that there were two major units at the said Plantain Point Army
Camp, namely, the Operational Staff and the Logistic/Administrative Straff and
the Military Police Camps had come under the supervision of the latter. He had
further averred that as a Military Police Officer he has no authority
whatsoever to arrest civilians under any circumstances and hence he had not
arrested the corpora referred to in this appeal.  
  
It is clear on the evidence that the corpora were arrested and detained in or
around 06.07.1990 at a cordon and search operation. According to the appellant
this was carried out by the Plantain Point Army Camp. The 1st respondent
denies any knowledge or involvement in such an arrest but admits that he was
attached to the Plantain Point Army Camp situated at Trincomalee. He had
further submitted that the said camp consisted of the Headquarters of the 22nd
Brigade of the Sri Lanka Army, the Operational Unit and the
Logistic/Administration Branch, Therefore on an analysis of the material
placed before this Court, although the 1st respondent may not be responsible
for the arrest and detention of the corpora and/or that he has no knowledge
whatsoever with regard to the arrest and detention, there is a possibility in
all probabilities that the corpora would have been arrested and detained by
officers in one or both of the other units of the said Camp. This

**349**

fact is clearly supported by the information given in the complaint made to
the Trincomalee Police (P1), complaint made in Colombo to the Civilian
Information Office (P2) and in the letter sent to His Excellency the President
in September 1990 (P5). It is inconceivable that civilians would have been
permitted to stay in the Plantain Point Army Camp without the permission/
knowledge of the Army authorities, especially at the relevant time where
hostilities were high. Therefore it is reasonable to conclude that the corpora
were kept in the Army Camp with the knowledge and connivance of the Army
officers. Hence Army authorities are responsible to account for the
whereabouts of the two sons of the appellant. In such circumstances, would it
be correct to say that the appellant had no right to move the Court for grant
of writ of habeas corpus? The writ of habeas corpus is a writ of remedial
nature and is available as a remedy in all cases of wrongful deprivation of
personally liberty. The basis of the writ of habeas corpus is the illegal
detention or imprisonment, which is incapable of legal justification and the
appellant's complaint involved the liberty of the corpora.  
  
In the instant application, the complaint made by the petitioner related to
the arrest, detention and the subsequent disappearance of the corpora. Whilst
Articles 13(1 ).and 13(2) refer to the arrest and detention of a person
according to the applicable procedure laid down by law, Article 13(4) of the
Constitution states that no person shall be punished with death or
imprisonment except by order of a competent court, made in accordance with
procedure established by law. The aforementioned Articles are contained in
Chapter III which deals with fundamental rights and falls within the category
which speaks of freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention and punishment and
prohibition of retroactive penal legislation.  
  
It is therefore evident that the appellant was complaining of an infringement
of the provisions contained in Chapter III of the Constitution. Moreover, it
is to be borne in mind that the complaint was against the officers attached to
the Plantain Point Army Camp who had carried out the cordon and search
operation. Therefore the allegations were made against the State which
involved the liberty of the corpora. According to the appellant, the corpora
and others along with him were taken to the Plantain Point Army Camp. Although
the appellant and some others were released later, he had not thereafter heard
anything about his sons. In fact he had referred to this position in all his
communications

**350**

regarding the arrest, detention and disappearance of his sons and therefore it
was not factually correct for the Court of Appeal to have stated that nearly 6
years after the alleged incident the appellant had at the inquiry whilst
giving evidence had stated for the first time that he too was taken into
custody. The Court of Appeal had taken the view that the appellant's evidence
must fail on the promptness test.  
  
The Chief Magistrate, Colombo who held the inquiry on the reference made by
the Court of Appeal, in his report dated 19.11.1996 (P7) has clearly stated
that the appellant had submitted that the corpora were arrested by the
Plantain Point Army Camp. A witness by the name Titus Jesudasan, had said that
he too was taken to the Plantain Point Army Camp and had also stated that the
said operation was conducted by one Colonel Tennakoon and that one Ajith
Kumara had questioned them at the time of the arrest. The 1st respondent of
course has denied any involvement. Based on the evidence of the 1 st
respondent the learned Chief Magistrate had come to the finding that 1st to
3rd respondents are not responsible for the disappearance of the corpora.  
  
Considering the evidence of Titus Jesudasan referred to by the learned Chief
Magistrate, Colombo in his report, I am of the view that the said witness has
corroborated the position taken up by the appellant.  
  
In the light of the above position, it is abundantly clear that the
appellant's main ground was that of the disappearance of his sons. Considering
the totality of the circumstances of this appeal, the only inference that
could be drawn is that both of them must have met an unnatural death. Prima
facie such deaths would have to be taken as offences of murder and the
important fact would be not to cast any aspersions on as to who had committed
the crime, but as a first step to come to the conclusion that the corpora are
not alive and that they have met unnatural deaths. In fact in Sebastian M.
Hongray v. Union of India2 where a writ of habeas corpus was issued to produce
C. Daniel and C. Paul who were taken to Phungrei Camp by the Jawans of 21st
Sikh Regiment, Desai J. referring to the persons who were missing stated that,

> "Prima facie, it would be an offence of murder......It is not necessary to
> start casting a doubt on anyone or any particular person. But prima facie
> there is material on record to reach an affirmative conclusion that both
> Shri C. Daniel and Shri C. Paul are not alive and have met an unnatural
> death."

**351**

In the aforesaid circumstances it is beyond doubt that at the time the Court
of Appeal made the order, there was prima facie evidence of an infringement of
the fundamental rights of the corpora at least in terms of Article 13(4) of
the Constitution caused by some State Officers. Article 13(4) of the
Constitution does not deal directly with right to life, but states that,  
  
"No person shall be punished with death or imprisonment except by order of a
competent court, made in accordance with procedure established by law. The
arrest, holding in custody, detention or other deprivation of personal liberty
of a person pending investigation or trial shall not constitute punishment."  
  
Considering the contents of Article 13(4), this Court has taken the position
that no person should be punished with death or imprisonment except by an
order of a competent court. Further, it has been decided in Kotabadu Durage
Sriyani Silva v. Chanaka Iddamalgoda (3) and 4 and in Rani Fernando's case(5)
that if there is no order from Court no person should be punished with death
and unless and otherwise such an order is made by a competent court, any
person has a right to live. Accordingly Article 13(4) of the Constitution has
been interpreted to mean that a person has a right to live unless a competent
court orders otherwise.  
  
In such circumstances it was apparent that there was an alleged violation of
Article 13(4)oftheConstitution.  
  
Therefore, for the reasons aforementioned, I hold that the Court of Appeal
should have referred the entire matter for determination by the Supreme Court
in terms of Article 126(3) of the Constitution.  
  
2. _Whether the 1st respondent and/or the State are liable for the arrest and the subsequent presumed death of the corpus_  
  
The appellant stated that his sons were taken into custody on 06.07.1990 by
the Plantain Point Army in the course of a cordon and search operation.
According to the appellant after the arrest, his sons were detained in the
Plantain Point Army Camp and since then he has not received any information of
his sons.

**352**

Learned Counsel for the 1st respondent made several submissions to indicate
that the 1st respondent is not responsible for the alleged disappearance of
the corpora and that the appeal should be dismissed.  
  
In support of his submissions, learned Counsel for the 1st respondent has
relied upon the following positions:

> (a) The appellant in his original application for the writ of habeas corpus
> did not take up the question of violation of his fundamental rights in terms
> of Article 13(4) of the Constitution ; and  
>  
>  (b) The appellant has not made the complaint within the stipulated time
> limit of one month from the disappearance of his children.;

_(a) The appellant in his original application for the writ of habeas corpus
did not take up the Question of violation of his fundamental rights in terms
of Article 13(4) of the Constitution ;  
_  
The appellant, it is to be borne in mind, preferred an application for a writ
of habeas corpus to the Court of Appeal, on the basis of the arrest, detention
and the subsequent disappearance of his two children. The appellant therefore
did not come  before the Court of Appeal and later to the Supreme Court on the
basis of an infringement of Article 13(4) of the Constitution. Whilst the
appellant's chief and only contention was on his application for a writ of
habeas corpus, it was this Court which had granted leave on the question of an
infringement in terms of Article 13(4) of the Constitution. The Supreme Court
has the jurisdiction to look into such a question in terms of Article 126(3)
of the Constitution. In terms of Article 126(3), it is obvious that the
purpose of that Article was to prevent persons from filing different
applications in the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal on the same
transaction. Referring to the purpose of the provisions in Article 126,
Justice Mark Fernando, in Shanthi Chandrasekeram v. D. B. Wijetunga and others
(Supra) stated that,  
  
_" Since those provisions do not permit the joinder of such claims, the
aggrieved party would have to institute two different proceedings, in two
different courts, in respect of virtually identical 'causes of action' arising
from the same transaction unless there is express provision permitting
joinder. The prevention in such circumstances, of a multiplicity of suits
(with their known concomitant) is the object of Article 126(3)."_

**353**

It would therefore not be correct for the 1st respondent to take up the
position that, as the appellant has not taken up the infringement of Article
13(4) at the initial stage, that now he cannot urge such violation before the
Supreme Court. In fact, it is also to be borne in mind that, the appellant
could not have combined a violation of Article 13(4) with an application for a
writ of habeas corpus in the Court of Appeal and in the event he had proposed
for an application in terms of Article 13(4) of the Constitution, he should
have made the application to the Supreme Court and not to the Court of Appeal
and in any event, the sole purpose of Article 126(3) of the Constitution is to
avoid such multiplicity of actions and therefore the 1st respondent cannot now
take up the position that the appellant has failed to urge the infringement in
terms of Article 13(4) of the Constitution. On a careful consideration of the
provisions of Article 126(3), I hold that, it is the duty of the Court of
Appeal to decide whether there is prima facie evidence of an infringement or
an imminent infringement of the provisions of the Articles contained in the
Chapter on fundamental rights of the Constitution and if so to refer such
matter for determination by the Supreme Court. In such circumstances, there is
no requirement or a need for the appellant to take up the question of an
infringement of Article 13(4) of the Constitution in his application for a
writ of habeas corpus in the Court of Appeal.

> _(b) The appellant has not made the complaint within the stipulated time
> limit of one month from the disappearance of his children._

Learned Counsel for the 1st respondent submitted that, there was no basis on
which the Court of Appeal could have referred the appellant's application in
terms of Article 126(3) of the Constitution as he has not complained within
one month since the alleged incident as stipulated in Article 126(2) of the
Constitution. His position is that the appellant's children were alleged to
have been removed from their residence and were taken to Plantain Point Army
Camp in June or July 1990, whereas his application praying for mandates in the
nature of writs of habeas corpus were filed only in June 1994.  
  
Learned Counsel for the 1st respondent considered that, in a long line of
cases, the Supreme Court has consistently held that the time limit of one
month stipulated in Article 126(2) of the Constitution is mandatory. He took
up the view that the intention of the legislature with regard to the mandatory
time limit specified in Article 126(2) of the Constitution is re- emphasized
in section 13(1) of the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka Act, No. 21 of
1996 which states that,

**354**

> "When a complaint is made by an aggrieved party in terms of section 14 to
> the Commission, within one month of the alleged infringement or imminent
> infringement of a fundamental right by executive or administrative action,
> the period within which the inquiry into such complaint is pending before
> the Commission shall not be taken into account in computing the period of
> one month within which an application may be made to the Supreme Court by
> such person in terms of Article 126(2) of the Constitution."

Learned Counsel for the 1st respondent also drew our attention to the decision
in Shanthi Chandrasekeram v. D. B. Wijetunga and others (Supra) where he
submitted that, the detainees were arrested on or about 03.07.1991 and that
the applications praying for the writs of habeas corpus were filed in August
1991.  
  
Admittedly, the corpora were taken into custody in July 1990 and the appellant
had come before the Court of Appeal only in June 1994. The appellant had
stated in his petition that he had made inquiries and had searched for his
sons with government and non governmental organizations (P1-P5).  
  
Habeas corpus, unlike other prerogative orders still remains as a writ. It is
not discretionary and therefore it cannot be denied because there may be some
alternative remedy. As pointed out by Wade (Administrative Law, 9th Edition,
2004, pg. 594).

> "The writ may be applied for by any prisoner, or by anyone acting on his
> behalf, without regard to nationality, since 'every person within the
> jurisdiction enjoys the equal protection of our laws'. It may be directed
> against the gaoler, often the appropriate prison governor, or against the
> authority ordering the detention, e.g. the Home Secretary. It is not
> discretionary, and it cannot therefore be denied because there may be some
> alternative remedy. There is no time limit. The defense will not always be
> statutory."

It is also to be borne in mind that the writ of habeas corpus potentially has
a very wide scope as it is directly linked to the liberty of citizens.
Blackstone referring to the writ of habeas corpus, had stated that,
(Commentaries, BK III, 12th Edition, 1794, pg. 131):

**325**

"the king is at all times entitled to have an account, why the liberty of any
of his subjects is restrained, wherever that restraint may be inflicted."  
  
Although the learned Counsel for the 1st respondent had referred to the
provision in Article 126(2) of the Constitution, the appellant had not moved
the Court in terms of that provision. It is this Court which had granted
Special Leave to Appeal to consider the question of any violation in respect
of Article 13(4) of the Constitution. Therefore it would not be correct to say
that the appellant had to strictly adhere to the mandatory time limit
stipulated in Article 126(2). The application made by the appellant was on the
basis of obtaining a writ of habeas corpus and was not in terms of the
fundamental rights jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. Although I am in
complete agreement that a long line of cases of this Court had decided that an
application on the basis of obtaining relief in terms of any infringement or
imminent infringement of his fundamental rights will have to be filed within
30 days of the alleged infringement, subject to a few exceptions, it is my
view that this condition does not apply to the appellant in this case as he
had moved the Court of Appeal on an entirely a different premise. In such
circumstances it would not be relevant to consider the application of Article
126 in relation to the time bar with regard to this appeal.  
  
The next question that has to be gone into is whether the 1st respondent and
or the State are liable for the arrest and the subsequent presumed death of
the corpora.  
  
The appellant's position was that in or around 06.07.1990, two of his sons
were taken into custody by the Army Officers attached to the Plantain Point
Army Camp. The appellant had made a complaint to the Trincomalee Police on
09.12.1992 about the said arrest. In the said complaint and in the subsequent
complaints made by the appellant with regard to the arrest of his sons he had
mentioned that his sons were arrested by the officers attached to Plantain
Point Army Camp. However, the appellant had made no direct allegation against
the 1 st respondent to the effect that he and he alone is responsible for the
arrest of his sons. The appellant's contention was that the corpora were
arrested by the officials of the Plantain Point Army Camp and they were last
seen at the said Camp. This position was substantiated by witness Jesudasan
who was also arrested at the time the corpora were arrested, but released
after a few days of the arrest.

**356**

Habeas corpus could be applied for and granted in many occasions such as when
there is an excessive delay in bringing a prisoner up for trial (R v Brixton
Prison Governor, ex-parte Walsh(6) )or in executing an order for his
deportation (R v Durham Prison Governor, ex-parte Hardial Singh(7)). However,
it is to borne in mind that the writ has served and has a remarkable
reputation as a bulwark of personal liberty although it has failed to measure
up to the standards of the European Convention on Human Rights (Wade,
Administrative Law, 9th Edition pg. 596).  
  
In such circumstances the question arises as to the burden of proof in habeas
corpus cases. Considering this question Wade (Supra) is of the view that it is
the responsibility of the detaining authority to give positive evidence of the
circumstances. As pointed out by Wade (Supra at pgs. 294-295):  
  
"In cases of habeas corpus there is a principle which 'is one of the pillars
of liberty, that in English Law every imprisonment is prima facie unlawful and
that if is for a person directing imprisonment to justify his act.  
  
Accordingly the detaining authority must be able to give positive evidence
that it has fulfilled every legal condition expressly required by statement,
even in the absence of contrary evidence from the prisoner. This rule is
indeed an example of the principle stated at the outset, since unjustified
detention is trespass to the person. It is particularly important that the
principle should be preserved where personal liberty is at stake".  
  
The existence of the Plantain Point Army Camp is not disputed by the 1st and
4th respondents and the appellant as well as witness Jesudasan refers to the
cordon and search operation conducted by the said Army Camp.  
  
Although the 1st respondent denies his involvement with such an operation, he
himself has stated that Plantain Point Army Camp was the Headquarters of the
22nd Brigade of the Sri Lanka Army and moreover that there were two major
units at the said camp which consisted of the branches dealing with the
operations and administration of the area. The Military Police Camps had come
under the supervision of the latter. He has also admitted that he had no
authority to arrest civilians under any circumstances and that there were
other high ranking officers in charge of

**357**

the Army Camp. All the documents filed by the appellant give a clear
indication that he had been referring to the Plantain Point Army Camp as the
place from which the cordon and search operation was conducted, the arrests
made and was the place where the corpora as well as the appellant (for a short
period) were detained. As has been pointed out earlier, it is reasonable to
conclude that corpora were kept in the Army Camp with the knowledge and the
connivance of the Army officers. In such circumstances, it was the duty of the
Commanding Officer who had the authority to arrest and detain, to discharge
the burden as to what took place on or about 03.07.1991. As pointed out by
Wade, one cannot ignore the cardinal principle laid down in English Law with
regard to habeas corpus applications that every imprisonment is prima facie
unlawful and that it is for a person directing imprisonment to justify his
act. Since there is no evidence against the 1st respondent I cast no liability
on him, but I hold that the State is responsible for the disappearance of the
corpora while they were in detention at the Army Camp and the subsequent
presumed death.  
  
For the aforementioned reasons, I answer both questions raised by this Court
at the time Special Leave to Appeal was granted in the affirmative. The appeal
is allowed and the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 01.07.2003 is set
aside.  
  
On a consideration of the circumstances referred to above, this Court must
consider the kind of relief that should be granted to the appellant. In a
similar situation, Desai J. in Sebastian M. Hongrayv Union of India (Supra)
had held that exemplary costs from the respondents are permissible in such
cases. As we have held that the 1st respondent is not personally responsible,
there cannot be any exemplary costs payable to the appellant. However, as has
been referred to earlier, the Commanding Officer has the authority to arrest
and to detain and was in overall charge of such operations. In the
circumstances, the State is responsible for the infringement of the
fundamental rights of the corpora governed in terms of article 13(4) of the
Constitution, which rights have accrued to and/or devolved upon the appellant.
It is to be borne in mind that respect for the rights of individuals is the
true bastion of democracy and State has to take steps to redress the
infringement caused by its officers to the corpora. I therefore direct the
State to pay a sum of Rs. 150,000 each for the two sons of the appellant, who
had disappeared in detention as compensation and costs.

**358**

" Thus Rs. 300,000, being the total amount to be paid to the appellant within
3 months from today.  
  
**UDALAGAMA, J.**      -     I agree.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.**    -     I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2005/6.html_  

