##  Namasivayam v. Gunawardena - SLR - 394, Vol 1 of 1989 [1986] LKSC 6;
(1989) 1 Sri LR 394 (30 October 1986)

**

394

NAMASIVAYAM  
v.  
 GUNAWARDENA

**

SUPREME COURT  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., ATUKORALE. J. AND HAG. DE SILVA, J.  
S. C. APPLICATION NO. 166/86  
MAY 1.8 AND JUNE 2 AND. 22, 1987

_

Fundamental Rights_ \- _Illegal arrest and detention - Torture_ \- _Articles_
7 /, 73/7J _and (2), 17 and 126(1) and (2), 155(5}_ \- _Section 4(a) and (b)
of the Public Security Ordinance, Regulations 18 and 19 of the Emergency
(Miscellaneous) Provisions and Powers Regulations_ \- _Supreme Court Rules of
1978, rule 65(4).

_

The petitioner was travelling in a bus at Nawalapitiya when he was arrested by
the 3rd respondent. He was not informed the reason for his arrest. He was
taken to a security personnel camp and kept there and repeatedly assaulted by
the 3rd

**395**

respondent and other security personnel. He was forced to make a statement on
the lines suggested by the 3rd respondent. He was not released after his
statement as promised but continued to be kept in unlawful detention.

The respondent said the petitioner was arrested because he was stated to be
acquainted with the facts of a case of robbery of a gun from Rozella Farm
which was being investigated. "He wanted the petitioner to accompany him to
the Ginigathena Police Station.

A preliminary objection was taken on behalf of the respondents that the
application was filed out of time. On behalf of the petitioner it was
contended that the arrest was illegal, the detention orders were bad as the
Emergency had lapsed during their currency and the affidavits-of 1. 2 and 3
respondents had been filed out of time in contravention of Rule 65(4) of the
Supreme Court Rules of 1978\. '

**

Held :-

**



  1. Because the remedy under Article 126 is guaranteed by the Constitution, Article 126(2) must be given a generous and purposive construction. A literal interpretation, of the period of limitation will defeat the petitioner's right to his Constitutional remedy. To make the remedy under Article 1 26 meaningful to the applicant, the one month prescribed by Article 126(2) should be calculated from the time that he is under no restraint. If this liberal construction is not adopted for petitions under Article 126(2) the petitioner's right to his constitutional remedy under Article 126 can turn out to be illusory. It could be rendered nugatory or frustrated by continued detention. The petitioner was arrested on 28.07.86 and in Police custody. He was thereafter in detention from 04.08.86  
even when he filed his application on 03.10.1986, under successive detention
orders. The respondents admit the taking of the petitioner on 28.07.86 but
state he was released and re-arrested on 04 08.86 and thereafter kept in
detention The attorney-at-law retained by the petitioner's wife was not able
to interview the petitioner The one month prescribed by Article 1 26(2)
applies to the case of the applicant having free access to his lawyers and to
the Supreme Court Hence the petitioner's delayed1 application for relief under
Article 126 should not be rejected.

  2. The petitioner's complaint of torture is not corroborated by medical evidence and therefore the evidence is insufficient to establish violation under Article 11.
  3. The explanation of the 3rd respondent affords no justification for the arrest of the petitioner on 28.07.86. There was therefore an infringement of Article 13 (1) on the arrest and failure to inform the arrestee of the reasons.
  4. Under Regulation 19(2) detention can extend up to 90 days after which the person detained has to be released unless he is produced before the expiry of the period before a Court of competent jurisdiction.

**396**

(5) Under Regulation 19(2), Article 1 55(5) and section 4{a) & (b) of the
Public Security Ordinance read together, the validity of a detention order
made under a Regulation since lapsed is kept alive. The expiry of the
Emergency Regulations does not affect the detention order under which the
petitioner was held.

(6), The 1.2.3 respondents filed their objections after the 7 days from date
of service of a notice as stipulated by Rule 65(4) of-.the Supreme Court Rules
1978 but the Chief Justice had granted them an extension on an application
made by them.

The Chief Justice here exercised a discretion founded on the inherent right of
the Supreme Court to do justice As a matter of administrative arrangement the
Chief Justice deals with applications for extended time Affidavits and
objections filed within such extended time could be admitted.

Application for infringement of Fundamental Rights under Articles 11, 13(1)
and (2),

_Jayampathy Wickremaratne_ with _M. S. M. Suhaid, M. H M Salman_ and _Hemasiri
Withanachchi_ for Petitioner.

  _Nihal jayasinghe SSC_ for Attorney‑General.

Petitioner present in person produced from Remand Prison.

### Cur. adv. vult

September 9, 1987

**SHARVANANDA, C.J.** _  
  
            _By his petition dated 3rd October 1986 the Petitioner complained to this Court that the fundamental rights guaranteed to him by Articles 11, 13 (1) and 13(2) had been violated by the Respondents.

In this petition, the Petitioner has stated that: on 28.7.86 while he was
travelling in a C.T.B. bus on his way to Nawalapitiya, he was arrested by
Police Sgt. Najibdeen, the 3rd Respondent; he was not informed the reason for
his arrest, he was taken to a security personnel camp and kept there till 4th
August 1986 and during this period he was repeatedly assaulted by the 3rd
Respondent and other security personnel. He was told that he was a terrorist
belonging to an organisation which they referred to as T.E.L.E. or Tamil Eelam
Liberation Extremists; though he denied the allegation they continued to
assault him until he

**397**

agreed to make a statement on the lines suggested by the 3rd Respondent. On
4.8.86 he was taken to the Police Station Hatton and produced before the 2nd
Respondent who was the Head Quarters Inspector of the Hatton Police; as he was
unable to withstand any more physical assault and as he was promised that he
would be released, he made a statement to the 2nd Respondent on the lines
suggested by the 3rd Respondent. He was not released after his statement as
promised; he was continued to be kept in unlawful detention. On 31.8.86 he was
taken to the Gampola Police Station and kept there till 5.9.86. At Gampola
Police he was compelled by threats to repeat to the A.S.P., Gampola the
statement, that he had made earlier to the 2nd Respondent. He made the
statement because he feared that he would be subjected to assault by the 3rd
Respondent and other officers. On 5.9.86 he was taken back to Hatton Police
Station and kept till 18.9.86. On 18.9.86 he was taken to the Hatton
Magistrate and was remanded by him indefinitely.



The Petitioner further complained that the Attorney‑at‑Law arranged by his
wife to interview him was denied access to him by the 2nd Respondent.

The Respondents by their affidavits have denied the allegations made against
them by the Petitioner. Police Sgt. Najimudeen, 3rd Respondent, denied having
arrested the petitioner on 28.7.86. He has stated that "on 28.7.86, I was
investigating into a case of robbery of gun from Rosella Farm committed on
3.6.86. I had reason to believe that the Petitioner was acquainted with the
facts and circumstances relating to the said robbery. I requested the
Petitioner to accompany me to Ginigathena Police for questioning. At the
Police Station he was questioned in connection with this case and was released
immediately after his statement was recorded." The 3rd Respondent further
stated that subsequently he received information that the Petitioner was
involved in acts which constituted offences under the Emergency
(Miscellaneous) Provisions & Powers Regulations and that on 4.8.86, he
arrested the Petitioner in terms of Regulation 18 at the Watawala Railway
Station, that after having explained the charge against him he took the
Petitioner to the Hatton Police Station, where he was questioned on the
information he, had;

# 398

that the Petitioner made a statement to the 2nd Respondent in which he
admitted that he was a member of the Tamil Eelam Liberation Extremists. The
3rd Respondent has denied having made any inducement, threat or suggestion to
the Petitioner to make the statement.



The 3rd Respondent further stated that on 5.8.86 the 1st Respondent who is the
Deputy Inspector General of Police, Kandy, made order authorising the
detention of the Petitioner at the Hatton Police Station for 30 days from
5.8.86, that the Petitioner was detained at the Hatton Police Station till
31st August 1986 on which date he was taken to the Gampola Police Station, for
the purpose of recording a statement by the A. S. P., Gampola. Recording of
the statement continued from 31 .8.86 till 5.9.86. The Petitioner was taken
back to Hatton Police Station on 5.9.86 and was produced before the Magistrate
on 18.9.86 and was remanded by the Magistrate. The 3rd Respondent denied
having told Mr. Wickremaratne, Attorney‑at‑Law that he had instructions from
the 2nd Respondent not to permit any person to speak to the Petitioner. As the
2nd Respondent was away at the time when Mr. Wickremaratne came to the Hatton
Police Station, the Probationary Sub‑Inspector had asked him to obtain
permission from the A.S.P., Hatton to speak to the Petitioner. As Mr.
Wickremaratne was unable to meet the A.S.P. he went away.



The 1st Respondent who is the Deputy Inspector General of Police, (Central
Range) has filed affidavit stating that on 5.8.86 it was brought to his notice
that the Petitioner had been arrested on suspicion of having committed an
offence under the Emergency Regulations. He made order on 5.8.86 authorising
the Hatton Police Station to be the place where the Petitioner should be
detained till 4.9.86, and that subsequently on 4.9.86 he again made order that
the Petitioner be kept at that place till 4.10.86.



The 2nd Respondent who is the Headquarters Inspector, Hatton Police Station
has stated that on 4.8.86 Petitioner was brought before him at the Hatton
Police Station, that he voluntarily made a statement to him, wherein he
admitted his involvement in the activities of the T.E.L.E., that the
Petitioner was

**399**

refused permission to the Attorney-at-Law to speak to the Petitioner.

At the outset of the hearing Counsel for the Attorney-General raised a
preliminary objection that the petition under Article 1 26 of the Constitution
was filed out of time.

Article 1 26 provides that an application to the Supreme Court praying for
relief in respect of any infringement by executive or administrative action
should be filed within one month of the alleged infringement. According to the
Petitioner, he was unlawfully arrested on 28.7.86 and was in breach of Article
13(1) of the Constitution, not made aware of the reason for his arrest, and
was unlawfully detained from that date.

In my view, Article 1 26(2) postulates a person whose freedom of movement is
not fettered by being kept in custody or detention, who has free access to the
Supreme Court to apply for relief under Article 126 of the Constitution.
According to the Petitioner from the date of his arrest on 28.7.86 to the time
of the filing of the petition on 3.10.86 he was in detention. And hence he did
not have free access to the Supreme Court or to his lawyer to be able to take
proceedings within the one month stipulated by Article 126(2). Admittedly the
Petitioner was in detention from 4.8.86 to the date of his filing the present
application.

Counsel stated that even though he was not in a position to make his
application, his wife could have, on his behalf, made the application within
the time. According to the' Petitioner his wife was strictly enjoined by the
Police not to-discuss with the Petitioner any matter pertaining to the
detention and that he was not able to discuss anything with his wife, relating
to his detention or arrest because of the presence of a Police Officer
whenever his wife visited him. Further Mr. Wickremaratne,

**400**

Attorney-at-Law who was appointed by Petitioner's wife to interview the
Petitioner was not able to have any conference with the Petitioner. In any
event the Petitioner cannot suffer for the failure of his wife to take steps
under Article 126 It cannot be gainsaid that his detention prevented him from
taking proceedings within one month prescribed by Article 126. To make the
remedy under Article 1 26 meaningful to the applicant, the one month
prescribed by Article 1 26(2) should be calculated from the time that he is
under no restraint. If this liberal construction is not adopted for Petitions
under Article 1 26(2) the Petitioner's right to his constitutional remedy
under Article 126 can turn out to be illusory. It could be rendered nugatory
or frustrated by continued detention. According to the facts in this case, the
Petitioner was unlawfully arrested, and was not informed of the reason for his
arrest on 28.7.86. The Respondents admit that the Petitioner has been in
detention from 4\8.86 and continued to be in detention even on 3.10.1986 when
he filed the present application. The Respondents admit the incident of
28.7:86, but state that he was re-arrested on 4.8.86 and thereafter kept in
detention. Admittedly the Attorney-at-Law retained by Petitioner's wife was
not able to interview the Petitioner, in the circumstances, the Petitioner was
thwarted from filing his petition under Article 1 26, within one month in
terms of that Article. A literal interpretation of the period of limitation
will defeat the Petitioner's right to his constitutional remedy. It is
significant that Article 1 7 which provides that every person shall be
entitled to apply to the Supreme Court as provided by Article 1 26 in respect
of the infringement by executive or administrative action of his fundamental
right, is itself included in the Chapter on fundamental rights. Because the
remedy under Article 126 is thus guaranteed by the Constitution, a duty is
imposed upon the Supreme Court to protect fundamental rights and ensure their
vindication. Hence Article 126(2) should be given a generous and purposive
construction. The one month prescribed by Article 126(2) for making an
application for relief by a person for infraction of his fundamental right
applies to the case of the applicant having free access to his lawyer and to
the Supreme Court. Hence, if the Petitioner was obstructed by reason of his
detention from having access to his lawyer and to the Supreme Court and thus
prevented from making his application within the

**401**

one month of the infraction complained of; his delayed application for relief
under Article 1 26 should not be ruled out, if he made his application as soon
as he was free from that constraint to make the application.

We therefore overruled the preliminary objection raised by State Counsel.

On the question whether the petitioner was subject to cruel treatment or
torture, petitioner's averments stands uncorroborated by any medical evidence
and has been denied by the Respondents. The evidence is not sufficient for us
to hold that there had been any violation of Article 11 of the Constitution.

The Petitioner states that he was arrested on 28.7.86 when he was travelling
in a bus, by the 3rd Respondent and that he was not informed of the reason of
the arrest. The 3rd Respondent in his affidavit admitted the incident but
stated that he did not arrest the petitioner. According to him he only
required the petitioner to accompany him to the Ginigathena Police Station for
questioning and released him after recording the statement at the station. If
his action constituted an arrest in the legal sense, implicit in the 3rd
Respondent's explanation is the admission that he did not give any reason to
the Petitioner for his arrest. In my view when the 3rd Respondent required the
Petitioner to accompany him to the Police Station and took him to the Police
Station, the Petitioner was in law arrested by the 3rd Respondent. The
Petitioner was prevented by the action of the 3rd Respondent from proceeding
with his journey in the bus. The Petitioner was deprived of his liberty to go
where he pleased. It was not necessary that there should have been any actual
use of force; threat of force used to procure the Petitioner's submission was
sufficient. The Petitioner did hot go to the Police Station Voluntarily. He
was taken to the Police by the 3rd Respondent, in my view the 3rd Respondent's
action of arresting the Petitioner and not informing him the reasons for his
arrest violated the Petitioner's fundamental rights warranted by Article 1
3(1) of the Constitution. The liberty of an individual is a matter of great
constitutional importance. This liberty should not be interfered

**402**

with, whatever the status of that individual be, arbitrarily or without legal
justification. The 3rd Respondent does not plead that he had any reasonable
suspicion that the Petitioner had committed any cognizable offence when he
arrested the petitioner on 28.7.86. In his affidavit he states that since he
had reason to believe that the Petitioner was acquainted with the facts and
circumstances relating to the robbery of a gun at Rozella Farm, Rozella, he
required the Petitioner to accompany him to the Ginigathena Police Station. In
my view the explanation of the 3rd Respondent affords no justification for his
arrest of the petitioner on that date.

On the question of the legality of the detention complained of the Respondents
state that they took action under Emergency Regulations and were holding the
Petitioner in detention from 4.8.86 until the Magistrate made order remanding
the Petitioner to fiscal custody. They state that they had a reasonable
suspicion that the petitioner was involved in the activities of the T.E.L.E.
Though the Respondents have not placed before this Court any material to
justify their suspicion, yet it cannot be said that in the conditions
prevailing in the; country their suspicion was not reasonable.

Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that the detention order 'A' made on
5.8.1986 under the Emergency Regulations dated 18.7.86 was valid only upto
18.8.86. The said regulations were in operation for a period of one month from
the date of the making thereof and hence were' valid only till 18.8.86. He
submitted that a new detention order had to be made in terms of the new set of
regulations to lend validity to the detention of the petitioner. Regulation
19(2) provides that a person detained in pursuance of the provisions of
regulation 18 ... may be so detained for a period not exceeding ninety days
reckoned from date of his arrest under the regulation and shall at the end of
the period be released by the officer in charge of that place unless such
person has been produced by such officer before the expiry of that period
before a Court of competent jurisdiction.

Article 155(5) of the Constitution provides that-

"Where the provisions of nay law relating to public security have been brought
into operation by the making of

# 403

a Proclamation under such law, (the Public Security Ordinance) such
Proclamation shall, subject to the provisions of Article 155(6), be in
operation for a period of one month from the date of the making thereof, but
without prejudice to the earlier revocation of such. Proclamation or to the
making of a further Proclamation at or before the end of the period."

Section 4 of the Public Security Ordinance provides, inter alia, that ‑

"the expiry of revocation of any Proclamation under section 2 of the Public
Security Ordinance shall not affect or be deemed to have affected ‑

(a)        the past operation of any thing duly done or suffered to be done
under Part II of the Ordinance, while that Part was in operation;

(b)        any offence committed, or any right, liberty or penalty

                                    acquired or incurred while that Part was in operation."

This liability to be detained for a period of, ninety days was the penalty
incurred by the Petitioner under the Emergency Regulations current between
18.7.86 and 18.8.86: The expiry of the said Regulations does not therefore
affect the detention order under which the Petitioner was held. In view of the
aforesaid provisions of the law I do not agree with the apparently plausible
submission of Counsel, that the detention order cannot survive the emergency
regulation under which it was made.

Counsel for the Petitioner objected to the admission of the reception of the
affidavits filed by the Respondents on the ground that they were not filed
within time specified by Rule 65(4) (2) of the Supreme Court Rules of 1978.
Counsel pointed to the mandatory nature of the Rule and urged that an
affidavit or objection filed outside the time stipulated by the Rule is not in
compliance with the Rule and should not be admitted.

The aforesaid Rule 65(4) provides‑

# 404

"Upon leave being granted a notice of the application together with a copy of
the written submissions shall be given forthwith by the Registrar to each of
the Respondents other than the Attorney‑General, and each such Respondent may,
within seven days of the service of such notice and written submissions, file
counter‑affidavit and counter‑submissions with notice to the Petitioner. Any
further written submissions by any part shall be permitted only at the
discretion of the Court."

In this case notice of the Petitioner's application was served on the
Respondents on or about the 24.10.86. The Attorney General on 30.10.86 filed
proxy and moved for time to file objections. But the other Respondents' did
not file proxy or did not ask for time to file objections, within the seven
days of the service of the notice on them. On 7.11.86, the Attorney‑at‑law for
the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents filed his proxy and moved "as it was .not
possible for the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents to obtain necessary material to
prepare and file counter affidavits, I respectfully move that this Court be
pleased to grant further 2 weeks time to file counter affidavit." The Chief
Justice acceded to the request of the Respondents and granted further time to
file counter affidavits.

 I agree With the Counsel for the Petitioners that if the Respondent did not
file their affidavits and written submissions within the time specified by the
above Regulation, they are not entitled to claim that their affidavits and
written submissions should be taken into account. But it does not follow that
this Court has no discretion to grant further time on being satisfied that the
Respondents would not be able or were not able to collect the necessary data
or material for such affidavits or written submissions on an application made
to it by the Respondents. That discretion, is founded on the inherent right of
this Court to do justice. As a matter of administrative arrangement the Chief
Justice of this Court deals with such applications and grants extended time,
if circumstances warranted grant of further time within which to file
objections. Affidavits and objections filed within such extended time could be
admitted. Since in the exercise of the discretion, this Court

**405**

had granted further time to the Respondents to file affidavits or submissions,
and the Respondents have, within the time so allowed, filed their affidavits,
the objection of the counsel for the Petitioner against their admission cannot
be upheld.



Though I hold that the Petitioner has not established that his fundamental
rights, assured to him by Article 11 and 13(2) have been violated by the
Respondents. I hold that since the 3rd Respondent had unlawfully arrested the
Petitioner on 28.7.86 and failed to inform the Petitioner the reason for his
arrest, the 3rd Respondent had violated Petitioner's fundamental rights,
assured, to him by Article 13(1). In the exercise of the powers under Article
126(4) of the Constitution, I order the State, represented in these
proceedings by the Attorney-General to pay the Petitioner Rs. 3000/- as
compensation for such, violation.

The Petitioner's application is allowed to the extent indicated above. In the
circumstances of the case, parties will bear their  
own costs. '

**

ATUKORALE, J.** \- I agree

**

H. A. G. de silva, J, -** I agree

_

Article 13(1) infringement.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/6.html_  

