##  Elmore Perera v. Major Montague Jayawickara Minister of Public and
Plantation Induistries and Others - SLR - 285, Vol 1 of 1985 [1985] LKSC 6;
(1985) 1 Sri LR 285 (21 May 1985)

**

285

ELMORE PERERA  
v.  
MAJOR MONTAGUE JAYAWICKREMA MINISTER OF PUBLIC  
ADMINISTRATION AND PLANTATION INDUSTRIES AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., WANASUNDERA, J. WIMALARATNE, J., COLIN-THOME, J.,  
RANASINGHE, J., ABDUL CADER, J., ATUKORALE, J. TAMBIAH, H., AND  
L. H. DE ALWIS, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION No. 134/84  
MARCH 18.18, 20, 21, 25, 26, AND 27 1985.

_

    Fundamental Rights under Articles 12 and 14(1) (g) of the Constitution -Application under Article 126 (2) of the Constitution -Equality before the law and equal protection of the law-Discrimination -:Essentials, of pleadings in complaints of discrimination - Burden of proof- Arbitrariness and mala fides - Can new dimension applied by the Indian Supreme Court to the concept of equality to transcend the classificatory principles be adopted here? 

_

The petitioner was Deputy Surveyor-General and in 1978 he was seconded for
service in the Academy of Administration Studies where in 1979 he was made
Head of the Operations Management Division. In November of the same year upon
the formation of the Sri Lanka institute of Development Administration (SLIDA)
he was appointed C0-ordinating Consultant, Projects and Operations Management
Division. In May 1982 when SLIDA was incorporated by Act. No.9 of 1982 the
petitioner was appointed Additional Director Training and Evaluation. He also
delivered lectures at SLIDA. One V.T. Navaratne was the Director of SLIDA. In
terms of the incorporating Act SLIDA functioned under the 1st respondent, the
Minister of Public Administration, During his period of service the petitioner
added to his qualifications and received training abroad. In November 1982 he
was admitted as an Associate Member of the Institute of Cost and Management
Accountants. SLIDA had a Governing Council of which the 2nd respondent as
Secretary to the Ministry of Public Administration was Chairman. The
petitioner boasted an unblemished record of public service .

Sometime prior to March Ad the Q on 24.5.1 983 on the instructions of the 1st
respondent to the petitioner directing him -to-stop interfering with the
Playing Section of the SLTA as it was not consistent with his position. in
SLIDA which came under the 1st respondent. On 6:7.1983 the petitioner was
reverted to his, substantive post of Deputy Surveyor General. Thereafter-on
8.11,.83. the 2nd respondent directed that, the petitioner should no longer be
invited to lecture at the SLIDA as that was contrary to the wishes of the 1st
respondent. 2 The

**286**

petitioner's connections with SLIDA were terminated by a letter in which
however was noted the petitioner's "valuable contribution over several years".
The 1st respondent continued to show his animosity against the petitioner in
regard to the activities of the SLTA and threatened to put the petitioner in
the, Public Officers Reserve (Pool), set out in the Public Administration
Circular No. 136 of 1 7.4. 1979. The 3rd respondent who was the Secretary of
the Ministry of Lands acting on instructions received from the 2nd respondent
served on the petitioner a letter dated 24.8.84 (received by the petitioner
27.8.1984) through the Surveyor-General (4th respondent) transferring g the
petitioner to the Pool "for inefficiency and incompetence" and putting him on
compulsory leave with orders however to sign the attendance register. The'
petitioner was asked to: show cause within 30 days. why he should not be
retired or otherwise punished and he by his letter of 25.9.84 addressed to the
2nd respondent through the 3rd respondent (under whom the Survey Department
functioned) gave reasons why he should not be so retired. Alleging non-receipt
of any reply the 2nd respondent informed the petitioner by letter 1 of
2.10.1984 that he was being compulsorily retired on the grounds of general
inefficiency in .teems, of paragraph' 24 :3 of Chapter XLVlll of the
Establishment Code.

The petitioner contends that he was compulsorily retired without good grounds
and without consideration of his explanation entirely because' of: the
animosity which the 1st respondent bore against him over the refusal to
condone, the grant of special privileges to the 1st respondent in the SLTA.
The 2nd, 3rd and 4th respondents acted solely on the dictation of the 1st
respondent and have been participants in the plan of the 1st respondent to get
the petitioner out of the Public Service. The 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents'
have violated the Fundamental Rights of-the petitioner under Articles ,121:1)
and 14 (1) (g) of the Constitution.

The main complaint of the petitioner was that .he had been denied the equal
protection of the law guaranteed by Article 1 (1) under' which ''all persons
are equal before the law and are entitled to equal protection of, the law".
Circular No. 136` was wrongly applied to him and the procedure prescribed by
the Establishment Code was not followed.

The complaint under Article 1-4 (1). (g) was not pressed:

1\. The retirement of the. petitioner was secured not by following the
Establishment Code as-should have been done but by misapplying Public
Administration Circular No. . 136 which of itself was of questionable
validity.

2\. Arbitrary procedure had been followed and the action of the 2nd respondent
in retiring the petitioner for general inefficiency was unreasonable,
unjustifiable and lacked bona fides: , .

3\. Article 12 means that all persons are equally subject to the law and have
a right to equal protection in similar circumstances both as regards
privileges and liabilities imposed by the law. This Fundamental Right is a
guarantee against discrimination. The underlying: principle is that equals
must be treated equally. The principle of equality does not absolutely prevent
the State from differentiating between persons' and things. The State has the.
power of. what is known as classification on a basis of rational distinction
relevant. to the subject matter dealt-with. So long as all persons falling
into the same

**287**

class are treated alike there is no question of discrimination. : Article 12
has also reference to the way the law is administered and applied. Before a
person can claim to be discriminated against he must make out that not only he
had been treated differently from others but he has been so treated from
persons similarly placed without any reasonable basis and such differential
treatment is unjustifiably made.

**

Held** further (per Sharvananda, C.J.)

(4) The burden of pleading and proving the facts on which petitioner's claim
can be sustained is upon the petitioner.

Semble (per Sharvananda, C.J.)

(5) Article 14(1)(g) only recognises .a general right in: every citizen- to do
work of a particular kind and of his choice. It does not confer the right to
hold a particular job or to occupy a particular post of ones choice. The
compulsory' retirement of the petitioner complained of may, at the highest,
affect his particular .employment but it does not affect his right to work as
a surveyor. Hence there is no infringement of the fundamental right under
Article 14 (1) (g).

Held further (Wanasundera, J., Wimalaratne J and Colin-Thome. J. dissenting)

(6) Discrimination can exist only where two persons or subjects are treated in
different ways' but not when two equals are treated alike. 'Discrimination' in
a precise sense cannot be shown only to one person or class of persons in
respect of a particular subject-matter.

(7) In complaints of discrimination and inequality` of treatment the
petitioner, has to plead and, prove that there are others or at least one
other. who was similarly situated and that he (the petitioner) was singled out
and subjected to unfavourable treatment. The maxim omnia praesumuntur rite
esse acta cannot be invoked to fill in the deficiency. There is no material on
record that any different procedure was followed in the case of any officer,
of staff grade who belonged to the same category as the petitioner. The
material for comparison was wanting. The burden of establishing the existence
of these facts rests on the petitioner because the respondents cannot be
called upon to prove a negative.

(8) What Article 12 strikes at is not unjust treatment or unjust
discrimination but unequal treatment of equals and' equal treatment of in
equals. Discrimination is hot inherent in every arbitrary or colourable
action. Where arbitrary action does not exhibit discrimination It maybe
reviewed on a writ application or in a declaratory action but it will not
attract Article 12.

(9) The new dimension applied by the Indian Supreme Court to .the concept of
equality to transcend the classificatory principle and thereby strike at all
arbitrary and male fide action cannot be adopted here because unlike in India,
our Article 126 vests fundamental rights jurisdiction only in the Supreme
Court and limits it to granting relief in cases involving infringement or
imminent infringement of only fundamental rights by administrative or
executive action and not' ordinary legal rights 'or infringement by
legislative action.

**288**

(10) Although the record discloses an instance of a -grave- miscarriage of
justice resultant from blatant-abuse of power, no action is maintainable under
Article 126 of our Constitution because the complaint is of a breach of non-
fundamental rights.

**

Cases referred to :

**

(1) _Yick Wo v. Hopkins (1886) 118 U. S. Reports 356.

(2) Snowden v. Hughes (1944) 321, U.S. 1,8 ; 88 L. ed. 497, 503

(3) Truax v. Corrigan (1921) 257 U.S. 312, 332.

(4) Kathi Raning Rawat v. State of Saurashtra AIR 1952 S. C. 123, 125.

(5) Melbourne Corporation v. The Commonwealth (1946-47) 74 CLR 31, 61.

(6) Riverina Transport Pty. Ltd v Victoria (1936-37) 57 CLR 327,' 343, 34.:

(7) Deena v. Union of lndia A1R 1983 S.C. 1155, 1167.

(8) Cochin Devaswon Board v. Vamana Setti and 'Another AIR 1966 S. C: 1980.

(9) Probhudas Morarjee Rajkotia v. Union of India AIR 1966 S. C.' 1044.

(10) State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Ghulam Rasool AIR 1961 S. C. 1301.

(11) Wijesinghe v. Attorney-General (1984) Fundamental Rights. Decisions, of
the Supreme Court p. 40 , S.C.' Application 13 / 1979 \- S.C. Minutes of
30.4.79.

(12) Dr. Wijetunga: v. Aluwatuwala and- Others: S. C. Application No. 89/84 -
S. C. Minutes of 30.10.1984.

(13) State of Orissa v. Dhirendra Nath Pas AIR 1961 $. C. 1715.

(14) The Manager, Government Branch Press v. Befappa AIR 1979.' S. C. 429
(1979) 1 S.C.C. 477

(15) Royappa b. State of Tamil Nadu AIR 1974 S.C. 555.

(16) Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab AIR 1982 S. C. 1325, 1336 to 1340.

(17) Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India AlR 1978 S.C. 597.

(18) Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India (1979)
3 SCR 1014; AIR 1979, S.C. 1628.

(19) Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi AIR, 1981 S. C. .487.

(20) Minerva Mills Ltd. v. Union of India (1981) 1 SCR 206 ;AIR 1'980 S.C.
1789.'

(21) Cornelius J. Phillips [1918] AC 199, 211.

(22) Satwant Singh Sawhney v. Ramarathnam AIR 1967 S.C 1837.

(23) State of Orissa v. Hanharayan Jaiswal AIR 1972'S C 1816 ; (1972) 2 SCC
36.

(24) Harrikisson v. Attomey General of Trinidad and Tobago (19791 W. L.R.62.

(25) Dalmia's Case 1959 SCR 279.

(26) Dhanaraj Mills Ltd. v. B. k Kocher AIR 195.1 Bombay 132.

(27) Narain Das v. Improvement Trust, Amritsar AIR 1972 S. C 865.

_

**289**

_

(28) Henderson V. N9,92 US 2W

(29) lowa Des Moines National Bank v. Bennet (1931) 284 US 133,135. ':

(30) U.P. Electric Co. Uttar Pradesh M 1970 S. C 21.

H. L. De Silva, P. C. with E D. Wickremanayake Rohan Gunapala and Miss Preethi

Ranatunga for the petitioner:

Shibly Aziz, D. S. d. with Anil Silva, S. C. and U, R. Wijetunga, 'State
Attorney for all respondents.

Cur. adv. vult **.

**_

MAY 21, 1985.

**

SHARVANANDA, C. J.

**

The petitioner instituted these proceedings on 1.11.1984; under the provisions
of Article 126 (2) of the Constitution, against the respondents, for a
declaration, that the compulsory retirement of the petitioner from the Public
Service by the 2Q respondent who A the Secretary of the Ministry of Public
Administration, by the 2nd respondent's . : letter P 1, dated 10. 84, is
unconstitutional, and constitutes an infringment of the fundamental rights
guaranteed to the petitioner by Articles 12 (1,) and 14 (1) (g) of the
Constitution. The 1st respondent to this application is the Minister of public
Administration, the 2nd respondent is his, Secretary, the, 3rd respondent is
the Secretary to the Ministry of Lands and the 4th respondent is the Surveyor-
General.

The petitioner, who, at the time of I the institution of this application was
51 years of age;; had graduated from the University of Ceylon in April 1956
with a B.Sc. Special Mathematics Degree; and had there after joined the:
Public 957, as an Assistant Superintendent of Surveys. in the Survey
Department; The petitioner had been promoted, in February 1972 as' an,
Assistant Surveyor- General, and , in 1975, as Deputy Surveyor-General. in
March-1978 the petitioner was seconded for: service in the Academy of
Administration OWN ;And in November 1979, -Upon the formation of the Sri Lanka
Institute of Development Administration (SLIDA) the petitioner was appointed
Co-ordination Consultant, Projects and Operations Management Division.
Thereafter, in May 1982, when SLIDA became a corporation,'. the -petitioner
was

**290**

appointed Additional Director Training and Evaluation:' SLIDA is;' in terms of
Act No. 9 of 1982, an institution which functions under the 1st respondent and
is subject to the control of the 1st -respondent in respect of its
administration. The petitioner had also, during his period of service from
time to time obtained qualifications' from foreign. universities, and also
been trained abroad in the field of `Public Management Development. In.
November, 1982 the petitioner ;had also been admitted as an Associate Member
of the Institute of Cost and Management Accountants. The document P 19
contains a detailed statement of the functions discharged, and the
qualifications obtained by the petitioner prior to June 1983.

The petitioner specifically avers in his petition that, during the entire
period of his career in the Public Service, there has not been to his
knowledge any adverse comment, complaint or entry regarding his work and / or
conduct as a -,public officer, and that he has had, an unblemished record as a
public officer:

Sometime prior to March 1983 the petitioner had been elected the President of
the Sri Lanka Tennis Association, of` which said Association the 1st
respondent had, also then been, a , Patron. In or about March 1983 disputes
seem to have arisen amongst a section of the members of. the said Association
and its management about what had come to be popularly known as the "half
-hour rule", whereby the time allotted id a member to play was-restricted to
only half an hour, and the alleged grant of special privileges in that
connection to the 1st respondent. These divisions and differences of opinion,
which seem to have assumed serious proportions extending far beyond the tennis
club precincts, had led to the Director of SLIDA; V.' T Navaratne, the
petitioners immediate superior at SLIDA, handing over to the petitioner on
24.5.83 the note P 6 in which the petitioner had been informed that he "should
stop interfering with the Playing Section of the Sri Lanka Tennis Club because
it is not consistent with his position in SLIDA which is an institution which
comes under the Minister-Who is an office-bearer of the SLTA". It is conceded
by the respondents that the "Minister" referred to, in P 6 is "the 1st
respondent, and that the contents of P 6 were communicated to V. T. Navaratne
by the' 2nd respondent on the directions of the 1st respondent. V. T:
Navaratne, in his affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents, accepts P 6 as
the document 'in which he made a contemporaneous note of the directions
received by him over the telephone from the 2nd

**291**

respondent, and that he thereafter communicated its contents to the
petitioner. He, however, denies the petitioner's' allegation that P 6 itself
was handed over by him to the petitioner. The petitioner states that, upon the
receipt of P 6, he unsuccessfully sought an interview with the 1st respondent
in order "to explain his conduct and ascertain the precise nature of any
complaint made by the 1st respondent."

A month later, on 24.6.83, the 1st respondent whose term of office as Vice-
Patron of the said Association had come to an end was not re-elected ; and the
1st respondent thereupon ceased to be an office bearer of the said
Association.

On 6.7.83 at about 8.45 a.m. the said V. T. Navaratne handed over to the
petitioner a copy of the letter "K", dated 5.7.83 and addressed to the
Surveyor-General by the 2nd respondent, in which the Surveyor-General is
informed that the petitioner is being released for service in the Surveyor-
General's Department as the, petitioner's services are no longer required by
SLIDA as that day. The petitioner thereupon reverted to his substantive p t of
Deputy Surveyor-General on the same day. The petitioner had nevertheless
continued to deliver lectures at SLIDA until 8.11.83 when the 2nd respondent
had summoned the said V. T. Navaratne and several other officers of SLIDA to
the 2nd respondent's Office and informed them that "the petitioner should not
thereafter be, invited to lecture in SLIDA as that would be contrary to the
wishes of the 1st respondent.":

After the petitioner's secondment with SLIDA was terminated by the said letter
"K", the minute "M", dated 21.7.83, was addressed by the said V. T. Navaratne
in which he, referred to the necessity, to fill the vacancy so created, and
also placed on record the "significant contribution" made by the petitioner to
"SLIDA's development particularly in the areas of Project Management and
Operations Research."

The petitioner maintains that, on or about 20.7.85, the 1st respondent, while
playing tennis at the S.L.T.A. courts instructed. John Rajapakse an Assistant
Superintendent of Police, who was also an Assistant-Secretary of the S.L.T.A.
to inform "that fellow Elmore Perera that I will take him off the Survey
Department and put him in my pool"; and that he (1st respondent) will not
allow the meeting fixed for the 8th August to take place ; that the' "pool":
referred to, is the Public Officers' Reserve set out in the Public
Administration Circular No. 136

**292**

of 17.4.79, a copy of which is the document " R"; that the said John Rajapakse
informed the General Committee of the S.L.T.A. at an emergency meeting; of the
said committee-held on 12. 8. 83, a copy of the minutes of which said meeting
is the. document P7.

A meeting of the General Committee of the S.L.T.A. summoned for the election
of office bearers of the Playing Section of the S.L.T.A. was, the petitioner
states, disrupted by the use of physical force, and that, at a meeting
purported to be held on the same day,'' the 1st respondent had in his speech
made a covert reference to the petitioner in the words : "Can we' allow one-
man and 'a 'coterie of people said to run the tennis of this country to get,
away with these excuses"":' that P10 is a copy of the minutes of the said
meeting.

After the petitioner was' reverted to the Surveyor-General's Department 'and
after the' invitations to deliver lectures at SLIDA ceased in November, 1983,
the petitioner addressed the letter "N" on 1 .3.84 to the 2nd respondent. In
response to the said letter "N" the 2nd respondent, by his letter. P" dated
1.3.84, expressed regret that circumstances made it necessary to terminate
your association with the Sri Lanka -institute of Development Administration
to which you made a valuable contribution over several years

The disputes which had arisen between the management and several members of
the S.L.T.A in regard to the allocation and use of the tennis courts of the
Association, had evoked the letter P12, dated 25.5.84, in which the Minister
of Sports had given a directive in terms of Sec. 39 (2) of the Sports Law No.
25 of 1973. An application was thereupon filed in the Court of Appeal on
6.6.84 in case No. 700/84! and an order staying the implementation of the said
directive had issued from the said Court against the petitioner. Thereafter,
upon an application made by the' petitioner, the said Court did, however, on
3.8.84 vacate the said stay-order.

The petitioner had received, according to him on. 27.8.84, the letter "Q"
dated 24. 8 84, addressed to the petitioner by the 3rd respondent through the
4th respondent in the said ,letter "Q" the petitioner is informed , that upon
instructions, received by the 3rd respondent from the 3 rd respondent is in
terms of the Circular' 136; transferring the petitioner to the Public
Officers' Reserve for efficiency and incompetence, and is placing the

**293**

petitioner on compulsory leave ; that, if the petitioner has any cause to show
why he (the petitioner) should not be retired on the ground of general
inefficiency or be otherwise punished, such cause should be forwarded in
writing within thirty days of the receipt of the letter through the 3rd
respondent to the 2nd respondent.

Whilst the Petitioner was so on compulsory leave he had received the letter
"S" dated 30.8.84 and signed by the 2nd respondent, by which he, the
petitioner, was required to report daily to the Office of the Ministry of
Public Administration with effect from 30.8.84 and sign the Attendance
Register at 8.30 a.m. and 4.15 p.m.

The petitioner pleads that, in reply to the said letter "Q", he, the
petitioner, forwarded the letter P18 and the annexure P19 dated 25.9.84 and
addressed to the 2nd respondent, through the 3rd respondent in which the
petitioner set down the reasons why he should not be retired for general
inefficiency ; P18 and P19, the petitioner maintains, were handed over by him
to' the Deputy Surveyor-General, N. G. R. Fernando, about 12 noon on 26.9.84,
before the expiration of the period of thirty days from the date on which he
had received the letter "Q", and that the said N. G. R. Fernando handed them
over to' the Surveyor-General, the 4th respondent, later the same afternoon.

The petitioner has thereafter received the letter P1, which is dated 2.10.84
and signed by the 2nd respondent in which the petitioner is informed that the
2nd respondent has been advised that no reply has been received from the
petitioner to the 2nd respondent's letter "W, and that, accordingly, the
petitioner is being compulsorily retired, with immediate effect, on the ground
of general inefficiency, in terms of paragraph 24 : 3 of Chapter XLVIII of the
Establishment Code.

The principal submission made on behalf of the petitioner upon the questions
of fact briefly is that the petitioner was so retired compulsorily without any
good ground for doing so and without a consideration of his explanations
submitted within the stipulated time, entirely because of the personal
animosity which the 1st respondent had towards the petitioner consequent upon
the petitioner's unwillingness, as President of the S. L. T. A. of which said
Association the 1st respondent himself' was at that time a Vice' Patron to
condone the grant of special privileges to the 1st respondent in regard

**294**

to the playing of tennis at the S.L.T.A tennis courts ;  that the 2nd, 3rd.
and 4th respondents, though purporting to act as public  officers, have in
fact acted at the dictation of the 1st respondent solely in order to conform
to the wishes of the respondent, and, have. been participants in the plan of
the 1st respondent to get the petitioner out of the Public Service.

The. 2nd respondent whilst denying that the - letter. P1 was sent by him in
order to pander to the wishes of the 1st respondent, maintains, inter alia,
that : PI was so sent in consequence of -a report he received from he 3rd,
respondent under whose Ministry the department of the Surveyor-General
functioned : P2 was sent to the petitioner only on the 3 rd respondent
informing the that no reply to PI has been received from the petitioner with
thin the stipulated time,, the order to sign the attendance register, which
the. petitioner refers to is one applicable to all officers placed .in. the,
said "pool".

The 3rd respondent, having produced marked 3R1 to 3R67 documents, said to be
from the personal file of the petitioner to refute the assertion of "an
unblemished record" of service made by, the petitioner in the ,petition,
maintains that the Petitioner had by his "long standing inability to adjust,
himself to the basic requirements of the public service clearly showed the
incompetence of the petitioner to be an effective public servant" that he,
therefore, requested the 2nd respondent to transfer the petitioner, to the
Public Officers' Reserve, as that, in his opinion, was the "most, efficacious
way of dealing with this recalcitrant and ineffective officer: who had
throughout his service in the public sector shown a positive penchant for
offensive behavior."

The petitioner complains that in the premises the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents
have violated his fundamental flights under Articles 12 (1) and 14 (1) (g) of
the Constitution and has in his application to this court, under Article 126
of the Constitution prayed, inter alia for a declaration that' his Fundamental
Rights under Articles 12 and 14 (1) (g) had been violated and infringed upon.
The main burden of the submissions 'of Senior Counsel for the petitioner was
that the petitioner had been denied equal protection the law. Counsel did not
address any argument in support of the petitioner's claim that there had been
an infringement of petitioner's Fundamental Right under Article 14 (1) (g) of
the Constitution.

**295**

Article 12 of the Constitution reads as follows :

1\. All persons are equal before the law and are entitled to equal protection
of the law.

2\. No citizen shall be discrimination against on the ground of race,
religion, language, caste, sex, political opinion, place of birth or any one
of such grounds provided ...."

Article 27 of the Constitution appearing in the Chapter relating to Directive
Principles of State Policy pledges inter alia in paragraph (6) :

"The State, shall ensure equality of opportunity, to citizens, so that no
citizen shall suffer any disability on the ground of race, religion language,
caste, sex, political opinion or occupation".

The expression "equality before the law" has been borrowed from the English
Law, and the expression "equal protection of the law" from the 14th Amendment
to the American Constitution, Article 12 forbids the State from denying to any
person equality. before, the,- law, and equal protection , of the law. This
Article is directly related to the Constitution. the assurance to all people
Equality and Justice: It only means that all persons are equally subject to
the law and have a right -to equal protection in, similar circumstances,. both
as regards privileges and liabilities imposed by the Law. It ensures that
equal laws have to be applied to all, persons, and that there must -be no
discrimination between one person and another, when their position is
substantially the same. This Fundamental Right is a guarantee against being
subject to discrimination in the matter of the rights, privileges and
immunities pertaining to him. !t inhibits the State from practising
discrimination. 'The principle which underlies this Article is that that -
equals must be treated equally, operate -equally on all persons under like
circumstances. This article guarantees equality among equals. As Jennings in
hi s' Law of the Constitution - 3rd Ed. page 49 states -

"Equity before the law means that among equals the laws should be equal and
should be equally administered, that like should be treated alike."

Equal protection of-the laws is a pledge of the protection of equal laws.

**296**

This Article is violated both by unequal treatment of the equals and equal
treatment of the unequals. The aim of the article is to ensure that invidious
distinction or arbitrary discrimination shall not be made by the State between
a citizen and a citizen who answers the same though The concept of equality
does not involve the idea of absolute equality among human beings. Hence
equality before the law does not mean that things which are different shall be
treated as they were the same . Thus the principle of -equality enacted under
Article 12 does not absolutely prevent the State from differentiating between
persons and things, The State has the power of what is known an
''classification'' on a basis of rational distinction relevant to the
particular subject dealt with. So long as all 'persons failing into the same
class are treated alike there is no question of discrimination and there is no
question of violating the equality clause. The discrimination which is
prohibited is treatment in a manner prejudicial as compared. to another person
in similar circumstances. Discrimination is the essence of classification ; so
long as it rests 'on a `reasonable,- basis there is no violation of the
constitutional rights of equality. Article 12 prohibits not only
discriminatory legislation in favour of a a particular person as against the
others in like' condition but it a!86 has reference to the way the law is:
administered.

"Though the law itself, be fair on its face and impartial in appearance, yet
if it is applied and administered by public authority to make unjust and
illegal discriminations between persons in similar circumstances, material to
their rights, the denial of equal justice is still within the prohibition of
the Constitution "Yick Wo v. Hopkins (1).

"Equality of application of the law is the fundamental principle which
permeates our whole system of law However, for an unlawful administration of a
valid statute to constitute a violation of constitutional rights, purposeful
discrimination must be shown. An erroneous performance of a statutory duty
although a violation of the statute, is not, without more, a denial of equal
protection to the laws." \- Snowden v. Hughes (2).

"What is forbidden is invidious discrimination. The guarantee of equal
protection is aimed at undue favour and individual or class privilege, on the
one hand, and at hostile discrimination or the oppression of inequality on the
other". Truax v. Corrigan (3).

**297**

Since the, essence of the right guaranteed by Article 12 and the evils which
it seeks to guard against are the avoidance of designed and intentional
hostile treatment: or discrimination on the part of those entrusted with the
administering of the same, a person setting up grievance's of denial of equal
treatment must establish that between persons similarly circumstanced, some
were treated to their prejudice and the differential treatment had n o
reasonable relevance" "to the object sought to- be 'achieved.' Before" 'a."
person can claim to be discriminated against another, he must show that the
other person Was similarly situated or equally circumstanced , he must make
out that not only he had been treated differently from others, but he had been
so treated from persons' similarly placed without any reasonable basis and
such differential treatment is unjustifiably made.

The expression "discriminate'' means .according to- the, Oxford Dictionary "to
make an adverse distinction with regard to." "Discrimination thus involves; an
element of unfavourable-bias and it is in that sense that the expression has
to, be understood in- this. context."' per Patanjali Sastri, C. J., in Kathi
Raning Rawat v. State of Saurashtra (4).

The expression ''discrimination" indicates an unjust; unfair or unreasonable
bias in favour of one person or class as well as bias against any person or
class. Discrimination can exist only where two persons or two subjects are
treated in different ways. It arises only from two dissimilar treatments and
not from similar, treatment. There is no discrimination when two equals are
treated alike. -

In Melbourne Corporation v. The Commonwealth (5) Latham, C. J: observed-

'I have some difficulty in -understanding- how; discrimination in a precise
sense can be shown in a law applying only to one person or class of persons in
respect of a particular subject matter. Discrimination appears to me to
involve differences in the treatment of two or' more persons' or subjects:"

He had expressed a similar view Parlier in Riverina Transport Pty. Ltd. v.
Victoria (6)

Discrimination can exist only where two persons or two subjects are treated in
different ways:': . . The first decision... . . whatever its character may be,
cannot be a discriminatory decision.

**298**

Discrimination can be introduced. only when another decision or decisions are
given... - Discrimination arises from a comparison of a number of decisions
and not from any single decision."

"Whether there are. other persons, who are situated similarly as the
petitioner is a question of. fact and whether the petitioner is subject to
hostile discrimination, is also a question of fact. That is why the burden to
establish the existence of this fact rests on the petitioner. To cast the
burden of proof in such cases on the State is really to ask it to prove the
negative, that no other persons are situated similarly as the petitioner and
the treatment meted out is not hostile" per Chandrachud, C. J., in Deena v.
Union of lndia (7) :

Giving the judgment of `the Supreme Court of India in Cochin Dewaswon Board v.
Vamana Setti and Another (8) Shah; `J: said-

"A person relying upon the plea of unlawful discrimination which infringes a
guarantee of equality before the taw or equal protection of the-laws must set
out with `sufficient particulars his plea, showing that between the persons
similarly circumstanced, discrimination has been made which is founded on no
intelligible differentia."

In Probudas Morarjee Rajkotia v. Union of lndia (9) the Supreme Court
observed-

"Lastly the argument was put forward by the petitioner that the failure of the
respondent to grant licence for the balance sum of Rs. 62,337 is
discriminatory and violates Article 14 of the Constitution. In' paragraph 16
of the petition it `is stated that \- 'other exporters and importers covered
by the said scheme have been granted import licences and the failure of the
respondent to grant the said licence to' the firm is discriminatory and
violates Article 14 of the Constitution.'

But it is not mentioned in the petition as to who were the persons who were
similarly placed and who had been given import licences by the authorities.
There is no specification of the persons who have been differently treated.
The plea of violation of equal protection of law under Article 14 of the
Constitution has not been properly pleaded in this case. lt cannot be too
strongly emphasised that to make out a case of denial of equal protection of
the law under Article 14 of the Constitution, a plea of differential treatment
is by

**299**

itself not sufficient. An applicant pleading that Article 14 has been violated
must make out that not only he had been treated differently treatment is
unjustifiably made. It is manifest in the present case, that the petitioners
have not furnished sufficient particulars to justify the plea infringement of
Article 14 of the Constitution. We accordingly hold that the case of the
petitioner should rejected." (Article 14 of the Indian Constitution
corresponds to our Woe 12.),

In the present case, the petitioner- has stated that the order of compulsory
retirement made against, him, by P 1, was unlawful and Made against him P1 was
unlawful and made against him solely by reason of the personal animosity and
vindictiveness that the 1st respondent had towards the petitioner and the 2nd,
3rd and 4th respondents were in the circumstances acting at the dictation of
the 1st respondent and that no charges were framed against the petitioner nor
the petitioner's reply dated 25th September 1984-P18-been duly considered. He
stated further that-

"As far as he is aware he is the only public officer who has been dealt with
in this manner, I flagrant disregard of the due process of law, administrative
rules and regulations and violations of the rules relating to the disciplinary
control of the public officers and the rules of natural justice and that he
has been denied equal protection of the law in violation of Article 12 (1) of
the Constitution." (Vide paragraphs 31 and 32 of the petition).

The petition does not disclose who were the persons who are similarly placed
like him' and who had been treated- correctly, according to law ,at least, the
instance of one other public officer who was in similar category as he was and
who had been compulsorily retired after the correct procedure having been
followed, should have the petitioner has to plead and -prove that there are
others who were similarly situated, and that he was singled out and subjected
to unfavourable treatment. The maxim 'omnia praesumuntur rite esse acta'
cannot be invoked to fill in, the ' deficiency when Me petitioner has failed
to make out that not only had he been treated differently from Others but that
he has been, so treated from person's' similarly circumstanced, There is no
'material on record that any different procedure was followed in the case of
any officer of staff grade who

**300**

belonged to category 2 : 2 : 1 of the Establishment Code before had been
compulsorily retired for general inefficiency, The material for comparison is
wanting. As stated earlier the burden of establishing the existence of these
facts rests on the petitioner. To cast the burden of proof in such case on the
respondents is really to ask them to prove the negative.

What Article 12 strikes at is not unjust treatment or wrongful treatment but
unequal treatment, or unjust discrimination. The petitioner has not
established that the other government servants similarly situated like him
were exempted from the application of the circular No.136 (R1), and that it
was applied to him alone. The contention of the petitioner is that the
circular R1' does not apply to him and that the relevant provisions of the
Establishment Code applicable to him were not observed or followed, before the
order P1, compulsorily retiring him was made. If this contention is correct,
what the petitioner complains of is, breach not of the Fundamental Right of
equality, but breach of a non-fundamental right only. In such circumstances,
this application under Article 126 cannot be maintained. As was held by the
judgement of a Bench of five judges of the Supreme Court of India in the State
of Jammu & Kashmir v. Ghulam Rasool (10)-

"It seems to us that even if the rules are a law (Kashmir Civil Service Rules)
and the respondent had not been given the benefit of them, all that can be
said to have happened is that the appellant had acted in breach of the laws.
That does not amount to a violation of the rights to the equal protection of
the law. Otherwise every breach of law by the government would amount to a
denial of the equal protection of the law....It is not the respondent's case
that the other servants of the appellant's status had been given the benefit
of those rules and such benefit has designedly been denied only to him. It
seems to us that the appeal must be allowed on the simple ground that the
respondent's petition does not show a violation of any Fundamental Rights".

This ruling has been followed by our Court in Wijesinghe v. Attorney-General
(11) and in Dr.Wijetunga v. Aluwatuwala and others (12). As I said in
Wijesinghe's Case (supra) " a mere violation of law by the executive does not
amount to a violation of equal protection". The ground of complaint of breach
of the Fundamental

**301**

Right guaranteed by Article 12 is not unjust or unfair treatment but unequal
selective or discriminatory treatment. It' is discrimination which does
violence to the 'constitutional right of equality: Discrimination is not
inherent in every arbitrary action. Arbitrary 'action may be pregnant with
discrimination but if it does not exhibit discrimination-, it may be reviewed
on a writ application or in' a declaratory action but will not attract Article
12. True it is that Article 12 is intended- to advance "justice -but its reach
is-' limited to cases where equals are treated as unequals and unequals
treated as equals and does not extend to cases: where, arbitrary or colourable
action is the cause of action.

Article 55 (5) of the Constitution provides as follows

Subject to the jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court under, paragraph
(1) of Article 126 no court or tribunal shall have power or jurisdiction to
inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner call in 'questions, any order or
decision of the Cabinet of Ministers, a Minister the Public Service
Commission, a Committee of the Public Service Commission or of a public
officer, in regard to any matter concerning the appointment, transfer,
dismissal or disciplinary control of a public officer".

The above provision expressly preserves to a public officer his right as a
citizen to vindicate his Fundamental Rights. Though a court or tribunal is
divested or jurisdiction to inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner call
in question any order or decision of the Cabinet or a Minister etc., in regard
to any matter concerning the appointment, transfer, dismissal or disciplinary
control of a public officer, yet is such order or decision impinges on any of
his Fundamental Rights, there is no constraint in his moving the Supreme Court
under Article 126 (1) of the Constitution against such infringement.

The Fundamental Right to equality which a public officer enjoys is a clog on
the "the-holding-of-office-during-pleasure" basis of his service. It ensures
his not being discriminated against. The rule that employment under the State
is held at pleasure does not militate against the application of Article 12 to
the matter of termination of such employment where there has been an arbitrary
discrimination in terminating such employment. The concept of equality
permeates the whole spectrum of a public servant's employment from
appointment,

**302**

through promotion and termination to the payment of his pension and other
terminal benefits. The limitation to the application of this constitutional
guarantee of equality is that only those who are similarly circumstanced are
entitled to equal treatment: The guarantee of equality does not imply that the
same rules should be made applicable to all grades of public servants inspite
of differences in their circumstances and conditions. The pleasure of the
State to terminate the services of a public officer has thus to be exercised
subject to the principle of equality. prescribed by Article 12. An order of
termination of . services or reduction in rank will be invalid for
contravention of Article 12, if there is a hostile discrimination in the
application of the Services Rules in the selection of the persons to be
discharged. Thus if against two public servants similarly circumstanced
inquiries may be directed according to procedures substantially different at
the discretion of the executive authority, exercise whereof is not governed by
any principle having any rational relationship to the purpose to be achieved
by the inquiry, the order selecting a prejudicial procedure out of the two o
en for selection is hit by Article 12. State of Orissa v. Dhirendra Nath Das
(13). The article thus forbids the ; State. from practising discrimination in
the treatment of its officers. Even though a person has no right, fundamental
or otherwise, to get an employment under government he has a right to be
treated equally with the other persons by the State. One who has no right to a
'government job may yet have a constitutional right to be free from
discrimination. The 'fact that o he' .not have a legal right to` get or keep
a, government employment does not mean that he can be denied employment or
that his services can be terminated on the ground; of his race, religion,
language caste, sex, political opinion, place of birth or: of any such
discriminatory ground (Article 12 (2)). This provision does not entitle a
citizen to have a Fundamental Right to any employment in public service or to
continue in such employment but entitles a citizen who is a public officer
however to complain about the termination of his services by the State as an
infringement of his Fundamental Right if such a termination of his employment
stems from his being singled out for discriminatory treatment. The relevant
question is not whether he was arbitrarily or wrongfully dismissed but whether
there was discrimination in treatment. The case of the Manager, Government
Brach Press v. Beliappa (14) (discussed below) brings out this point.

**303**

Counsel for the petitioner submitted that even if the petition has failed to
show discriminatory treatment of the petitioner the evidence showed the 2nd
respondent had exercised his powers arbitrarily, unfairly and the mala fide
and that such evidence was sufficient to establish that the petitioner had
been denied his Fundamental Rights of equality guaranteed to him by Article
12. He contended that Article 12 strikes at arbitrariness in State action,
that it ensures fairness of treatment. In support of his submission he
referred to certain recent judgements of Bhagawati. J. in the Supreme Court of
India and stated that he had laid bare a new dimension of Article 14 of the
Indian Constitution and invited us to keep pace with the trend in those
judgements. He invoked in his support the new doctrine enunciated for the
first time by Bhagawati, J. in Royappah v. State of Tamil Nadu [15] and
contended that the arbitrary action of the 2nd respondent constituted a breach
of the petitioner's Fundamental Right of equality. The question arises whether
the new dimension expatiated on in the judgements of Bhagawati, J. can in the
scheme of the provisions of our constitution, be applied to transcend the
classificatory principle and enlarge the concept of equality enshrined in our
Article 12. Before embarking on a discussion of the Indian judgements,
referred to by Counsel for the petitioner, it is necessary to bear in mind two
vital differences in the area of the court's jurisdiction in the two
countries.

1\. The jurisdiction of our Supreme Court to adjudicate on Fundamental Rights
is confined to the questions relating to infringements or imminent
infringements by executive or administrative action of any Fundamental Right.
Our Courts have not jurisdiction to question the validity of any legislation
which impinges on Fundamental Rights.

Article 80(3) of our Constitution precludes the canvassing of the validity of
any statue law. It provides that -

"Where a Bill becomes law upon the certificate of the President or the
Speaker, as the case may be being endorsed thereon, no court or tribunal shall
inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner call in question, the validity
of such Act on any ground whatsoever."

(1) On the other hand the, Indian Courts are vested with jurisdiction to
pronounce upon -the, validity- not only of executive action but also' of any
legislation which contravenes any Article of the e Indian Constitution
relating to Fundamental Rights. Thus in India person aggrieved can

**304**

challenge the validity of any, statute law on the ground that it is
inconsistent with a Fundamental Right. Thus any pronouncement or construction
of a Fundamental Right by the Indian Courts will have to be viewed in the
perspective of the comprehensive jurisdiction that the Indian Courts are
vested with, and has to be applied with a certain amount of caution b this
Court.

(2) Under our Constitution, the Supreme Court alone is vested with
jurisdiction to hear and determine any question relating to infringement of
any Fundamental Right. A party complaining of a breach of Fundamental Rights
can, apply to the Supreme Court in terms of Article 126 for relief against
infringement of.; Fundamental Rights. Article 126(3) however provides that
"where, in the course of hearing in the Court of Appeal into an application
for orders in the nature of a Writ of habeas corpus, certiorari, prohibition,
procedendo, mandamus or quo warranto, it appears to such court that there is
prima facie evidence of an infringement. or imminent infringement of the
provisions of Chap. III or Chap. IV by a party to such application, such court
shall forthwith refer such matter for determination by the Supreme Court."\-
Thus the Supreme Court jurisdiction under Article 126 is limited to the
enforcement of the Fundamental:; Rights guaranteed by the Constitution. ,It
does not extend to the enforcement of ordinary. Legal rights, it does not have
unlimited powers to reach and remove injustice wherever it exists. The
violation of a Fundamental Right is the sine. qua non of the exercise of the
jurisdiction under Article 126. The breach of some other constitutional right,
is not sufficient to found that jurisdiction. This Court will not in
proceedings under Article 126, interfere with an administrative order, however
erroneous, where he order does not contravene a Fundamental Right specified in
the Constitution.

Under the Indian Constitution not only the Supreme Court of India but also the
several High Courts of India have jurisdiction to enforce the Fundamental
Rights guaranteed by their Constitution Article 32,of the: Indian Constitution
vests the Supreme court with original jurisdiction to enforce Fundamental,
Rights guaranteed by their Constitution. However Article 226 of that
Constitution empowers the High Court to issue writs, directions or, orders in
the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, quo warranto and certiorari (a) for the
enforcement of any of the fundamental rights conferred by Part III of the
Constitution (b) for any of the fundamental rights conferred by Part III of
the Constitution (b) for any other purpose. The sole object of Article

**305**

32 of the Indian Constitution is the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights
guaranteed by that Constitution. A person has no right to move the Supreme
Court under Article 32, where no fundamental right has been infringed. On the
other hand the power of the High Court to issue writs under Article 226 can be
exercised for two fold purposes viz : the enforcement of (a) fundamental
rights, as well as of (b) non-fundamental or ordinary legal rights. The words
"for any other purpose" at the end of Article 226 makes the jurisdiction of
the High Court to issue the writs more extensive than that of the Supreme
Court, in a much as these words are absent from Article 32. Under Article 226
the High Court can grant relief not only in cases where fundamental rights are
being violated, but also in those cases where, for any other reason, it may be
just or expedient for the court to interfere. Thus in appreciating the
pronouncements of the Indian courts it is relevant to inquire whether the
application for relief was made to the Supreme Court under Article 32 or
whether it had been made to the High Court under Article 226 and whether the
particular judgement of the Supreme Court of India was pronounced in the
exercise of its original jurisdiction under Article 32 of the Constitution or
whether in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction from a judgment of the
High court in proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution. The judgment
of the Indian Supreme Court pronounced in proceedings under Article 32 would
appear to be of greater relevance to us when considering questions arising
under Article 126 of our Constitution than judgments pronounced by the Supreme
Court in its appellate capacity from decisions of the High Court in
proceedings under Article 226 of the Indian Constitution which deal with the
enforcement not only of Fundamental Rights but also of ordinary legal rights
not amounting to Fundamental Rights.

Bearing in mind the limited jurisdiction of our Supreme Court to play a
creative role in evolving a system of Rule of Law, I shall now proceed to
examine the application of the new doctrine propounded by Bhagawati, J., (I
assume for this purpose the correctness of this new doctrine or "approach" or
"dimension" enunciated by Bhagawati, J., even Though it does not appear to
have taken into consideration the judgment or ruling of the Supreme Court in
State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Rasool (supra) and it has; as Seervai has
commented, escaped all the Judges of an earlier day Vide Seervai :
Constitutional Law of India 3rd Ed: 272).

**306**

Bhagwati, J., in the course of his judgment in Bachan Singh y. State of
Punjab, (16) reiterated what he had originally, stated in Royappa's Case
(supra) and repeated in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India (17) Ramana Dayaram
Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India (18) and Ajay Hasia v.
Khalid Mujib Sehravardi (19):

"Now if we look at the various constitutional provisions including the
Chapters on Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State Policy, it is
clear that the rule of law permeates the entire fabric of the Constitution and
indeed forms one of its basic features. The rule of law excludes arbitrariness
its postulate is 'intelligence without passion' and reason freed from desire".
Wherever .we find arbitrariness or unreasonableness .there is denial of the,
rule of law. That is why Aristotle preferred a government of laws rather, than
of men. 'Law', in the context of the rule of law, does not mean any law
enacted by the legislative authority however arbitrary or despotic it may be.
Otherwise even under a dictatorship it would be possible to say that there is
rule of law, because every law made by the dictator howsoever arbitrary and
unreasonable has to be obeyed and every action half be taken in conformity
with such law. In such a case too even where the political set up is
dictatorial, it is law that governs the relationship between men and men and
between men and the State. But still it is not rule of law as understood in
modern jurisprudence, because in jurisprudential terms, the law itself in such
a case being an emanation from the absolute will of the dictator it is in
effect and substance the rule of man and not of law which prevails in such a
situation. What is a necessary element of the rule of law is that the law must
not be arbitrary or irrational and it must satisfy the test of reason and the
democratic form of policy seeks to ensure this element by making the framers
of the law accountable to the people. Of course, in a country like the United
Kingdom, where there is no written constitution imposing fetters on
legislative power and providing for judicial review of legislation, it may be
difficult to hold a law to be invalid on the ground that it is arbitrary and
irrational and hence violative of an essential element of the rule of law and
the only remedy if at all would be an appeal to the electorate at the time
when a fresh mandate is sought at the election. But the situation is totally
different in a court like India which has a written Constitution enacting
Fundamental Rights and conferring power on the courts to enforce them not only
against executive but also

**307**

against the legislature. The Fundamental Rights erect a protective armour for
the individual against arbitrary or unreasonable executive or legislative
action.

There are three Fundamental Rights in the Constitution which are of prime
importance and which breathe vitality in the concept of 'the rule of law. They
are Articles 14, 19 and 21 which in the words of Chandrachud, C-J in Minerva
Mills Case (20) constitute a golden triangle It is now settled law as a result
of the decision of this court in Maneka Gandhi's Case (supra) that Article 14
enacts primarily a guarantee against arbitrariness and inhibits State action,
whether legislative or executive, which suffers from the vice of
arbitrariness. 'This' interpretation placed on Article 1'4 by the Court in
Maneka Gandhi's Case (supra) has `opened up anew dimension of that Article
which transcends the classificatory principle. For a long time in' the
evolution of the `constitutional law' of our country, the court had construed
Article 14 to mean only this, namely that-you can classify persons' and things
for the application of a law but such classification must be based on
intelligible differentia having rational relationship to the object sought to
be achieved by the law. But the court pointed out in Maneka Gandhi's Case
(supra) that Article 14 was not to be equated with the principle of
classification. it was primarily a guarantee against arbitrariness in State
action and the doctrine of classification was evolved only as a subsidiary
rule for testing or determining whether a particular State action was
arbitrary or not. The court said 'Equality is antithetical to arbitrariness.
In fact, equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies. One belongs to the rule
of law while the other to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where
an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to
political logic and constitutional law and is therefore violative of Article
14.' The court thus laid down that every State action must be non-arbitrary
and reasonable, if it is not, the court would strike it down as invalid.

This view was reaffirmed by the court in: another outstanding decision in
Ramana Dayararn Shetty v. The International Airport Authority of India
(supra). There, tenders were invited by the Airport Authority for giving a
contract for running a canteen at the Bombay Airport. The invitation for
tender included a condition that the applicant must have at least 5 years`
experience as a registered 2nd class hotelier. Several persons tendered. One
was a person who had considerable experience in the catering business but he
was not

**308**

a registered 2nd class hotelier as-required by- the condition in the
invitation to tender. Yet his tender was accepted because it was the highest.
The contract given to him was challenged and the court held that the action of
the Airport Authority was- illegal. The court pointed out that a new form of
property consisting of government largesse in the shape of jobs, contracts,
licences, quotas, mineral rights and other benefits and services was emerging
in the social welfare State that India was and it was necessary to develop new
forms of; protection in regard to this new kind of property.

The court held that in regard to government largesse, the discretion of the
government is not unlimited in that the government cannot give or withhold
largesse in its arbitrary discretion or at its sweet will. The government
action must; be based on standards that are not arbitrary or irrational. This
requirement was spelt out from the, application of Article 14 as a
constitutional requirement, and it was held that having regard to the
constitutional mandate of Article 14 the Airport Authority was not entitled to
act arbitrarily in accepting the tender, but was bound to conform to the
standards or norms, laid down, by it. The court thus reiterated and,
reaffirmed its commitment against arbitrariness: in the. State action.

It can therefore ` now be taken to be 'well-settled that if a law is arbitrary
or 'irrational, it would fall foul- of Article 14 and would be liable 'to-be-
struck down as invalid. Now a ''law may contravene Article 14 because it
enacts provisions which are arbitrary, as for example, they make
discriminatory classification which is not founded on intelligible differentia
-having rational relation to the object sought 'to be achieved by the law or
they arbitrarily select persons or things for discriminatory treatment. But
there' is also another category of cases where without enactment of specific
provisions 'which are arbitrary; a law may still 'offend Article 14 because it
confers discretion on an authority to select persons or things for application
of the law without laying down, any policy or principle to guide the exercise
of such discretion. Where such unguided and unstructured discretion is
conferred,. on an authority, the law would be violative of Article 14 because,
it would enable the authority to exercise such discretion arbitrarily and thus
discriminate w out r e son :. So also Article 19 strikes against arbitrary
legislation in so far as such legislation is violative of one or the -other
provision (`clause (1) of that Article. Sub-clauses: (a) to (g) of

**309**

clause (1) of Article 19 enact various fundamental freedoms ; sub-clause (1)
guarantees freedom of speech and expression, sub-clause (b) ..... Now the
freedom guaranteed under these various sub-clauses of clause (1) of Article 19
are not absolute freedoms but they can be restricted by law, provided such law
satisfies the requirements of the applicable provisions in one or the other of
clauses (2) to (6) of that Article. The common basic requirement of the saving
provision enacted in clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19 is that the restriction
imposed by the law must be reasonable. If, therefore, any law is enacted by
the legislature which violates one or other provision of clause (1) of article
19, it would not be protected by the saving provision enacted in clauses (2)
to (6) of that Article ; if it is arbitrary or irrational, because in that
event the restriction imposed by it would a fortiori be unreasonable..

The third Fundamental Right which strikes against arbitrariness in State
action is that embodied in Article 21. This Article ...... guarantees the
right to life and personal liberty in the following terms

'21. No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except
according to procedure adopted by law.'

This Article also came up for interpretation in Maneka Gandhi's Case (supra).
Two questions arose before the Court in that case

One was as to what is the content of the expression 'personal liberty' ;

And the other was as to what is the meaning of the expression except according
to procedure established by law ....

But so far as the second question is concerned, it provoked a decision from
the Court which was to mark the beginning of a most astonishing development of
the law. It is with this decision that the court burst forth into
unprecedented creative activity and gave to the law a new dimension and a new
vitality. Until this decision was given, the view held by the court was that
Article 21 merely embodied a facet of the Diceyian concept of the rule of law
that no one can be deprived of his personal liberty by executive action
unsupported by law. It was intended to be no More than a protection against
executive action which had no authority of law...... But in Maneka Gandhi's

**310**

Case (supra) which marks a watershed in the history of development of
Constitutional Law in our country, this Court for the first time took the view
that Article 21 affords protection not only against executive action but also
against legislation and any law which deprives a person of his life or
personal liberty would be invalid unless it prescribes a procedure for such
deprivation which is reasonable, fair and just. The concept of reasonableness,
it was held, runs through the entire fabric of the Constitution and it is not
enough for the law merely to provide some- semblance of a procedure but the
procedure for depriving a person of his life or personal liberty must be
reasonable, fair and just. It is for the court to determine whether in a
particular case the procedure is reasonable, fair and just and if it is not,
the court will strike down the law as invalid..... Every facet of the law
which deprives a person of his life or personal liberty would therefore have
to stand the test of reasonableness, fairness and justness in order to be
outside the. inhibition of Article 21."

I have quoted in extenso from the judgment of Bhagawati, J., to show the basis
and reasoning behind his thinking that the Indian Constitutional system is
founded on the Rule of Law and that in any system so designed it is impossible
to conceive of arbitrary legislation or arbitrary executive action without
violating the guarantee of equality. In the absence of such a golden triangle
as constituted by such Articles as 14, 19 and 21 of the Indian Constitution
and in my view of the incompetency of our courts to pronounce on the validity
of arbitrary legislation our Constitution does not, in view, lend authority or
support for giving the extended meaning or the dimension envisaged by
Bhagawati, J., to the concept of equality predicated by our Article 12. It is
to be borne in mind that the principles enunciated by a Judge have to be
understood in the context of the facts therein ; any case even a locus
classicus is an authority for what it decides on the facts. "Dicta by judges,
however eminent, ought not to be cited as establishing authoritatively
propositions of law, unless these dicta really form integral parts of the
train of reasoning directed to the real question decided" \- per Lord Haldane
in Cornelius v. Phillips (21). With all respect to Bhagawati, J., it appears
to me that the cases in which he gave expression to his liberal view of
equality exhibited elements of discrimination and the ratio decidendi of the
several decisions was that such differential treatment offended the equality
clause. In Bachan Singh's Case (supra) the question in issue was the

**311**

constitutionality of the death penalty provided under Section 302 of the
Indian Penal Code read with Section 354 (3) of the Indian Criminal Procedure
Code.

The first case in which Bhagawati, J., gave the new dimension to the concept
of equality and departed from the accepted doctrine of classification was
Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu (supra). In the course of his judgment in that
case with which Chandrachud and Krishna lyer, J.J., agreed, Bhagawati, J.
stated as follows

"Article 16 embodies the fundamental guarantee that there shall be equality of
opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment
to any office under the State. Though enacted as a distinct and independent
fundamental right, because of its great importance as a principle ensuring
equality of opportunity in public employment which is so vital to the building
up of the new classless egalitarian society envisaged in the Constitution,
Article 16 is only an instance of the application of the concept of equality
enshrined in Article 14. In other words Article 14 is a genus whilst Article
16 is a species. Article 16 gives effect to the doctrine of equality in all
matters relating to public employment. The basic principle which, therefore,
informs both Articles 14 and 16 is equality and inhibition against
discrimination. Now, what is the content and reach of this great equalising
principle ? It is a founding faith, to use the words of Bose J., a way of life
and it must not be subject to a narrow pedantic or lexicographic approach. We
cannot countenance any attempt to truncate its all embracing scope and
meaning, for to do so would be to violate its activist magnitude. Equality is
a dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions and it cannot be cribbed,
cabined and confined within traditional and doctrinaire limits. From a
postivistic point of view, equality is antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact
equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule of law
in a republic, while the other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute
monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal
both according to political logic and constitutional-law and is therefore
violative of Article 14..... Articles 14 and 16 strike at arbitrariness in
State action to ensure fairness and equality of treatment. They require that
State action must be based on valid relevant principles applicable alike to
all similarly situate and it must not be guided by any extraneous or
irrelevant considerations because that would be denial of equality. Where the
operative

**312**

reason for State action, as distinguished from motive inducing from the
antechamber of the mind, is not legitimate and relevant but is extraneous and
outside the area of permissible consideration, it would amount to mala fide
exercise of power and that is hit by Articles 14 and 16. Mala fide exercise of
power and arbitrariness are different lethal radiations emanating from the
same vice ; in fact the latter comprehends the former. Both are inhibited by
Articles 14 and 16."

Royappa's Case (supra) was a case of alleged discriminatory treatment. The
petitioner filed the petition under Article 32 of the Constitution challenging
the validity of his transfer from the post of Chief Secretary, first to the
post of Deputy Chairman, State Planning Commission and then to the post of
Officer on Special Duty on the following grounds, namely (1) It was contrary
to the proviso to rule 4 (2) of the Indian Administrative Services Rules of
1954 and Rule 9 (1) of the Indian Administrative Services (Pay) Rules 1954\.
(2) It was a violation of Articles 1 4 and 16 of the Constitution, as the post
of Deputy Chairman, State Planning Commission and officer on Special Duty were
inferior in rank and status to the Chief Secretary ; and (3) It was made in
mala fide exercise of power, not on account of exigencies of administration or
public service.

According to the facts on the transfer of the petitioner from the post of
Chief Secretary, one Sabanayagam who was undoubtedly junior to the petitioner
was promoted as Chief Secretary, and was confirmed in that post.

Analysing the first ground of challenge Bhagawati, J. held that Rule 4 (2) of
the Indian Administrative Rules had no application but he held the challenge
under Rule 9 (1) of the Indian Administrative Services (Pay) Rules was better
founded.

Rule 9 in so far as material provided that -

"no member of the service shall be appointed to a post other than a post
specified in Schedule III unless the State Government... makes a declaration
that the said post is equivalent in status and responsibility to a post
specified in the Schedule."

If the State Government wants to appoint a member of the Indian Administrative
Service to a non-cadre post created by it, it cannot do so unless it makes a
declaration setting out which is the cadre post to which such non-cadre post
is equivalent in status and responsibility.

**313**

The making of such a declaration is a sine qua non of the exercise of power
under sub-rule (1). It has a purpose behind it and that is to ensure that a
member of the Indian Administrative Service is not pushed off to a non-cadre
post which is inferior in status and responsibility to that occupied by him
and to enable him to know what is the status and responsibility of his post in
terms of cadre posts and whether he is placed in a superior or equal post or
he is brought down to an inferior post. If it is the latter, he would be
entitled to protect his rights by pleading violation of Article 311 or
Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, whichever may be applicable. On the
facts, the court held that the appointment of the petitioner to the post of
Deputy Chairman was in contravention of Rule 9 (1), as the State Government
had failed to apply its mind and objectively determine the equivalence of the
post of the Deputy Chairman, when it appointed the petitioner to the post of
Deputy Chairman. But the court held that since the petitioner had without
protest accepted the appointment, he could not be permitted to challenge the
appointment. The court held also that the appointment of the petitioner to the
post of Officer-on-Special-Duty suffered from the same infirmity. There was
thus no compliance with the mandatory requirements of Rule 9 (1) and the
appointment of the petitioner to the post of Officer-on-Special-Duty was
accordingly liable to be held invalid for contravention of that sub-rule. But
it is significant that Bhagawati, J. held that -

"We cannot in this petition under Article 32 give relief to the petitioner by
striking down his appointment to the post of Officer on Special Duty, as mere
violation of Rule 9 (1) does not involve infringement of any fundamental
right. . . "

Then he proceeded to take up the last two grounds of challenge together for
consideration as in his view the third ground of challenge viz. mala fide
exercise of power was really "in substance and effect merely an aspect of the
second ground based on violation of Articles 14 and 16." He then proceeded to
discuss the merits of these grounds and it was in the course of his analysis
that he made the comment on Articles 14 and 16 quoted above. He added

"Articles 14 and 16 strike at arbitrariness in State action and ensure
fairness and equality of treatment. They require that State action must be
based on valid relevant principle applicable alike to all similarly situated
and it must not be guided by any extraneous or

**314**

irrelevant consideration, because that would be a denial of equality. Where
the operative reason for State action, as distinguished from motive inducing
from the antechamber of the mind, is not legitimate and relevant but is
extraneous, and outside the area of permissible consideration, it would amount
to mala fide exercise of power and that is hit by Articles 14 and, 16. Mala
fide exercise of power and arbitrariness are different lethal, radiations
emanating from the same. vice. In fact the latter comprehends the former. Both
are inhibited by Articles 14 and 16."

The petitioner was transferred first to the post of Deputy Chairman and then
to the post of Officer-on-Special-Duty and in his place Sabanayagam who was
admittedly junior to him, was not only promoted but also confirmed. The
result' of the. confirmation of Sabanayagam as First Secretary was that he
petitioner, though senior, competent and permanent was excluded from the post
of Chief Secretary. The petitioner contended that his transfer from the post
of Chief Secretary first to the post of Deputy Chairman and then to the post
of Officer-on-Special-Duty coupled with the promotion and confirmation of
Sabanayagam in the post of Chief Secretary, was clearly arbitrary and in
violation of Articles 14 and 16. The court held that it is not possible to
hold on the material on record that the post was inferior in status and
responsibility to the post of Chief Secretary and therefore it could not be
said that the petitioner was arbitrarily or unfairly treated or that equality
was denied to him when he was transferred from the post of Chief Secretary and
in his place Sabanayagam, his junior was promoted and confirmed. The challenge
based on Articles 14 and 16 therefore failed.

Turning to the ground of challenge based on mala fide exercise of power, the
court held that mala fides had not been established and rejected the
contention of the petitioner.

In Royappa's Case (supra) unequal treatment was the basic issue in the case.
The petitioner's allegation was that while he, should have been appointed as
Chief Secretary, he had been overlooked and Sabanayagam; his junior, was
appointed over him and that this discrimination resulted from the arbitrary or
mala fide exercise of power by the Respondent.

Within the framework of the facts in, Royappa's Case (supra) Bhagawati, J's
reasoning that Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness and mala fide
administration in order to ensure equality of treatment or

**315**

non-discrimination cannot be taunted. It was not necessary for him to
pronounce on the question whether arbitrary or mala fide exercise of power
which does not produce unequal treatment is violative of Articles 14 and 16.
The complaint in that case was unequal treatment or discrimination. Whatever
Bhagawati, J. said on the hypothetical or abstract question, was, with all
respect to that eminent Judge, obiter

Counsel also relied on the case of Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India (supra). In
that case the petitioner's (Maneka Gandhi's) passport was impounded by an
order dated 2nd July 1977. Thereupon she filed a writ petition under Article
32 of the Constitution to challenge that order. The challenge was founded on
the following grounds : -

(1) To the extent to which Section 10(3)(c) of the Passport Act 1967,
authorised the passport authority to impound a passport "in the interest of
the general public"; it is violative of Article 14 of the constitution, since
it confers vague and undefined powers on the passport authority.

(2) Section 10 (3) (c) is void as conferring an arbitrary power since it does
not provide for a hearing of the holder of the passport before the passport is
impounded ;

(3) Section 10 (3) (c) is violative of Article 21 of the Constitution, since
it does not prescribe 'procedure' within the meaning of that Article and if it
is held that the procedure has been prescribed, it is arbitrary and
unreasonable, and

(4) Section 10 (3) . (c) offends Article 19 (1) (a) and (g) of the
Constitution.

The Passport Act of 1967 was enacted in 1967 in view of. the decision of the
Supreme Court in Satwant Singh Sawhney v. Ramarathnam, (22). The position
which obtained prior to the coming into force of this Act was that there was
no regulation governing the issue of passports for leaving the shores of India
and going abroad ; the issue of passports was entirely within the discretion
of the executive and this discretion was unguided and unchallenged. By that
decision, the Supreme Court, by a majority, held inter alia that the
discretion vested with the executive in the matter of issuing or refusing
passports was violative of Articles 14 and 21 and hence the order refusing a
passport for the petitioner was invalid. In view of the reasoning in this
decision, Section 10(3)(c) of the Passport Act of 1967 was enacted to provide
-

**316**

"If the Passport Authority thinks it necessary so to do in the interest of the
sovereign integrity of India, friendly relations with any foreign country, and
in the interest of the general public, an order impounding the passport could
be made.-"

Bhagawati, J. held that the law is well settled that when a statute vests
unguided and unrestricted power on an authority to affect the right of a
person without laying down any policy or principle which is to guide the
authority in the exercise of this power, it would be affected by the vice of
discrimination, since it would leave it open to the authority to discriminate
between persons and things similarly situated and be violative of the equality
clause contained in Article 14. He said that it is difficult to say that the
discretion conferred on the Passport Authority was arbitrary or unfettered. It
was argued that the words, "in the interest of the general public to impound a
passport" were vague and indefinite: He held that the words "in the interest
of general public" had a clear and well-defined meaning and cannot be said to
be vague or indefinite. He concluded that the power conferred on the Passport
Authority under Section 10(3)(c) cannot be regarded as discriminatory and does
not fall foul of Article 14.

In the course of his judgment Bhagawati, J. however reiterated what he said in
Royappa's case (Supra) on equality being antithetic to arbitrariness and added
that

"the principle of reasonableness which legally as well as philosophically, is
an essential element of equality or non-arbitrariness pervades Article 14 like
a brooding omnipresence and the procedure contemplated by Article 21 must
answer the test of reasonableness in order to be in conformity with Article
14."

The question of any executive action did not arise in this case. The question
that arose was regarding the validity of legislation which conferred certain
discretionary powers on an officer.

Counsel cited the case of The Manager, Government Branch Press v. Beliappa
(supra). In this case the petitioner-respondent was a Class IV employee of the
appellant. One of the terms of his contract was that his appointment was
purely temporary and that it was liable for termination at the will and
pleasure of the appellant, without assigning any. reason, and without notice.
The appellant served a :notice on the respondent that he was guilty of an
irregularity and to show cause why disciplinary action should not be taken
against him. But thereafter the

**317**

appellant terminated respondent's services with immediate effect as his
appointment was temporary and terminable without notice and without assigning
any reason. Respondent thereupon filed a writ petition under Article 226 in
the High Court. The appellant reiterated his stand that the respondent's
appointment was temporary and that according to the conditions in the contract
of service it was liable to be terminated without notice. The respondent then
filed further affidavit alleging hostile discrimination, that his juniors were
retained in service and that his record of service was good. The High Court
allowed the writ petition. In the appeal to the Supreme Court the appellant
contended that Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution are not attracted to the
case of temporary employees and that the respondent could not complain against
actions taken in accordance with the contract of service. The Supreme Court
dismissed the appeal and held that if the services of a temporary government
servant are terminated in accordance with the conditions of service, on the
ground of unsatisfactory conduct or his unsuitability for the job and/or for
his work being unsatisfactory, or for a like reason which marks him off as a
class apart from other temporary servants who have been retained in service,
there was no question of the application of Article 16. But if the services of
a temporary government servant are terminated arbitrarily and not on the
ground of his unsuitability, unsatisfactory conduct or the like which would
put him in a class apart from his ' juniors in the same service, questions of
unfair discrimination may arise, notwithstanding the fact that in terminating
his services the appointing authority was purporting to act in accordance with
the terms of his employment. It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that
while three named juniors who were in all respects similarly situated were
continued in service the respondent was arbitrarily singled out for
discriminatory treatment, although the respondent's record of service was good
and at no time gave room for any complaint from his official superiors. The
court held that the services of the respondent had been terminated without
assigning any reason albeit in accordance with the conditions of his service,
while three employees similarly situated, junior to Beliappa in the same
temporary cadre had been retained, and observed-

"The protection of Articles 14 and 16 (1) will be available even to such a
temporary government servant, if he has been arbitrarily discriminated against
and singled out for harsh treatment, in preference to his juniors similarly
circumstanced. It is true that the

**318**

competent authority had a discretion under the conditions of service governing
the employee concerned which terminated the latter's employment without
notice. But, such discretion has to be exercised in accordance with reason and
fair play and not capriciously. Bereft of rationality and fairness discretion
degenerates into arbitrariness which is the-very antithesis of the Rule of
Law, on which our democratic polity is founded. Arbitrary invocation or
enforcement of a service condition terminating the service of a temporary
employee may itself constitute denial of equal protection and offend the
equality clause in Articles 14 and 16 (1 )."

agree with the judgment. The respondent was arbitrarily discriminated against
and singled out for harsh treatment in preference to his juniors similarly
circumstanced, and hence there was an infringement of his Fundamental Right of
equality but non sequitur, had the appellant arbitrarily terminated the
service of the respondent in accordance with the term of his conditions of
service and there was no question of discrimination such as the service of a
similar junior officer being retained, that the petitioner could have
maintained an action for breach of Article 14 of the Constitution.

We are referred to the case of Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. lnternational Airport
Authority of India (supra), In this case tenders were invited by the-Airport
Authority for giving a contract for running a canteen at the Bombay Airport.
The invitation for a tender included a condition that the applicant must at
least have five years' experience as a registered second class hotelier.
Several persons tendered. One who tendered was a person who had considerable
experience in the catering business, but he was not a registered second class
hotelier as required by the conditions in the invitation to the tender. Yet
his tender was accepted because it was the highest. The contract given to him
was challenged and the court held that the act of the Airport Authority was
illegal, in that having regard to the constitutional mandate of Article 14,
the Airport Authority. was not entitled to act arbitrarily in accepting the
tender but was bound to conform to the standard or norm laid down by it. It is
to be noted that the proceedings in this case originated in the High Court on
a petition under Article 226 of the Indian Constitution. Bhagawati,. J.
delivering the judgment of the Supreme Court in appeal said -

"It is a well settled rule of administrative law that an executive authority
must be rigorously held to the standard by which it professes its actions to
be judged and it must scrupulously observe ,

**319**

those standards on pain of invalidation of an act in violation of them. The
defined procedure ... must be scrupulously observed. This rule though
supportable also as emanating from Article 14; does not rest merely on that
Article. It has an independent existence apart from Article 14. It is a rule
of administrative law which has been judicially evolved as a check against
exercise of arbitrary power by the executive authority. It is indeed
unthinkable that in a democracy governed by the rule of taw the executive
government or any of its officers should possess arbitrary power over the
interests of the individual. Every action of the executive government must be
informed with reason and should be free from arbitrariness. That is the very
essence of the rule of law and its bare minimal requirement .... The State
need not enter into any contract with anyone, but if it does so, it must do so
fairly without discrimination and without unfair procedure .... The rule also
flows directly from the doctrine of equality embodied in Article 14."

"It is now well settled as a result of the decision of this court in Royappa
v. State of Tamil Nadu and Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India (supra), that
Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness in State action and ensures fairness and
equality of treatment. It requires that State action must not be arbitrary but
must be based on some rational and relevant principle which is n on-
discriminatory ; it must not be guided by any extraneous or irrelevant
considerations, because that would be denial of equality."

Bhagawati, J. in this case emphasised that it must follow as a necessary
corollary from the principle of equality enshrined in Article 14, that the
State cannot arbitrarily choose any person it likes for entering into any
relationship and discriminate between persons similarly circumstanced. I
respectfully agree that if the standard or norm laid down by the government
for entering into contracts with third parties is discriminatory it cannot
stand the scrutiny of our Article 12. The constitutional limitation of Article
12 forbids the Government to act arbitrarily in selecting persons with whom to
enter into contracts and discriminate against others similarly situate. There
must be a relevant reason for preferring one tendered to another.

The comments of Bhagawati, J. on the decision in State of Orissa v:
Harinarayan Jaiswal (23) is relevant with regard to Mr. Silva's contention. In
that case the respondent was the highest bidder in an

**320**

auction held by the Orissa Government, for the exclusive privilege of selling
by retail country liquor. The auction was held pursuant to an order issued by
the Government of Orissa in the exercise of the power conferred under section
29(2) of the Bihar Orissa Excise Act - 1915. Clause 6 of this order provided
that -

"no sale shall be deemed to be final unless confirmed by the State government
who shall be at liberty to accept or reject any bid without assigning any
reason therefor."

The government of Orissa did not accept any of the bids made at the auction
and subsequently sold the privilege by negotiations with some other parties.
The petitioner contended that the power retained by the Government to "accept
or reject any bid without any reason therefore was an arbitrary power
violative of Article 14 and 19(1) (g)." This contention was negatived by the
Supreme Court. Commenting on the decision Bhagawati, J. observed :

The government was not bound to accept the tender of the person who offered
the highest amount and if the government rejected all the bids made at the
auction, it would not involve any violation of Article 14 or 19 (1) (g)
obviously for the reason there was no discriminatory treatment of any of the
petitioners."

Mr. Silva basing his submission on Bhagawati, J's. opinion contended that
Article 12 embodies the principle of the Rule of Law and that the arbitrary
action of the 2nd respondent is a violation of the equality provided for by
that Article. Our Constitution is certainly founded on the Rule of Law.
Administrative Law is the area where this principle is to be seen especially
in active operation. The Rule of Law has a number of different meanings and
corollaries. Its primary meaning is that everything must be done according to
law, no member of the Executive can interfere with the liberty or property of
a subject except on the condition that he can support the legality of his
action before a. court of justice. Another meaning of the Rule of Law is that
it implies the absence of wide discretionary powers in the government to
encroach on personal liberty. or private property rights or freedom of
contract and that officials and Ministers are responsible for their unlawful
acts to the ordinary courts, applying the ordinary principles of law and. that
government should be conducted within a framework of recognised rules and
principles which restrict discretionary power. Absence of discretionary power
is thus kept in check. The Rule of Law

**321**

requires that the courts should prevent such abuse. A third meaning of the
Rule of Law is that disputes as to the legality of acts of government are to
be decided by Judges who are wholly independent of the Executive. Another
meaning is that law should be even handed between government and citizen.

The principle of equality before the law embodied in Article 12 is a necessary
corollary to the high concept of the Rule of Law underlying the Constitution.
By virtue of this provision, the Supreme Court is enabled to review and strike
down any exercise of discretion by the Executive which exhibits
discrimination. But as stated earlier, the Supreme Court is not vested with
any jurisdiction to invalidate any statute which tends to discriminate or
enables an authority to discriminate or act arbitrarily. On the other hand in
India such legislation can be struck down by the court. If the Indian Supreme
Court can strike down an arbitrary legislation, a fortiori, it can strike down
any arbitrary executive action, as the executive cannot be in a better
position than the legislature to act arbitrarily ; it is definitely subject to
the constraints which legislation is subject to. Under our Constitution,
unless the impugned arbitrary action of the Executive transgresses Article 12,
the Supreme Court has no jurisdiction under Article 126 to annul it.

The gravamen of petitioner's complaint is miscarriage of justice resulting
from abuse of power or non-observance of principles of natural justice, rather
than discriminatory treatment. The audi alteram partem rule which mandates
that no one shall be condemned unheard is one of the basic principles of
natural justice. It is fundamental to fair procedure that the 2nd respondent
should have heard the petitioner before he took such prejudicial action
against the latter. He has violated this basic principle of fair procedure. He
did not wait for and take into consideration the explanation (P 18 and P 19)
of the petitioner in answer to the allegations against him. The hurry to take
action against the petitioner cannot be appreciated. The motivation for it has
to be surmised. Further none of the 2-4 respondents have chosen to fault the
petitioner's explanation, probably for. the reason that no fault can be found
therein. He did not check from the 4th respondent, the Surveyor-General
whether the petitioner had shown cause within the thirty days from the date of
receipt of letter 'Q' dated 24th August, 1984. He never went through the
personal file relating to the petitioner. He does not appear to have even
bothered to find out

**322**

whether there was any material to justify his taking a decision which was so
fateful to the petitioner. According to his affidavit he does not appear to
have even asked the 3rd respondent to substantiate his allegations against the
petitioner. It was not sufficient for the 2nd respondent to base his decision
which gravely affected the petitioner on the mere request of the 3rd
respondent. I agree with counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner was
not granted a fair hearing. Certainly the conduct of the 2nd respondent is not
calculated to enhance the reputation of the State for fairness. The powers of
public authorities are essentially different from those of private persons. A
private person may have unfettered discretion to regulate his affairs. But a
public authority like the 2nd respondent is bound to act reasonably, in good
faith and upon lawful and relevant grounds. He should observe the principles
of natural justice when exercising his powers against any officer. The
omission of the. 2nd respondent is destructive to the claim of the State to
Rule of Law or to the status of model employer.

There is abundant substance in petitioner's complaint that the 2nd respondent
acted arbitrarily and capriciously. The 2nd respondent had depended too much
on the 3rd respondent's arbitrary report, a report which is not based on any
adverse entry after 1974 in the petitioner's confidential file. It is
surprising that while minor complaints against the petitioner had been
recorded in that file, the grave allegations made by the 3rd and 4th
respondents are not supported by any entry therein. From the 2nd respondent's
affidavit it is clear that the earlier order of transfer of the petitioner to
the Public-Officers-Reserve was not upon any material placed before him by the
Head of Department verifying the reasons why he should be placed on compulsory
leave for general inefficiency and general incompetence. The 3rd and 4th
respondents never confronted the petitioner with such charges and called for
explanation from him before they chose to make serious complaints against him-
such as 'causing considerable dissension within the administration",' "causing
serious problems", "placing obstacles in the way of the smooth functioning of
the department"; "petitioner was a disruptive influence", "petitioner was
involved in bitter conflicts with some of his good senior officers", 'his
conduct was contributory largely to stress and tension within the department.'
Fairness demands that the officer should have been given an opportunity to
correct or contradict such charges.

**323**

In my view the 2nd respondent's decision to retire` the petitioner
compulsorily on the' alleged ground of inefficiency is unreasonable and
unjustifiable and lacked bona fides. True, a grave injustice had been
inflicted on the petitioner. But, mere violation of law by the Executive does
not amount to a violation of the Fundamental Right of equality postulated by
Article 12. Rules of natural justice cannot be elevated to the status of
Fundamental Rights. Natural justice is not a fundamental right in our country
where the architects of our Constitution deliberately eschewed the "due
process' found in the American Constitution. The petitioner has come to this
court seeking relief against "the arbitrary dishonest and capricious act" of
the 2nd respondent, but relief cannot be granted in proceedings under Article
126 in the absence of proof of hostile discrimination evidencing unequal
treatment. In view of my conclusion that the petitioner has suffered a breach
of only a non-fundamental right, and cannot therefore maintain this
application, I do not proceed to discuss the merits of the other arguments of
counsel for the petitioner, such as the applicability of the circular (R 1) to
the case of the petitioner and whether the relevant provisions of the
Establishments Code have been observed etc.

Counsel for the petitioner correctly did not press the ground that the action
of the respondents had infringed the petitioner's fundamental right of freedom
to engage in any lawful occupation, as provided by Article 14(1) (g). The
right of the petitioner to carry on the occupation of surveyor is not, in any
manner, affected by his compulsory retirement from government service. The
right to pursue a profession or to carry on an occupation is not the same
thing as the right to work in a particular post under a contract, of
employment. If the services of a worker are terminated wrongfully, it will be
open to him to pursue his rights and remedies in proper proceedings in a
competent court or tribunal. But the discontinuance of his job or employment
in which he is for the time being engaged does not by itself infringe his
fundamental right to carry on an occupation or profession which is guaranteed
by Article 14(1) (g) of the Constitution. It is not possible to say that the
right of the petitioner to carry on an occupation has, in this case been
violated: It would be open to him, though undoubtedly it will not be easy, to
find other avenues of employment as a Surveyor. Article 14(1) (g) recognises a
general right in every citizen to do work of a particular kind and of his
choice. It does not confer the right to hold a particular job or to occupy a
particular post of one's choice.

**324**

The compulsory retirement complained of, may at the highest affect his
particular employment, but it does not affect his right to work as a Surveyor.
The case would have been different if he had been struck off the roll of his
profession or occupation and thus disabled from practising that profession.

It is with regret that I have to reject the petitioner's present application
for the reason that it does not show a violation of a fundamental right for it
to be maintainable under Article 26 of the Constitution, for, the record
discloses an instance of grave miscarriage of justice resulting from blatant
abuse of power by top officials. I must say that had the 2nd respondent not
misused the powers delegated to him by the Cabinet and wrongly contrived to
terminate the services of the petitioner prematurely on tenuous charges, the
petitioner would not have been left with a stigma at the tail end of his
career of efficient service which had earned him quick promotions.

dismiss the application, but the respondents shall bear their own costs.

**

RANASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** \- I agree.

**

TAMBIAH, J.** \- I agree.

**

DE ALWIS, J.** \- I agree.

**

WANASUNDERA, J.

**

This is an application by the petitioner under Article 126 of the
Constitution, complaining of a violation of the fundamental right o the equal
protection provision in Article 12 of the Constitution. The petitioner was a
staff grade senior public officer holding the substantive post of Deputy
Surveyor-General at the time he was compulsorily retired from service.

The 1st respondent to the petition is Major Montague Jayawickrema, the
Minister of Public Administration and Plantation Industries. The 2nd
respondent is Mr. D. B. I. P. S. Siriwardene, Secretary, Ministry of Public
Administration. The 3rd respondent is Nanda Abeywickrema, Secretary, Ministry
of Lands. The 4th respondent is S. D. F. C. Nanayakkara, the Surveyor-General.
The Attorney-General has been joined as is required by the law and is named
the 6th respondent.

**325**

The petitioner had worked in the Surveyor-General's Department from the date
of his appointment to the public service in February 1957 as an Assistant
Superintendent of Surveys. He rose in the Department to the position of a
Deputy Surveyor-General. In March 1978 he was seconded for duty to the Academy
of Administrative Studies. In 1979. he was appointed Head of the Operations
Management Division of this institution. This institution underwent a
transformation in November 1979 and became known 'as the Sri Lanka Institute
of Development Administration (SLIDA). In May 1982 this institution underwent
a further change and became a corporation. The petitioner functioned as a Co-
coordinating Consultant, Projects and Operation, Management Division of SLIDA
and later was appointed to the post of Additional Director, Training and
Evaluation, while still on secondment as a public officer.

The petitioner has produced evidence to show that the governing authorities of
these institutions, including the 2nd respondent, had greatly valued the
petitioner's services at those institutions and commended him for them.
However, on 6th July, 1983, his services at SLIDA had been summarily
terminated and he was reverted to his position of Deputy Surveyor-General in
the Survey Department, which comes under the Ministry of Lands and Land
Development. Thereafter, by letter dated 24th August, 1984, the 2nd and 3rd
respondents, purporting to act under Public Administration Circular 136,
informed the petitioner that he was being transferred to the Public Officers'
Reserve on the ground of inefficiency and incompetence and, by the same
communication, called upon the petitioner to give his explanation within a
period of 30 days why he should not be compulsorily retired or otherwise
punished for general inefficiency. The petitioner has stated that on 25th
September, 1984, which he says was within the permitted time limit, he sent
his explanation in a letter addressed to the Secretary, Ministry of Lands and
Land Development, through his immediate head, the Surveyor-General. However,
on 27th September, the 3rd respondent informed the 2nd respondent that he had
had no reply from the petitioner and on the same day the 2nd respondent has
called for the relevant file and a few days later, by letter P 1 signed by the
2nd respondent and dated 2nd October, 1984, the petitioner was informed that
he was being retired from the public service for general inefficiency. The
petitioner was then only 51 years of age and had still

**326**

9 more years to reach the compulsory age of retirement. It is the petitioner's
complaint that the action taken against him was the result of personal
animosity on the part of the 1 st respondent towards the petitioner, the 1 st
respondent being the Minister in charge of Public Administration and having
authority over the petitioner in the petitioner's capacity as a public
officer. The petitioner states that this animosity arose. from certain actions
of the petitioner in his capacity as the President of the Sri Lanka Tennis
Association (SLTA) which had affected the 1st respondent, who is also a member
of this Association. The petitioner states that the Sri Lanka Tennis
Association is a private sports club and his membership in the club or its
activities have no bearing whatsoever with the petitioner's official duties as
a public officer.

The petitioner also states that the order of compulsory retirement was put in
operation through the 2nd, 3rd and 4th respondents, who had or claimed to have
varying degrees of supervisory control over the petitioner, and these
respondents, while purporting to act as public officers, had in fact been
acting at the behest and on the dictation of the 1st respondent, who was
actuated by personal animosity and vindictiveness.

The petitioner alleges that he has been dealt with in flagrant violation of
the due process of law and in disregard of rules relating to disciplinary
control of public officers. He has added that as far as he is aware he is the
only public officer who had been dealt with in this manner. He complains that
this constitutes a violation of his fundamental right guaranteed by Article 12
(1) of the Constitution.

Apart from the mala fides imputed to the respondents which Mr.- H. L. de Silva
submitted is sufficient by itself to vitiate the disciplinary proceedings
taken by the respondents, he contended further that, as there is a violation
of a constitutional right flowing from the express provisions of the
Constitution and from rules made there under and since an invidious
distinction has been' made between the petitioner and other public officers,
this would be another ground for sustaining this petition even without proof
of malice.- Perhaps the strong feelings engendered by a sense of injustice may
have compelled Mr. H. L. de Silva to place the issue of ma la fides in the
forefront of his case, but it seems to me that there are other approaches to
this case.

**327**

The question of mala fides is a factual issue which has to be determined upon
a consideration of the numerous affidavits submitted by and on behalf of the
petitioner and the respondents respectively, on which there is a sharp
conflict. The petitioner's accusations are undoubtedly of a serious nature
which Mr. Aziz did his best to meet. The factual evidence on the issue of mala
fides has special relevance to the motives and the circumstances providing the
opportunity for the respondents to take action against the petitioner. It
would also contain the grounds for such action, but to complete the picture a
further element has to be considered and that is the nature of the
disciplinary procedure that was adopted and the validity of such procedure in
relation to fundamental rights. There is therefore more than one issue in this
case, particularly the one relating to the validity of the disciplinary
procedure, that can be decisive of this petition. It is fortunate therefore
that I find that this petition can be resolved on a single legal issue, making
it also unnecessary for me to reach a decision on the factual question. For
the purpose of answering this legal issue, it would first be necessary to
examine carefully the relevant constitutional and legal provisions under which
disciplinary action was taken against the petitioner.

The constitutional provisions relating to disciplinary control and dismissal
of public officers show that public officers who serve the State can be
divided into at least five different categories. Each such category is
governed by a different set of provisions regarding their appointment, tenure,
disciplinary control and removal. For the purposes of this judgment, I shall
confine myself to the class of public officers referred to in Article 55 of
the Constitution to which the petitioner belongs. In the first instance, these
officers come within the authority of the Cabinet of Ministers. The Cabinet is
also the sole authority that can provide for and determine all matters
relating to this class of public officers, such as the formulation of schemes
of recruitment and codes of conduct for such public officers, the principles
to be followed in making promotions and transfers, and the procedure for the
exercise and delegation of the powers of appointment, transfer, dimissal and
disciplinary control of such public officers. The constitution allows the
Cabinet to delegate control over those public officers to another authority.
For this purpose the Constitution has established a Public Service Commission,
which can share these administrative duties with the Cabinet. The Public
Service

**328**

Commission can itself delegate its functions to other authorities. These
constitutional provisions, by providing this system of delegation, ensure a
large measure of flexibility in their operation.

At present the Cabinet has reserved to itself the power of dismissal and
disciplinary control of four types of public officers of this category. The
power of disciplinary control and dismissal over all the other public officers
of this category has been delegated to the Public Service Commission. The
Public Service Commission has in turn delegated control over staff grade
officers in a Ministry to the Secretary of each such Ministry. Mr. H. L. de
Silva has submitted that the petitioner's case falls into this category. There
has also been a specific delegation by the Public Service Commission to the
Secretary, Public Administration, of control over all staff grade officers not
in Ministries and staff officers in the combined Services. Control over non-
staff members has been delegated to each Head of Department.

At this stage it is necessary to look at the various administrative rules and
provisions containing the procedures for disciplinary action . against public
officers. The standard procedures are contained in the Establishments Code,
which compilation as its name indicates is the basic enactment on these
matters. The relevant Chapter is XLVIII of Volume 11 of this Code, which
contains the rules of Disciplinary Procedure.

According to the petitioner, he falls under the main provision of section
2:2:1 of this chapter and the power of dismissal and disciplinary control over
him has been delegated by the Public Service Commission to the Secret dry of
each Ministry. The Public Service Commission had itself been vested with this
authority upon a delegation made to it by the Cabinet of Ministers.

The procedure for the retirement for general inefficiency by the Cabinet of
Ministers or by a Secretary to a Ministry is dealt with in section 23. The
required procedural steps are the following : The Secretary must, in the first
instance, obtain reports on the officer's work and conduct from the Department
in which he has previously served. The Secretary must then inform the officer
in writing of grounds on which it is proposed to retire him for general
inefficiency and request the, officer to show cause in writing within a
stipulated period against the proposed action. On receiving the officer's
explanation, the Secretary must forward the case with his own report

**329**

thereon to the Cabinet of Ministers, through his own Minister. The Minister
must also make his own observations on the matter. If the Cabinet considers
that the offence is one that should be dealt with as falling under Schedule
"A", it will call upon the officer to explain why he should not be
compulsorily retired. If, on the other hand, the Cabinet considers that the
offence is of a type that should be regarded as one falling under Schedule
"B", it will refer the matter back to the Secretary concerned with a direction
that it should be so dealt with.

Admittedly the above procedure has not been followed in this case. The
affidavits of the 2nd and 3rd respondents indicate that they have taken steps
under an alternate procedure contained in Public Administration Circular No.
136, and they have sought to justify the retirement of the petitioner on this
basis.

Public Administration Circular No. 136 (2R1) had been issued by the 2nd
respondent as the Secretary, Ministry of Public Administration and Home
Affairs. It is dated 17th April, 1979 and addressed to all Secretaries of
Ministries and Heads of Departments.

The Circular is titled "Public Officers' Reserve". Paragraph 1 is worded as
follows :

"The Government has decided to set up a Public Officers' Reserve comprising
the following categories of officers

A - those redundant to the needs of the individual departments ; and

B - (i) those who on account of such reasons as inefficiency and incompetence,
are not effective members of the Department ; .

(ii) those who on account of engagement in anti-Government activities, are not
effective members of the Department."

Paragraph 2 states

"The Reservists will be subjected to the following conditions :

(i) Reservists in category 'A' will be granted their increments during the
Reserve period ;

(ii) Reservists in category 'B' will be granted increments only after
examination of each case by the Ministry of Public Administration and Home
Affairs ;

(iii) All Reservists will be placed on compulsory leave."

**330**

The regulations that follow relate to the procedure for taking action. This
would have normally, according to the Constitution, been laid down by the
Cabinet as part of its policy-making powers. But, although the above
impression is sought to be conveyed, it is the Secretary, Public
Administration, who seems to take over from this point onward. Paragraphs 3 to
10 are worded as follows :

"3\. To enable me to implement this decision I shall be glad, if, in respect
of all officers falling under the categories 'A' and 'B' in para 1 of this
Circular, in all Departments under your Ministry, you would forward a
Reservist Report as in Annex 1. It should be sent in duplicate to me and with
a copy to D.S.T. using half sheets (one side only) in respect of each
employee.

4\. The Reservist Report should clearly indicate, as provided, whether the
Reservist falls under category 'A' or category 'B' (i) or category 'B' (ii).

5\. When an officer in category 'A' is transferred to the Reserve, his post
will thereafter not be filled except with the authority of the Treasury as
funds for such a post will be frozen.

6\. In respect of category 'B' Reservists, the transferring Department should
forward to this Ministry a full confidential report on the reasons for the
request for transfer.

7\. In respect of category 'B' Reservists, the reasons for the transfer
requests should be clearly indicated in cage 12 of Annex 1, i.e. whether on
account of such reasons as ineffiency and incompetence on the one hand or on
account of engagement in anti-government activities on the other hand.

8\. Where under category 'B' (i) an officer's transfer is requested on account
of such reasons as inefficiency and incompetence, the Head of Department
should take action under Section 24:1 and 24:2 of Chapter XLVIII of the
Establishments Code. Thereafter however, instead of himself taking action in
terms of 24:3, he should forward all papers with his observations to reach me
within two months of the Reservist Report.

9\. Where under category 'B' (ii) an officer's transfer is requested on
account of engagement in anti-Government activities, the Head of Department
should forward to reach me within one month of the

**331**

Reservist Report, a draft charge sheet with full particulars of all ;acts of
omission and commission, oral and documentary evidence relied on etc. to be
served by me on the Reservist concerned.

10\. The Reservist Reports should be sent to reach me by 30th June, 1979."

Annexure 1 contains the form of the Reservist. Report referred to in paragraph
3.

When Circular 136 is scrutinized; it is found that it reveals a number of
infirmities and weaknesses both inherent and in regard to the context in which
it has been issued. Some of them are of a fundamental nature.

It would have been noted that this Circular has been issued by the Secretary;
Public Administration and Home Affairs. The only reference \- to the.
Government is in the first line of the Circular to the effect that "the
Government has decided to set up a Public Officers' Reserve". The other
paragraphs in the Circular, and certainly those from 3 to 10, are statements
made by the Secretary and there is no reference to those being decisions of
the Government. The date of issue of this Circular is also material. It is
dated 17th April, 1979. In contrast to this, the Establishments Code, which
was admitted in evidence before us, states that it is "issued by the Secretary
to the Ministry of Public Administration under the authority of the Cabinet of
Ministers".

Let us again contrast Volume Il of the Code. It is dated 8th April, 1981,
which is subsequent to the Circular and begins with the following introductory
paragraphs :

"This Volume of the Establishments Code deals with the disciplinary control of
all public officers other than public officers referred to in Articles 41, 51,
52, 54 and 114(6) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of
Sri Lanka and members of the Army, Navy and Air Force.

2\. The provisions of this volume have been approved by the Cabinet of
Ministers in terms of Article 55 (4) of the Constitution of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

3.The new print of Volume II replaces the existing Volume 11 dated 22.04.1974
and shall come into force with effect from 7th September, 1978.'

**332**

There is no reference to the Circular in the Establishments Code, which is an
authoritative enactment issued by the Cabinet of Ministers and subsequent to
the Circular. The Code has also been designed to apply to all classes and
categories of Public officers falling under Article 55. The Circular, on the
other hand, has a reference to the Code, there by admitting the validity of
the Code. The only portion of the Circular that can pass muster is the bare
establishment of a Public Officers' Reserve for which at least there is
Cabinet authority.

Although at the beginning the 2nd respondent relied on the Circular alone, it
must have dawned on him and his legal advisers that reliance on the circular
alone may not justify the procedure followed in this case. Later, in the
course of the proceedings, the 2nd respondent filed a second affidavit
disclosing certain documents which show that in 1981 the Attorney-General
himself had expressed doubts about the validity of the acts of the Secretary,
Public Administration, in respect of this Circular.

In deference to this opinion steps were then taken to feed the Secretary,
Public Administration, with the necessary authority. . Document 2133 filed
with this affidavit is the relevant Cabinet decision. it bears the date 11th
February 1981 and is as follows :

"Cabinet Paper No. 151 of 1981, a memorandum by the Minister of Public
Administration on 'Public Officers Reserve' was considered and it was decided
that the Public Service Commission delegates the powers of transfer, dismissal
and disciplinary control of Public Officers in the Public Officers' Reserve to
the Secretary, Ministry of Public Administration in conformity with the
Attorney General's advice referred to in the memorandum."

In clarification, the Deputy Solicitor-General informed us that the Attorney-
General had expressed the opinion that the Secretary, Public Administration,
had no delegated authority to deal, in any manner, with Public Officers in the
Reserve until a delegation to such effect was granted to him by the proper
authority: Such a delegation had to be effected in two -stages. First, by a
delegation by the Cabinet to the Public Service Commission and, secondly, by a
delegation-. by the Public Service Commission to the Secretary, Public
Administration.

Consequent to 2133, the Secretary, Public Service Commission, in turn, sent
letter' 2R3A to the Secretary, Ministry of Public Administration, notifying
the delegation of the powers of the Commission over the Public Officers'
Reserve to the Secretary, Public

**333**

Administration. This letter is dated 2nd April 1981. This, and not 17th April
1979, the date of, the Circular, would thus be the effective date of the
delegation. Incidentally a slight difference in wording between 2R3 and 2R3A
may be noted and could be of some consequence While by 2R3 the Cabinet
sanctioned a delegation by the Public Service Commission to the Secretary,
Public Administration, of "the powers of transfer, dismissal and disciplinary
control of public officers in the Public Officers' Reserve," the actual
delegation by the Public Service Commission to the Secretary, Public
Administration, states that it is a "delegation of powers relating to the
transfers, dismissal and disciplinary control of officers reported to the
Public Officers' Reserve."

I am inclined to agree with the opinion of the Attorney-General that Circular
136 issued on 17th April 1979 by the Secretary, Public Administration, in so
far as it relates to the provisions of paragraphs .5 to 10, had been issued
without proper legal authority and is therefore void.

Now, whatever be the effect of the attempted rectification, the terms of the
subsequent delegation cannot have the effect of automatically and
retroactively validating Circular No. 136. Nor has this Circular been
subsequently reissued.

Mr. H. L. de Silva has submitted further that this Circular was intended to
provide for the establishment of a Public Officers' Reserve as an interim
measure to weed out and render inactive all unwanted public officers following
upon the change of Government and the coming into operation of the present
Constitution. He has drawn our attention to paragraph 10, which gives 30th
June 1979 as the final date for sending the Reservists' Reports, and to items
3, 10 and 11 of Annexure 1, which has also given the date 31st May 1979 as the
material date for the purpose of the particulars that have to be furnished.
These items are strongly suggestive of Mr. de Silva's contention and this
insistence and reference to a deadline in May 1979 in the Circular' has not
been satisfactorily explained by the respondents.

It will also be observed from the wording of the paragraphs of the Circular
that they appear to deal with merely the transfer to the Reserve and not with
the larger question of disciplinary proceedings. Briefly the procedure
contemplated by the Circular is for the Secretary of the relevant Ministry to
forward to the Secretary, Public Administration, the Reservist's Report duly
perfected. This is in effect

**334**

a request for the transfer of the officer concerned. Paragraph 6 contemplates
the Department that has requested the transfer to send to the Ministry of
Public Administration "a full confidential report on the reasons for the
request for transfer." This probably could be done within the two months'
period referred to in paragraph 8.

When a request has been made for transfer on the ground of inefficiency and
incompetence, paragraph 8 provides for an inquiry before further action is
taken. The proposed inquiry is under section . 24 : 1 and 24 : 2 of Chapter
XLVIll of the Establishments Code. According to these provisions of the Code,
this has to be taken by the Head of the Department. The Code however has been
varied by the Circular to the extent that the final decision has now to be
taken by the Secretary, Public Administration, and the Head of Department has
to forward to him all the relevant papers along with his observation.

The other provisions of the Establishments Code indicate that the delegated
disciplinary authority over the class of officers, such as the petitioner, is
the Secretary to his own Ministry and this Secretary himself has to make the
necessary inquiries and report to the Cabinet of Ministers. When the
provisions of paragraph 8 of the Circular refer 'to sections 24 : 1 and 24 :2
of the Code, it is not clear whether it is intended that these sections should
apply in the normal way or whether section 24 is incorporated by reference in
the Circular and that section has to be adapted and modified to fit into the
provisions of the Circular. Whatever view we take, the Circular appears prima
facie to be inconsistent with the constitutional and other provisions lawfully
made under constitutional powers and would, therefore, be ultra vires. If the
provisions of section 24 are to be applied in the normal way, then, as Mr. H.
L. de Silva submitted, this is an indication that the Circular is not intended
to apply to the category to which the petitioner belongs, but to a lower
category of officers. Whereas the Code promulgated by the Cabinet has divided
the public officers into several categories, this Circular has sought to erase
those divisions and to go by a common standard, namely, the lowest common
denominator where the Head of the Department is the immediate disciplinary
authority.

It is unnecessary to pursue the question as to whether the Circular could or
could not have been revalidated and if a fresh circular had to be issued what
its contents should be. In the absence of a prescribed or applicable
procedure, the provisions of the Establishments Code. mutatis mutandis must
therefore continue to apply.

**335**

The Establishments Code is the basic document relating to procedures of
disciplinary action against public officers. It has been formulated by the
Cabinet of Ministers under Article 55 (4) of the Constitution in whom such a
power is reposed. This formulation has the characteristics of a policy
decision as it deals with the broad principles and procedures governing
disciplinary action against officers of practically the entire public service
in this country. The particular weight to be attached to this Code could be
judged from the fact that public officers in this country under the new
constitutional provisions have now been brought entirely within the domain of
the Executive. Any complaints from public officers relating to their
appointment, transfer, dismissal or disciplinary control, cannot be
entertained by the ordinary courts and decisions of the Cabinet, the Public
Service Commission, or their delegates in regard to any of the above matters
cannot be canvassed in a court of law - Article 55 (5). The only matter that a
public officer can take to the courts - and that only to the Supreme Court
under Article 126 - is a violation of a fundamental right and no other. The
administration of the public service is now an internal matter of the
Executive. It would however appear that the Cabinet, after due deliberation,
has sought to formulate a Code of regulations containing fair procedures and
safeguards balancing the requirements and interests of the Government with the
rights of public officers, and the legal protection now provided by the law to
public officers is contained in this Code. These procedures are therefore
mandatory and cannot be superseded or disregarded without due legal authority.

In my view, in the present case the 2nd, 3rd and 4th respondents have acted
not in terms of the applicable Code, but under a mistaken belief that they
were free to act on some arbitrary procedure. Here we have a case not of the
mere fallibility of officers engaged in the ordinary business of
administration or who operate given Codes of rules, regulations or practices,
but the case of a formulation of policy by highly placed officials involving
the arrogation to themselves of the constitutional powers vested in the
Cabinet of Ministers and the disregard wittingly or unwittingly of a duly
formulated existing Code of Procedure providing protection to public officers.
These actions on the part of the respondents are not the erroneous actions of
some minor public officials operating at the peripheral level of the
administration, but are intentional acts, though misguided, operating, if not
at a policy-making level, at least at a level where their acts have the nature

**336**

and characteristics of policy decisions. They are departures from the norm and
constitute unequal treatment within the meaning of Article 12.

The present case can be contrasted with a case where there is a mere error or
mistake in the working of a Code or regulations which had been duly enacted.
Admittedly such an error or mistake cannot give rise to a violation of a
fundamental right, though it can constitute a violation of an ordinary right
unless that Code or regulations themselves have been purposely formulated so
as to work in a discriminatory way.

In Harrikisson v. Attorney-General of Trinidad and Tobago (24) the Privy
Council dealt with such a situation. The petitioner, who was a school teacher,
was transferred from one school to another without giving him the three
months' notice which was required by the Rules. The powers of transfers,
appointment and disciplinary control of teachers had been vested in the Public
Service Commission by the Constitution. However, by a constitutional amendment
this power was transferred to a Commission called the Teaching Service
Commission.

The Teaching Service Commission had, by Gazette notification, adopted as their
own the Public Service Commission Regulations which related to transfers. The
relevant regulations were as follows :

"134\. Every application for an appointment on transfer in the Teaching
Service shall be addressed to the Director through the Permanent Secretary on
the prescribed form . . ."

"'135. (1) Where the Commission proposes to transfer, a teacher . . . the
Commission shall, except where the exigencies of the Teaching Service do not
permit, make an order of transfer in writing and shall give not less than
three months' notice to the teacher who is to be transferred. (2) Where a
teacher has applied for a transfer to a particular public school and the
Commission proposes to transfer the teacher, but not to the particular school,
the Commission shall, except where the exigencies of the Teaching Service do
not permit, make an order of transfer in writing and shall give not less than
three months' notice to such teacher. (3) A teacher who is aggrieved by an

**337**

order made under paragraph (1) or (2) may make representation to the
Commission for a review of the order in accordance with paragraph (4). (4)
Where a teacher desires to make representation to the Commission for a review
of an order made under paragraph (1) or paragraph (2), such teacher, within 14
days of the receipt of the order, shall give notice in writing to the
Permanent Secretary ... and shall submit with the notice his representations
in writing. (5) The Permanent Secretary shall, within seven days of the
receipt of any representation made to him in writing under paragraph (4)
forward such representation together with his comments . . . thereon to the
Commission. (6) The Commission shall consider the representations of the
teacher and the Permanent Secretary ... submitted to it under paragraphs (4)
and (5) and shall record its decision in writing."

"'136. Notwithstanding that a teacher in respect of whom an order has been
made under paragraph (1) or (2) of regulation 29 has made representation under
paragraphs (5) and (6) of the said regulation the teacher shall assume his
duties on transfer pending the review of the order by the Commission."

The appellant however considered that the transfer was intended as a
punishment for allegations he had made of improprieties at the first school
and that the exigencies of the Teaching Service did not justify his transfer
on less than 3 months' notice. He applied to the High Court under section 6 of
the Constitution for a declaration that there had been a violation of his
fundamental rights in "property" and of his right to equality before the law
and equal protection of the law. The appellant had however chosen not to avail
himself of an administrative review procedure provided by the regulations.

In regard to the equality provisions, the Privy Council said

"These regulations define the legal rights enjoyed by the appellant in
relation to his transfer from one post to another in the Teaching Service. It
is in exercise of these rights that he is entitled to the protection of the
law."

It also said :

" . . . What the appellant was entitled to under this paragraph was the right
to apply to a court of justice for such remedy (if any) as the law of Trinidad
and Tobago gives to him against being transferred from one post to another
against his will. There is nothing in the material before the High Court to
give any colour to the suggestion that he was deprived of the remedy which the
law gave him. On the contrary he deliberately chose not to avail himself of
it."

**338**

Speculating on what could be the position if the appellant had availed himself
of his remedy under the regulations, the court went on to add : .

"Strictly speaking this makes it unnecessary for their Lordships to decide
whether, if the appellant had followed the procedure laid down in the
regulations, and the commission, after considering his representations and
those of the Permanent Secretary, had adhered to their decision to order him
to be transferred to Palo Seco Primary School, the Nigh Court would have had
any jurisdiction to quash the commission's order, not, as their Lordships have
indicated, under section 6 of the Constitution, but upon an application for
certiorari. Those hypothetical circumstances correspond more closely with
those which the Court of Appeal assumed to exist since they were unaware that
there were regulations applicable to the appellant which gave him a right to
seek a review by the commission of the order of transfer."

This was a case, as stated earlier, where action was taken under a valid set
of regulations and even if there had been some irregularity in the application
of those regulations, this would not have amounted to a violation of the
fundamental right of equality. In contrast, the case before us is one where
the authorities had acted arbitrarily without a valid set of rules of
procedure or in disregard of the Code contemplated by the Constitution and
formulated by the Cabinet of Ministers. This Code constitutes the norm and
embodies the necessary safeguards to protect the rights of public officers. It
constitutes the state of the law on this matter and is and should be
applicable, without exception, to all public officers of the class or category
to which the petitioner belongs. Any departure id a particular case from this
basic norm, which is of general application, would be a deprivation of the
protection given by the law and must be regarded as unequal treatment and a
violation of Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

Recent trends in the Supreme Court of India on the interpretation of the
equality clause in the Indian Constitution -were brought to our notice, but it
is unnecessary .for me to enter into a discussion, interesting though it be,
of these developments for the purpose of this judgment. Suffice- it is to say
that in a number of recent Indian decisions- the Indian Supreme Court appears
to have taken the view, that it is prepared to hold that even a mere departure
from defined

**339**

procedures would be sufficient to constitute a violation of the fundamental
right of equality under Article 14. However, as stated above, it has become
possible for me to base my judgment on grounds other than this and it is
therefore not necessary to rely on this line of reasoning. I would however
like to set out as a matter of interest a quotation from the judgment in
Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. ` International Airport Authority of India (supra)
which is as follows

2 (a) It is a well settled rule of administrative law that an executive
authority must be rigorously held to the standards by which it professes its
action to be judged and it must scrupulously observe those standards on pain
of invalidation of an act in violation of them. The defined procedure, even
though generous beyond the requirements that bind such agency, must be
scrupulously observed. This rule, though supportable also as emanating from
Article 14, does not rest merely on that Article. It has an independent
existence apart from Article 14. It is a -rule of administrative law which has
been judicially evolved as a check against exercise of arbitrary power by the
executive authority. It is indeed unthinkable that in a democracy governed by
the rule of law the executive Government or any of its officers should possess
arbitrary power over the interests of the individual. Every action of the
executive government must be informed with reason and should be free from
arbitrariness. That is the very essence of the rule of law and its bare
minimal requirement."

In the course of the arguments an incidental question came up for discussion,
namely, whether in order to establish discrimination under Article 12 there
must be actual evidence to show that other persons had been differently
treated, compared to the petitioner. It was suggested that in this case there
was no evidence of other persons of the same category being treated or placed
in a more advantageous position than the petitioner.

Admittedly a comparison is necessary. In the case of an individual or office,
which is singular, the notional comparison would be with the norms or the
protection legally applicable to that person or office. In the case of a
person in a group, it would be the norms or protection applicable to the
group; and in the case of a' group or category, the issue would really be the
reasonableness of the classification itself. The suggested view is therefore
based on a misconception and is not supported either by law, logic or
practice.

**340**

It would be observed that Article 12(1) does not use the word "discriminate".
It merely sets out the concept of equality. The term "discriminate" is used
however in Article 12(2), which is subsidiary to Article 12 (1), and what this
provision does is to prohibit a classification in terms of the specified items
which, in the absence of such a provision, may have been a permissible
classification under Article 12(1). Article 12(1) is cast in much broader
terms than 12(2) both in concept and content. Any departure from the norm
which is the law of the land, whether or not it be understood in the specific
sense of the term "discrimination" used in Article 12(2), would prima facie
amount to a violation of Article 12(1). But Article 12(1) does not forbid
reasonable classification. In this connection the courts have held that a law
may be constitutional even though it relates to a single individual who is in
a class by himself. -Dalmia's Case (25).

Take the example of legislation. In this country we have the mechanism of
deciding the constitutionality of legislation at the Bill stage or pre-
enactment stage, but in the U.S. and in India the constitutionality can be
decided at any time after enactment. In such cases, when there is a conflict
of the legislation with the fundamental rights, this issue is generally
decided on a notional basis and not necessarily by showing that the impugned
legislation is discriminatory in relation to any real individual 'A' or 'B'.
Where impugned legislation or executive action is based on a classification,
which is generally the case, again matters are generally decided on a notional
basis, that is, whether one class is placed advantageously or
disadvantageously in relation to the other.. Innumerable cases indicate this,
although in some cases where the necessary evidence is forthcoming the actual
names of an individual or individuals who may have been treated more
advantageously may be given. This however is not one of the criteria in
deciding the matter - rather a matter of evidence and procedure. One can
contemplate many situations, classifications and even government posts which
are singular and have no parallel and in such cases the proposed test cannot
be applied and if applied would mean that even some of the highest officers of
the State will be relegated to a position where they would be denied the
constitutional remedy under Article. 126. The application of that test would
also mean that the very first instance in the application of a law, regulation
or rule or

**341**

executive action, however illegal and discriminating it may be, cannot give
rise to a cause of action for lack of comparison and an aggrieved ; person
would be again shut out from coming to court under Article 126\. The equality
clause of the Constitution must by its very nature be all-embracing and of
universal application, subject only to the principle of classification. The
proposed test has nothing to do with the principle of classification nor does
it purport to have any rational relation to the object sought by the impugned
act or legal provisions. Such a view, far from advancing the protection of the
fundamental rights which are enjoined on us, lets in an irrational and
irrelevant factor into the process of interpretation and this would result in
cutting down considerably the wide scope of the equality clause.

This brings me to the next question as to whether or not such discrimination
can constitute "executive or administrative action' within the meaning of
Article 126 of the Constitution. Although we can begin a discussion of this
matter by referring to the case of Wijesinghe v. The Attorney-General (supra),
it may be necessary to remind ourselves that in Wijesinghe"s Case (supra) this
court was dealing with the exception rather than the general rule relating to
state liability for violation of fundamental rights. The present case relates
to a different situation. This is a case, as stated earlier, not of some
error, negligence or mistake on the part of some public officer operating a
given Code of rules or practices. Here we have purposeful though misguided
action by a group of public officers who, acting for and on behalf of the
state, have formulated and put in operation a set of rules. These decisions
have the characteristics and nature of policy decisions at one level while at
another level they maybe considered as ordinary administrative action. While
the steps taken by the 2nd respondent have the characteristics of a policy
decision, some of the other errors, which would ordinarily be regarded as
violations of mere rights and not a violation of a constitutional right or a
fundamental right, may in the special circumstances of this case have to be
assimilated to the aforesaid policy decision as they constitute an integral
part of the alternate procedure devised in this matter. The respondents, while
acting in their capacity as public officers but without due authority, had
under a' mistaken view of their powers sought to divert the orderly course of
administration to unauthorised and unwarranted channels, thereby placing the
petitioner at a disadvantage compared with other officers similarly placed. In
short

**342**

the petitioner has been denied the protection of the law which he was entitled
to. This would constitute discrimination by executive or administrative action
within the meaning of Article -12.

In my view, this application can be disposed of on this legal ground alone. I
am accordingly not called upon to make any pronouncement on the factual
question of malice argued before us and I wish to make it clear that I make no
pronouncement thereon.. The petitioner therefore succeeds in this application
and I would quash the order of compulsory retirement and order the State to
reinstate the petitioner in the substantive post he held before action was
taken to retire him.

It is however quite clear that the relations between the petitioner and some
of the respondents are quite strained and the petitioner would prefer an order
of compensation rather than continue in service. The Deputy Solicitor-General,
who presented the case. for the Government competently and fairly indicated to
us when a settlement was discussed in the course of the hearing that the
Government would be prepared to take back the petitioner and, if necessary,
permit him to retire from service in the normal way, adding any years of
service necessary for this purpose.

The petitioner is undoubtedly an able officer whose competence and skills in
many fields were conceded by the respondents. The respondents have however
alleged that the petitioner's conduct is abrasive and belligerent and is a
disruptive influence wherever he works and that this is a serious failing
going to his competence and efficiency in the case of his further promotion.
Clearly the Government would prefer not to. have him in these circumstances
and, since the petitioner has himself averred that the feelings between him
and his seniors have been strained to breaking point, I trust that the offer
made by the State, which is expected to be a model employer, is still open and
it would be possible for the parties to adjust their differences in a fair and
reasonable manner. It would be unfortunate if an officer of undoubted ability
who had served the State for 27 years is compelled to go out in this fashion,
leaving the public service under a cloud.

I would suggest for the, serious consideration of the State some adjustment of
this matter on lines indicated above which-it would be observed, does not go
beyond the terms that were offered by the , State in the course of the
hearing. Apart from the above suggestions,

**343**

my specific order is for the reinstatement of the petitioner in his
substantive post with effect from the alleged date of compulsory retirement.

The application is therefore allowed with costs, which are payable by the
State.

**

WIMALARATNE, J.

**

The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, in its
Preamble, assures to all people freedom, equality, justice and fundamental
human rights as the intangible heritage that guarantees the dignity and well
being of succeeding generations of the People of Sri Lanka. To give meaning to
this Preamble the Constitution enumerates in Chapter III the Fundamental
Rights it guarantees. Further, in Chapter VI which deals with the "Directive
Principles of State Policy & Fundamental Duties" it proclaims in Article 27
(2) that the State is pledged to establish in Sri Lanka a democratic socialist
society the objectives of which include the full realisation of the
Fundamental Rights and Freedoms of all persons. Article 4 (d) enjoins all
organs of government to respect, secure and advance, and not to abridge,
restrict or deny the fundamental rights declared and recognised in the
Constitution. In my approach to the interpretation of the equality provisions
contained in Article 12 (1) I shall bear in mind not only the recitals in the
Preamble, not only the injunction contained in Article 4 (d), but also the
spirit enshrined in them and the duty of this Court to advance and not to
restrict the fundamental rights so meaningfully enshrined.

The petitioner Elmore Perera is an Honours Graduate of the University of
Colombo. He joined the public service as an Assistant Superintendent of
Surveys on 1.2.57. By 1975 he had risen to the rank of Deputy Surveyor-General
without any halt in his progress. He was seconded to the Academy of
Administrative Studies in 1978 and made Head of the Operations Management
Division of that Organisation in 1979. In the same year there was formed the
Sri Lanka Institute of Development Administration (SLIDA). The petitioner was
appointed co-ordinate consultant; Projects & Operations Management Division of
that Institution. SLIDA was incorporated by Act No. 9 of 1982 and among the
general objects of SLIDA is the development of a competent cadre of
supervisory and support staff throughout the public service to ensure
efficient and effective

**344**

administration at all levels - Section 3 (d). SLIDA has a Governing Council
whose Chairman is the Secretary to the Ministry of Public Administration and
who is the 2nd respondent to this application. The other members of the
Council consist of the Secretaries to several important Ministries as well as
a Director of the Institute, Mr. V. T. Navaratne by name. The Governing
Council appointed the Petitioner to be the Additional Director, Training and
Evaluation. By November 1982 the petitioner had also completed the I.C.M.A.
examination and was admitted as an Associate-- Member of the Institute of Cost
and Management Accountants.

His career was however interrupted when he was informed that his services were
no longer required at SLIDA, by the 2nd respondent's letter K dated 5:7.83.
Yet, whilst reverting to his substantive post of Deputy Surveyor-General he
did lecture at SLIDA as a visiting lecturer until that too was discontinued in
November 1983. Admittedly that was as a result of instructions received by the
2nd respondent from the 1st respondent, who is the Minister of Public
Administration and to whom the subject of SLIDA was assigned. An attempt to
ascertain whether there was any reason other than the Minister's directive for
this reversion revealed that the Director Mr. Navaratne had placed on record
on 21.7.83 the fact that the petitioner "had made a significant contribution
to SLIDA's development, particularly in the area of project management and
operations research". What is more, the 2nd respondent expressed his regret
that circumstances made it necessary to terminate the petitioner's association
with SLIDA "to which petitioner had made a valuable contribution over several
years". I take it that senior Public Officers mean what they say, and say what
they mean.

I therefore find it difficult to understand how Mr. Navaratne in his affidavit
filed in this case takes up the position that the petitioner had at times been
abrasive, tactless in his relation with trainees, and that ' his attitude was
counterproductive to the objectives of SLIDA. If that had been so he should
never have given the petitioner the certificate referred to , but having given
it he must expect us to act on it.

After he reverted to his substantive post the petitioner had to undergo
further humiliation. By Public Administration Circular No. 1.36, dated 17.4.79
the Government had set up a "Public Officers Reserve"

**345**

with the intention of placing in that Reserve the following categories of
officers :

A (1) those redundant to the needs of the individual departments ; and

B (i) those who on account of such reasons as inefficiency and incompetence,
were not effective members of the department ,

(ii) those who on account of engagement in anti-government activity were not
effective members of the department ,

All reservists were to be placed on compulsory leave prior to disciplinary
action being taken against them.

The 3rd respondent who is the Secretary to the Ministry of Lands, under which
Ministry comes the Department of the Surveyor-General, who is the 4th
respondent by his letter Q dated 24.8.84 requested the 2nd respondent to
transfer the petitioner to the Reserve, and also required the petitioner to
show cause why he should not be retired for general inefficiency and
incompetence. The reply was to be sent to reach the 2nd respondent within 30
days of receipt.

The petitioner was thus placed in the Reserve, sans work, awaiting his trial
for inefficiency and incompetence. He says he sent a reply to reach the 3rd
respondent on 26.9.84 but the 3rd respondent by his letter 2R2 dated 27.9.84
reported to the 2nd respondent that he had received no reply to Q up to that
date. Thereupon the 2nd respondent by his letter P1 dated 2.10.84 retired him
under section 24 :3 of Chapter XLVIII of the Establishments Code on the ground
of general inefficiency because the petitioner had not replied to Q. It would
suffice to state here that section 24 :3 applies to the case of the Head of
Department retiring an officer and not to the case of a Secretary to a
Ministry retiring an officer.

It has been contended by learned Counsel for the Petitioner that Circular No.
136 has no application to the retirement for general inefficiency of an
officer of a grade to which the petitioner belongs. The circular, by paragraph
8, imposes a `duty on the Head of Department to take action under sections 24
:1 and 24 :2 of Chapter XLVIII of the Code. When we- look at those sections in
the Establishments Code, which is the document X7 it seems quite clear

**346**

that they, relate to the retirement of officers for, general inefficiency in
respect of. whom disciplinary control is exercised by the Head of a Department
and not by a Secretary to a Ministry. Staff grade officers such as the
petitioner fall within subsection 2 :2 :1 and in respect of those officers the
Public Service Commission (P.S.C.) has delegated its powers of, dismissal and
disciplinary control to Secretaries of Ministries. It was never intended that
staff officers who fall within category 2 :2 :1 were to be dealt with by the
circular. The circular was limited not only in its scope as regards the
categories of officers who could be death with under it, but also in its
duration, as could be gathered from the fact that Heads of Departments were
obliged to send in the "Reservist Report" to reach the Secretary, Public
Administration before 30.6.79. This aspect of the matter as well as the
failure of the 2nd, 3rd and 4th respondents to comply with the Circular, even
on the assumption that it did apply, has been dealt with fully in the
judgments of my brothers Wanasundara, J., and Colin Thome, J. whose judgments
I have had the benefit of reading. There has thus been a misapplication of
Circular No. 136.

The power of dismissal and disciplinary control of public officers (other than
of those public officers who hold office by virtue of an appointment from the
President) is vested by Article 55 (1) of the Constitution of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka in the Cabinet of Ministers. The Cabinet
directly exercises these powers over Additional Secretaries to Ministries,
Heads of Departments, Government Agents and Senior Assistant Secretaries. The
Cabinet has delegated its powers over other categories of public officers to
the Public Service Commission by Article 55 (3), and by article 55 (4) the
Cabinet has provided for "the procedure for the exercise and delegation of the
powers of appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of public
officers"". That procedure is to be found in the Establishments Code. By
subsection 2 :2 :1 of the Code the P.S.C. has delegated to Secretaries to
Ministries its powers of dismissal and disciplinary control of certain
categories of officers in the Staff grade (with certain exceptions which do
not concern us in this case). Admittedly Deputy Surveyors-General fall within
the category so delegated to the Secretary to the Ministry, which is the
Ministry of Lands and Land Development, and whose Secretary is the 3rd
respondent.

**347**

The Petitioner's case is that the disciplinary powers placed in the hands of
the Cabinet of Ministers to retire compulsorily a public officer of the staff
grades was never exercised by the Cabinet in the case of the Petitioner.
Disciplinary powers Which were conferred on the executive for purposes germane
to the administration of the public service were used by the four respondents
for a wholly alien purpose, namely, to punish the Petitioner (a public
officer) on account of personal grievances by securing his premature
retirement from the public service. Thus the Petitioner was denied both
equality before the law, as well as the equal protection of the law.

The retirement on grounds of general inefficiency of staff grade officers such
as the Petitioner is regulated by the following sections of the Code :

23\. Retirement for General Inefficiency by the Cabinet of Ministers or by the
Secretary to a Ministry. 7

23: 1 Where the Secretary to a Ministry is of opinion that an officer referred
Win section 2 : 1 or sub-section 2 : 2 : 1 and not belonging to a Combined
Service should be compulsorily retired from Public Service on grounds of
general inefficiency, which cannot be appropriately dealt with by specific
charges, or which do not appropriately fall within the terms of section 22 he
will obtain reports on the officer from the Departments in which he has
previously served on his work and conduct.

23 : 3 Thereafter, the procedures outlined in sections 22 : 3 to 22 : 6 will
apply.

22 : 3 The Secretary will then inform the officer in writing of the grounds on
which it is proposed to retire him for general inefficiency and request him to
show cause in writing within a stipulated period as to why he should not be
retired or otherwise dealt with for inefficiency.

22 : 4 On receiving his explanation the Secretary will forward the case, with
his own report thereon to the Cabinet of Ministers through the Minister
concerned. The Minister will also make his own observations on the matter.

**348**

22 : 5 If the Cabinet of Ministers considers that the offence is one that
should be dealt-with as falling under Schedule A it will call upon the officer
to explain why he should not be compulsorily retired.

22 : 7 If the offence falls under Schedule 'A the order may either be one of
compulsory retirement or one imposing a punishment.

**

Schedule A

**

(1) Incompetence, negligence or errors of judgment resulting in serious
failures in the planning or execution of important programmes, projects or
policies.

(2) Offences of the type that: are serious enough to warrant dismissal or a
major punishment.

(3) Repeated offences of a type which considered singly, are not serious
enough to warrant dismissal or a major punishment, but where repetition
justifies 'dismissal or a major punishment.

It is quite clear, in fact it has been conceded, that the 3rd respondent, the
Secretary to the Ministry of Lands had not complied with this procedure.
Whilst there has been a misapplication of the Circular by the 2nd respondent
there has been a non-application of the correct procedure in respect of the
retirement of the petitioner for general inefficiency by the Secretary to his
Ministry, the 3rd respondent. The Cabinet of Ministers was never made aware of
any offence committed by the petitioner for the Cabinet to take steps under
sections 22 : 5 and 22 : 7 of the Code. The termination of the petitioner's
services was clearly unlawful.

The Petitioner states that the order of compulsory retirement by the 2nd
respondent was not only unlawful, but also made against him solely by reason
of the personal animosity and vindictiveness that the 1 st respondent (the
Minister) had towards him, and that the 2nd, 3rd & 4th respondents were, in
the circumstances, acting at the dictation of the 1 st respondent and in order
to conform to his wishes, and have thus by these acts denied the petitioner
-the equal protection of the law. In support of the hostility of the Minister
towards him the petitioner relies on the following incidents:

(a) The Instructions given by the Minister to the 2nd respondent on 24.5.83
that the petitioner should be summoned and instructed to stop interfering with
the playing section of the Sri Lanka Tennis

**349**

Association (S.L.T.A.). It is admitted that the 2nd respondent conveyed these
instructions to V. T. Navaratne, who in turn conveyed them to the petitioner.
There appears to have been quite a deal of friction between the petitioner who
was the President of the S.L.T.A. and one Duwearachi, who was the President of
the playing section of that body. The 1 st respondent was the Vice-Patron of
the S.L.T.A. It is alleged by the petitioner that Duwearachi as an ardent
supporter of the Minister had claimed for the Minister certain privileges such
as waiver of the limitation on playing time to half an hour, which was opposed
by the Petitioner.

The Petitioner's services at SLIDA were terminated as from 6.7.83. This was
done on the instructions of the Minister, as admitted by the Minister in his
affidavit, for the reason that SLIDA had a responsibility for training present
and future administrators, and permitting a lecturer of the disposition of the
Petitioner to train them would be inimical to the interests of SLIDA.
Unfortunately, however, the 2nd respondent who was the Chairman of SLIDA and
whose responsibility it was to assess the value of the lectures appears to
have had a different view. It cannot be forgotten that by his letter P2 of
13.3.84 2nd respondent had referred to the valuable services rendered by the
Petitioner to SLIDA over several years. Even if, as the 2nd respondent says,
it was a polite way of terminating an association, it was too serious a matter
to have been put down in writing considering the fact that his own Minister, a
few months earlier, had an unfavourable opinion of the Petitioner's
disposition and hence disqualified him to teach future administrators. It
seems to me that apart from the independent attitude the Petitioner took in
the affairs of the SLTA of which he was President, there was no valid reason
for the 2nd respondent to have terminated his services at SLIDA. The only
reason was to satisfy the Minister's direction.

(b) John Rodrigo is an assistant Superintendent of Police and also Assistant
Secretary of the SLTA. He says in his affidavit that on 20.7.83 when he was
waiting for a game of tennis near court No. 22 the 1 st respondent addressed
him thus-"I say, you better tell that fellow Elmore Perera that I will take
him off the Survey Department and put him in my pool." The "pool" referred to
is the "Public Officers Reserve" which came under the Minister of Public

**350**

Administration. There was an emergency committee meeting of the SLTA held on
12.8.83 and John Rodrigo reported this conversation to the Committee. The 1 st
respondent denies having made this statement and attributed that John Rodrigo
has maliciously made this affidavit in order to malign him. In view of the
Minister's denial, and the period of about 14 months-that elapsed between the
alleged statement of the Minister and the date of actual transfer to the
"pool," I would hold that that allegation has not been proved by the
Petitioner.

(c) On 25.5.84 the Minister of Sports issued a directive to the SLTA limiting
the playing area by reserving 14 courts out of 23 courts for the purpose of
carrying out coaching and training programmes at a national level. This
directive of the Minister was challenged in the Court of Appeal by Duwearachi
and his faction. A temporary success in the way of a "stay order" was turned
into defeat when the court refused to extend the stay order beyond 3.8.84. The
petitioner Elmore Perera was the 2nd respondent to that application.

(d) The petitioner pleads that the failure of the Minister to get elected as
Vice-Patron followed by the failure of the Minister's faction in the Court
case "wounded his pride". Hence he decided to take revenge on the petitioner
by getting the co-operation of three public officers (2nd, 3rd and 4th
respondents) who he alleges were prepared to abuse the authority and powers
vested in them under the disciplinary rules to terminate the petitioner's
career as a public officer. The petitioner submits that Q and P1 were issued
at the Minister's instigation.

The next question is whether the 2nd respondent, in terminating the
petitioner's services as Deputy Surveyor-General acted independently, or
whether he acted at the request of the Minister. As regards the removal of the
petitioner from SLIDA, even if 2nd respondent acted on the directions of the
Minister he cannot be blameworthy because there may be some justification by
reason of section 30 (1) of Act No. 9 of 1982, which obliges the Institute to
give effect to such special or general direction given in writing by the
Minister. But as regards the transfer of the petitioner to the Reserve that
was not upon any material placed before him by the Head of Department (4th
respondent) in the form of a full confidential report, as required by
paragraph 6 of the

**351**

Circular, but, at the mere. request of the 3rd respondent, without even an
oral communication of the reasons for alleging general inefficiency in support
of the request. There was even less justification for terminating the
petitioner's services by letter P .1. Nowhere has the 2nd respondent come to
any finding of general inefficiency. Manifestly he did not have the
confidential report of the' petitioner,- required by the Circular to be sent
to him, before he took a decision, nor does the 2nd respondent say that even
an oral communication of--the petitioner's inefficiency was ever made to him
at any time by either the 3rd or the 4th respondents who are the officers who
would have known best. The letter P 1 gives as the reason for holding that the
petitioner is guilty of inefficiency the fact that he had not replied the 3rd
respondent's show cause letter within 30 days: But it- has been established
beyond doubt that the petitioner did hand over-his reply within 30 days to the
3rd respondent. Learned Deputy S.G. quite correctly stated that he was not
taking the defence that the reply was not sent in time. We are therefore left
with the simple situation that the petitioner has been retired for
inefficiency without proof of any inefficiency. To retire a public officer on
the ground. of inefficiency when in fact such inefficiency has not been proved
is to add insult to injury.

When the 3rd respondent by his letter of 27.9.83 informed the 2nd respondent
that the petitioner had not as yet sent his explanation, what was the
inordinate hurry for the 2nd respondent to take immediate action to retire the
petitioner when paragraph 8 of the Circular itself gave the Head of Department
a two- month period of time to send all papers together with his observations.
The 2nd respondent 'could well have shown his bona fides by calling for the
confidential report required to be sent by the Circular even at that stage.
Had he not been in haste, the 2nd respondent would have had the benefit of
reading the petitioner's explanation contained in P 18 and P 19 which had
reached the hands of the Surveyor-General within the stipulated month. The
petitioner submits that the haste with which the 2nd respondent acted shows
his desire to please his Minister at every turn, even if that meant the
removal of a Senior Public Officer for general inefficiency without any
evidence of such.

What, then is the remedy available to a public officer whose services have
been terminated without compliance with the Constitutional procedure
stipulated for his removal, and who proved that such

**352**

termination has been motivated by ill will towards him ? Article 55 (5)
provides that subject to the jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court under
paragraph (1) of Article 126 no court or tribunal shall have power or
jurisdiction to inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner call in question
any order or decision of the Cabinet of Ministers, a Minister, the Public
Service Commission, a Committee of the Public Service Commission or of a
Public Officer, in regard to any matter concerning the appointment, transfer,
dismissal or disciplinary control of a public officer. So the Writs are out,
Declaration is out and an action for damages for wrongful dismissal is out. He
is completely debarred by this section from seeking relief in the Court of
Appeal or the District Court. His only forum is the Supreme Court, if he comes
by way of Article 126 (1 ).

The argument of the Deputy S.G. that the petitioner if he is aggrieved by the
retirement order has a right to appeal to the P.S.C. does not merit serious
consideration because it is not an answer to a charge of infringement of
fundamental rights when the exclusive jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is
invoked under Article 126. If a violation of the fundamental right to equality
and equal protection is found to be present upon a complaint made by a public
officer, the Supreme Court cannot deny the petitioner relief on the ground
that he has another remedy, namely, an appeal to the P.S.C. The exercise of
the Supreme Court jurisdiction is not conditional upon there being no other
remedy available to the person aggrieved. If the petitioner's complaint of a
violation of fundamental rights is true, then Article 17 of the Constitution
guarantees to him the constitutional remedy provided by Article 126. Since
Article 17 appears within Chapter III, entitled "Fundamental Rights", the
remedy itself has the status of a fundamental right and is an entrenched right
and its exercise cannot be taken away or whittled down by the plea that he
could appeal to the P.S.C. The P.S.C. cannot determine the question whether
his fundamental right to equality has been violated. The jurisdiction is
exclusively vested in the Supreme Court. The P.S.C. may decide whether an
order of compulsory retirement has been properly made by the lawful authority
but it cannot rule on the question of a violation of fundamental rights. In
this case the lawful authority to make an order of compulsory retirement was
the Cabinet of Ministers which did not in fact exercise the power. It seems to
me that the right of appeal given under Article 58 (2) does not apply to a
case where the authority empowered to make the order is the Cabinet of
Ministers. The power

**353**

which the second respondent purported to exercise was never lawfully delegated
to him by the P.S.C. Therefore no: question of an appeal to the P. S. C.
arose. in this case.

It is significant; that the petitioner is here not complaining of an
inadvertent failure to comply with the law-not an isolated mistaken view or a
bona fide `error` made by the respondents: His case is that it was a wilful
and a deliberate course of conduct carried out with a malicious intention and
in concert and collusion by the four respondents in order to punish the
petitioner for a purely personal and private grievance of the 1 st respondent
which has nothing to do with their official duties.

In the case of Wijesinghe v. Attorney-General (supra) this Court held that
every wrong decision or breach of the law does not attract the constitutional
remedies relating to fundamental rights. Where a transgression of the law
takes place due solely to some corruption, negligence or error of judgment a
person cannot be allowed to come under Article 126 and allege that there has'
been violation of constitutional guarantees. That was a case where the
petitioner, who was a sub post mistress from 1975 complained that her services
had been terminated from 31.1.79 by the Post-Master-General in consequence of
a Cabinet decision following the report of a Committee known as the "Political
Victimisation Committee" set up to inquire into political victimisations by
the previous government. The petitioner stated that her termination was-
effected without any charges being brought against her and without giving her
a hearing. The relief claimed Was under Articles 12 (1) and (2). The Court in
coming to its finding had been guided by the decision of the Supreme Court of
India in State of Jammu & Kashmir v. Ghulam Rasool (supra) where the Court
held that even where the State had failed to follow the procedure prescribed
by the Kashmir Civil Service Rules before the order demoting the employee was
made, all that the State had done was to have, if the Rules had the status of
Law, acted in breach of the law, but that did not amount to a denial of the
equal protection of the law. In his judgment in Wijesinghe's Case (supra)
Wanasundera, J. made the following significant observation :

"The mistake of the (Political Victimisation) Committee however serious,
cannot in my view have the effect of undermining the Cabinet decision, which
by virtue of the Constitutional provision, is entitled to an independent
existence".

**354**

What I understand by the above passage is that by virtue of Article 55 (1) the
Cabinet of Ministers had the power to. terminate the services of public
officers , because they held office "at pleasure". "At pleasure" in the
context meant at the pleasure of the Cabinet of Ministers who by Article 43
(1) is charged with the direction and control of the Government of the
Republic and which is collectively responsible to Parliament. The Head of the
Cabinet of Ministers is the President himself. "At pleasure" can never mean at
the pleasure of a Secretary to a Minister or at the pleasure of a single
Minister. Had the decision to retire the petitioner been taken by the Cabinet
of Ministers, then such decision would be unassailable. So that, unlike in
Wijesinghe's Case (supra) there is no decision, (other than an unlawful
termination by a Secretary who had no jurisdiction) "entitled to an
independent existence". Wijesinghe's Case (supra) is therefore easily
distinguishable.

In Dr. Wijetunga v. Alawatuwala (supra) the petitioner who was a Doctor in
Government service admitted that he openly but passively associated: himself
with his father on political platforms of the S.L.F.P. during the Presidential
Elections of 1982. Charges were framed against him in respect of his political
activity. The petitioner did not complain that the disciplinary inquiry was
vitiated by any irregularity or breach of principles of natural justice. In
fact at the end of the inquiry he signed the record of the proceedings to
signify his satisfaction with the manner in which the inquiry was held. His
only complaint was that the Inquiring officer was under pressure to hold
against him.

Rodrigo, J. held firstly that the only way out for the petitioner to seek
relief from the order of his dismissal is to have recourse to the saving
clause in Article 55 (5), and secondly that he cannot bring himself under
Article 12 (1) except in contrast, and there was no other person to provide
the contrast. In my separate judgment I agreed with the order proposed by
Rodrigo, J. because the facts did not disclose that there had been a violation
of, any of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 12 (1), 12 (2) or 14
(1.) (g). Incidentally, the first of the above findings of Rodrigo, J. that
the only way out for the petitioner to seek relief was under Articles 55 (5)
provides an answer to those who are of the view that the petitioner's remedy
was by way of appeal to the P.S.C. under Article 58 (2).

**355**

Chapter III of the Constitution dealing with "Fundamental Rights" provides in
Article 12(1) that "All persons are equal before the law and are entitled to
the equal protection of the law." Our Article 12(1)` is in the same terms as
Article 14 of the Constitution of India'. Shukla in his Commentary on the
Constitution of India (7th Ed.) states at page 29 that this Article guarantees
to every person the right not to be denied equality before the law or the
equal protection of the law. The first expression :- "equality before the law"
which is taken from the English Common law, is -a declaration of equality of
all persons within the territory, implying thereby the absence of any special
privilege in favour of any individual. The second expression, "the equal
protection of the laws" which is rather a corollary of the first expression,
and is based on the last clause of the first section of the 14th Amendment to
the American Constitution, directs that equal protection shall be secured to
all persons in the enjoyment of their rights and privileges without favoritism
or discrimination. Equality before the law is a negative concept ; equal
protection of the law is a positive one.

Seervai in his critical commentary on the Constitutional Law, of India (Vol 1
3rd Ed.) states at p. 275 that equal protection of the laws must mean the
protection of equal laws for all persons similarly situated. To separate
persons similarly situated, from those who are not, we must discriminate, that
is, "act on the basis of a difference between" persons . . . . who are and
persons who are not similarly situated.

It has been the main contention of learned D.S.G. that even assuming that all
the facts as deposed to by the Petitioner are established, yet there is no
violation of Article 12(1) of the Constitution. For Article 12(l) to operate
there has to be proof of discrimination by the executive, and there can be no
discrimination unless there be more than one person. In the instant case, it
is his submission that besides establishing that his services have been
unlawfully terminated, there is no proof that he has been discriminated as
against another of his same class either in the method of retirement or in the
procedure adopted.

The contention of learned Counsel for the petitioner is that unlawful
discrimination is the denial of equality or the equal protection of the law.
An arbitrary deviation from the normal rules in an isolated instance adverse
to the interests of the person in respect of whom the deviation is made
-amounts to unlawful discrimination. Unlawful

**356**

discrimination also exists when the executive applies a law or rule different
to the law or rule which the Constitution has laid down for the protection of
the public. Here the Constitution has laid down in the Establishments Code,
the procedure for retirement on grounds of general inefficiency. Instead of
following that procedure, which was easily open to the executive if it was
acting constitutionally, the executive has in the case of the petitioner only
followed a "short cut" procedure, a procedure which was not meant for
application to the category of officers to which the petitioner belonged.

The question then is, has there been discrimination between the .petitioner
and others similarly situated ? The Cabinet of Ministers, by virtue of powers
vested under Article 55(1) has drawn up in Vol. 11 of the Establishments Code
the procedure for the disciplinary control of all public officers (other than
certain categories which need not concern us). The equal protection that the
petitioner enjoyed is that he, along with others similarly situated as himself
(eg. the 18 other Deputy Surveyors-General) would all be controlled in the
matter of discipline by the provisions of the Establishments Code relating to.
their category, and not by some other rule or circular not applicable to them.
If the Executive chooses not to follow the stipulated procedure, that is the
Establishments Code relating to officers in category 2:2:1, in dealing with
the petitioner, then the petitioner has lost the equal protection guaranteed
to him. His may be the first case of deviation from the established procedure.

In order to establish discrimination it is not necessary for the .petitioner
to show that correct procedure was applied in the case of others and that he
has been singled out for the adoption of a different procedure. Nor is it
necessary for him to show that no others were the victims of the wrong
procedure now applied for the first time, perhaps, in his case. Take the case
of X, Y & Z officers of the same grade lined up for retirement on, say the
ground of general inefficiency. The wrong set of rules is purposefully applied
in the case of X and he is retired, whilst the cases of Y and Z have yet to be
tried. It is not necessary for X to wait till Y and Z have been tried,
;perhaps after :the executive becomes wise and tries them following the
correct procedure. The moment the correct Constitutional procedure has not
been adopted in the case of X, the equal protection afforded to him by the
correct procedure has been violated.

**357**

Quite clearly if there was evidence led that in earlier years a number of
public officers in the staff grade (referred to in section 2:2:1 of the
Establishments Code) were compulsorily retired for general inefficiency by the
proper authority viz. Cabinet of Ministers, after following the procedure
prescribed in section 23, there would be irrefutable evidence that the
Petitioner has been denied the equal protection which the Constitution
guarantees to him. Is the position any different if the Establishments Code
itself had just come into existence and there had in fact been no compulsory
retirement for general inefficiency of public officers in the staff grade ?
Can it be said that while in the first situation there is violation of equal
protection, in the latter situation there is no violation of equal protection
because there is no proved previous instance of the due observance of the
rules ? That would be a most extraordinary result where a violation of
equality is considered to be established only if there are proved instances of
due compliance with the law. Does it then mean that the first deliberate
refusal to follow the law does not result in a denial of equal protection and
a person can only succeed in establishing a violation of equal protection if
he can adduce evidence of previous instances where the law has been followed ?

Nor need he show that others in his category have also been, like him,
"treated" under the circular and retired. That also is not a burden cast on
him. I inquired during the argument from learned D.S.G. whether any other
officers in category 2 : 2 : 1 of the Code had been retired under the circular
on the ground of general inefficiency, but there has been no response. As
learned Counsel for the petitioner aptly put it :

"To deviate from the rules or to refuse to apply them to the petitioner is of
itself a negation of the petitioner's right to equal protection, for by such
refusal there is clearly a reduction in the measure of protection afforded to
him. It is no longer equal in measure. It is no longer equally enjoyed because
it is now granted to some and denied to another who by membership of that
class is entitled to it along with others".

Learned D.S.G. referred us to the decision in Melbourne Corporation v. The
Commonwealth (supra) where Latham C.J. said this : "I have some difficulty in
understanding how 'discrimination' in a precise sense can be shown in a law
applying only to one person or class of persons in respect of a particular
subject matter.

**358**

Discrimination appears to me to involve differences in the treatment of two or
more persons or subjects" at p.. 61 . In that case the proposition on which
the plaintiff corporation relied was that the Commonwealth Parliament cannot,
even under a legislative power expressly conferred upon it, make a
"discriminatory" as distinct from a general law, which is aimed at or directed
against an essential governmental power or function of a State. Section 48 of
the Banking Act, 1945 made provision that except with the consent in writing
of the Treasurer, a Bank shall not conduct any banking business for a State or
any authority of a State, including a local governing authority. The passage
referred to above was made in the context of holding (at p. 69) that laws
"discriminate" against States if they, single out States for taxation, or some
other form of control. So that "discrimination" or "non discrimination" in the
enactment of laws cannot afford a parallel when we are in the field of
violation of fundamental rights by executive action.

The essence of discrimination is a deviation from the established standard or
norm. So that every wilful and deliberate refusal to accord to a person his
legal rights per se entails discrimination against him. Such a person is being
discriminated in that the norm or standard applicable (not necessarily
hitherto applied) to all persons in that class is not being applied to him who
belongs to that class of persons who are entitled. Such a person is being
discriminated vis-a-vis all persons falling into that class, and that class in
the instant case is the class of staff grade public officers (those falling
under 2 : 2 : 1). So with all respect to those of my brother Judges who insist
on contrasts and comparisons with actual previous instances, as a pre-
condition for the proof of discrimination, to do so in every case is to adopt
a simplistic view of discrimination, which is not what the Constitution
expects us to do.

Discrimination may be bona fide or mala fide. "If the person who alleges
discrimination succeeds in establishing that the step was taken intentionally
for the purpose of injuring him, or in other words that it was a hostile act
directed against him, the executive act complained of must be annulled, even
if the statute itself be not discriminatory. In short, if the Act is fair and
good, the authority who has to administer it will be generally protected. To
this rule, however; there is an exception; which comes into play when where is
:evidence of mala fides in. the application of the Act". Constitutional Law of
India by Bashu (2nd Ed.) p. 28.

**359**

"Hostile discrimination" by executive 'action may give rise to situations in
which- Article 14 of the Indian Constitution can be invoked. In Dhanaraj Mills
Ltd. v. B. K: Kocher (26) the Court took the view that when a subject
challenges a specific act of an individual officer as being contrary to
Article 14, the Court is not powerless to give the subject protection against
a dishonest officer, but that protection cannot: besought under. Article 14 or
under Article. 226. Seervai submits that the judgment is clearly wrong when it
holds that no relief is available under Article 226 against "dishonest,
arbitrary or capricious acts" of the officer. If the dishonest action
intentionally and purposefully discriminated against the petitioner the
decisions in Ghulam Rasool (supra) and in Narain Das v. Improvement Trust,
Amritsar (27) may have been different. In both cases the petitioners failed to
establish hostile discrimination.

The true scope and ambit of Article 14 of the Constitution of India has been
the subject of numerous decisions. In the early stages of the evolution of the
Constitutional Law of India' Article 14 came to be identified with the
"doctrine of classification" because of the view taken by the Supreme Court
that Article 14 prohibits' discrimination, and there would be no
discrimination where the classification making the differentiation fulfills
two conditions, namely (i) that the classification is founded on an
intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things from others
left out of the group ; and (ii) that the differentia has a rational relation
to the object sought to be achieved by the impugned legislative or executive
action.

However, a "new doctrine" (as Seervai calls it) was for the first time laid
bare in 1974 in Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu (supra) to the effect that
Article 14 embodies "a guarantee against arbitrariness':. The Court speaking
through Bhagwati, J. with Chandrachud and Krishna lyer, J J. agreeing said

"The basic principle which, therefore informs both Articles 14 and 16 is
equality and inhibition against discrimination. Now, what is the content and
reach of this great equalising principle ? It is founding faith, to use the
words of Bose, J., 'away of life', and it must not be subject to a narrow
pedantic or lexicographic approach. We cannot countenance any attempt to
truncate its all-embracing scope and meaning, for to do so would be to violate
its activist magnitude. Equality is a dynamic .concept with many aspects and
dimensions and it cannot be 'cribbed, cabined and confined' within traditional

**360**

and doctrinaire limits. From a positivistic point of view, equality is
antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact, equality and arbitrariness are sworn
enemies ; one belongs to the rule of law in a republic while the other to the
whim and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary it is
implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and
constitutional law and is therefore violative of Article 14, and if it affects
any matter relating to public employment, it is also violative of Article 16.
Articles 14 and 16 strike at arbitrariness in state action and ensure fairness
and equality of treatment."

This doctrine was reaffirmed and elaborated by the Supreme Court, also
speaking through Bhagwati, J. (Untwalia and Fazal Ali, JJ. agreeing) in Maneka
Gandhi v. Union of India (supra) in these terms

"Now the question immediately arises as to what is the requirement of Article
14 : What is the content and reach of the great equalising principle
enunciated in this Article ? There can be no doubt that it is a founding faith
of the Constitution. It is indeed the pillar on which rests securely the
foundation of our democratic republic. And, therefore, it must not be
subjected to a narrow, pedantic or lexicographic approach. No attempt should
be made to truncate its all-embracing scope and meaning, for to do so would be
to violate its activist magnitude. Equality is a dynamic concept with many
aspects and dimensions and it cannot be imprisoned within traditional and
doctrinaire limits..... Article -14 strikes at arbitrariness in State action
and ensures fairness and equality of treatment. The principle of
reasonableness, which legally as well as philosophically, is an essential
element of equality or non-arbitrariness pervades Article 14 like a brooding
omnipresence. ""

This was again reiterated by the Court (Bhagwati, J., Tulzapurkar, J. and
Pathak, J.) in Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of
India (supra). Finally the scope of Article 14 was elucidated by the Court in
Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujab Sehravardi (supra) (Chandrachad, C.J., Bhagwati,
J., Krishna lyer, J., Fazal Ali, J. & Koshal, J.). Bhagwati, J. speaking for
the court said :

"It must therefore now be taken-to be well `settled that what Article'` 14
strikes at is arbitrariness 'because an action that is arbitrary, must
necessarily involve negation of equality. The doctrine

**361**

of classification which is evolved by the Courts is not a paraphrase of
Article 14 nor is it the objective and end of that article. It is merely a
judicial formula for determining whether the legislative or executive action
in question is arbitrary and therefore constitutes denial of equality. If the
classification is not reasonable and does not satisfy the two conditions
referred to above, the impugned legislative or executive action would plainly
be arbitrary and the guarantee of equality under Article 14 would be breached.
Wherever therefore there is arbitrariness in State action whether it be of the
legislature or of the. executive or of an 'authority' under Article 12,
Article 14 immediately springs into action and strikes down such State action.
In fact, the concept of reasonableness and non-arbitrariness prevades the
entire constitutional scheme and is a golden thread which runs through the
whole of the fabric of the Constitution."

There could be no doubt that what Bhagwati, J. has enunciated in the above
cases is the Law of India today, despite Seervai's criticism of this new
doctrine at p. 273.

Then again, there is the case of The Manager, Government Branch Press v.
Belliappa, (supra) where it was held by the Court (Sarkaria, Tulzapurkar & A.
P. Sen J J.) that if the services of a temporary government servant are
terminated arbitrarily, and not on the ground of his unsuitability,
unsatisfactory conduct or the like which could put him in a class apart from
his juniors in the same service, a question of unfair discrimination may
arise, notwithstanding the fact that the appointing authority was acting in
accordance with the terms of employment. Sarkaria, J., speaking for the Court
said "Bereft of rationality and fairness, discretion degenerates into
arbitrariness which is the very antithesis of the rule of law on which our
democratic polity is founded," at p. 483.

It is this "new dimension" in the principle of equality in both its aspects
which has been underscored by Mr. Justices Bhagwati & Sarkaria in the cases
cited. While in the sphere of legislation when the question of a violation of
the principle of equality is involved the doctrine of classification assumes
great importance, in the sphere of executive action the dominant role is
played by the doctrine of bona fides and its negation namely, the misuse and
abuse of power. Where there is an abuse of power there is ipso facto a denial
of equality before the law and the equal protection of the law. The judgments
of Mr. Justice Bhagwati have elucidated those principles with crystal

**362**

clarity. By his lucid exposition of these principles the constitutional
guarantee of equality has received a new impetus and has acquired a new vigour
to the great advantage of the people, and the realisation of the sovereignty
of the people. The doctrine of equal protection has thus become a powerful
shield against the abuse of power by the Executive.

I have had the benefit of reading the Judgment prepared by the Chief Justice,
wherein he states

"It is fundamental to fair procedure that the 2nd respondent should have heard
the petitioner before he took such prejudicial action against the latter. He
has violated this basic principle of fair procedure. He did not wait for and
take into consideration the explanation (P 18 & P 19) of the petitioner in
answer to the allegations against him. The hurry to take action against him
cannot be appreciated...... Furthermore none of the 2-4 respondents have
chosen to fault the petitioner's explanation, probably for the reason that no
fault can be found therein. He did not check from the 4th respondent the
Surveyor-General whether the petitioner had shown cause within the 30 days
from the date of receipt of letter 0 dated 24.8.84. He never went through the
personal file relating to the petitioner. He does not appear to have even
bothered to find out whether there was any material to justify his taking a
decision which was so fateful to the petitioner. According to his affidavit he
does not even appear to have asked the 3rd respondent to substantiate his
allegation against the petitioner...... Certainly the conduct of the 2nd
respondent is not calculated to enhance the reputation of the State for
fairness." Then again according to the C.J., "There is abundant substance in
petitioner's complaint that the 2nd respondent acted arbitrarily and
capriciously. The 2nd respondent had depended too much on the 3rd respondent's
arbitrary report, a report which is not based on any adverse entry after 1974
in the petitioner's confidential file: . . . . the grave allegations made by
the 3rd and 4th respondents are not supported by any entry therein. From the
2nd respondent's affidavit it is clear that the earlier order of transfer of
the petitioner to the Public Officers' Reserve was not upon any material
placed before him by the Head of the Department verifying the-reasons why he
should be placed on compulsory leave for general inefficiency and general
incompetence. The 3rd and 4th

**363**

respondents never confronted the petitioner with such charges and called for
explanation from him before they chose to make serious complaints against
him."

"In my view the 2nd respondent's decision to retire the petitioner
compulsorily on the alleged ground of inefficiency is unreasonable and
unjustifiable and lacked bona fides. True, a grave injustice has been
inflicted on the petitioner". (The emphasis is mine).

I am in entire agreement with the Chief Justice on the above findings of fact,
with which Ranasinghe, J., Atukorale, J., Tambiah, J. and L. H. De Alwis, J.
also agree.

But in spite of such a finding the majority of the Members of this Court held
that no violation of equal protection has taken place as "there is no evidence
of discriminatory treatment" because it has not been shown' that there are in
comparison others who have received favourable treatment. It then means with
great respect that equal protection has become a wholly illusory concept and
one devoid of any real value or usefulness. It means that despite the fact
that the petitioner has been treated in a manner prejudicial to his interests
in being arbitrarily retired as compared with his colleagues in the public
service also similarly situated but who continue to remain in service, that
there is nevertheless no denial of equal protection. This is a conclusion
which in my respectful view will surely lead to a denial of elementary justice
; For how can it be said that the man who is arbitrarily dismissed from
service as well as his colleagues who remain in service, without being so
subjected to arbitrary treatment, all enjoy equal protection despite the
vastly different consequences that have ensued in their respective cases ? To
accept that there is arbitrariness in the case of the man dismissed and accept
that no such prejudicial consequences have taken place in the case of those
who remain in office is to concede the fact of differential treatment and
hostile discrimination. That is the very essence of a denial of equal
protection.

My conclusions, therefore, are that -

(1) the petitioner's services have been terminated on the alleged grounds of
inefficiency and incompetence, without an iota of evidence of inefficiency and
incompetence ;

(2) the petitioner's services have. been terminated by the misapplication of a
Circular which was not meant- to apply to the category of officers to which he
belonged ;

**364**

(3) the procedure laid down in the Establishments Code, which is the
Constitutional procedure has not been followed in retiring him

(4) there has thus been "hostile discrimination" in that -

(a) he has not been retired according to procedures prescribed by the
Constitution, and

(b) the termination of his services has been mala fide, that is, for reasons
other than inefficiency and incompetence ;

(5) the petitioner's fundamental right to the equal protection of the law
guaranteed under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution has been violated by
executive action.

I would accordingly grant a declaration that (i) the fundamental right of the
petitioner under Article 12 (1) has been violated (ii) that the compulsory
retirement of the petitioner from the public service is unconstitutional,
unlawful, null and void.

As regards damages or compensation I take into account the fact that a senior
public officer with 27 years' experience in the Surveyor-General's Department
has been purposefully branded as inefficient and incompetent without any
proof. On the contrary his record of service appears to be unblemished except
for a few occasions when his independence had proved irksome to his superiors.
There has thus been the addition of insult to injury. I would therefore direct
that he be paid his salary from the date of retirement up to age 55 as well as
damages in a sum of Rs. 300,000. He will also be entitled to the costs of this
application.

**

COLIN-THOME, J.

**

The main questions in this case are whether

(a) the compulsory retirement of the petitioner from the Public Service was
unconstitutional, unlawful, illegal and null and void ;

(b) the fundamental rights of the petitioner under, Articles 12 (1) and 1:4
(1) (g) were violated and infringed, upon ; and

(c) the compulsory retirement of the petitioner was an act of hostile
discrimination against him.

**365**

The 3rd Respondent sent a letter to the petitioner, notifying him that he was
being transferred to the Public. Officers' Reserve with effect from 1
984.08.24. This letter dated: 1984.08.24 was received by the petitioner on
1984.08.27. This fact was not contested by the learned Deputy Solicitor-
General. This letter marked 0 reads as follows :

'My. No. 01/28/2-25 (09)

Ministry of Lands & Land Development  
500, T.B. Jaya Mawatha,  
Colombo 10.  
1984.08.24.

Mr. Elmore Marsh Perera, Deputy Surveyor-General,  
Through Surveyor-General.

The Secretary, Ministry of Public Administration, has instructed me to
transfer you to the Public' Officers' Reserve with effect from 1984:08.24 for
reasons of inefficiency and incompetence in terms of the provisions of Public
Administration circular No. 136 dated 1979.04.17=and to place you on
compulsory leave as from that-date.

I inform you that you are accordingly transferred to .the Public Officers
Reserve with effect-from, 1984:08:24 and placed on compulsory leave as from
that date Report to the Secretary, Public Administration, immediately you
receive this letter.

Further, if` there re any reasons` w y you should riot be compulsorily retired
for general inefficiency or otherwise punished submit them in writing to the
Secretary, Public Administration, through me within 30 days: of receipt of
this letter.

K. W. M. P. Mapitigama  
                                                                                                                                Sgd/- Nanda Abeywidkrema,  
Senior Assistant Secretary.
Secretary,  
(Administration)
Ministry of L. &'L. D.

Copies :. (i) SPA - No 543 E 595/56 DG

(ii) Surveyor-General - S.P.A.'s letter of 84,Q8.23 addressed to me with copy
to you 'refers: For the early submission of the particulars referred to in
paragraphs 4 and 5 thereof.'' -

According to this letter it was the Secretary, Ministry of Public
Administration (the' 2nd Respondent) who directed the transfer of the
petitioner "to the for reason is of inefficiency and incompetence in `terms
office the provisions -of- Public Administration Circular No. 136 dated
1979.04.17:' '-

**366**

The 2nd Respondent has averred in paragraph 6 (g) of his affidavit that-
Circular 136- is yet in operation and the requirement in paragraph10 of the
Circular was. inserted by him for administrative reasons.

Paragraph 10 of the. Circular reads

''The Reservist Reports should be sent to reach me (Secretary, Public
Administration) by 30th June, 1979."

No material was placed before, Court to establish conclusively that Circular
136 has been kept alive after the 30th June, 1979, at all times-relevant to
this case.

Assuming that Circular 136 applied to the petitioner the question arises for
consideration whether its provisions have been observed by the respondents.
Paragraphs 6 and 8, of the Circular 136 read as follows :-

6.In respect of category 'B' Reservists, the transferring transferring
Department should-,forward to this Ministry a full confidential report on the
reasons for the, request for transfer.

8\. Where under category 'B' (i) an officer's transfer is requested { on
account of such reasons as inefficiency and incompetence; the Head "of
Department' should take action under sections 24:1 and 24:2 of Chapter ,XLVIII
of the Establishments Code. Thereafter however, instead of himself -taking
action in terms of 24:3, he should forward all papers with his observations to
. reach me within two months of the Reservist Report."

Sections 24:1, 24:2 and 24:3 of Chapter XLVIII of the Establishments code
reads

"24:1 Where the Head of a Department is of opinion that an officer referred to
in section 2:3 should be retired for general . inefficiency which cannot
appropriately be dealt with by specific charges he will obtain reports on the
officer from the Department in which he has previously served, on his work and
conduct.

24:2 He will then inform .the, officer in writing of the rounds on which it is
proposed to retire him and order him to show cause why he should not be
retired or. otherwise dealt with for general inefficiency.

**367**

24:3 If the explanation is found to be' unsatisfactory the' Head of the
Department will either make an order of retirement for general inefficiency`
or impose other appropriate punishment as he deems fit."

It is clear when paragraphs 6 and 8 are read with sections 24 1 and 24:2 of
Chapter XLVIII of the Establishments Code that it is the Head of Department
and not the Secretary' Public Administration, who has the authority to call
for an explanation from` the petitioner as to 'why he should not be
compulsorily retired. It is the Head of Department who should initiate the
procedure for transferring a Public Officer' into the Public Officers' Reserve
and not the Secretary, Public Administration.

Again, assuming that Circular 136 applied to the petitioner the letter O did
not as required by the Circular which brought section 24:2 into operation
specify the grounds on which 'the petitioner was to be retired for' general
inefficiency, in asking him to show cause. This was a contravention of the
audi alteram partem rule embodied in section 24:2. At no time was the
petitioner informed in writing that in the view of the administration he' was
temperamentally unsuited to continue in 'the public service and that he had a
disruptive influence on the service, and to show cause against these charges.

From the 2nd respondent's affidavit it is clear that the order of transfer to
the Public Officers' Reserve was not upon any material placed before him by
the Head of Department in -the form of "a full confidential report on the
reasons for the request for transfer" as required by paragraph 6 of Circular
136. The 2nd respondent does not aver in his affidavit that the 3rd respondent
even orally communicated the reasons for alleging general inefficiency in
support of the request to place the petitioner on compulsory leave.

In paragraph 6 (a) of his affidavit the 2nd respondent has stated that he
received from the Secretary, Ministry of Lands and Land Development (3rd
respondent) a Report indicating that the petitioner was a public officer who
by reason of his inefficiency and incompetence was not an effective member of
the Survey-General's Department and requesting a transfer to the Public
Officers' Reserve under Circular 136.

The Report referred to in the 2nd' respondent's affidavit was the Reservist
Report on the lines of Annex l of Circular 136 signed by the 3rd respondent.
It was marked 2R1 - The reasons for transfer to the

**368**

Reserve consisted of two words inefficiency and in incompetence- This Report
was dated 23.8.84. The letter Q transferring the petitioner to the Reserve was
dated 24.8.84. So that here was no.-prima facie case made out for making the
order of compulsory leave contained in the document Q. The 2nd respondent does
not even; say that he brought his mind to bear on the question or that he
examined ;the petitioner's personal file. The 2nd respondent acted with
alacrity on the bald; statement in the.- Reservist Report 2R without raising a
query. The petitioner has stated in his second affidavit (paragraph 6) that
the 2nd respondent told. him. that the Minister had wanted immediate action
taken on the 3rd respondent S request.

The last paragraph of document O requested the petitioner to state his-
reasons, if any, why he should, not be compulsorily: retired for inefficiency
or otherwise punished and. to submit them to the Secretary, Public
Administration,, through the Secretary,, Ministry of Lands and Land
Development within 30 days of receipt of Q. Q was received by the petitioner
on the 27th August 1984, The undue haste with which this matter was dealt is
made clear by paragraph 8 of Circular 136 which required the Head of
Department to. forward all papers with his observations to reach the
Secretary., Public Administration within two months of the Reservist Report.

On the 2nd October 1984". he -2nd respondent' sent' the petitioner the
following letter (marked P1)

My No. 543 E 595/56DG

Ministry of Public Administration,  
Independence Square,  
Colombo, 7.:  
1984- October 2nd.

Mr. Elmore Marsh Perera,  
144, Sri Vipulasena Mawatha, -  
Colombo 10.

Retirement

It has been notified that no reply has been received from you up to now to
letter of Secretary, Lands-.& Land Development dated 24.8.84. informing you,
in accordance with my instructions, to 'notify, within 36 days, reasons; if
any, why compulsory retirement for general inefficiency or punishment' in some
other manner should not be imposed: -

**369**

02\. Accordingly, you are retired with immediate effect for general
inefficiency under sub-para 24.3 of Chapter XLVIII of the Establishments Code.

H. N. Junaid,
Sgd/- D. B-1. P. S. Siriwardhana,  
Director of Establishments.
Secretary, Ministry of Public Administration.

Copies :

I. S/L & LD - Reference 01/28/2-25(09) of 84.09.27. Take action to retire the
--officer with immediate effect in -accordance with the above instructions and
notify my Chief Accountant the date of retirement with copy to me.

II. Chief Accountant - for necessary action.

III. Surveyor-General - for information.

IV. Deputy Secretary to the Treasury - for information."

Although P.1 which informed, the :petitioner that he was being compulsorily
retired on the ground of general inefficiency and incompetence, implies that
the 2nd respondent had come to' such a finding, nowhere in his affidavits does
he state that he came to a considered view on the matter and if he; did. on
what material he, had acted. Manifestly he did not have the full confidential
report required to be sent by Circular 136. He does not even say that he
called for the petitioner's personal file and examined it, nor does he say
that an oral communication concerning the petitioner's inefficiency or
incompetence was ever made to him at any time by either the 3rd respondent or
the 4th respondent who were the officers: directly concerned. The inference is
therefore that the 2nd respondent came to a finding without any evidence.

The' 2nd respondent received letter 2R2 dated 27 9.84 from the 3rd respondent
informing him that- no explanation had been received from the petitioner On
26.9.84 the petitioner's explanation P18 and P19 was received by the 4th
Respondent. P 18 and P 19' were addressed to the Secretary, Lands and Land
Development through the Surveyor General The 2nd` respondent does not say in
his affidavit whether he had seen P18 and P19 at any time or whether, he
inquired - from the 3rd respondent or the 4th respondent after 27:9:84 and
before' he sent P1 on 2.10:84 whether the petitioner's explanation had been
received. The petitioner at this time was reporting every day

**370**

at the Ministry of Public Administration. `The 2nd respondent could have
questioned the petitioner w ether he had forwarded his explanation but he
chose not do so.

The petitioner reverted to the Surveyor General's Department-from the Sri
Lanka Institute of Development Administration (S.L.I.D.A.) in July 1983 and
worked there until his transfer to the Reserve in August 1984\. The Surveyor
General's Department came under the Ministry of Lands and Land Development. lf
as the 3rd respondent now states in his affidavit that the 4th respondent
(Surveyor General) had made serious complaints to him about the petitioner on
several occasions it is remarkable that none of these complaints are in'
writing. Neither the 3rd respondent nor the 4th respondent has explained why,
:these complaints are not in writing considering that they were of such a
serious nature :

(i) "causing considerable dissension within the administration,``

(ii) that the ".petitioner was causing serious problems

(iii) that he placed, obstacles in the way of the smooth function functioning
of the department,"

(iv) that the "petitioner was a bell gerent and abrasive official (v) that he
was "a disruptive, influence,

(vi) that he was involved in bitter conflicts with some of his good senior
officers,"

(vii)' that his conduct was "contributory largely to stress and tension,
within the department:"

If such complaints were made to the 3rd respondent by the 4th respondent t is
remarkable why the 3rd.-respondent :as Secretary:` to the Minister did not
call upon the petitioner for his explanation on serious matters of discipline.
The 3rd respondent has not explained his inaction.

If, the petitioner had been guilty of such serious acts of indiscipline in the
Survey Department , especially during the period ,duly, l August 1984 the
Surveyor General (4th respondent) was obliged (a) to have the officers
concerned to make written complaints against the petitioner on matters and to
ask the petitioner to petitioner to submit

**371**

explanations. The fact that the 4th respondent h as no written records of .(a)
or (b) casts doubt on whether such incidents did take place. It is also
significant that the 3rd respondent, and, the 4th respondent have not; been
able to get an affidavit from even one officer of the Surveyor Generals
Department to substantiate the allegations against the petitioner in their
affidavits.

The absence of a full confidential report" required by the Circular setting
out the reasons for requesting the 'transfer of the petitioner to the Public
Officers' Reserve makes it very unlikely that the 4th respondent initiated
action against `the petitioner.

The failure of the 4th respondent to explain what..-he did with the
petitioner's explanation P 18 ;and P 19 which were handed to him on the 26th
September 1984 indicates that the explanation was with held by him or that it
was sent by him to the 3rd respondent who did not forward it to the 2nd
respondent. A serious omission in the affidavits of the 3rd and 4th
respondents is their failure to explain what was done to the explanation
submitted by the petitioner.

It is necessary now to examine the material 'placed before Court to
substantiate the charges of inefficiency. and incompetence made- by the
respondents against the petitioner.. To begin with only photo copies of
selected documents from the petitioner's personal- file marked 313 1 to 3R67
were filed and. not the whole personal file. The Court, however, examined the
whole personal file of the petitioner and was able to get a composite picture
of the petitioner's work and conduct since 1957.

The petitioner graduated from the University of Ceylon in 1956 obtaining a
B.Sc. (Special Mathematics) Degree He joined the Public Service as an
Assistant Superintendent of. Surveys in the Survey Department on the 1st
February 1957. In 1958/1959 he was sent to the" University of Cambridge,
England,, for training in Geodetic and Topographical Surveying.

The photo copies 3R1 to 3R67 from his personal file fall into three categories
:-

  1. 3131 to 31345 (1960-1966) 
  2. 3R46 to 31350 (1974-1'975) 
  3. 3135.1 to 31367 (1984).

**372**

The-vast bulk of these documents 3R1 to 3R45 fall within-the period 1960 to
1966. There were several complaints against the petitioner in this period for
instance that he queried the orders of his immediate superior officer in an
abrasive manner, that he was intractable and did not carry out orders. He was
warned by the Surveyor General that if he did not co-operate with his
Superintendent and continued to-bicker With him over trivial matters it will
be necessary to transfer him out of the Division. The petitioner denied that
he was impolite to his Superintendent: He stated that he had merely pointed
out to the Superintendent his mistakes and this was unpleasant: to the
Superintendent. The Surveyor General asked him to refrain from criticising his
Supervising Officer In the meanwhile however the petitioner continued to
receive his increments.

The petitioner was, promoted Superintendent of Surveys with effect from the
1st October 1967. In 1969 a Board of Assessment appointed by the Public
Service Commission and presided over by the then `Surveyor, General C. T.
Gunawardene placed the petitioner second in order 'of seniority out of a batch
of five officers who were appointed together in 1957.

The petitioner was appointed' CO-Manager of the UNDP Project that established
the Institute of Surveying aril Mapping at Diyatalawa from 1968 to 1971 During
this period the- petitioner-spent six months visiting Survey' Training
Institutes and, Universities in the U.S.A., Canada,: Switzerland and India. He
served as Assistant Surveyor General from April' 1972.

R. A. Goonewardene who was Acting Surveyor General from October 1971 to
-September 1973 has stated in his affidavit that in 1967 when he was Assistant
Surveyor General the petitioner sewed under him as- Superintendent in charge
of Puttalam Division. The petitioner'-"displayed considerable organisational
ability and initiative With which he was very impressed. The division
functioned very satisfactorily under his leadership." During his tenure of
office as Acting Surveyor General the petitioner was in charge of Western
Division and later was Assistant Surveyor General. The petitioner made
"valuable contributions at the -monthly Staff Conferences by careful study of
the agenda." "The petitioner has always been articulate and '.direct in his
speech and unafraid-to be even the only person to hold his views. Immediately
after exchanges at conferences ; an exemplary spirit of camaraderie was
happily always present."

**373**

It is significant that: between 1966 and 1974 there have been no adverse
entries : in his file.. The second category of four documents 31146 to 31350
refer to he period August 1974 to March 1975, 31146 dated 5.8.74 is a
complaint by W. P. de Silva, Asst. S.S., to the Surveyor General of
"humiliation, harassment and lack of co-operation by the petitioner". W. P. de
Silva stated: in paragraph 4 "The final result is a retard in progress. An
attitude which leans heavily on verbal huggers and colonial and imperialist
verbosity can never be conducive to a smooth and effective co-operation
between officers."

The explanation of the petitioner, if any, is not included among these papers.
The Acting Surveyor General in a letter to the petitioner, dated 16.8.74
(31148) has requested him to avoid "correspondence of a desultory nature" and
to "be more tactful with your subordinates.",

3R49 and 31150 deal with a disciplinary. inquiry into the conduct of a
Government Surveyor P. W. Pathirana which was entrusted to the petitioner. The
documents were stolen from the petitioner's- table frustrating the inquiry.
The petitioner accepted responsibility for this.

Between 1975 and July 1984 there were no adverse entries in the petitioner's
personal file. 'In,-1975 he was promoted Deputy Surveyor General. -'He joined
the Academy of' Administrative Studies on secondment with effect from the 1st
March 1978 as' 'a- Training and Research Associate: In January: 1979 he sat
for the Graduate Management Admission Test at Princeton University, U.S.A. and
obtained an overall score of 94% which included a score of 99% in the
quantitative area. In 1979 he was appointed Head of the Operations Management
Division.

On the formation of the Sri Lanka Institute of` Development Administration
(S.L.I.D.A.) in November 1979 he was appointed Co-ordinating Consultant,
Projects-and Operations Management Division:

From September 1980 to April 1981 he qualified for the Diploma in Public=
Management Development with Specialisation in Project Analysis at the
institute of Public Ser I vice, International University of Connecticut,
U.S.A.

ln April and May 1981 he followed a Course in Project Management for
Infrastructure Projects at the Economic Development Institute of the World
Bank, Washington, U.S.A.

**374**

From May to August 1981 he qualified for the Certificate in Training and
Education for National Development at the Institute of- Public Service
International of the University of Connecticut.

From 3rd May"1982 when S.L.I.D.A. became a Corporation, the Governing Council
created the post of Additional Director, Training and Evaluation and appointed
him to the post.

In November 1982 he completed his I.C.M.A. examination and was admitted as an
Associate Member of the Institute of Cost and Management Accountants, London

The Hon. R. Premadasa, Prime Minister, nominated him to participate :as a
Professional Associate in a Management Training Seminar for Public Works
Projects at the` East-West Center, Hawai, from the 27th February to the 12th
March 1983.

The third category of documents 3R51 to 3R67 has been put together selectively
an , is incomplete. As a result these documents present a distorted version of
the petitioner's work and conduct in 1984 It is significant that the first
three documents 3R51, 3R52 and 3R53 are dated 6.8.84 only 1:6 days-prior to
the letter Q dated 24.8.84; transferring o petitioner to the Public Officers'
Reserve.'

In 3R51, dated 6:8.84; the Surveyor General has found fault with the
petitioner for stating in a minute "In spite of repeated instructions, the
Administration is dragging its heels; in the filling -of these vacancies.''

A Superintendent had complained to the petitioner by a minute dated 19.6.84,
that several important vacancies in his branch had not been filled and that
this was retarding work. He pointed out that although the petitioner had
informed the Surveyor. General by letter No. 1 B/Staff of 11.4.84 to fill the
vacancies and although the Surveyor General had instructed the Deputy,
Surveyor en ral (Administration) on 1 .84 to fill the vacancies nothing had
been done.

**375**

This prompted the petitioner to send a minute to the Surveyor General dated
31.7:84 as follows

"S. G.

The output in 1 B is very poor  but this, has gone on at this level for
several years. PI. see SIB Is recommendation for remedying this situation. In
spite of, repeated instructions from you, the Administration is dragging its
heels in the filling of these vacancies. Nothing useful can be done until
these vacancies are filled.-Pl. push this if it is within your power to do
so."

The Surveyor-General has omitted the words "from you" in 3R'51 and has advised
the-petitioner to be more courteous in his correspondence. He objected to the
word "push". -

In 3R52, dated 6,8.84, the Surveyor-General addressed a letter to the
petitioner about the transfer of R. M. W., Perera; G.C.S. Officer,-in

"You keep insisting that the officer (R M W. Perera) has been transferred out
of the Accounts Branch to the C.C. Branch without obtaining his consent while
D.S.G. (Adm.) has stated clearly that the officer agreed to take' up duties
as' H/R in the C. C. Branch. Your statement is incorrect. personally checked
this matter with Perera who stated that he verbally agreed to the transfer in
the CC. Branch, though he did not make an application in writing."

The Surveyor-General faulted the Petitioner for casting `insolent aspersions"
on the motives of the D.G.S. (Adm.).

The connected document instead of being attached to 31152 has been-inserted
later in the set of 311 documents and marked 3R64. In 31164 the petitioner has
addressed a minute to the' Surveyor-General dated 25.7.84 as follows

"S. G.

PI. see Ir. from Mr. Perera submitted h/w.

D.S.G. (A)'s report to you appears to have been based on incorrect in for

PI. cancel the tfr."

The Surveyor-General has made a minute immediately :below: the above minute;
dated 26.7.84.as follows:

"The officer's wish is not so important as urgent view of the C.C. for :a
senior G.C.S. officer as Head of R...... (indecipherable) Pl. allow this."

**376**

The letter, from R. M.W. Perera referred to by the petitioner in his minute to
the Surveyor General dated 25.7.84 (X10) reads.

''D.S.G. (R & M)

Sir,

This is to inform you that I have not made a request for a transfer I prefer
to remain in the.- Accounts Branch PI:

Sgd. R.M.W. Perera

S.G.

PI. see my recommendation on annexed Ir.

initialled E. P. 7/25."

3R53, also dated 6.8.84, is a letter addressed to the Surveyor General by
W.K.M. de Silva D.S.G. complaining of the long and unnecessary delays in
granting allocations by D.S.G. (HM) to be distributed among the various
Divisions. What the Surveyor-General's reaction was to this OWNS whether he
'called-for an explanation from the petitioner is not known as there are no
endorsements touching this matter among the 3R documents..

3R54, 3R55, and 3R56 are connected documents. The petitioner had queried the
traveling claims of the surveyor named M. Velayathampillai. In 3R56 dated
23.8.84 (the day before the petitioner was sent on compulsory leave)
Velayathampillai complained about the undue delay by the petitioner in
settling his traveling claim.

3R57 and 3R58 are about the dilatoriness of D S . G'.' Range 2 and about who
is to cover and 3R60 are. correspondence between the petitioner.. and, D.S.G.
(R2) over the delay-in taking charge of store rooms. In 3 6) the-petitioner
forwards certificates to be placed in his personal file. 3062 is only part of
a minute by the petitioner. In 31363 the petitioner complains to the Surveyor
General about the lack of co-operation by the C.A.O. over the Duty Lists for
watchers and the Surveyor General has called for a meeting of the offices
concerned on 6.7.84. 3R64 should be read with 3R52.

CR65, dated 4.6.84 is a note to the Superintendent of Stores by his assistant
complaining that was rude to him when he presented the Superintendent's note
asking for a day's' weave.

**377**

3R66 is a note from the petitioner to the Superintendent of Stores dated
12.6.84 directing him to speak to the petitioner with all papers on which
orders have to be made and that no papers ;should-be sent unless the
petitioner calls for them specifically.

31167 dated 2.10.84 (the. day-: the petitioner was compulsorily retired) is a
note from the Superintendent of Stores to the Surveyor General complaining
about the incidents :referred to- in 3865 and 31166. There is an endorsement
by the Surveyor General on this document 3867 dated 8.10.84 (six days after
the petitioner was retired) which reads

"This is a complaint by Mr. Hector Weeratunga Supdt. of .Surveys (Stores) :-
Mr. Weeratunga, in making this complaint appealed to me that if I am taking
any direct action (e.g.) calling for explanation etc. that he be not placed
under the supervision of Mr. E. M. Perera (D.S.G. (R.M.) ). Under the
circumstances I am filing this note in confidential file."

According to this endorsement by the Surveyor General (4th respondent) 3867
has been filed in a confidential file and not in the personal file of the
petitioner.

The petitioner has, annexed X1-2 dated 1.6.84 which is a note by him to the:
Surveyor General regarding the application by the Superintendent of Stores for
leave. X1 2 reads :

S. S. Stores has not turned up for work today He has sent a note informing me
of his inability to come for personal reasons. He has not made any
arrangements for his work and several persons who, have arrived from
-outstations like Trinco and Polonnaruwa have come to me with their stores
applns. This has happened several times, before. 1 regret I cannot continue to
cover up S. S. Stores functions when he is on leave. Hence please reconsider
your decision not to assign an Asst. S.S. to assist S.S. Stores."

The Surveyor General has made an endorsement on this document which he has
initialled and dated 6/4. It reads

D. S. G. (R. M.)

I have not made a final decision not to assign an Asst. S.S. The main problem
is that we are short of exp officers in the field etd. (indecipherable)."

The tone of this endorsement by the Surveyor General is in, marked - contrast.
to, the tone of his belated endorsement on 31167 made on 8.10. 84 in
connection with' the elated complaint of H. Weeratunga dated 2.10:84 over an
incident which took place early in June 1984.

**378**

The Respondents have filed an affidavit dated 29. 11.84 from V:' T. Navaratne,
Director of S. L.I D .A. He avers that after the Petitioner was appointed an
Additional Director ng) in S.L.I.D.A. in 1982 the Petitioner started to
"intermeddle with the day to day running of the different Divisions which was
disruptive of S.L.I.D.A. as a Training Institute." The Petitioner was very
abrasive in this dealings (with the staff) and harsh in his attitude was
counter-productive to the goal's of S.L.I.D.A."

The affidavit by V. T. Navaratne is contradicted by his Memorandum he
submitted to the Governing Council of S. L.I. D.A. dated 21 st July 1985 which
states : -

"Mr. E M. Perera, Addl. Director, Training/S.L.I.D.A.

Mr. E. M. Perera, Deputy Surveyor General came on secondment to the former
Academy of Administrative Studies (now S.L.I.D.A.) as a Training and Research
Associate in 1978 and was subsequently, appointed as Consultant in the
S.L.I.D.A. Faculty: From 3rd May, ,1982 he served; as Addl. Director in charge
of Training and Evaluation. From 7.7.83 the Ministry of Public Administration-
terminated hiss secondment with S.L.I.D.A. and reverted him to the Surveyor-
General's office.

I am covering up the work of Additional Director, Training as no 'suitable
arrangement could be made at present. A recommendation for filling the vacancy
will be made to the Governing Council in due course.; .

I wish to place on record that Mr. E. M. Perera made a significant
contribution to SLIDA's development particularly in the areas of Project
Management and Operations Research."

The '2nd Respondent is in a, similar predicament as V. T Navaratne On 6.7.83
he discontinued the Petitioner's services with SLIDA with less than 24 hours'
notice. He transferred the Petitioner to the Public Officers' Reserve on
24.8.84 and compulsorily retired him, on 2:10.84 for "inefficiency and
incompetence'

In a letter to the Petitioner dated 13th March, 1984, the 2nd Respondent wrote
:

I am sorry that circumstances made it necessary to terminate your association
with the Sri Lanka Institute of Development Administration to -which you made
a valuable contribution giver several years."

It is common ground that the membership of the SLTA was divided in o two
embittered factions. The petitioner was In one faction and the 1 s t
respondent was in the other. " `

**379**

On the 3rd March 1983 Kingsley Candappa addressed a letter t the petitioner in
his capacity as President of the: Sri Lanka Tennis Association, complaining
that the half hour rule of play was not being observed by some members of the
SLTA. This rule was necessary as there was a, heavy demand for the courts.
Candappa stated that on the 2nd March 1983 when he was waiting to play on
court No. 2 the belt rang but the four persons playing there did-not vacate
the court One of the players was the 1 st respondent Candappa stated that f
Committee members did not observe the rules it will be difficult to get young
members to observe- the half hour rule:

As the petitioner was abroad.. at the: time- C. Duwearatchi Vice-President of
the SLTA and Captain of the Playing Section replied on the 9th March to
Candappa's letter, stating that it was. "a matter of protocol"; based on an
unwritten code that a- Minister, enjoyed special privileges above that of an
ordinary member.

Petitioner did not share the views of Duwearatchi on this matter and he told
him so in a letter dated 18th June, 1983 `"

I On the 24th May, 1983; V. T. Navaratne Director of SODA handed a note to 1
the petitioner conveying directions to the petitioner issued to the 2nd
respondent by the 1 st respondent. The note reads"

'I am directed to inform you that you should summon Mr. Elmore Perera and
inform him that he should stop interfering with the Playing Section of the,
Sri Lanka Tennis Club, because it is not consistent with his position in SLIDA
which is an institution which comes under the Minister who is an office bearer
of the SLTA

The 1st respondent has admitted in his affidavit that he got the 2nd
respondent to convey this message to the petitioner "as he was involving,
himself in the affairs of the Sri Lanka. Tennis Association and of its Playing
Section, and in a manner unbecoming of a public servant and capable of
bringing the public service into disrepute.''

SLIDA functioned under the 1st Respondent and Was subject to his control:

Within half-an-hour of receiving the note; from V. T. Navaratne the.
petitioner sought an interview with the 1st respondent in order to explain his
conduct and ascertain the precise nature of-any complaint by the 1st
respondent. The 1st respondent refused to see him.

**380**

On the 24th June, 1983; the 1st respondent ceased to be a Vice-Patron of the
SLTA and was not. re-elected to: the post.

At about 8.45 a.m. on the 6th July 19.83 V. T. Navaratne., Director of SLIDA
handed over a letter to the. petitioner from the 2nd respondent, stating that
the petitioner's services were not required by SLIDA as from: .that day. - He
was reverted to his post as Deputy Survey-General at about 9.30 a.m. the same
day. No reasons were given for this precipitate action. Neither V. T.
Navaratne nor the Surveyor-General had asked for this transfer.

Later, the 2nd respondent wrote a letter to the petitioner dated 13th March,
19.84` stating : `I am Sorry that circumstances: made it necessary to
terminate your association with the Sri Lanka Institute of Development
Administration to which you made a valuable contribution over several years."

On the 8th August 1983 the rival factions of the SLTA held. separate.
meetings. The meeting attended by the petitioner to elect office bearers for
the Playing Section was disrupted with force. At the rival meeting attended by
the 1st respondent he made a veiled reference to the petitioner in the
following words

"Can we allow one man and a coterie of people said to. run the tennis of this
country to get away with all these excuses ?"

Although the petitioner's services with -SLIDA were abruptly discontinued on
the 6th July 1983 he continued to deliver lectures in SLIDA training courses
with great acceptance and according to V.T. Navaratne's Memorandum to the
Governing Council of SLIDA' dead ' 21st July 1983 the petitioner ''made a-
significant contribution-, to SLIDA's development particularly in the areas of
Project Management and Operations Research."

`According to W. N. H. Ranasinghe, a Consultant in SLIDA, the petitioner was
one of the best lecturers in SLIDA. On the 8th November 1983 the 2nd
respondent summoned V. T. Navaratne, H. B. Sandors 8 A. P. Rupasinghe a d
others to his office and "made it clear that the petitioner should not
thereafter be Invited to lecture in SLIDA as that would be contrary to the
wishes of the Hon. Minister of Public Administration.

**381**

The 1st respondent has admitted in his affidavit that he gave instruction to
dis continue the petitioner as he was of the view "that SLIDA had
responsibility for training present and future administrative personnel and
permitting a lecturer of the disposition of the petitioner   to train them
would be inimical to the interests served by SLIDA"

On the 6th June 1984 an application was filed` in the Court of Appeal in case
No. 700/84 by C ,E- Duwearatchi and S B : Wijeratne, Petitioners who, were
captain and Secretary. respectively: of the Playing Section of. the SLTA. The
Respondents were (1) the Minister of Sports. (2) Elmo Perera, President of the
SLTA and: (3) A. J . T. Madugalle, Hony. Secretary of the SLTA.

The application- by the petitioners" under Article: :14.0 :of the Constitution
was for a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari to quash the direction
issued by ,the : 1st . respondent, the Minister V Sports to-the SLTA under
Section 39 (1) of the Sports Law, to make 14 courts available for training and
coaching programmes as lawn tennis in Sri Lanka. is seriously impeded by the
lack of facilities: An ex paste, stay order was obtained and notice was issued
to the respondents. Subsequently, after argument the Court of Appeal vacated
the stay order: by judgment delivered on the 3rd August, 1984

On the 24th. August 1984 984.-the-.,petitioner was transferred to Public
Officers Reserve" On the 2nd October 1984 he was compulsorily retired.

The main objection to this application by the learned Deputy Solicitor-General
is that there has been no breach of a, fundamental right' of the petitioner
under Articles 12 (1) aril. 1 4 (1)" (g) of the Constitution, even assuming
that all the facts alleged by the petitioner are correct:

These two Articles state

12 (1) "All persons are equal' before the law and are entitled to ' ' the
equal protection of the law.

14 (1) (g) ''Every citizen is entitled to the, freedom to engage . himself or
in association with others in, any lawful occupation, profession, trade,;
business :or enterprise."

**382**

The 14th Amendment of the' Constitution of the United States of America
provides that "the State shall hot deny to any person within its
jurisdiction....... the equal protection of the laws.'' "

Article Ad the Constitution of India provides India provides that 'the State,
shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection
of the laws in the territory of India:."

The first expression "equality before the law" is taken English common law and
implies the absence of any special privilege in favour of any individual. A
Court administering justice is not concerned `with Me status or position of
the parties appearing before it, "the law is no respecter of persons."

The object of the second expression "equal protection of MOW is to make the
whole system of the law rest upon the fundamental principle of- equality of
application of the law." "The guarantee was aimed at undue favour and
individual or" class privilege; on the `one hand, and at hostile
discrimination or the oppression of inequality on the other : per Taft-, C: J.
in Truax v. Corrigan (supra).

It has been held by the Courts in the United States that Article 14 06 boo
preclude ",legislative classification.," provided , it is reasonable. The
segregation of Negroes by requiring them to attend separate schools or ride in
separate buses is only a glimpse of the difficulties that have beset this
complex doctrine in the socio-economic setting of the United States.

The general doctrine as stated in Henderson v. Mayer (28) is as follows :-

"Though the law be fair on its face and impartial in its appearance, yet if it
is applied and administered by public authority with an evil eye and unequal
hands so as practically to make unjust and illegal discriminations, material
to their rights, the denial of equal justice is still within the prohibition
of the Constitution".

In the State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Ghulam Rasool (supra) the respondent was
a Civil Engineer who held his appointment under the appellant. On September 8,
1954, while the respondent was holding the post of Development Commissioner he
was suspended by the appellant. Later on February 12, 1955 the appellant made
a further order demoting the Petitioner to the post of Divisional Engineer.

**383**

The respondent moved the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir for a writ directing
the appellant not give effect to the order of February 1 , 1955, and to
recognise him as the Chief Engineer, the substantive post held by him when he
was, suspended with effect from the date of suspension and with all the
emoluments of that office The High Court issued the writ as prayed. The State
appealed from this judgment of the High Court.

The respondent was connected with a Hydro Electric Scheme from 1949 till he
was transferred from the work in 1953. The appellant was `dissatisfied with
the progress of the work and the manner, it was carried out. On September 8,
1954 various officers associated with the scheme including the respondent were
suspended. Thereafter on October 20 1954, the Appellant appointed a Commission
to investigate 'into' the reasons for the progressive 'rise in the estimates,
<the defective planning and delay in the execution of the work and other
irregularities and to fix responsibility upon the persons concerned and make
appropriate recommendations:

The Commission made certain enquiries and eventually submitted a report to the
`appellant: 'The' appellant then made the order demoting ' the respondent
purporting to act on the basis of the report.

The respondent. in his application -for a writ questioned the validity of the
orders suspending and demoting him on the grounds that the Commission did not
conduct the enquiry according to . the rules of natural justice. He was not
even informed of the charges against him nor given a proper hearing and if, he
had been" given, a proper opportunity, he would have proved that he had not,
been at fault at all.

The respondent also submitted that he could be reduced in rank only in
accordance with the procedure laid down in the Kashmir Civil Service Rules
passed by the State Council Order No. 81- C of 4939 and this procedure had not
been followed The High Court took the view. that these Rules had the, status
of law:

The High Court was moved to exercise its powers under Art. 32 (2A) to enforce
a fundamental right.

**384**

Counsel for the respondent submitted that the respondent was entitled to have
the- procedure prescribed by the Kashmir Civil Service Rules followed before
the order' demoting him could be made: and as that procedure was not followed
his client had been denied the equal protection of the laws under `Art: 14.

The Court held that even if the Rules are a law and the respondent has been
given the benefit of them, ail that can be said to have happened is that the
appellant has acted in breach of the law: But' that does .not amount to -a
violation of the right-to the: equal protection of -the laws. Otherwise every
breach of law by a Government 'would amount to a denial of the equal
protection of the laws. It was not the respondent's case that other servants
of the appellant had been given the benefit of those Rules- and such benefit
had, been designedly denied only to him. The appeal must be allowed on the
simple ground that the respondent's petition does not show a violation of any
fundamental. right.

It is noteworthy that in Rasool's Case (supra) the respondent did not submit
that there was hostile discrimination against him by the appellants or to use
the expression in Snowdon v. Hughes (supra) "an element of intentional or
purposeful: discrimination The reasons for the judgment in Rasool's Case
(supra) w1 ere followed in Wijesinghe v. Attorney-General (supra). The
petitioner who was: a Sub-Postmistress from April, 1975, complained that her
services were terminated with effect from 31.1, 79 by the Post Master General
in consequence of a Cabinet decision following a report, from the Political
Victimization .Committee.-,, The petitioner stated that the termination was
effected without any charges being brought against her and without giving her
a hearing. She claimed that her fundamental rights under Article 12 had been
violated.

Evidence was, led. before the Victimization Committee that- the Petitioner had
herself been improperly appointed due to the pressure of the local Member of
Parliament and: that she was selected over the claims of Indra Ranjini who was
better qualified and had previously acted as Sub-Postmistress. The petitioner
complained that she had not been given an opportunity of refuting these
allegations.

**385**

According to the contract of employment her services could be terminated
giving one month's; notice. The cabinet acting on the report of the
Victimization Committee decided to terminate her contract of service after due
notice.

The Court dismissed ,the application holding that there was no violation: of a
fundamental tight, Per Wanasundera, J. "On the material placed before me
;.ham. unable to say. that the government action could be described as an
instanced of purposeful-. or hostile discrimination."

In Narain Das v improvement Trust Amritsar (supra) the Supreme Court of India.
held that hostile discrimination ;against the appellants by the executive in
refusing exemption under s. 53 of the Punjab Town improvement Act 1922, had
not been established. Consequently there was no denial of equality..

A clear distinction must be drawn between the law and the administration of
the law. If the law itself-permits discrimination the Court may intervene. In
Dhanaraj Mills Ltd. v. B. K. Kocher (supra) it . was ;held that the position
is different when a subject comes to the Court and ,challenges a specific act
of an individual officer as being in contravention of Art. 14. The officer in
acting contrary to Art. 14 is really acting contrary to the law and not in
conformity with or in consonance with the law . . . In such a case the-
subject comes to Court not for protection under Art:- 14, but for protection
against the dishonest, arbitrary or capricious act of the officer. The Court-
is not powerless; to give the subject protection-against a dishonest. officer,
but that protection cannot be sought under Art. 14 or tinder-Art. 226;

Seervai has submitted (See Constitutional Law of India;-2nd Edn., Vol. 1;.
207) "that this judgment is clearly wrong when it holds that no relief under
Art. 226 is, available against `the dishonest, arbitrary or capricious' action
of the officer. If the dishonest. action: intentionally and purposefully
discriminated against. the petitioner, the decisions which we have considered
earlier ;are agreed. that the petitioner's -right to equality under Art. 14
would be violated, and relief under Art 226 would be available."

"If a deliberate intention on the part of the executive to violate the law is
actionable under Art. 14, it is, difficult to See why a deliberate violation
of the law in an individual case by an executive officer is not

**386**

actionable under Art. 14:"I am in agreement with these submissions by Seervai
which are supported by the Judgment of the U.S. Supreme Court delivered by
Brandeis, J. in Iowa  Des Moines 'National Bank v. Bennet (29).

"The prohibition of the 14th Amendment, it is true, has reference exclusively
to action by the State, as distinguished from action by private individuals .
But acts done by virtue of a public position under-a State Government and in
the name and for the State ... are not to be treated as if they were acts of
private individuals, although in doing them the official acted contrary to an
express command of the State law. When a State official, acting under color of
State authority, invades, in the course of his duties-,-a private right
secured by the federal Constitution, that right is violated, even if the State
officer not only exceeded his authority but disregarded special commands of
the State law."

The doctrine of classification was adopted by the Supreme Court in India prior
to 1974; but since then it has been jettisoned as being too restrictive in its
interpretation of Art. 14. In U. P. Electric Co. v. Uttar Pradesh (30) Shah,
J. referring to the doctrine of classification observed :

"Art. 14  . . . ensures equality among equals. Its aim is to protect persons
similarly placed, against discriminatory 'treatment. . . A person setting up a
grievance of denial of-equal-treatment by law must establish that between
persons similarly circumstanced, some were treated to their prejudice.'

In. Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi (supra) (before a Bench of five
judges) Bhagwati, J: stated at p. '740 ;".It is sufficient to' state that the
content and reach of Article 14 must not be confused with the doctrine of
classification., Unfortunately, in the early stages of the evolution: of our
constitutional law; Article 14 'came-.'to be identified with the doctrine of
classification because, the view taken was that that article forbids
discrimination and there would be no discrimination where the classification
making the differentia fulfils two conditions, namely (i) that the
classification is founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes
persons or things that pre grouped together from others left out of the group
; and (n) that that differentia has a ratio al relation to the object' sought-
to be achieved by' the impugned

**387**

legislative or executive action. It was for the first time in Royappa v. State
of Tamil Nadu (Supra) (1974) 2. S.C.R. 348, (1974) 4 S C.C .,3 38, that this
Court laid bare a new dimension of Article 14 and pointed out that that
article has highly activist magnitude and it . embodies a guarantee against
arbitrariness. This court speaking through one of us (Bagwati ,J) said,:
(S.C.C. p. 38) the basic principle which, therefore informs both Articles, 14
and 16 is; equality and -inhibition against discrimination. Now, what is. the
content and reach of this great equalising principle ? It is a founding
faith;, to: use -the words of Bose J., 'a way of life,' and it must not be
subjected to a narrow pedantic or lexicographic approach. We cannot
countenance any attempt to truncate its all-embracing scope and meaning, for
to do so would be to violate its activist magnitude: Equality is a dynamic
-concept with many aspects and dimensions and it cannot be 'cribbed, cabined
and confined' within traditional and doctrinaire limits. From a . positivistic
point of view; equality is antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact, ;equality
and. arbitrariness are sworn enemies ; one belongs to the rule of law in a
republic while the other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch.
Where an act is arbitrary it is implicit in it that it is unequal both'
according to political logic and constitutional law and is therefore violative
of Article 14 and if it affects any matter relating to public employment, it
is also violative of Article 16. Articles 14 and 16 strike at arbitrariness in
State action and ensure fairness and equality -of treatment:

This interpretation of Article, 14 followed the interpretation of Article 14
by a Full Bench of seven judges of the Supreme Court in, Maneka Gandhi v.
Union of India (supra) and a Bench of five Judges in Ramana Dayaram Shetty v.
International Airport Authority of India (supra).

I am in respectful agreement with-the- interpretation of Article 14, in Ajay
Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi (supra). Shorn of its unaccustomed rhetoric
the dictum that equality is antithetic to arbitrariness is axiomatic. The
doctrine of classification is not, an exhaustive free rendering of Article 14
(Article 12 of the Constitution of Sri Lanka). Classification is a convenient
`formula in certain appropriate cases'' for determining' whether legislative
or executive action is arbitrary and therefore 'constitutes denial of
equality. `It does not exhaust all the dimensions of Article 12. The object of
Article 12 is to protect "All persons" from legislative or executive- action
which amounts to hostile discrimination and is mala fide.

**388**

A denial of equality or equal protection ipso facto involves, illegal
discrimination. It may involve the adoption of any criteria or differentia
that results in the recognition of a `class, cadre or group to which the law
would ordinarily 'apply. Alternatively, it may involve an arbitrary deviation
from the legal rules in an isolated instance in favour of or adverse to the
interests of a person in respect of whom the deviation is made. It may be that
the deviation from the accepted rules does not reveal the recognition of an
identifiable class. cadre or group within the class. it is nevertheless.
unlawful discrimination.;

In order to establish discrimination or a denial of. equal protection it Js
not necessary to establish the due observance of the law in the case -of:
others who form part. of that class in previous instances. The Rule of Law
which postulates equal subjection to the law, requires the -observance of the
law in all cases. The maxim omnia praesumuntur rite esse acta under, section
114 of the Evidence Ordinance applies, and, the Court will presume that
official acts have been regularly performed. T r

The objection has also been taken that the petitioner cannot invoke the
special jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 126 as he is free to
enforce his legal rights through the normal legal remedies open to him,
including the prerogative writs. This principle does not apply as the
petitioner has come to Court with an allegation that his fundamental rights
under Articles 12 (1) and 14(1) (g) have been infringed and has sought relief
under Article 126. There is a curtailment of judicial review imposed by
Article 55 (5) and the petitioner is limited to the Article 126 jurisdiction
which limits the choice of forum. Furthermore, if the petitioner chose to
appeal to the Public Service Commission or the cabinet of Ministers under
Articles 58 and 59 before applying to the Supreme Court under Article 126 for

**389**

relief or redress in respect of the infringement of his fundamental rights,
within one month of the alleged infringement, this opportunity may have been
lost forever.

The Rules made under Article 55 (4) of the Constitution governing the
procedure for the exercise of the powers of disciplinary control and dismissal
of public servants are designed to include provisions of certain basic rights
of a proper investigation and a fair hearing and the rule of natural justice
which are implied in the exercise of these powers, before disciplinary action
is taken or an order of dismissal is made against a public officer. Together
with the rules which control the exercise of these powers the provisions of
the Constitution guarantee to public officers a measure of security and a
standard of fairness in regard to the terminon of their employment, despite
the fact that they hold office at pleasure.

For the reasons stated in this judgment I hold that the fundamental rights of
the petitioner under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution have been violated.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner has not pressed the ground that the
petitioner's fundamental right of freedom to engage in any lawful occupation
under Article 14 (1) (g) has been infringed. I therefore make no declaration
regarding the infringement of his rights under Article 14 (1) (g).

I hold that the compulsory retirement of the petitioner from the Public
Service has been motivated not on the basis of inefficiency and incompetence
but for extraneous and irrelevant reasons. His compulsory retirement, in which
the 1st , 2nd, 3rd and 4th respondents played a significant role, was an act
of hostile discrimination against the petitioner and mala fide. The procedures
laid down in the Constitution and the Establishments Code for compulsorily
retiring a Public Servant have been blatantly flouted. I grant the declaration
prayed for that the petitioner's fundamental rights under Article 12(1) have
been violated and that the compulsory retirement is unconstitutional,
unlawful, illegal and null and void.

The petitioner has withdrawn his prayer for reinstatement in the Public
Service. However, I direct that the petitioner be paid his salary and other
benefits to which he is entitled from the date of his retirement until his
55th year.

**390**

As the allegations of inefficiency and incompetence Ore a burlesque of the
truth, direct that 'damages in a sum of there lakhs of rupees be paid to the
petitioner for violation of his fundamental rights. The petitioner must also
be paid his costs.

**

ABDUL CADER, J.

**

Articles 58 (1) and 59 of the Constitution provide for appeal to the Public
'Service Commission and the Cabinet --by any public servant aggrieved by an
order or decision against him. Petitioner did not appeal to these bodies, but
instead petitioned this Court that his fundamental right has been violated.

Petitioner 'was compelled to adopt this procedure without adopting the appeal
procedure first, because of the one month rule in Article 126 (2) and because
of Article 55 (5) which purports to exclude legal process in any other court.
But is this article so exclusive as to shutout for instance a writ in the;
Court of Appeal ?. I would like to leave behind (on the verge of my
retirement) my opinion that At may not be so, as the words ''order or
decision'' generally connote a valid and proper order 'or -decision.- If my
view e correct,-petitioner cont ending as he was that 2nd respondent had no
legal authority or jurisdiction to, take disciplinary anion against the
petitioner, could well have petitioned the Court of Appeal questioning the
validity of the impugned order or decision, (Lord, Reid in.. Anisminic Case)
and/or contending, that even if the 2nd respondent had jurisdiction,
petitioner had not been dealt with fairly.

Apart from the Many circumstances set out in the several judgments of my
brothers, there are-two glaring defects, in the procedure adopted by 2nd
respondent that no appellate body could have ignored:

1\. Rule 6 of R 1, which the A respondent followed, " requires a full
"confidential report on the reasons for the request sent to the 2nd
respondent. Obviously this is a requirement so that 2nd respondent could bring
an independent mind to decide the very vital questions whether petitioner was
inefficient and incompetent. This report was not sent, full, or otherwise and
2nd respondent t k action on a mere request.

**391**

2\. Petitioner sent his is reply P 18 to Q within the time limit given to him.
Admittedly P 18 was not considered by 2nd respondent before he decided to
terminate petitioner's employment. This action offends natural justice.

If my view of Article 55 (5) is correct, petitioner need not have gone through
the very expensive procedure of coming to this Court in the first instance;
but rather he could have followed the appeal procedure which the Constitution,
permits him, and thereafter gone to the court of Appeal, as the; time limit in
a writ application will be computed from the order in the last legal step
available to a petitioner by other process. Secondly, where as in this case, a
petitioner is: unable to prove discrimination, he could well succeed in a writ
application.

As regards the question referred to the Full Bench lam of the view that equal
protection of the law will involve equality between two or more persons' and
when a single instance is presented to court the court is obliged to set its
own standards instead of weighing the case by standards adopted by the
executive, which should be the proper test. I therefore agree with
Sharvananda, C.J. than this petition should fail for want of proof of
discrimination and that this petition be dismissed.

_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1985/6.html_  

