##  Kularatne and Another v. Rajapakse - SLR - 24, Vol 1 of 1985 [1984] LKSC
6; (1985) 1 Sri LR 24 (12 December 1984)

**

24

KULARATNE AND ANOTHER  
v.  
RAJAPAKSE

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, J., WANASUNDERA, J. AND ABDUL CADER, J.  
S.C. No. 1/84 AND S.C. No. 2/84.  
ELECTION PETITION No. 8/83.  
SEPTEMBER 19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26, 1984.

_

    Election petition - Corrupt practice of false statement of fact relating to personal character and conduct of petitioner - Section 58 (1) (d) of Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council - Scope of appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeal from determination of Election Judge - Section 82 (A) (1) of Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council.

_

The petitioner an unsuccessful candidate at the by-election for the
Mulkirigala Electoral District held on 18th May 1983 filed this petition
seeking to have the election of the 1st respondent at the said election set
aside on the ground that the 2nd respondent had as the agent and/or with the
knowledge and/or consent of the 1st respondent committed the corrupt practice
of making a false statement relating to her personal character and conduct at
a meeting at Middeniya to support the 1st respondent's candidature.

The 2nd respondent had in his speech at the said meeting made statements
imputing that the petitioner had shown no love or gratitude to her late father
George Rajapakse who earlier represented this electorate and that she was a
hypocrite and a fraud to ask the voters to vote for her to show their
gratitude to the late George Rajapakse. The 2nd respondent did not dispute
making the impugned statements nor did the respondents challenge the fact of
the agency of the 2nd respondent.

The respondents also pointed to a deficiency in the pleadings. The petitioner
had failed to aver that the false statements were made for the purpose of
affecting her return. It was also argued that the statement related to the
public or political character of the petitioner since gratitude to her late
father was an election issue.

**

Held -

**

(1) If the election judge's determination cannot be shown to be erroneous in
point of law it is final and the finding of the Election Judge; cannot. be
upset in appeal. Section 82A (1) of -the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections)
Order-in-Council provides for an appeal to the Supreme Court only on a
question of law and not otherwise. The Supreme Court can interfere with the
conclusion of the Judge only if it is shown that he had erred in taw or Vas
reached if finding which no reasonable tribunal, properly instructed, could
have reached.

(2) The burden is on the petitioner to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the
statement complained of was made by the 2nd respondent and that it is false.

**25**

(3) On the evidence and concession` made, by Counsel for the respondents the
judge was perfectly justified in concluding that the 2nd respondent was an
agent of the 1st respondent and that the speech was made by the 2nd respondent
acting as such. agent and with the knowledge and, consent of the 1st
respondent.

(4) What is forbidden' by section 58 (1) (d) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) Order-in-Council is a false statement of fact in relation to the
personal character of the candidate for the purpose of affecting the return of
such candidate. A politician may be criticised or held up-to obloquy for his
public conduct but the man beneath the politician cannot be assailed in
respect of his honour, veracity and purity by false statements.

(5) The evidence led justifies the determination of the trial Judge that there
has been no ingratitude on the part of the Petitioner.

(6) In her pleadings it was sufficient for the petitioner to allege that the
respondents committed the corrupt practice set out in section 58 (1) (d) of
the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council without specifying the
elements constituting the offence. The failure to specify that the false
statement was made for the purpose of affecting her return is a failure to
refer to one element of the corrupt practice. At most it is an irregularity
which caused no prejudice and no objection on the point had been taken at the
trial.

(7) The charge of filial ingratitude is essentially a reflection on the
private character of the petitioner and gravely prejudices her. If the
allegation is unfounded as here it is a false statement affecting private
character and will offend section 58 (1) (d) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) Order-in-Council.

**

Case referred to :

**_

  1. Rajapakse v. Gunasekera _[ 1984] 2 Sri LRI, 17-19.  


 _

  2. Edward v. Bairstow _[1956] AC 14.  


 _

  3. Pioneer Shipping Co. Ltd. v. B. T. P. Tioxide Ltd. _[ 1982) AC 724, 752.  


 _

  4. North Louth case. _(1910) 6 0 M & H. 10.

_**

Appeal** from the Election Court.

K. N. Choksy, P. C. with Mark Fernando, D. ,' H. N. Jayamaha, Miss. l. R.
Rajapakse and Nihal Fernando for 1st respondent-appellant in appeal No. 1/84
and for 1st respondent-respondent in appeal No. 2/84.

Mark Fernando with Daya Pelpola for 2nd respondent-appellant in appeal No.
2./84.

H. L. de Silva, P.C. with Gomin Dayasiri for petitioner-respondent in both
appeals.

_

_Cur. adv. vult._

December 12, 1984.

**

SHARVANANDA, C.J.

**

The petitioner-respondent filed the present election petition in respect of
the by-election for the Mulkirigala Electoral District No. 75 held on 18th
May, 1983. At the said election the 1st respondent - appellant

**26**

was declared elected as the Member of Parliament for the said electoral
district. The petitioner was one of the unsuccessful candidates. By her
petition the petitioner sought for a declaration that the election of the 1st
respondent was void and/or should be set aside, on the ground that a false
statement of fact relating to the personal character and conduct of the
petitioner had been made and published by the 2nd respondent (2nd respondent-
appellant in S. C. Appeal No. 2/84) in terms of section 58 (1) (d) of the
Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council, as the agent of the 1st
respondent (1st respondent-appellant in S. C. Appeal No. 1/84), and/or with
the knowledge and/or consent of the 1st respondent.

The petitioner set out the allegation relied on by her as follows in paragraph
5 (a) of her petition :

"At a meeting held at Middeniya in the Electoral District of Mulkirigala in
support of the candidature of the 1st respondent for the U.N.P., held on or
about 14th May 1983, the 2nd respondent made a speech immediately after the
1st respondent had spoken, and while the 1st respondent was himself present at
the platform. In his speech the 2nd respondent said that the petitioner who
was the daughter of late Mr. George Rajapakse was campaigning for the votes of
the people upon a poster which called for gratitude or "Kalaguna Selakeema"
towards the late Mr. Rajapakse. The 2nd respondent said -that on the day that
late Rajapakse was leaving Sri Lanka for open heart surgery in England, he
wanted to see his children to say good-bye and had gone to the house where
they lived, but that the petitioner had shut the door in his face, refused him
admission and turned him out."

(a) The petitioner further alleged in paragraph 7 of her petition that the
aforesaid statement is false and affects her personal character and/or conduct
and that the said statement implied -that she had no love or gratitude, as
daughter towards her own father ;

(b) That she was a hypocrite and fraud in asking for votes on the basis of the
peoples" gratitude for her late father, who had been the former Member of
Parliament for Mulkirigala from 1960 to 1976.

**27**

After trial the Election Judge held that the 2nd respondent, as agent of the
1st respondent and with- his knowledge and consent, made a false statement of
fact in' relation to the personal conduct -of the petitioner for the purpose
of affecting the return of the petitioner as candidate for' the Electoral
District of Mulkirigala and thereby committed -a corrupt practice as alleged
in paragraph 5 (1) of the petition, in breach of section 58 (1) (d) of the
Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council. Accordingly he declared
that the election of the 1st respondent as Member f Parliament for the
Electoral District of Mulkirigala was void and he' certified that as his
determination and directed that the respondent should pay the petitioner a sum
of Rs. 2100. as costs. Against the decision of the Election Judge the 1st
respondent has filed S C. Appeal No. 1 /84 and the 2nd respondent has filed S.
C. Appeal No.2/84. Both Appeals were taken up together for argument.

In Rajapakse v. Gunasekera (1) I referred to the limited scope of the
appellate jurisdiction of this Court when hearing an appeal from the
determination of an Election Judge. Section 82(A) (1) of the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council provides for an 'appeal to the
Supreme Court only on a question of law and not otherwise. emphasised there at
page 5 that -

"This Court cannot review the findings of fact by a trial Judge unless a
question of law is involved in the finding or the finding itself, is in a
legal sense a question of law".

If the determination cannot be shown to be erroneous in point of law, it is
final and the findings of the Election Judge cannot be upset by this Court in
appeal. This Court can only interfere with the conclusion of the Judge if it
is shown that he had erred in law or has reached a finding which no reasonable
tribunal, properly instructed, could have reached. Edward v. Bairstow (2),
Pioneer Shipping Co., Ltd. v. B.T.P. Tioxide Ltd. (3) (per Lord Rosknill).
Therefore this Court is not entitled to intervene unless it is satisfied that
the Election Judge has misdirected himself in law avid has reached a perverse
finding, unwarranted or unsupported by the evidence of record.

I approach the decision of this appeal with the consciousness of the statutory
limitation of the appellate jurisdiction of this Court that it cannot question
the correctness of the findings of fact reached by the Election Judge unless
they are not supported by any evidence or are

**28**

unreasonable or perverse ; if there is evidence to support the finding of
fact, the finding is final and this Court cannot vary or reverse the decision
unless it is satisfied that the Election Judge has erred on a question of law,
but must loyally accept the conclusion of fact reached by him, though
uninhibited by any such limitation, it may find or weigh the facts
differently. The Election Judge is the tribunal of fact charged with the
function of finding and assessing qualitatively the factual circumstances. It
is only if the weight given by him to a particular factor shows a misdirection
in law that this Court in the exercise of its limited appellate jurisdiction
will interfere and substitute its own decision on the supposition that, but
for the error of law, the election tribunal would not have- reached such a
decision. In the absence of such a circumstance, this Court cannot review and
re-evaluate the evidence placed before the Election Judge.

The entire evidence was subjected to a very critical -analysis by Counsel for
the appellants in an endeavour to persuade us that the Election Judge had
erred in his assessment of the evidence before him. I have given my anxious
consideration to their submissions, having regard to the consequences which
will befall the appellants if the decision of the Election Judge is upheld.
But to accept their contentions would amount to this Court usurping the
function of the Election Judge and transgressing the statutory limitation
placed on this Court in appeal. I cannot, with all respect to Counsel for the
appellants, hold that this is a case in which no reasonable tribunal could
have reached the conclusion arrived at by the Election Judge. Counsel rightly
pointed to- one error of law in the judgment under appeal, where the Judge
stated that the essence of the allegation in paragraph 5 (a) is that "the
petitioner refused admission to her father when the latter. came to see her".
I agree with Counsel that the Judge was wrong in taking such a narrow view of
the allegation contained in the said paragraph. He had probably been misled by
the petitioner's averments in her petition. In my view, the gravamen of the
allegation is that the petitioner is an ungrateful daughter of the late George
Rajapakse. and hence is least entitled to call upon the voters to show their
gratitude or 'kalaguna selakeema' towards her father the late George Rajapakse
by voting for her. The alleged occasion of the petitioner refusing admission
to her father when the latter came to see her is only one manifestation
referred to by the 2nd respondent to substantiate his allegation that the
petitioner is an ungrateful daughter. However, this misdirection of law did
not constrict the view of the

**29**

Judge to the totality of the evidence of other instances of ingratitude relied
on by the respondents, tending to show that the petitioner is an ungrateful
child. The respondents sought to support their allegation of ingratitude by
reference to three instances. The Judge did not rule out any evidence which
the respondents proposed to lead to establish their allegation of filial
ingratitude. We have the benefit of the finding of the Judge on the evidence
placed before him by the respondents to establish their general allegation
except on one matter, referred to below. In the circumstances the error of law
committed by the Judge in his encapsulation of the allegation of the
petitioner has not affected his judgment. The said error of law does not
vitiate his judgment.

The burden lay on the petitioner to prove beyond reasonable' doubt that the
statement complained of was made by the 2nd respondent and that the statement
was a false statement (Rajapakse v. Gunasekera (supra).

The finding that the second respondent made the impugned statement was not
challenged in appeal. The 2nd respondent's speech was tape-recorded -P 9 (a)
and P 10 (a). The passage of speech relied upon by the petitioner as having
been made by the 2nd respondent is P 10 (g). The tape was played in the
election court and 2nd respondent's voice was identified: The respondents did
not go into the witness box to challenge the evidence of the petitioner and of
the witness Galappathi who taped the speech, identifying' the voice of the 2nd
respondent. The Judge has held that the tape P 9 (a) contains an authentic
record of the speech of the 2nd respondent and P 10 an accurate transcript of
the speech and has further found that the 2nd respondent made the statement
set out in P 10 (g) in the course of his speech.

At the trial Counsel for both respondents specifically stated that they were
not challenging the 2nd respondent's agency.

On the evidence and concession made by Counsel for the respondents, the Judge
was perfectly justified in concluding that the 2nd respondent was an agent of
the 1st respondent and that the speech was made by: the 2nd respondent,.
acting as such agent and with the knowledge and consent of the 1st respondent.

What is forbidden by section 58 (1) (d) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) Order-in-Council is a false statement of fact in relation to the

**30**

personal character or conduct of a candidate for the purpose of affecting the
return. of any candidate. In the North Louth case (4) Gibsen, J., at page 163
stated that -

"A politician, for his public conduct may be: criticised, held up to obloquy
for that the statute gives no redress, but when the man beneath, the
politician has his honour, veracity and purity assailed, he is entitled to
demand that his constituents shall not be poisoned against him by, false
statements containing such unfounded imputations".

In this context, it is stated in Halsbury's Law of England, 4th Ed. Vol. 15,
paragraph 790, pages 431-422 that-

"the false statement of fact need not be defamatory at common law, so long. as
it is a statement which is calculated to influence electors, as for instance,
a statement made in a hunting county that the candidate shot a fox or a
statement made to promoters of total abstinence that the candidate has taken a
-glass of wine; but it is essential that it should relate to the personal
rather than the political character or conduct of the candidate. The question
to be determined is what in the circumstances is the true meaning which the
reader would place upon a statement. The true meaning will depend on the
occasion of the publication, the persons published, the person attacked and
the readers intended to be addressed."

Counsel for the 2nd respondent took objection that the petition of the
petitioner is not in order and should have been rejected in limine on the
ground that the petitioner had failed to plead in the petition, that the
impugned statement was made for the purpose of affecting the return of the
petitioner. What the petitioner has stated in paragraph 4 of her petition is
as follows :

"The petitioner states that the election' of the respondent is void and is
liable to be set aside in terms of section 58 (1) (d) of the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council .... by reason of the commission of
the corrupt practice of the making of, and the publishing of a false statement
concerning the personal character and conduct of the petitioner. by the 2nd
respondent who was an agent of the 1st respondent and/or a person who acted
with the knowledge and/or consent of the 1st respondent."

**31**

I do not think there is any substance in this objection. It is true that the
petitioner has not specifically referred to one of the elements of the offence
of corrupt practice, viz : that the statement was made for the purpose of
affecting her return, but she has referred to the relevant section of the`
Election Order-in-Council defining the offence of corrupt practice and had
pleaded that the respondents had committed the corrupt practice. It would have
been sufficient for her to have pleaded that respondents committed the corrupt
practice set out in section 58 (1) (d) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections)
Order-in-Council with respect to her. When she proceeded to specify certain
elements of the offence of corrupt practice, she did something which was not
necessary and hence when she failed to refer to one element of the offence viz
: that the statement was made for the purpose of affecting her return, she
failed to state part of something which was not necessary. At most, the said
failure was an irregularity which did not cause and could not have caused any
prejudice to the respondents in their having a fair trial of the petition.. It
is to be noted that this objection was not taken in the lower court.

At the trial; the respondents based their allegation of ingratitude following
three instances :

(i) that the petitioner shut the :door. in the face of the late George
Rajapakse, her father, when he wanted to, see her and her mother in the house
where they lived to ay good bye before he left for open heart surgery in
England ;

(ii) the petitioner did not go to the Airport, Katunayake when her father went
abroad for a surgical operation , and the petitioner had not, to date, built a
tomb to deposit her father's ashes.

In regard-to the first and second instances the petitioner in her sworn
evidence-said-:that no incident as stated by the 2nd respondent ever took
place and further-stated. that on 5:5.76 when her father was leaving the
country, he came to their - house, spoke to her and -her brother and .advised
each of them and requested them to attend to their studies. According to her,
he did not want them to come to the airport but, took them by car, to. their
respective schools. Further, before he left the house, he had given them his
picture post-cards P 1 and P 2 dated and signed by him. She admitted that she
did, not go to the airport that day to see him off, the reason being not that
she was

**32**

indifferent to her father's departure, but because he did not want her and her
brother to come there, though she in fact wanted to go to the airport. As
against her evidence, there was no contradictory evidence of any eye-witness.
The 2nd respondent, though he described graphically in his statement. P 10
what he alleges to have happened when George Rajapakse want to petitioner's
house to bid good bye, did not get into the witness box to contradict the
petitioner's version of what happened on the morning of 5.5.1976 at the
petitioner's house. When the petitioner gave evidence not even a suggestion
was made to the petitioner that an incident as referred to by the 2nd
respondent ever took place between the petitioner and her father that morning
of 5.5.1976. The trial Judge was, in the circumstances justified in accepting
petitioner's evidence on this point - in fact, any other finding would on the
evidence have been perverse. As regards the petitioner's failure to go to the
airport, the trial Judge has accepted the petitioner's explanation for not
going. He has rejected the evidence of Kamala Wickremanayake, the 2nd
respondent's witness, that the deceased; her brother had expressed at the
airport disappointment at his daughter's failure to come to the airport. He
had characterised her evidence as patently tainted and partisan and that she
was ill disposed towards her niece (the petitioner) seeking a political
career. A better reason for rejecting Kamala Wickremanayake's evidence would
have been the belatedness of her story - according to her she had not
communicated, the late George Rajapakse's expression of disappointment to
anybody nor did she convey it to the petitioner her niece nor take her to
task, at any time, for her failure. She had kept it locked up in her bosom
from 1976 to 1983. Further she was not well disposed towards the petitioner as
is evident from the fact that she had addressed five or six election meetings
on the last day in favour of the 1st respondent and hence her evidence against
the petitioner is suspect. There is no good reason for holding that the trial
Judge was not justified in rejecting Kamala Wickremanayake's evidence as
against petitioner's evidence. Then, there are the letters P 3, P 4 and P 7
written by the petitioner's father to the petitioner and her brother which
give the' lie to Kamala Wickremanayake's story of disappointment or
displeasure at the petitioner's conduct. The letter `P 4 was written in
flight; addressed to my darling Nero and Shyam' (Petitioner and her brother)
advising them "Please look after yourselves` and do not lose heart that you
have lost your father." Counsel for the appellants, dissected the letters and

**33**

subjected them to an unemotional analysis in an endeavour to show that they
reflected a sense of grief on the writer's part. The trial Judge has commented
that-

"these letters lead to the irresistible conclusion that there was a close bond
of love and affection between the petitioner and her father. There is no doubt
that there is some expression of sadness shown in some of these letters. But
such expressions are natural and to be expected."

I am not satisfied that this observation is irrational. Perhaps, the deceased
had a premonition of premature demise. I share the trial Judge's conviction
"beyond a reasonable doubt that there was no displeasure between the
petitioner and her father".

The petitioner in her petition has not complained of the 2nd respondent's
allegation in his speech that she had not to date interned her father's ashes
and had so failed to perform her duty by her father. The petitioner in her
evidence has stated that her father's ashes had not been interned because of
numerous problems. She said that members of the Rajapakse family had tried to
make political capital of the ashes at the 1976 by-election and the 2nd
respondent himself at the 'General Election of 1977. According to her, the
relations were interested in the ashes to advance the interests of Rajapakses
respective candidates. It was not possible in those circumstances to entomb
the ashes and the petitioner did not give in to their requests. With the
passage of time, the petitioner had changed her mind on the question of
entombing the ashes and she does not now like to intern the ashes for the
reason "Everyday those ashes are in our room. When I see the ashes I feel as
though I can see my father. Therefore I did not like to entomb the ashes. I
feel that entombing the ashes is like throwing the ashes into the jungle". The
petitioner has given a very reasonable explanation' for not entombing the
ashes. Her conduct does not show any contumacy on her part. No evidence has
been placed before court that such conduct savours of ingratitude or that it
is obligatory on the part of children to intern the ashes of their parents
under any circumstances-and that failure to do so, for whatever reason, good
or bad is regarded by the community as an act of filial ingratitude. Counsel
for the petitioner mentioned cases of some eminent persons whose ashes have
not been interned, but have been otherwise preserved. Applying ordinary norms
of filial conduct one cannot say that preserving the ashes of 'a dead father
without entombing them for the purpose referred to by the petitioner

**34**

manifests ingratitude on the part of the children. All that the petitioner has
admitted Js that internment of ashes is a sacred thing as far as the Sinhala
people are concerned, but from that the conclusion cannot be drawn that
preserving the ashes without interning them would be regarded by the Sinhalese
community, as heinous and smacking of ingratitude on' the part of the
deceased`s children. A court can act only on proof of what is generally
regarded by the community as an act of filial ingratitude. The facts of this
case have no resemblance to the case of a man having a number of illegitimate
children or mistresses and he being described as a man of immoral character.
By all accepted norms the court will readily endorse that description. But,
the instant case is different and evidence. should have been led by' the
respondents to show. that the <mere non-internment of ashes for ,whatever
reason is ipso facto regarded by the community as an act of filial
ingratitude. The; election-judge has not recorded his finding on this matter.
I can. very well appreciate the failure of the election-judgment to make any
pronouncement on this issue, when he had no evidence to guide him, and the
petitioner has not admitted :that such. failure to intern the ashes would
constitute ingratitude on her part. In my view, the allegation of ingratitude
on this account stands unsubstantiated.

The petitioner has established that the passage in 2nd respondent's speech PIO
contains a false statement relating to her personal character and conduct
which is calculated to mislead the electors to her prejudice. The statement of
the 2nd respondent must be judged in the context in which it was made. The 2nd
respondent alleged that the petitioner was seeking to use her father's name in
furtherance other candidature on a poster which called for gratitude from the
voters towards her father to whom she herself. was an ungrateful daughter and
hence was least entitled to cash in. on it. The allegation that she was
ungrateful is; a false allegation and was calculated to denigrate her and
affect her return. It was not a statement of opinion but was a statement of
fact in relation to the personal character or conduct of the petitioner. Mr.
Mark Fernando contended that the statement was made in regard to the public or
political character. of the petitioner as a candidate and not to her personal
character, since gratitude to her late father had been made an election issue
by the petitioner. I cannot agree with his submission. The charge of filial
ingratitude is essentially a : reflection on the private character of the
petitioner. The impugned statement affected the candidate beneath the
politician. It touched her private character. A statement that she was
endeavouring to

**35**

perpetuate dynasty-rule or family bandyism would have been criticism casting
no reflection 'on her private character but would have been criticism of her
public character and hence would not have constituted a corrupt practice. But
to attribute filial ingratitude to any opposing candidate is to touch on her
private character which would gravely prejudice her and if that allegation is
unfounded it is a false statement affecting private character and will offend
section 58 (1) (d) of the Parliamentary Election-Order-in-Council.

The election-judge was entitled, in the circumstances to accept and act on the
denial of the-petitioner who, unlike the case of the petitioner in the case of
Rajapakse v. Gunasekera (supra) had not been proved to be an untruthful
witness. His determination cannot be characterised as irrational or perverse.

This appeal is an appeal on questions of fact and no material misdirection in
law are involved in it. I dismiss S.C. (Election Petition) Appeal No. 2/84
with costs payable by the 2nd respondent-appellant to the petitioner-
respondent and I dismiss S.C. (Election Petition) Appeal No. 1/84 without
costs.

**

WANASUNDERA, J**. - I agree.

**

ABDUL CADER, J**. - I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/6.html_  

