##  Charlotte Perera v. Thambiah and Another - SLR - 352, Vol 1 of 1983 [1983]
LKSC 6; (1983) 1 Sri LR 352 (10 October 1983)

352

CHARLOTTE PERERA

**v.**

THAMBIAH AND ANOTHER

  


SUPREME COURT,

WANASUNDERA, J . , RATWATTE, J.,

AND ABDUL CADER,  J.­

S.C.NO‑ 47/82, S.C.SPECIAL

LEAVE TO APPEAL NO. 69/82

APPLICATION NO. C.A.(L. A.) NO. 60/81,

D.C‑ MOUNT‑LAVINIA,

CASE NO. 667/RE.

OCTOBER 10, 1983.



_Landlord and Tenant -Action in ejectment on the ground of sub ‑letting ‑ S
10(5) of Rent Act No. 7 of 1972-Appeal . _

#  353



1972 ‑ Appeal ‑ Execution Pending appeal ‑ 5.23 of the judicature Act (as
amended by Act No‑37 of 1979 ‑ S. 763 (2) CPC (as amended by Act No. 53 of
1980) ‑ S. 761 C.P.C. ‑ S. 777 C.P.C. ‑ S. 22 (11) of Rent Act.



 In an action in ejectment against the lst defendant on the ground of
subletting Plaintiff obtained judgement for ejectment of the defendants.­ The
1st defendant appealed and the appeal was pending in the Court of Appeal. The
plaintiff applied for execution pending appeal. Both defen­dants objected but
the District Judge allowed execution pending appeal. The two defendants
applied to the Court of Appeal for leave to appeal and revision. The Court of
Appeal stayed execution pending determination of the appeal. The plaintiff
appealed to the Supreme Court.



For a Court to stay execution pending appeal the judgment‑ debtor must show
that execution may result in "substantial loss". Then and only then can stay
be ordered (S. 763(2) C.P.C.). security will have to be given by the
judgment‑debtor for stay. Section 23 of the judicature Act as amended by Act
No. 37 of 1979) permits the Court to stay execution if it sees fit.



Under S. 761 C.P.C. the judgment‑creditor's right to move for execution is
postponed till after the expiry of the appealable time.



No insuperable difficulty exists to restore the evicted judgment‑debtor to
possession in case he wins the appeal. In Section 777 C.P.C. there is ample
provision to restore the judgment‑debtor to Possession in the interests of
justice.

#  354

  
_Vethamanicam v. Dawoodbhoy_ (1962) 63 N.L.R.  54B overruled



# Cases referred to



1 _Vethamanicam vs. Dawoodbhoy (1962)63 N.L.R. 548_

_  _

_2\. Wickremanayake vs. Simon Appu(1972)76 N.L.R. 166_

_  _

_3\. Shell Transport Company vs. Dissanayake (1924)26 N.L.R. 363, 365._

_  _

Appeal from judgment of the Court of Appeal .



Miss. Maureen Seneviratne with Hilton Seneviratne for plaintiff‑appellant.
A.C. Goonaratne Q.C. with S. Rudramorthy for 1st defendant ‑ respondent.

Cur.adv.vult.

  
July 29. 1983.  


**SAMARAKOON, C. J.,  
 **

The Appellant instituted this action on  12‑07‑1978 in the District Court of
Mount Lavinia against the 1st., Defendant‑Petitioner‑Respond (hereinafter
referred to as 1st Respondent) and 2nd Defendant‑Respondent (hereinafter
referred as 2nd Respondent) to have them ejected from premises in suit. The
Appellant alleged that 1st Respondent had sublet a part of the premises the
2nd Respondent in contravention of the provisions of section 10(5) of the Rent
Act No.7 1972. The 1st Respondent denied the allegation. The 2nd Respondent
admitted the sub‑letting denied that it was in contravention of the Law After
trial the learned District Judge entered judgment for the Appellant and
ordered inter a I the ejectment of the two Respondents. The Respondent
appealed from this order to the Court Appeal and that Appeal is pending. On
.27‑08‑1, the Appellant filed an application for the



# 355

  
execution of the decree pending appeal. Each of the Respondents filed
objections to this application. After inquiry on 18‑01‑1983 the District Judge
ma4q order on 27‑01‑1963 allowing the application for execution of writ. The
Respondent then made two applications to the Court of Appeal. They are No.
CA/LA.6/83 being an application for leave to appeal and No.CA.210/83 being an
application for revision of the order of the District Judge. They were heard
together and by order delivered on 15th March, 1983, the Court of Appeal
stayed execution of the writ till final determination of the appeal. The
appellant has appealed against the order in both Applications and the Appeals
in this Court are numbered S.C.29/83 (Application for leave to Appeal) and
S.C.30/83. (Application for 'Revision). The two appeals were heard together
and this order covers both.



At the hearing we had the benefit of an exhaustive argument from opposing
Counsel on the law applicable to an application of this kind. On account of
the seeming confusion that appears to have been caused by a succession of
amendments I desire to delve in‑to the history of the legal provisions
touching this matter. Since the introduction of the Civil Procedure Code
(Cap.101) of 1889 these applications have been governed by the provisions of
Chapter LIX. Section 761 reads as follows:‑



 "761\. Execution of a decree shall not be stayed by reason only of an appeal
having been, preferred against the decree; but, if any application be made for
stay of execution of an appealing decree before the expiry of time allowed for
appealing therefrom, the court 46tch passed the decree may for sufficient
cause order that execution be stayed.

#  356

  


Provided that no order shall be made under this section unless the court
making it is  satisfied-



(a) that substantial loss may result to the party applying for stay of
execution unless the order is made;



(b) that the application has been made without unreasonable delay; and



(c) that security is given by the applicant for the due performance of such
decree  or order as may ultimately be binding upon him ",



An analysis of this section reveals the following ingredients:‑  


1\. The filing of an appeal does not stay execution of the decree appealed
against. The judgement- creditor's right to apply for such execution was
unquestionable.



2\. The Court may stay execution if before the expiry of the appealable period
the judgment- debtor without unreasonable delay makes application for stay of
execution.



3\. The court may then stay sufficient cause if _and only if_



(a) such cause may result in substantial loss to the judgment‑debtor, and

           

(b) if security is given by debtor to honour the ultimate decree or order of
the Supreme Court



Section 763 stipulates that a sale of immovable  property in execution of a
decree for money which,  is the subject of an appeal, _shall be stayed on the_  



**  357 **



application of the judgment‑debtor until the appeal is disposed of provided
security is furnished The judgment‑debtor's right to a stay on furnishing
security is absolute.



The above are provisions relating to the relief of the judgment­ ‑debtor. The
rights of the judgment- creditor to execution of the decree pending appeal is
limited by the provisions of section 763. The relevant portion of which reads
as follows:‑



"763\. In the case of an application being made by the judgment‑creditor for
execution of a decree which is appealed against, the judgment‑debtor shall be
made respondent.



if, on any such application, an order is made for the execution of a decree
against which an appeal is pending, the court which passed the decree shall,
on sufficient cause being shown by the appellant, require security to be given
for the restitution of any property which may be taken in execution of the
decree, or for the payment of the value of such property, and for the due
performance of the decree or order of the Supreme Court.



In terms of this section  


(a) The judgment‑debtor must be made Respondent to the application for
execution of the decree.



(b) If the judgment‑debtor shows sufficient cause, then security shall be
required of the judgment‑creditor as a  pre‑requisite for the execution of the
decree.



The Civil Procedure Code was repealed by the provisions of the Administration
of Justice Law No.25 of 1975 but was revived by section 4(1) of the Civil
Courts Procedure (Special Provisions) Law

# 358



No.19 of 1977 in terms of  the Civil Procedure Code shall for all purposes be
deemed to be, and to have been, in operation as if the same had not been
repealed and shall continue to be the law governing the procedure and the
practice in Civil Courts". By the provisions of section 114 of the Civil
Procedure Code( Amendment)  Law No.20 of 1977, section 671 and section 672 of
the Code were repealed. Section 671 was replaced as follows:-



"761\. No application for‑ execution of an appealable decree shall be
instituted or entertained until after the expiry of the time allowed for
appealing therefrom:



Provided, however, that where an appeal preferred against such a decree, the
judgment- creditor may forthwith apply for execution such decree under the
provisions of sect 763."



By this new section the judgment‑creditor's right to apply for execution of
the decree was postponed till after the expiry of the appeal time and such
application had to be considered terms of section 673. The right of the
judgment-debtor to apply for stay of execution thereby ceased to exist. He was
left high and dry. There remained only his limited right in‑section 673
showing cause why security should be obtained. Then came the Judicature Act
No.2 of 1978. Section 23 of that Act gave the judgment‑debtor a right of
appeal, and nothing else. His predicament seems to been noticed in the year
1979 and an attempt made by the Judicature (Amendment) Act No.37 1979 to give
him relief. Section 23 was re and substituted as follows:‑



"23\. Any party who shall be dissatisfied any judgment, decree, or order
pronounced by a

#  359



District Court may (excepting where such right is expressly disallowed) appeal
to the Court of Appeal against any such judgment, decree, or order from any
error in law or in fact committed by such court, but no such appeal shall have
the effect of staying the execution of such judgment, decree or order, unless
the District Judge shall see fit to make an order to that effect, in which
case the party appellant shall enter into a bond, with or without sureties as
the District Judge shall consider necessary, to appear when required and abide
the judgment of the Court of Appeal upon the appeal."



This section did not go to the extent of permitting the judgment‑debtor to
make an application for stay of execution. It merely gave the discretion to
Court to stay writ of execution if it thought fit to make such an order. It
was only in 1980 that the judgment debtor's right of application to stay of
writ was restored. This was done by an amendment to section 763 by the Civil
Procedure Code (‑Amendment) Act No.53 of 1980 which reads as follows:‑



"(2) The Court may order execution to be stayed upon such terms and conditions
as it may deem fit, where ‑



(a)  the judgment‑debtor satisfies the court that substantial loss may result
to the judgment‑debtor unless an order for stay of execution is made, and



(b)  security is given by the judgment‑debtor for the due performance of such
decree or order as may ultimately be binding upon him."



From 1977 to 1979 the judgment‑debtor was without any remedy and for a further
year and a

#  360

  
half he could make no application himself for stay of writ.



It appears to me that the law as it stands today is somewhat wider the
provisions of section  761 of (Cap.86). Under that section a Court could stay
writ for "sufficient cause," but whatever that cause may be it must be shown
to the satisfaction of Court that it may result in "substantial loss". Then,
_and only then_ ,  can the order be made. To day the matter is governed by the
provisions of section  23 of the Judicature Act (as amended by Act No. 37 of
1979) read with section 763(2) of the Civil Procedure Code (as amended by Act
No. 53 of 1980).Section 23 permits the Court to stay writ of execution if it
sees fit and section 763(2) permits it to stay writ if the judgment-debtor
satisfies the Court that substantial loss may result. The two provisions are
not linked as in section 761.



judgment  in this case was delivered by the  District Judge on   21‑05‑82\. On
03‑08‑82 the  Appellant made an application for execution  of writ  pending
appeal. On 15-11-82 1st  Respondent filed objections pleading that
"irreparable damage" will be caused if he is ejected from the premises. I will
refer to this in detail later in this judgment. The 2nd Respondent had
apparently left the premises but he filed objections on 11-10-82 and requested
Court to assist him to reoccupy the premises he vacated. However he did not
appear at the inquiry into these objections. After inquiry the District Judge
delivered order on 27-01-83 allowing the execution of writ pending appeal. It
is difficult to gather from the order what precise reasons motivated the Judge
to allow the application. I shall however do the best I can to analyse it as I
have the benefit of submission made by Counsel for the Respondent as a guide.
The Judge refers to the case of  _Vethamanicam vs,_

  **  361  
 **

_Dawoodbhoy_ cited to him but makes only a passing reference to it. Counsel
submits that tads being a tenancy case the oft quoted dictum of T.S. Fernando,
J. should have been accepted and followed by the Judie. The Court of Appeal
was of the opinion that in assessing whether substantial loss will result to
the tenant a primary consideration that would weigh against the issue of a
writ was that set out in the dictum of Fernando, J. in the said case. That
case was also a tenancy case in which the judgment‑creditor made an
application to execute writ pending appeal in terms of section 763 Civil
Procedure Code. Holding that the Judge should have refused the application
Fernando,J. reasoned thus.:‑



"What kind of security a landlord can offer will compensate a tenant ejected
from rent ­controlled premises in the event of the Supreme Court in appeal
holding against the landlord and refusing ejectment? The most law‑ abiding
landlord who has ejected one tenant and rented his Premises to Another may
find himself physically and legally incapable of ejecting the new tenant so
that he may comply with the order of the Court of Appeal. I am of opinion
that, having regard to the nature of the suit and the relief available to a
successful tenant‑applicant, the learned Commissioner should have refused the
landlord's application made for execution of decree."



There is no doubt that a landlord who lets Premises governed by the Rent Act
cannot eject the tenant in order to comply with the order of Court. But that
is not the be all, and end all of the matter. The law is not powerless to act
in such cases. If the Supreme Court reverses the decree entered in favour of
the judgment‑creditor than the judgment‑debtor is entitled in law to a
restoration

#  362



of the _status quo_. There is no longer a valid decree under which the
judgment‑creditor or any. claiming under him could continue to occupy the
premises. "justice therefore requires that the Plaintiff, who had been placed
in possession in execution of a decree which had turned out to be invalid,
should no longer be allowed to  continue in possession of the land ." per
H.N.G. Fernando, C.J. in _Wickremanayake_ _vs. Simon Appu_ (2) _._ I would go
further, where the process of Court has been utilised to deprive a judgment-
debtor of his occupation of premises pending appeal and subsequently the
decree upon which that process was issued is  invalidated by the Supreme
Court, justice requires that the judgment- debtor be restored  to occupations
by the removal of all those in occupation, irrespective of the means by which,
or the rights upon which, they entered into occupation. It is the duty of the
Courts of Law to provide such relief to the displaced judgment- debtor.
Section 777 Civil Procedure Code is ample provision for such procedure.
Fernando, J. expressed his final conclusion thus-



"l am of opinion that, having regard to the  nature of the suit and the relief
available to  a successful tenant‑applicant, the learned   Commissioner should
have refused the  landlord's application made for execution of decree."



Nature of the suit? Nowhere in his judgment does he categorically state that
in tenancy actions by reason of their very nature, applications execution of
decrees pending appeals should no entertained. As for 11the relief available
successful tenant‑applicant" I have already indicated that he is not without
adequate remedy. In the result I am unable to agree with either the reasoning
or the conclusion of Fernando, J. I am therefore of the view that the decision
in



#  363

_Vethamanickam vs. Dawoodbhoy_ (supra) is wrong in law and must be overruled.



Counsel for the 1st Respondent submitted that a person who enters into
occupation of these premises pending appeal in ignorance of the fact that a
decree in ejectment had been entered against the former tenant of the premises
cannot be ejected under the provisions of section 777 of the Civil Procedure
Code. He cited the provisions of section 22(11) of the Rent Act No.7 of 1972.
This is a special provision made for cases in which a decree for ejectment has
been entered on the ground of reasonable requirement, and therefore has no
relevance to this case. In any event I believe this provision became necessary
because the provisions of section 777 of the Civil Procedure Code would
otherwise have applied and the occupant would have been ejected.



The only other reason given by the District Judge is that it is "unjustifiable
to deprive" the Plaintiff of his success. This is hardly a reason and I do not
need to consider it. The Court of Appeal has however given another reason
besides that given in the judgment of Fernando, J. It took into account the
fact that "the loss that may result to the Petitioner (1st Respondent) if
ejected at this stage consists ..........  of  the deprivation of a residence
for his immediate occupation", as it "is a well known fact that there is a
shortage of residential houses in the area." Perhaps there is a shortage of
residential houses in that area. Perhaps he is unable to find one for his
immediate use in the same area. But why confine it to the same area? The 1st
Respondent is a Pensioner drawing a pension of Rs.600/= per mensem. His
financial resources are such that it would be impossible to find alternative
accommodation in the same area. There is no evidence whatsoever that he looked
for alternative accommodation within his

#  364



means in any other area. The 1st Respondent did not himself urge the reason
given by the Court of Appeal. He sought to take advantage of the provisions of
section 763(2) of the Civil Procedure  Code and endeavoured to prove
substantial loss. In fact he pleaded irreparable loss. For this purpose he
pleaded that if he is ejected he cannot find alternative accommodation. At the
inquiry he modified this plea and stated that it was difficult to find another
house " _all of a sudden on this occasion"._ He pleaded in his objections that
he was a pensioner paid Rs600/= per mensem and had no other source of income.
Yet upon the Court making order allowing the issue of writ the 1st
Respondent's Counsel promptly moved that the issue of the writ be delayed by
one week and offered to deposit security in Rs. 36000/= as security for such
delay. He has failed to satisfy the Court that substantial loss will result.



For the above reasons I would set aside the order of the Court of Appeal and
allow both appeals. The Appellant will be entitled to one set of costs in this
Court of Appeal.



**Wanasundera, J.** I agree.



**Wimalaratne,    J. **I agree.



**Ratwattev J.** I agree.



**SHARVANANDA, J.**



I  regard my inability to agree with the judgment of the Hon. Chef Justice.



I agree with the judgment of the Court of Appeal that substantial loss will
result to the 1st defendant if Writ of Execution is not stayed pending the
final decision of his appeal against the judgment of the District Judge,
holding that

# 365



the 2nd defendant was a sub-tenant of the 1st defendant and that the plaintiff
was entitled to have the 1st defendant ejected from the premises in suit.



The premises in suit, namely No.1, Campbell place, Dehiwela, are
rent‑controlled and are subject to Rent Act No. 7 of 1972. The 1st Defendant
had been a tenant of the premises under the plaintiff from March 1968. The
plaintiff instituted this action on 12.7.1978 for the ejectment of the
defendant on the ground that the "1st defendant on or about 1.5.78, in
contravention of section 10(5) of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972, sub‑let a part
of the premises to the 2nd defendant." The 1st defendant denied the allegation
and stated that the 2nd defendant was only a boarder and not a tenant. After
trial the District Judge entered judgment for the plaintiff and ordered that
the defendant be evicted from the premises in suit. The 1st defendant duly
preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal and that appeal is pending. On
27.8.82 the plaintiff  filed an application for execution of the Decree in her
favour, pending appeal. The 1st defendant filed objection to this application
. In his affidavit filed along with his objections, the 1st defendant stated,
inter alia, that he, his wife and unmarried daughter are the occupants of the
house in suit, that he does not have any sub‑tenants or boarders in his house;
and that if he was ejected from the premises he could not find alternative I
accommoda­tion; that he was a pensioner receiving an income of Rs. 600/‑ a
month and that he does not have any other source of income and that if an
order is not made for the stay of execution of the Writ, irreparable damage
would be caused to him. The Plaintiff did not file any counter affidavit
traversing the facts stated by the 1st defendant in his affidavit, nor did she
choose to  cross‑examine

#  
 366

The 1st defendant on the truth of the averments stated by him in his
affidavit.



At the inquiry held into the application for execution , Counsel of the
plaintiff appears to have confined her submissions  to the question that
according to the Judicature Act, the Court had no authority to suspend the
Writ of Execution and that the facts relied on by the 1st defendant were "not
required for the Writ of Execution " and that much damage would be caused to
the plaintiff if the Writ of Execution was not issued, the nature or extent of
the damage was nowhere specified or indicated. After inquiry, by his order
dated 27.1.83, the District Judge allowed the plaintiff's application for the
issue of Writ. The 1st defendant then moved the Court of Appeal by way of an
application for Leave to Appeal and by way of Revision to have the order of
the District Judge set aside. The Court by its order delivered on 15.3.1983
set aside the order of the District Judge and directed Stay of Execution of
the Writ till final determination of the 1st defendant's appeal. From the said
order the plaintiff has preferred this appeal.



I agree with the comment of the Court of Appeal, respecting the order of the
District Judge allowing execution that "there is no attempt whatsoever by the
learned District Judge to assess the loss (which I think is very substantial)
that may result to the petitioner, if he were ejected pending the appeal that
has been filed by him. There has thus been a failure on the part of the Judge
to properly exercise the discretion vested in him."



In my view the District the Judge has completely failed to address his mind to
the relevant questions involved in an inquiry into Stay of Execution pending
appeal. There is not even a

#  
 367

  
reference in his order to the relevant provisions of law ‑ section 763(2) of
the Civil Procedure Code or to section 23 of the Judicature Act. The only
reason that appears to have motivated the District Judge to allow the
plaintiff' application is to be gathered from the following excerpt:



"today no one can say what its (appeal's) results will be. Sometimes the
defendant might succeed, sometimes he may lose, why should the plaintiff be
deprived of his present success or victory. I am of the opinion that it is
unjustified to deprive the plaintiff of his success. I hold that it is highly
unfair to deprive the plaintiff of his success which he achieved after having
fought for such a long time on the presumption that he will lose in the end,
in the circumstance I allow the application",



In my view, no value whatsoever can be attached to this judgment Of the
District Judge.  


Prior to the coming into operation Of the Administration of Justice Law No. 44
of 1973, on 1.1.74, the provisions of law relating to the execution of a
decree under appeal and to the Stay thereof are to be found in sections 761 to
764 of the Civil Procedure Code. (Chap.101 of the 1956 Legislative Enactments)
and section  73 of the Courts Ordinance (Chap.6). It is not necessary for me
to refer to the subsequent legislative repeals and amendments of these
provisions as they have been set out fully in the judgment of the Chief
Justice. In my view the law jurisdiction of the District Court, to stay
execu­tion of judgments pending appeals are to be found in section 23 of the
Judicature Act No.2 of 1978, as amended by section 2 of the Judicature
Amendment Act No. 37 of 1979 and sections 761 and 763(1)& (2) of the present
Civil Procedure Code, Chap. 101



#  368

as amended by Civil Procedure Code Amendment No ,53 of 1980.



Section 23 of the Judicature Act No.2 of 1978 as amended by Judicature
Amendment Act. No. 1979 provides as follows:



"Any party who shall be dissatisfied with judgment, decree or order pronounced
District Court may (excepting where such r. is expressly disallowed) appeal to
the of Appeal against any such judgment, decree order from any error in ‑ law
or in f committed by such Court, but no such appeal shall have the effect of
staying the execution of such judgment or decree or order, unless the District
Judge shall see fit to make order to that effect. In which case the I
appellant shall enter into a bond, with or without sureties as the District
Judge shall, consider necessary, to appear when required and abide by the
judgment of the Court of  Appeal, upon the appeal."



Section 763 of the Civil Procedure Code, as amended by Act No. 53 of 1980
reads as follows;



763 (1) "In the case of an application being made by the judgment‑creditor for
execution of a decree which is appealed against the judgment‑debtor shall be
made respondent. If, on any such application, an order is made the execution
of a decree against which an appeal is pending, the Court which passed  decree
shall, on sufficient cause being by the appellant, require security to be
given  for the restitution of any property which  may be taken in execution of
the decree, the payment of the value of such property, for the due performance
of the  decree or order of the Supreme Court".

#  369



(2) The Court may order execution to be stayed upon such terms and conditions
as it may deem fit, where -  


(a)  the judgment‑debtor satisfies the court that substantial loss may result
to the judgment‑debtor unless an order for stay of execution is made and



(b) security is given by the judgment‑debtor for the due performance of such
decree or order as may ultimately be binding upon him"



Garvin J. pointed out in _Shell Transport. Company vs. Dissanayake_. (3)



"The leading principle relating to the issue of an execution of decree under
appeal is that it shall not be stayed by reason only of an appeal having been
preferred against the decree. These are the opening words of Chapter LIX of
the Civil Procedure Code, which deals with the execution of decrees under
appeal"



Though the opening words of Chap. LIX (section 761) are not present in the
current amended Civil Procedure Code, this principle is in my view kept alive
by section 23 of the Judicature Act, as amended by Act No.37 of 1979, and
applies generally to executions of decrees pending appeal. This principle is
however subordinated in its appli­cation to another fundamental principle,
that is enshrined in section 763(2) of the Code, that execution may be stayed
if the appellant satisfies the Court that substantial loss may result to him
thereby. It is thus competent for the Court to order stay of execution on the
application of the party appealing, on its being satisfied of the probability
of substantial loss resulting to the appellant and on his giving the necessary
security. The District Court, thus may make order staying

#  370  


execution "when it shall see fit to make an order to that effect" - vide
section 23 of 1979 or when it is satisfied that substantial loss may result to
unless an order for stay of execution is made he gives security for the due
performance, of decree or order as may ultimately be binding him ‑ vide
section 763(2) of the Code.



Today's legal position thus appears to me to be that it is not computer for
the Court to stay execution of the decree merely on the ground that the
judgment-debtor has preferred appeal  against it, but it is competent for the
Court to stay execution of a decree against which an appeal is pending, if the
judgment- debtor satisfies the Court that substantial loss may result to him
unless an order for stay of execution is made and furnishes the necessary
security for the due performance of such decree, as may ultimately be binding
upon him. It is significant that the words used in section 763(2) are "the
Court may Order execution to be stayed." It is not absolutely obligatory to
make the stay order execution to be stayed." It is not absolutely obligatory
to make the stay order even if the judgment-debtor satisfies the conditions
prescribed by section 763(2), (a)&(b). such an order would  operate grave
injustice to the judgment‑creditor, if on a balance of the claims of judgment-
debtor and judgment-creditor, the judgment-creditor would suffer substantial
loss in equal or greater measure than the judgment-debtor the Court may be
justified in refusing to make a stay  order  under section 763(2); a
discretion to make such an order is vested in the Court to be exercised not
arbitrarily but judicially as the justice of the case may demand. In a case
where decree for ejectment is entered in favour of the plaintiff on the ground
of his reasonable requirement, the Court may well be justified in refusing
Stay of Execution under section763(2).  

**371  
 **

In the present case the plaintiff came into court seeking ejectment of the
defendant on the ‑let a part alleged ground that the latter had sub-let a part
of the rented premises which he had been occupying from 1968. The plaintiff
resides in her own separate house and does not require the premises in suit
for her own occupation or for the occupation of any member of her family. She
will suffer no hardship or loss by execution. being stayed pending appeal. On
the other hand the 1st defendant‑tenant Will suffer grave hardship and loss by
being dislodged from the premises and‑ deprived of the roof which the Rent
Act. had secured for him from 1968. The 1st defendant has in his affidavit
praying for stay of execution stated that he could not find alternative
accommodation . The plaintiff appellant has not traversed this statement, may
be, for the good reason which the Court can take notice, of, namely, that it
is well nigh impossible for a person of the limited financial means of the 1st
defendant to find alternative accommodation. The non‑availability of housing
accommodation to a person of the class of the 1st defendant within his purse
strings is a notorious fact. It is in this perspective that the loss which
will result to the 1st defendant by the issue of execution will have to be
viewed.



A point was made of the fact that the 1st defendant was ready and willing to
deposit a sum of Rs.36000/‑ as security. This circumstance should not be
counted against him. It drives home the desperate plight of the tenant. it is
not proof of the fact that with this sum of Rs. 36000/‑, the 1st defendant
could have found alternative accommodation. Section 9 of the Rent Act makes it
unlawful for anyone to pay any premium or any amount as advance of rent
exceeding the authorised rent for a period of three months. It may be that the
1st defendant may be able to raise a loan of Rs.36000/‑

#  372

  
and give the security, as condition for the due performance of the decree that
may be  ultimately binding upon him. That sum is not lost to him. It will be
released to him when his security bond is discharged; but a premium given for
alternative accommodation will invariably be lost him. In any event no
evidence has been placed before the Court that this premium of Rs. 36000/-
will be sufficient today to secure alternative accommodation, leave alone the
question of purchasing any premises for that amount.  



In any view the dispossession and the disturbance of  the status quo
inevitably re of execution will involve, will in substantial loss to the 1st
defendant - he his family will be turned out of their home and left without a
roof over their head. On the other hand the plaintiff-landlord will not loose
anything if the Writ is stayed pending appeal. I agree that the fact that the
decree-holder will suffer no loss, if the execution is stayed, is not
sufficient ground for the stay of execution, but, on the other hand the fact
that the judgement‑debtor will suffer grave loss if the execution is not
stayed is very  relevant - it makes vital difference to the situation. The
legislature has, in the interests of justice, provided that such a
circumstance is sufficient ground for stay of execution pending appeal. Hence
I agree with the conclusion of the Court of Appeal that on the undisputed
facts this case the 1st defendant‑tenant has established that he will suffer
substantial loss if thee Writ not stayed.



Reference was made in the course of argument to the judgment of T.S. Fernando,
J., the argument to the judgment of T.S. Fernando, J., in _Vedamanickam vs.
Dewoodbhoy_ (1). In that case, landlord made an application under section 763
of the old Civil Procedure Code (which corresponds to action 763(l) of the
present code as amended by

#  373



 Act No 53 of 1980) to execute he decree. Even though considerations arising
under section 763 (2) of the Code were not agitated in that case and the only
question was the adequacy of security, T. S., Fernando, J. refused the
application for execution, stating,



"what kind of security a landlord can offer will compensate a tenant ejected
from rent controlled premises, in the event of the Supreme Court in appeal
holding against the landlord and refusing ejectment. The most law abiding
landlord who had ejected one tenant and rented his premises to another, may
find himself physically and legally incapable of ejecting that new tenant, so
that he may comply with the order of the Court of Appeal. I am of the opinion
that having regard to the nature of the suit and the relief available to the
successful tenant‑applicant the learned Commissioner should have refused the
land­lord's application made for the execution of decree".



agree with the Chief Justice that the law is not powerless to act in the cases
referred to by T.S.Fernando, J., and that if the Supreme Court reverses the
decree entered in favour of the judgment‑creditor then the judgment‑debtor is
entitled in law to the restoration of the status quo ante. But one cannot
overlook the fact that the restoration remedy, in the nature of things
involves long frustrating delay that will render the relief largely illusory
and discourage a displaced tenant from pursuing his appeal as the appeal will
be purposeless. A tenant cannot reasonably be expected . to make short‑shift
arrangements in the meantime without suffering grave hardships. In my view the
probability that the landlord may rent out his premises to another or

#  374

  
that the landlord may demolish the premises are considerations irrelevant to
the inquiry, whet substantial loss may result to the tenant unless an order
for stay of execution was made under sect 763(2).



I dismiss the appeal No. 29/83 with and dismiss appeal No. 30/83 without costs



_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/6.html_  

