##  Albert v. Veeriahpillai - SLR - 110, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC 6; (1981) 1
Sri LR 110 (23 September 1981)

**110**

**ALBERT  
V.  
VEERIAHPILLAI**

**SUPREME COURT.  
SAMARAKOON, C. J., SHARVANANDA, J. AND WANASUNDERA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL 73/80-C.A. 1644/79 REV.- L. T. HATTON K/4330.  
SEPTEMBER 2,1981.  
**  
_Labour Tribunal- Vacation of earlier order made without jurisdiction
-Inherent jurisdiction of Tribunal to vacate such order-Natural justice
-Subsequent order directing reinstatement of applicant-Appeal there from
dismissed for want of appearance - Effect- Power of Supreme Court to allow
grounds of appeal not set out in application for leave to appeal-
Circumstances when that power will be exercisedÂ­ Articles 118 and 127 of the
Constitution.  
_  
The Labour Tribunal on 12th December, 1966, vacated an ex-parte order made by
it earlier and in so doing it purported to exercise jurisdiction under
regulation 29 made under the Industrial Disputes Act. This regulation however
enabled the Tribunal only to correct clerical errors and mistakes specified
therein. The order vacated was one by which the applicant's application to the
Tribunal was dismissed for want of appearance and the reason for vacating it
was that the applicant had subsequently satisfied the Tribunal that the reason
for his default was that he had no notice of the hearing.  
  
On a subsequent date the applicant was present but the respondent though he
had notice of the date was absent and the inquiry proceeded ex-parte. The
Labour Tribunal then made order directing the reinstatement of the applicant.
The respondent appealed from the said order to the Supreme Court (as formerly
constituted) but this appeal was dismissed for want of appearance.  
  
**Held**  
  
(1) The authority to vacate an earlier order is attributable to the inherent
jurisdiction of the Tribunal to set aside such order if it had been made
without jurisdiction in as much as the breach of principles of natural justice
goes to jurisdiction and renders an order or determination made in proceedings
of which the person against whom the order or determination was made has had
no notice, void.  
  
(2) Further, the appeal preferred by the respondent to the Supreme Court
having been dismissed, the Supreme Court must be deemed to have rejected the
respondent's argument canvassing the Tribunal's order of 12th December, 1966
whereby it vacated its earlier ex-parte order and to have affirmed the
validity of the said order of the Tribunal. The respondent being bound by the
said judgment of the Supreme Court is precluded from reagitating the question
of authority of the Tribunal to vacate the ex-parte order of dismissal made by
it.  
  
**  Held further**  
  
The cumulative effect of Articles 118 and 127 of the Constitution enables the
Supreme Court to allow an appellant to urge before it grounds of appeal other
than the one on the basis of which the-Court of Appeal granted leave, if the
material on record warrants the determination of the same, subject however to
the limitation that it may not permit a party to raise a new point if the
other party has had no proper notice of the new ground, or would suffer grave
prejudice by the belated stage at which it is raised.

**111**

  **Cases referred to  
**  
_(1) Sri Lanka Ports Authority v. Peiris_ (1981) 1 Sri L. R. 101.  
  
_(2) Craig v. Kanseen,_ (1943) 1 All E.R. 108.  
  
_(3) Kofi Forfie v. Seifah,_ (1958) A.C. 59; (1958) 2 W.L.R. 52; (1958) 1 All
E.R. 289n.  
  
_(4) Peiris v. The Commissioner of Inland Revenue_ , (1963) 65 N.L.R. 457.  
  
_(5) Nagalingam v. Ledchumipillai,_ (1951) 54 N.L.R. 28.  
  
**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_N. R. M. Daluwatte_ , for the applicant-appellant.  
  
_V. S. A. Pullenayagam, with R. Manickavasagar and Miss Mangalam
Kanapathipillai_ , for the respondent.

Cur. adv. vult.

September 23, 1981.  
  
**SHARVANANDA, J.  
**  
By his application dated 6th July, 1965, the applicant- appellant applied to
the Labour Tribunal for relief against the termination of his services by the
employer- respondent. The application was taken up for inquiry on 2nd October,
1966\. On that date the respondent was present, but the applicant was absent.
The Tribunal, by its order dated 31st October, 1966, dismissed the application
for want of appearance. The applicant, however, later appeared before the
Tribunal and satisfied the Tribunal that the reason for his default was that
he had had no notice of the hearing on 2nd October, 1966. On it being so
satisfied, the Tribunal made order dated 12th December, 1966, vacating its
earlier order of dismissal of the application and restored the application to
the roll of pending inquiries. The hearing of the application was put off on a
number of dates as the respondent was away in India and was unable to appear.
Finally, on 3rd August, 1970, the matter was taken up for inquiry. On that
date the applicant was present, but the respondent, though he had notice of
the date, was absent. The inquiry proceeded ex-parte. By its order dated 10th
September, 1970, the President, Labour Tribunal, directed, inter alia, the re-
instatement of the applicant. The respondent thereupon preferred an appeal to
the Supreme Court from the said order. The appeal came up for hearing before
the Supreme Court on 25th January, 1972. Neither party was present and the
appeal was dismissed. The respondent did not give up. By making frivolous
applications to the Tribunal and appealing to the Supreme Court from the
orders of the Tribunal, the respondent has, to date, succeeded in stalling the
enforcement of the order of the Tribunal

**112**

dated 10th September, 1970. In 1979 his ingenuity suggested a new course.  
  
By his application dated 13th August, 1979, the respondent moved the Court of
Appeal to revise the aforesaid orders of the Tribunal dated 12th December,
1966 and 10th September, 1970. He succeeded in persuading that Court to hold
with him. The Court of Appeal, by its judgment dated 5th November, 1980, held
that the order dated 12th December, 1966, by which the Tribunal vacated its
earlier order dated 31st October, 1966, entered for default of appearance was
null and void, as having been made without jurisdiction inasmuch as Regulation
29 of the Industrial Disputes Act under which the President, Labour Tribunal,
purported to vacate his earlier order did not give jurisdiction to the Labour
Tribunal to vacate such an order. The Court of Appeal was of the view that
since the order dated 12th December, 1966, was made without jurisdiction, the
subsequent order made on 10th September, 1970, was also made without
jurisdiction and was therefore void. The. applicant- appellant has now, with
the leave of the Court of Appeal, preferred this appeal to this Court from the
order allowing the employer -respondent's revision application.  
  
At the outset of the hearing of this appeal, counsel for the respondent stated
that he was constrained to raise a preliminary objection to the hearing of the
appeal. He submitted that the Court of Appeal had granted leave to Appeal
under Article 128(l) of the Constitution as "there was a substantial question
of law involved, inasmuch as whether the Labour Tribunal had the jurisdiction
to vacate an order that it had made on the ground of default of appearance of
any particular party concerned". He contended that it is not open to the
appellant to agitate any other question of law than the one, which, in the
view of the Court of Appeal, was involved in the appeal. He also submitted
that the appellate jurisdiction of this Court is confined to the adjudication
of the question of law stated by the Court of Appeal and that the appellant
cannot canvass any other question. He argued that if this Court hears new
contentions or points of law other than that which, in the view of the Court
of Appeal, warranted leave to appeal and sets aside the judgment appealed from
on those new ground's, it would, in effect, be exercising powers of revision
if excess of the jurisdiction vested in it by the Constitution. In my view
this objection of counsel for the respondent is without

**113**

merit. Articles 118 of the constitution provides that "the Supreme Court shall
be the highest and final court of record in the Republic and shall, subject to
the provisions of the Constitution, exercise, inter alia final appellate
jurisdiction." Appellate jurisdiction may be exercised by way of appeal or
revision. Article 128 of the Constitution prescribes how the appellate
jurisdiction of this Court is invoked by way of appeal. The leave of this
Court or of the Court of Appeal is a sine qua non for a party to come to this
Court by way of appeal. But once leave is granted, on whatever ground it be,
the appeal is before this court and this Court is seised of the appeal. Its
appellate jurisdiction extends to the correction of all errors in fact or in
law which shall be committed by the Court of Appeal or any Court of First
Instance (vide Art. 127 of the Constitution). Therefore, it is competent for
this Court to permit parties to bring to its notice errors of law or of fact
and raise new contentions or new points of law, or sue motu to raise them if
there is proper foundation for them in the record. Thus, this Court will allow
an appellant to urge before it grounds of appeal not set out in the
application for leave if the material on record warrants the determination of
same. This Court is not hamstrung by the fact that the Court of Appeal had not
granted leave to appeal on the ground urged before the Supreme Court. This
Court however, doing justice between the parties, may not permit a party to
raise a new point if the other party has had no proper notice of the new
ground, or would suffer grave prejudice by the belated stage at which it is
raised. The appellate jurisdiction of this Court is very wide in its
amplitude, as it should be, it being the final Court of Appeal. The narrow
construction contended for by Counsel erodes its width and usefulness. What I
stated in Sri Lanka Ports Authority v. Peiris (1) is apposite in this context:  
    
"Leave to appeal is the key which unlocks the door to the Supreme Court, and
once the litigant has passed through that door, he is free to invoke the
appellate jurisdiction of this Court for the correction of all errors in fact
and/or in law which have been committed by the Court of Appeal or any Court of
First Instance. This Court, however, has the discretion to impose reasonable
limits to that freedom."  
    
In my view the Court of Appeal has misdirected itself on the question of the
jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal to set aside its order dated 31st October,
1966\. According to its judgment, the Tribunal's jurisdiction to alter orders
made by it rested only on

**114**

Regulation 29 of the Industrial Disputes Act and the Tribunal had no power
other than the power conferred on it by that Regulation to alter or vacate its
orders. This Regulation 29 enables a Labour Tribunal only to correct clerical
errors and mistakes specified therein. This regulation does not vest any
jurisdiction on a Labour Tribunal to make an order vacating an earlier order
made by it. But that does not mean that the Tribunal has no- jurisdiction to
do so. The Court of Appeal has not addressed its mind to the inherent
jurisdiction of the Tribunal to set aside the order of dismissal for default
of appearance on the part of the applicant when the applicant had no notice of
the hearing. Breach of principles of natural justice goes to jurisdiction and
renders an order or determination made in proceedings of which the person
against whom the order or determination was made has had no notice, void. As
the applicant had no notice of the hearing on 2nd October, 1966, the
proceedings of that date are a nullity, and the Tribunal had, in the
circumstances, no jurisdiction to make an order dismissing the application of
the applicant. Hence the order of dismissal dated 31st October, 1966, was made
without jurisdiction and the Labour Tribunal had the inherent jurisdiction to
set aside that order, on it being satisfied that the applicant has had no
notice of the hearing. A Tribunal has inherent jurisdiction to set aside a
judgment or order which it had delivered without jurisdiction. As stated by
Lord Greene M. R. in Craig v. Kanseen (2):  
  
"A person who is affected by an order which can properly be described as a
nullity is entitled, ex debito justitae to have it set aside. So far as the
procedure is concerned, it seems to me that the Court in its inherent
jurisdiction can set aside its own order and that it is not necessary to
appeal from it."  
  
The above statement of the law was quoted with approval by the Privy Council
in Kofi Forfie v. Seifah (3).  
  
The Tribunal thus had the inherent power to declare the proceedings of 2nd
October, 1966, a nullity. The fact that the Tribunal had incorrectly referred
to Regulation 29 of the Industrial Disputes Act for its jurisdiction to make
the order of vacation does not vitiate the order. The authority to vacate its
earlier order, which was a nullity, is attributable to another source, viz.,
the inherent jurisdiction of the Tribunal to set aside an order made without
jurisdiction. By virtue of this authority the Tribunal had the power to do the
thing that it did. The exercise of a power will

**115**

be referable to a jurisdiction which confers validity upon it and not to a
jurisdiction under which it will be nugatory. (Peiris v. The Commissioner of
Inland Revenue (4) ). In my view the Court of Appeal was in error in holding
that the order of 12th December, 1966, was made without jurisdiction.  
  
The Court of Appeal has further overlooked the fact that the respondent had
preferred an appeal to the Supreme Court from the final order made by the
Labour Tribunal on 10th September, 1970, and that the appeal was dismissed by
the Supreme Court. The Court of Appeal has not appreciated the legal
significance of this dismissal. When an appeal is dismissed, there being no
appearance for the appellant, the dismissal of the appeal must be regarded as
involving the rejection of all the arguments which might have been raised at
the hearing of the appeal. The absent party must bear the consequences of his
own laches (vide Nagalingam v. Ledchumipillai (5).) The effect of the Supreme
Court judgment dismissing the respondent's appeal was that the Supreme Court,
should be deemed to have rejected the respondent's argument canvassing the
Tribunal's order of 12th December, 1966, and to have affirmed the validity of
that order.  
  
The respondent is bound by the judgment of the Supreme Court dated 25th
January, 1972, affirming the order of the Labour Tribunal dated 10th
September, 1970, which proceeded on the basis that the order of 12th December,
1966, was a valid order. In the circumstances, the respondent is precluded
from re-agitating the question of the authority of the Tribunal to vacate the
ex-party order of dismissal made by it.  
  
I allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and dismiss
the respondent's revision application. The respondent shall pay the applicant-
appellant the costs of this appeal and of the revision application in the
Court of Appeal.  
  
There has been undue delay in the enforcement of the order of the Labour
Tribunal dated 10th September, 1970. I direct that steps be taken to enforce
the said order without any further delay.  
  
**SAMARAKOON, C. J.- I** agree.  
  
**WANASUNDERA, J.- I** agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

J.P. de Almeida,  
Attorney-at-Law.  

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/6.html_  

