##  Selvarajan v. Vigendra Andwife Shyamala - SLR - 224, Vol 2 of 1996 [1980]
LKSC 6; (1996) 2 Sri LR 224 (28 November 1980)

**224**

**SELVARAJAN  
v.  
VIGENDRA AND WIFE SHYAMALA**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P S. DE SILVA C.J.  
RAMANATHAN J.  
WIJETUNGA J.  
S.C. 54/96  
S.C. SPL. LA 287/95  
C.A. 472/83 (F)  
D. C. COLOMBO 4848/RE  
JUNE 24, 1996  
JULY 31, 1996

_Rent Act 5 of 1972 ‑ S. 22(3)(c) ‑ Tender of _arrears ‑ _Credit of Case_ ‑
_Supervening Impossibility_ ‑ _Lex Non Cogit ad Impossibilia_.

The Plaintiffs Respondents instituted proceedings for the ejectment of the
Defendant ‑ Appellant from the premises in question. The 2nd Plaintiff is the
Landlord and the 1st Plaintiff the 'Thesawalamai Husband'. The Defendant ‑
Appellant in his answer took up the position that he had deposited in Court
before the Summons returnable date the arrears of rent and relied on S.
22(3)(C) of the Rent Act. The District Court entered judgment in favour of the
Plaintiffs, the Defendants appeal to the Court of Appeal was dismissed.

It was contended that it was impossible to comply with the provisions of S
22(3) (C) because the plaintiffs were resident abroad.

**Held:**

(1) Evidence discloses that the Defendant used to deposit the rent to the
Credit of the Plaintiff in their Bank Acounts in Sri Lanka and on one occasion
the rent had been paid to the Attorney‑at‑Law for the plaintiffs. This is not
a Case where the _Maxim_ _lex non cognit ad impossibilia_ could be applied.
The previous course of conduct of the Defendant himself negatives the plea of
supervening impossibility. There was no insuperable difficulty in adopting
either of the two modes of payment which he had previously adopted and had
been accepted by the landlord.

(2) Deposit of money to the credit of the case does not constitute a tender of
arrears of Rent to the landlord within the meaning of S. 22(3)(c).

**225**

**AN APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

**Cases Referred to:**

1. _Jayakody v. Lilian Perera_ ‑ 1993(2) SLR 74

_S. Mahenthiran_ for the Substituted ‑ Defendant‑Appellant.

_P. A. D. Samarasekera P_.C. with _R. K. S. Sureshchandra  _for __
Plaintiff­Respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

August 22, 1996.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

The Plaintiffs instituted these proceedings on 19.8.81 for the ejectment of
the Defendant from the premises in suit on the ground of arrears of rent. The
2nd Plaintiff is the landlord of the premises and the 1st Plaintiff is the
"Thesawalamai husband" of the 2nd Plaintiff. The original Defendant was the
tenant of the premises but he died whilst the application for special leave to
appeal to this court was pending. His wife has now been substituted in the
room of the original deceased Defendant.

The Defendant in his answer took up the position that he had deposited in
court before the summons returnable date the arrears of rent and accordingly
relied on the provisions of section 22(3) (c) of the Rent Act.

The Plaintiffs did not give evidence, but produced documents marked P1‑P3. The
Defendant gave evidence on his behalf. After trial, the District Court entered
judgment in favour of the Plaintiffs. The Defendant's appeal to the Court of
Appeal was unsuccessful, and hence the pesent appeal to this court.

It is common ground that the Defendant deposited the arrears of rent in court
prior to the summons returnable date. It was also not disputed that the
Plaintiffs were residing in the United Kingdom.

Special Leave to appeal to this court was granted on the following question:‑

**226**

"Since the Plaintiffs were not in Sri Lanka, is the deposit of money in court
on 23.8.82 by the Defendant in accordance with section 22(3) (c) of the Rent
Act?"

Mr. Samarasekera for the Plaintiff‑Respondents relied strongly on the decision
of _Jayakody v. Lilian Perera_ (1), where the court held, "that the deposit of
money to the credit of the case does not constitute a tender of arrears of
rent to the landlord within the meaning of section 22(3) (c) of the Rent Act."

Mr. Samarasekera urged that there must be strict and proper compliance with
the requirements of section 22 (3) (c) in order that the tenant might get the
benefit of the "concession" granted to him by law. Counsel submitted that it
is only where there is a valid tender of the arrears of rent as contemplated
by section 22(3) (c) of the Rent Act that the landlord will not be entitled to
proceed with the action for ejectment of the tenant. Counsel further pointed
out that the evidence discloses that the Defendant used to deposit the rent to
the credit of the Plaintiffs in their bank account in Sri Lanka and on one
occasion the rent had been paid to the Attorneys‑at‑Law for the Plaintiffs.
Payments so made have been accepted as payment to the landlord.

Mr. Samarasekera further contended that the absence of the Plaintiffs from Sri
Lanka was not a "new situation". In any event, counsel argued, that the
deposit of arrears of rent in court is not in conformity with the provisions
of section 22 (3) (c) of the Rent Act.

The principal submission of Mr. Mahenthiran for the Defendant Appellant was
that it was impossible to comply with the provisions of section 22 (3) (c)
because the Plaintiffs were resident in the United Kingdom. To use Counsel's
own words "there existed a practical impossibility of performance by the
Defendant to tender to the landlord the arrears of rent" Counsel urged that
the situation was one of "a supervening impossibility "and that this crucial
fact was sufficient to distinguish the present case from the case of _Jayakody
v_. _Lilian Perera_ ( _supra_ ).

On a consideration of the submissions of Mr. Mahenthiran it would appear that
counsel is in fact relying on the principle embodied in the

**227** __

maxim " _lex non cogit ad impossibilia_ ". The true question which arises for
decision is whether the application of this maxim is warranted, having regard
to the evidence of the Defendant himself. It is in evidence that there was a
time when the Defendant paid the rent by crediting it to the Plaintiffs bank
account in Sri Lanka. In the written submissions filed on behalf of the
Defendant in the District Court it is stated that "the Defendant gave evidence
that the Plaintiffs were out of Sri Lanka and upto 4 years ago rent was
deposited at the bank:" In the notice to quit (P3) dated 23.2.1981 addressed
to the Defendant by the Attorney‑at-Law for the Plaintiffs it is stated, inter
alia, that the Defendant is in arrears of rent for the months of May 1979,
December 1980 and January 1981 at the rate of Rs. 750/‑ per month. When the
Defendant was questioned as to why he failed to pay the arrears of rent, his
answer was "I had no money at that time. I intended to collect the money and
pay it." He was further questioned as to why he did not send a cheque to the
Attorney‑at‑law for the Plaintiffs. His reply again was "at that time I had no
money". The matter does not rest there. There is evidence that on a previous
occasion by the notice to quit dated 5.8.80(P1), the Defendant was informed by
the Attorneys‑at‑law for the Plaintiffs that he was in arrears of rent from
May 1979. In reply to P1 the Defendant by letter P2 dated 28.11.1980 forwarded
to the Plaintiffs' Attorneys‑at-law a cheque for Rs. 13,500/‑ drawn in favour
of the 2nd Plaintiff (landlord). The cheque was accepted as rent for the
period June 1979, to November 1980. Thus it is seen that apart from the
practice of paying rent to the credit of the bank account of the Plaintiffs,
there is clear evidence that the Defendant himself has paid arrears of rent to
the Attorneys‑at‑law of the Plaintiffs and such payment has been accepted as
payment to the Plaintiffs. As rightly submitted by Mr. Samarasekera, the
absence of the Plaintiffs from Sri Lanka was not a new situation that had
arisen all of a sudden. The evidence shows that the true reason for the
Defendant's failure to pay forthwith the arrears of rent set out in the notice
P3 was not the absence of the Plaintiffs from the Island but his inability to
find the money.

In my view the evidence of the Defendant himself shows that this is not a case
where the _maxim lex non cogit ad impossibilia_ could properly be applied. The
previous course of conduct of the Defendant himself negatives the plea "of
supervening impossibility". From a strict, legalistic, stand point it would at
first sight appear that this is a case of

**228**

"impossibility of performance" since the Plaintiffs resided abroad. However,
on a scrutiny of the Defendant's evidence it is manifest that he has himself
adopted two modes of payment of rent to her. Was there then, an insuperable
difficulty in adopting either of the two modes of payment which he had
previously adopted and had been accepted by the landlord? The evidence
certainly does not reveal any such difficulty. The resulting position is that
there is in truth no valid ground upon which this case could be distinguished
from _Jayakody v. Lilian Perera (supra).,_

I accordingly hold that on the evidence the plea of "supervening impossibility
of performance" fails. The appeal is accordingly dismissed but in all the
circumstances without costs.

The Defendant is now a widow and is in difficult circumstances. Immediate
ejectment from the premises would naturally cause grave hardship. In the
special circumstances of this case I direct writ of ejectment not to issue
till 31st August 1998.The Plaintiffs will be entitled to take out writ without
notice after 31st August 1998 and to be placed in possession of the premises
in suit.

**RAMANATHAN, J. ‑ **I agree.

**WIJETUNGA, J. ‑ **I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1980/6.html_  

