##  Sudu Aiya and Others Vs the Attorney- General - SLR - 358, Vol 1 of 2005
[2004] LKSC 6; (2005) 1 Sri LR 358 (24 November 2004)

**358**

**SUDU AIYA AND OTHERS  
vs  
THE ATTORNEY- GENERAL**

SUPREME COURT,  
YAPA, J.  
WEERASURIYA J.  
JAYASINGHE. J.  
UDALAGAMA, J. AND  
FERNANDO, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No 17/2003 (TAB)  
H.C. COLOMBO No. 836/2002  
11TH AND 13TH OCTOBER, 2004  
  
_Criminal Law-Conspiracy to commit murder -Section 296 read with sections 102
and 113B of the Penal Code - Commitment of murder by 2nd and 3rd accused-
Section 296 read with section 32 of the Penal Code -1st accused indicted with
abetment of murder by 2nd and 3rd accused - Section 296 read with section 102
of the Penal Code - Evidence of accomplice -Reliable and corroborated by
confession of accused to accomplice and another-- Circumstantial evidence.  
  
_The appellants (accused) were indicted with conspiracy to commit the murder
of Sujith Prasanna Perera ('Sujith') between 21st and 24th March 2001. The 2nd
and 3rd accused were charged with the murder on 24.03.2001. The 1st accused
was charged with abetment of murder by each of the 2nd and 3rd accused. The
three accused were convicted of the offences with which they were indicted,
before the High Court.

**359**

The main evidence on which the accused were convicted was given by accomplice
Ratnayake who gave convincing evidence which was corroborated by the evidence
of many witnesses and the confessions of the 2nd and 3rd accused to Ratnayake,
a customs officer and that of the 3rd accused to one Rajakaruna at the
Vavuniya Army Camp. Ratnayake had been given a conditional pardon by the
Attorney-General.  
  
The motive of the murder had been the fact that there was a customs inquiry by
the deceased Sujith against the 1st accused.  
  
According to Ratnayake, on 15th or 16th March, 2001 the 1st accused requested
him to find a man who could ride a motorcycle. Ratnayake found the 2nd
accused. On 22nd March the 1st, 2nd and 3rd accused were taken by Ratnayake in
his car to a motorcycle trade center, where the 1st accused spoke to the
proprietor and his servants and obtained a red Honda motorcycle No. 160
series. Sirisena a workman noted the number 160- 2093 on a piece of paper,
later produced as P7.  
  
On 24.03.2001 Sujith deceased was driving his car from the direction of Kandy
towards Colombo with his brother-in law Dinesh. According to Dinesh a red
Honda motor cycle overtook the car. Then it slowed down and came on the side
of the car when a shot rang killing Sujith. Dinesh saw the pillion rider
looking back at the car:  
  
The weapon ( the pistol) was brought by the 1st accused and given to Ratnayake
who kept it as a parcel and Ratnayake gave it to the 2nd accused who had come
with the 3rd accused.  
  
There had been another attempt to kill deceased on 23.03.2001 when the 2nd and
3rd accused went out with the weapon and returned to Ratnayake saying that
they were unsuccessful. The 3rd accused returned the weapon. On 24.03.2001 the
2nd and 3rd accused returned and the weapon was returned to the 3rd accused.
They returned to (Ratnayake) about 7.30 a.m. and said the at the mission was
accomplished. They then left on the motorycycle. Prior to that the 3rd accused
gave Ratnayake 2 motor cycle number plates and a jacket all of which Ratnayake
burnt in his back yard. The police observations state that evidence of burning
was found on being shown the place by Ratnayake. The 3rd accused returned the
weapon to Ratnayake.  
  
According to Ratnayake the 1st accused attended Sujith's funeral and later at
the 1st accused's request Ratnayake returned the weapon to the 1st.accused who
collected it and left. On 5th April, 2001 "Ratnayake had met the 1 st accused
at Negombo and with the help of Mansoor and Sisira, the 1st accused left for
India, by boat saying that he wished to hide.

**360**

On 24.03.2001 the 1st accused took the 3rd acused to Pettah bus stand and sent
him off to the Vavuniya camp where he told witness Rajakaruna that he had a
done a job for the 1st accused. When the news of Sujith's murder appeared in
the newspaper, the 3rd accused admitted the murder to Rajakaruna.  
  
On a statement of the 2nd accused police recovered the motorcycle from the
house of one Albert, (P2 )  
  
**HELD:  
  
**1\. The prosecution has proved the case beyond reasonable doubt, despite the
failure of the High Court to specifically advert to the requirement. The
defect was in any event, curable under section 334(1) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act.  
  
2\. The evidence of accomplice Ratnayake was credible and the entire
transaction is corroborated by many witnesses including at the sale of the
motorcycle and the confessions of the 2nd and 3rd accused relevant under
sections 17 and 21 of the Evidence Ordinance.  
  
3\. The arrangement between Ratnayake and the 1st accused on 15th and 16th
March, 2001 for finding a motor cycle man to the 1st accused was not evidence
of the conspiracy, but evidence of motive or a state or mind or preparation
under sections 8 and 14 of the Evidence Ordinance. The conspiracy was between
21st and 24th March, as alleged.  
  
4.There is no merit in the appeal of the accused. Cases referred to :  
  
1\. _King v Jayawardena_ 51 NLR 2 5  
  
2\. _Queen v Sathasivam_ 55 NLR 255  
  
3\. _Queen Liyanage_ 67 NLR 193 at 203  
  
4\. _Mohamed Usman Mohamed Hussain v State of Maharastra_ (1981) AIRSC 1062 at
1067  
  
5\. _Rex v Baskerville_ (1916) 17 AER 38  
  
6.. _Somaveera v The Attorney-General_ (1990) 1 SLR 256  
  
7\. _Francis Appuhamy v The Queen_ 68 NLR 437 at 443  
  
8\. _Naliaratnam v Singarajah v The Attorney-General_ CA No. 208/95 CAM 6.7.99  
  
9\. _Nagamani Theivendran c The Attorney-General_ SC Appeal No. 65/ 2000  
  
SCM 16.10.2002. 10. Mannar Mannan v The Republic of Sri Lanka (1990) ISLR 280

**361**

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court.  
  
_Dr. Jayampathy Wickramaratne, P. C._ with _Gaston Jayakody_ for 1st appellant
-accused.  
  
_Dr. Ranjith Fernando_ with _Himalee Kularatne_ for 2nd and 3rd appellant-
accused.  
  
_Priyasath Dep, P. C. Additional Solicitor General_ with _Mohan Seneviratne,
State Counsel , K. P. Ranasinghe_ (Jnr.) State Counsel and _Riyaz Hamsa, State
Counsel_ for _Attorney-General._

_Cur.adv.vult_

November 24, 2004  
  
**HECTOR YAPA,J.  
**  
This is an appeal filed in terms of Section 451 (3) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979 as amended by Act, No. 21 of 1988, against the
conviction and sentence imposed on the accused appellants (Accused) by the
trial at Bar.  
  
Three accused in this case were indicted under 4 counts. In the 1st count, 1st
, 2nd, and 3rd accused were indicted with the offence of conspiracy to commit
the murder of Sujith Prasanna Perera between the period 21st March 2001 and
24th March 2001, and offence punishable under Section 296 read with Sections
102 and 113B of the Penal Code. In the 2nd count, the 2nd and 3rd accused were
indicted with the commission of the murder of Sujith Prasanna Perera on 24th
march 20 01, an offence punishable under Section 296 read with Section 32 of
the Penal Code. In the 3rd count, 1st accused was indicted for abetting the
2nd accused to commit the murder of Sujith Prasanna Perera on the date
specified in count 2, and offence punishable under Section 296 read with
section 102 of the Penal Code. In the 4th count, the 1st accused was indicted
for abetting the 3rd accused to commit the murder of Sujith Prasanna Perera on
the date specified in count 2, an offence punishable under section 296 read
with Section 102 of the Penal Code.  
  
At the conclusion of the Trial at Bar, three accused were convicted on all
counts in the indictment and were sentenced to death. The present appeal is
against the said conviction and sentence.  
  
At the trial, prosecution led the evidence of several witnesses and marked
several documents. Briefly the case for the prosecution as disclosed from

**362**

the evidence is as follows. According to the medical evidence, Sujith Prasanna
Perera's death had occurred on 24.03.2001, at about 8.30 a.m. He had died of
close range firearm injuries to his head and chest. Both these injuries were
fatal, and were caused by bullets fired from a weapon which had emitted
bullets with a spinning effect.  
  
The only eyewitness to the incident was Dinesh Wijegunatillake. He was the
brother in law of the deceased. According to him on 24.03.2001, he and the
deceased had left their house in the car driven by the deceased towards
Colombo at about 8.00 a.m. Deceased was going for his computer class at
Kollupitiya and the witness was on his way to his shop at Maradana. When they
were travelling on the Kandy - Colombo road near Ishara Traders, a motorcycle
came on the right side of the car and was moving parallel to the car. At that
time the witness had seen the rider wearing a helmet with a plain sun visor
and the pillion rider was wearing a helmet with a dark sun visor. Both were
wearing dark coloured jackets. The motorcycle was a Honda, red in colour. As
they were riding, they were observing the inside of the car without
overtaking. As he felt suspicious, he brought it to the notice of the deceased
who did not pay any attention. Thereafter, the motorcycle slowed down allowing
the car to proceed and when their car came closer to the Wedamulla Bridge, he
heard a loud noise like a tyre burst. The car shutters broke and he saw a
cloud of smoke. Head of the deceased had rested on to his side and was
bleeding. He then realized that his brother in law had been shot. The car had
slowed down, gone to the other side of the road and had fallen into a ditch.
At that point of time, witness had seen the said motorcycle proceeding and the
pillion rider looking back at the car. Witness had seen the registration
number of the motorcycle as 160 -four thousand series, which was a red
coloured Honda.  
  
The main witness for the prosecution was Ratnayake who had been tendered a
pardon by the Attorney General. He was attached to the Customs Department as
an Assistant Superintendent of Customs. According to this witness the 1 st
accused, some where on 15th or 16th March, 2001, had told him that he was
having a problem that was" worrying his head" and requested of him to find a
person who could ride a motorcycle. From this conversation, he gathered that
the 1st accused was talking about the deceased Sujith Perera and that he
needed a motorcycle rider to harm him. He knew that there was a customs
inquiry against the 1st accused in which the deceased was an important
witness. Besides, the

**363**

relationship between the 1 st accused and the deceased was not cordial.
Ratnayake said that the 2nd acused was working in his partnership business
called "Canon Freight". His company had provided a motorcycle to the 2nd
accused for his use and therefore, when the 1 st accused requested a person to
ride a motorcycle he thought that the 2nd accused was a suitable person.
Therefore, somewhere between 15th and 20th March, 2001, he had told the 2nd
accused who was known to the 1st accused as well, to do whatever Anura
Weerawansa Sir (1 st accused) requested him to do. Thereafter, on 22nd March
2001, in the evening, Ratnayake had gone in his car with the 1st accused to
the Y. M. B. A. at Kiribathgpda where they met the 2nd and 3rd accused. Then
the 2nd and 3rd accused joined them and four of them went to Kirillewella
motorcycle sales centre owned by his friend Sisira. It had been through
Ratnayake that the 1 st accused had got friendly with Sisira. The time was
about 7. 00 p.m. when they went to the motorcycle sales center and as the gate
was closed, they got it opened. Thereafter, the 1 st accused had spoken to
Sisira over the phone and was able to obtain a motorcycle. The 3rd accused
examined the motorcycle, got the defects attended to and thereafter both the
2nd and 3rd accused left'the place in that motorcycle. It was a red coloured
motorcycle bearing registration number 160 series. After the 2nd and 3rd
accused left the place, Ratnayake had gone to drop the 1st accused at his
house at Welisara. When they went there, the 1 st accused had given Ratnayake
a parcel wrapped in a brown paper bag and had told him to give it to the 3rd
accused at the Y. M. B. A. Kiribathgoda on the following day which was the
23rd March, 2001. Witness said that he knew the parcel contained a weapon like
a pistol, which he brought home and kept under the bed.  
  
' On March 23rd morning Ratnayake telephoned the 2nd accused requesting him to
come to his house and when the 2nd accused came there, he took the parcel that
was brought on the previous night, and went with the 2nd accused in his
motorcycle to the Y M. B. A. Kiribathgoda. Shortly thereafter, when the 3rd
accused arrived there, he had given the parcel (weapon) to the accused and
came home leaving the 2nd and 3rd accused there. After sometime 2nd and 3rd
accused had come to Ratnayake's house and told him that they could not do the
job and the 3rd accused returned the weapon. Immediately thereafter, Ratnayake
had telephoned the 1 st accused and informed him about it. Then on the 24th

**364**

March, 2001, 2nd and 3rd accused had come to Ratnayake's house in the morning
around 7 .00 a.m. in two motorcycles. When Ratnayake gave the weapon to the
3rd accused, both of them had gone in the motorcycle in which the 3rd accused
had come, leaving the other motorcycle at his house. Sometime later, Ratnayake
had received a telephone call from the 1 st accused saying that he was coming
to Ratnayake's place. Then the 1st accused had come to his house at about 7
.30 a.m. and when they were in conversation, Ratnayake had got a call from the
2nd or 3rd accused stating that they were coming to his house. Shortly
thereafter, the 2nd and 3rd accused came to his house and informed them that
the mission was accomplished, suggesting that Sujith Perera was murdered.
Thereafter, the 3rd accused had returned the weapon and a parcel containing
two motorcycle number plates. Then they had tea and kiribath and immediately
thereafter, the 1 st accused had taken the 3rd accused in his jeep to the
Pettah bus stand to send him off to the army camp in Vavuniya. The 2nd accused
had gone away in his motorcycle.  
  
While Ratnayake was at his work place, the 1 st accused had given him a
telephone call and when Ratnayake told him that he was frightened, the 1 st
accused had pacified him saying not to be afraid. Ratnayake said that the two'
number plates and the jacket, given to him by the 3rd accused were burnt in
his back yard as he felt that they may cause problems, which he had later
shown to the police as the place where they were burnt. Ratnayake further said
that, he and the 1st accused attended the funeral of Sujith Perera. Then on a
later date, at the request of the 1 st accused he had taken the weapon to a
place close to the Makola junction and the 1st accused had come in his jeep ,
collected it and had gone away. On 5th April, 2001, the 1st accused had met
him ( Ratnayake) at the Royal Park flats and had told him that he has problems
other than this and therefore he was going to hide. About three days later, he
had met the 1st accused in Negombo and on that occasion, Mansoor and Sisira
had gone in search of a boat to send the 1st accused to India. Few days
thereafter Ratnayake and Sisira had gone to Lellama, (Negombo) and on that
occasion, he had seen the 1 st accused shaking hands with Sisira in the
presence of Mansoor. Thereafter, Ratnayake said that he had seen the 1st
accused only in court.

**365**

The prosecution also presented evidence of other witnesses not only for the
purpose of corroborating the evidence given by Ratnayake and Dinesh
Wijegunathilake but also to disclose additional material relating to the
police investigation and the conduct of the accused after the commission of
the offence. When the defence was called, all three accused made dock
statements denying any involvement with the crime. In addition the 1st accused
called witness Abeysinghe to give evidence relating to the times that
Ratnayake had reported for duty at the Customs Department on the 23rd and 24th
of March, 2001. The defence case was closed leading in evidence D 1 to D 3 and
X 1 and X2.  
  
At the hearing of this appeal learned counsel for the 1st accused appellant
submitted that according to count I in the indictment, the alleged conspiracy
had taken place at Walisara or Kiribathgoda during the period 21st March, 2001
to 24th March 2001. In the information provided by the Attorney-General to the
Hon. Chief Justice, it was stated that the alleged conspiracy commenced on
22.03.2001 at Kiribathgoda, when the three accused and Ratnayake met in front
of the Y M. B. A. and conspired to cause the death of the deceased and for
that purpose they decided to obtain a motorcycle. Hence, the case the 1 st
accused had to meet in the High Court was that he conspired with the other
accused between the  period 22nd and 24th March, 2001. Therefore, it was
contended by learned counsel, that the evidence of Ratnayake that, on or about
15th or 16th March, 2001, the 1 st accused had told him that he had a
"headache" and wanted a motorcycle rider to get rid of it, and also
Ratnayake's evidence, that he told the 2nd accused between the period 15th and
20th March, 2001, to do whatever the 1st accused wanted him to do, should be
disregarded. He further submitted that the Attorney General did not consider
these items of evidence to form any part of the evidence relating to the
conspiracy. In other words, what the learned counsel for the 1st accused was
trying to submit was that these items of evidence were inadmissable and
therefore had been wrongly admitted as evidence.  
  
In regard to this matter, learned Additional Solicitor Genera! submitted that
according to witness Ratnayake, the reference of the 1 st accused to a
"headache" which had to be got rid of, was made in relation to the deceased.
This reference was made either on the 15th or 16th March, 2001, which was a
date prior to the dates specified in the conspiracy

**366**

count in the indictment. His contention was that, it was open to the
prosecution to place these items of evidence not to establish a conspiracy,
but to show a motive or the existence of a state of mind which would be
relevant under sections 8 and 14 of the Evidence Ordinance. In a charge of
conspiracy it is always open to the prosecution to lead evidence of such
isolated acts in order to establish the commencement or the formation of the
conspiracy. It would appear from such evidence, that the relationship between
the deceased and the 1 st accused was not cordial. Prosecution also led
evidence to show that the deceased was giving evidence in a customs inquiry
against the 1 st accused, and therefore there was a strong motive for the 1 st
accused to cause harm to the deceased. When the 1 st accused mentioned to
Ratnayake about a "headache which had to be got rid of, Ratnayake understood
the reference to mean the killing of the deceased. These items of evidence
clearly establish the state of mind, the motive or even preparation on the
part of the 1 st accused to cause harm to the deceased. Undoubtedly, such
evidence would be admissible under sections 8 and 14 of the Evidence
Ordinance. Vide King vs Jayawardena (1) Queen vs Sathasivam(2). Further, it
would be wrong to assume that the conspiracy has to be proved before the
evidence of other acts or conduct of the alleged conspirators could be led in
evidence, since evidence of such acts would have a bearing with regard to the
formation or the starting point of the conspiracy. Therefore, in our view the
prosecution has the right to place those items of evidence before the court.
The submission that these items of evidence were inadmissible, as they
referred to a time prior to the period of the conspiracy is unacceptable. The
guiding principle in this matter would be, whether such evidence could be
considered as relevant and admissible in terms of the Evidence Ordinance.  
  
  
It was contended, by the learned counsel for the 2nd and 3rd accused
appellants that in a charge of conspiracy it is an essential ingredient to
establish through evidence that there was an agreement on the part of the
conspirators to commit the offence, namely, the murder of Sujith Perera. In
this case, he complained that the Trial at Bar misdirected itself by failing
to look for such material before coming to the conclusion that the charge of
conspiracy has been established. On this question learned Additional Solicitor
General submitted that, if the evidence of Ratnayake is accepted as true, his
evidence clearly shows that there was an agreement among the accused to cause
the murder of the deceased Sujith Perera. As stated above he further submitted
that, the events referred to by Ratnayake had taken place between the period
21st March 2001 to

**367**

24th March, 2001 and these events cannot be explained in any other way except
to say that these accused had acted according to an agreed plan. He said that
it was Ratnayake's evidence that the 1st accused told him sometime earlier on
the 15th or 16th March, 2001, that he had a problem that was "worrying his
head" and requested him to find a person who could ride a motorcycle. At that
point of time Ratnayake thought that the 2nd acused who was using a motorcycle
and was working for him, was the most suitable person for the purpose and
therefore, somewhere between the period 15th and 20th March, 2001, he had
requested the 2nd accused to do whatever the 1 st accused wanted him to do.
Then on 22nd March 2001, in the evening 1 st, 2nd and 3rd accused and
Ratnayake met near the Y. M. B. A. Kiribathgoda, and proceeded to the
Kirillewela motorcycle sales centre. At the sales centre the accused selected
a manoeuvrable and high speed motorcycle and got the defects attended to. On
the same day the 1 st accused gave Ratnayake a parcel containing a weapon like
a pistol to be given to the 3rd accused on the following day at the Y. M. B.
A. Kiribathgoda. On 23rd morning Ratnayake went with the 2nd accused in  his
motorcycle to the Y. M. B. A. Kiribathgoda, met the 3rd accused and handed him
the weapon and came back home leaving the 2nd and 3rd accused there. Sometime
later both the 2nd and 3rd accused came to Ratnayake's house and returned the
weapon to him stating that they could not do the job. Immediately, Ratnayake
brought this matter to the notice of the 1 st accused. Then on the 24th
morning the 2nd and 3rd accused came to Ratnayake's house, collected the
weapon and went away. Sometime therefter, when the 1st accused was at
Ratnayake's house, the 2nd and 3rd accused had come there and informed them
that the mission had been accomplished. At that stage the 3rd accused had
returned the weapon and a parcel containing the two motorcycle number plates.
Then they all had food together and thereafter the 1 st accused had taken the
3rd accused to be dropped at the Pettah bus stand to send him off to Vavuniya.
All these events had taken place between the period 21st March to 24th March
2001 in quick succession. Why did these accused act in this way ? is it not
logical to conclude that these accused acted in this way since, they had an
agreement to commit the murder of Sujith Perera. This conclusion appears
reasonable in view of the evidence of Rajakaruna who said that the 3rd accused
had admitted to him about the commission of this murder, when the 3rd accused
told Rajakaruna that he carried out a job for "Aiya" meaning the 1st accused.

**368**

An agreement could either be express or implied and it could be proved by
direct or circumstantial evidence. In dealing with the nature of evidence that
could be presented to establish a charge of conspiracy, the court in the
leading case of the Queen vs Liyanage and others (3) at 203 stated as follows.
"The evidence in support of an indictment charging conspiracy is generally
circumstantial. It is not necessary to prove any direct concert, or even any
meeting of the conspirators, as the actual fact of  conspiracy may be inferred
from the collateral circumstances of the case. Conspiracy can ordinarily be
proved only by a mere inference from the subsquent conduct of the parties in
committing some overt acts which tend so obviously towards the alleged
unlawful results as to suggest that they must have arisen from an agreement to
bring it about. Upon each of the isolated acts a conjectural interpretation is
put, and from the aggregate of these interpretations an inference is drawn."
Similar views were expressed in the case of Mohamed Usman Mohamed Hussain vs
State of Maharashtra (4). Further, it has been stated that in a conspiracy the
accused may have agreed to act together without previous concert or
deliberation since the requisite agreement may have come into being on the
spur of the moment, although the accused had not met earlier. The gist of the
offence of conspiracy is agreement. In the present case, there is clear
evidence that the accused met together before. They are close associates.
Therefore, their subsequent conduct as seen from the evidence clearly provides
material from which their prior agreement, which is an essential ingredient of
the offence concerned may be rightly inferred. Learned counsel's submission
that in this case, the prosecution has failed to establish that there was an
agreement on the part of the accused to cause the murder of the deceased is
unacceptable. The Evidence of Ratnayake coupled with the other circumstantial
evidence presented by the prosecution show very clearly that the accused
conducted themselves in this manner, due to an agreement they had to commit
the murder of the decased Sujith Perera. In other words, an agreement by the
accused to commit the murder of Sujith Perera has been inferentially
established by the prosecution.  
  
Another matter raised by learned counsel for the 1st accused appellant was
that the Trial at Bar did not apply the higher standard of proof that was
required, when applying the principle that the evidence of an accomplice
should be corroborated by independent testimony. Learned counsel argued that
witness Ratnayake was an accomplice and therefore his evidence had to be
corroborated by independent evidence. He cited the case of

**369**

Queen vs Liyanage (Supra) where the principle has been laid down that the
evidence of accomplices requires independent corroboration of their evidence
in material particulars.  
  
Counsel pointed out that Liyanage's case, after having laid down the general
rule regarding corroboration, dealt with the ca se where an accomplice gives
evidence under a conditional pardon and came to the conclusion that such
evidence has to be considered carefully, even cautiously, and only accepted
when it is corroborated and found to be convincing. His submission was that
the court in Liyanage's case has set a higher standard of proof in the case of
an accomplice who has received a conditional pardon. In the present case
therefore, counsel complained that the Trial at Bar did not consider this
important difference and instead relied on the standard that would be
ordinarily applied to the evidence of an accomplice.  
  
On the other hand in dealing with Ratnayake's evidence, counsel for the 2nd
and 3rd accused appellants submitted that his evidence was unsatisfactory. He
argued that the Trial at Bar failed to consider the question that
corroboration is only required, if the witness requiring corroboration is
otherwise credible. The tenor of counsel's argument was that the evidence of
Ratnayake was not credible and therefore had to be rejected and there was no
need to look for corroboration.  
  
It would appear that both these submissions as referred to above made by both
counsel relate to the question of credibility of witness Ratnayake. Hence, it
would be appropriate to examine his evidence very closely for that purpose.
Undoubtedly, witness Ratnayake is not only an accomplice, but a co-conspirator
who had been given a conditional pardon. There is no controversy over this
matter. Thus, it would require that his evidence should be corroborated by
independent evidence, in material particulars. Even though, there is no
impediment for a court to convict an accused person  upon the uncorroborated
testimony of an accomplice in terms of section 133 of the Evidence Ordinance,
the principle that the evidence of an accomplice should be corroborated by
independent evidence in material particulars, has now virtually become a rule
of law. Besides, section 114 illustration (b) of the Evidence Ordinance states
that the court may presume, that an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless
he is corroborated in material particulars. It would be safe therefore, to act
on the evidence of an accomplice only when his evidence is corroborated and
appears to be

**370**

convincing. In the case of Queen vs Liyanage at page 213, Reference was made
to the assessment of the evidence of an accomplice who has received a
conditional pardon in the following terms. "We have not forgotten that some of
the prosecution witnesses who are obviously accomplices were giving evidence
under a conditional pardon, "With halters round their necks",  and with a
natural inducement to earn it. Is their evidence to be forthwith struck out or
disregarded ? Or is it to be considered carefully ,even cautiously, and only
accepted when it is corroborated and found to be convincing ? We have chosen
the tatter course. The evidence of fellow conspirators or accomplices is of
course tainted and suspect, especially when they admit their own complicity.
But it is not usual for a prosecution 1 for conspiracy to be instituted
without the evidence of one or more persons who have, at one time or another,
been parties to the conspiracy." Therefore, it is seen that the evidence of
accomplices or co-conspirators who have given evidence under a conditional
pardon could be accepted and acted upon, provided their evidence has been
carefully and cautiously considered and found to be convincing.  
  
Witness Ratnayake as stated earlier is not only an accomplice but a co-
conspirator with the other accused. They happen to be close associates and the
alleged conspiracy revolved round them. The 1st accused had obtained the
services of the 3rd accused, a trusted friend who was from his village and who
had earlier stayed in the 1 st accused's house. Ratnayake obtained the
services of the 2nd accused who was the wharf clerk attached to his business
concern and was known to the 1st accused. The relationship between the 1st
accused and Ratnayake appears to be something more than a friendship.
Ratnayake's evidence clearly highlight his deep involvement with the other
accused. If his evidence is accepted as being reliable, it is sufficient to
establish the charge of conspiracy. Even in relation to the charge of murder
which is the 2nd count in the indictment. If Ratnayake's evidence is believed,
then there is sufficient material to establish this count. It would be seen
that Ratnayake has given evidence in detail with regard to the conduct of the
1 st, 2nd and the 3rd accused during the period 22nd March to 24th March 2001.
The admission made to Ratnayake by the 2nd and 3rd accused in his house on
24th March, 2001, that the job was accomplished, and thereafter the handing
over of the weapon and the two number plates show that the 2nd and 3rd accused
were fully involved in the commission of the crime. It is also in evidence
that the 3rd accused had admitted to witness Rajakaruna about the killing of
Sujith Perera at the instance of the 1st accused. With regard to the
complicity of the 1st accused on the charge of abetment

**371**

referred to in counts 3 and 4 of the indictment, Ratnayake's evidence alone if
accepted would be sufficient to establish the said counts. Such an inference
is possible because, according to Ratnayake, it would appear that the 1st
accused was instrumental in obtaining the services of the 3rd accused, the
securing of the motorcycle and the weapon to be used in the crime and finally
he took the 3rd accused in his jeep after the commission of the murder to be
dropped at Pettah in order that the 3rd accused could board a bus to Vavuniya.
In fact Ratnayake has given direct evidence in respect of the 1st, 3rd and 4th
counts in the indictment and circumstantial evidence in respect of the 2nd
count in the indictment.  
  
If one were to accept Ratnayake's evidence as trustworthy, then his evidence
alone would be sufficient to establish the guilt of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd
accused in respect of the four counts in the indictment. However, in
evaluating Ratnayake's evidence, he being an accomplice and one who has been
granted a pardon, it would be necessary to examine his evidence in the light
of the nature and extent of corroborative evidence available in the case. In
the leading case of R vs Baskerville(5) reference was made with regard to the
nature of corroboration required in relation to the evidence of an accomplice.
The relevant passage reads as follows" The corroboration required must be
independent testimony which affects the accused by connecting or tending to
connect him with the crime. In other words, it must be evidence which
implicates him, i.e., which confirms in some material particulars not only the
evidence that the crime has been committed, but also that the prisoner
committed it. The corroboration need not be direct evidence that he committed
the crime ; it is sufficient if it is merely circumstantial evidence of his
connection with it. Nor is it necessary that the accomplice should be
confirmed in every detail of his evidence ; if it were, his evidence would be
merely confirmatory of the independent testimony and would not be essential to
the case." This position was accepted and followed in the Case of Queen vs
Liyanage. The important consideration when looking for corroboration is that,
the complete story need not be corroborated, but what the law requires is
corroboration in some material particulars so that a court could act on that
evidence as being reliable. In other words what is necessary is some
additional evidence  direct or circumstantial, rendering it probable that the
accomplice's story is true and reasonably safe to act upon, and such evidence
has the effect of connecting or tending to connect the particular accused with
the crime.  
  
The Trial at Bar referred to in detail, the items of corroborative evidence
relating to Ratnayake's evidence. Briefly some of the items of corroborative

**372**

evidence taken into consideration by court were the following. It was
Ratnayake's evidence that on 22nd March 2001, he along with the 1 st, 2nd and
3rd accused went to the Kirillewela motorcycle sales centre to obtain a
motorcycle and gave a detailed account of what took place at the sales centre.
This material was corroborated by Gamage Sirisena and Don Nishantha who were
working at the motorcycle sales centre. According to them on 22nd March 2001,
at about 6.30 or 7.00 p.m. four persons came to their sales centre. One of
them spoke to the owner of the sales centre Sisira Chandrasiri (Sisira) over
the phone and thereafter the owner spoke to them and instructed them to give
these persons who had come a motorcycle of their choice. They selected a 125
CC Honda red coloured motorcycle bearing registration number 160-2093. One of
them inspected the motorcycle, got the defects attended to and removed if from
the premises. Gamage Sirisena who noted down the number of the motorcycle on a
piece of paper, identified this note and it was produced at the trial marked
P7. The entry in the book maintained at the sales centre where it was noted
that a particular motorcycle was given on 22\. 03.2001 to be returned on
23.03.2001 was produced marked P8. The owner of the sales centre Sisira gave
evidence stating that on 22.03.2001 at about 7.00 p.m. " the 1st accused spoke
to him over the telephone from the sales center and made a request for a
motorcyel. He said he instructed Gamage Sirisena and Don Nishantha over the
phone to give a motorcycle of their choice. It would appear that these three
witnesses corroborated each other without any contradictions.  
  
According to Ratnayake's evidence on 24th morning at about 7 .00 a.m. 2nd and
3rd accused came to his house collected the weapon and went away. Thereafter
they came home about an hour later and told him in the presence of the 1st
acused that the job was done, meaning Sujith Perera was murdered. This
position was corroborated by witness Rajakaruna who was working with the 3rd
accused at the Pampamadu Army Camp Vavuniya. Rajakaruna gave evidence at the
trial and stated that both of them i.e. he and the 3rd accused went on leave
and reported for duty on 24th March, 2001. Two or three days after their
return to the Army Camp, the 3rd accused had told Rajakaruna that he did a job
for "Aiya" meaning the 1 st accused and for the said purpose he got a  good
bike and a superb rider. He further requested Rajakaruna to read the
newspaper. Rajakaruna after reading the newspaper inquired from the 3rd
accused, whether he was referring to the murder of Sujith Perera, and the

**373**

3rd accused had admitted it. On this matter there is therefore, a clear
admission by the 3rd accused to witness Rajakaruna.  
  
When evaluating the evidence of Ratnayake, it is not out of place to mention
the fact that the evidence of witness Dinesh Wijegunathilake the only
eyewitness to the incident, provides some measure of corroboration to
Ratnayake's evidence. His evidence in relation to time when this incident took
place and with regard to the fact that the deceased was shot by two persons
travelling in a red coloured Honda motorcycle 1 60 series, fall in line with
the evidence of Ratnayake, Don Nishantha and Gamage Sirisena. Witness Dinesh
Wijegunathilake was very clear in his mind that the two people who were
responsible for the shooting of the deceased on the morning of 24.03.2001,
travelled in a red coloured Honda 160 services.  
  
Ratnayake's evidence was that, after the 2nd and 3rd accused collected the
weapon from him and left his house at about 7.00 or 7 .30 a.m. on 24th March
2001, he received a telephone call from them after about an hour stating that
they were coming to his house. They had come walking into his house with a bag
and then the 3rd accused had given the weapon and the parcel containing the
motorcycle number plates. Witness Ariyadasa the three - wheel driver
corroborated this part of Ratnayake's evidence, when he stated that on 24th
March 2001 at about 8.30 a.m., he was at the Galewala junction, when 2nd and
3rd accused came with a small bag, got into his three wheeler and proceeded
towards Makola juntion and got down close to the Sapugaskanda police station.
According to Ariyadasa 2nd accused was well known to him. He also identified
the 3rd accused at the police station and in court as the person who travelled
with the 2nd accused on that day in his three-wheeler. It would appear that
Ratnayake's house was very close from the place they got down from the three-
wheeler. On this matter Ratnayake's evidence is further corroborated by
witness  Randunu Mendis an employee of the communication centre "Gateway
Enterprises" situated at the Galwala junction. He said that on 24th March
2001, around 8.00 or 9.00 a.m. a telephone call had been taken from the
communication centre. The Register maintained at the communication centre in
which the telephone number 927121 was recorded, was marked P14, at the trial.
Apparently this telephone number 927121 (P14a), which was recorded in P14, was
the telephone number at witness Ratnayake's house.

**374**

Another aspect of Ratnayake's evidence was that on the 24th March, 2001, 2nd
and 3rd accused came to his house and reported that the mission was
accomplished. Thereafter, they returned the weapon and the parcel containing
the motorcycle number plates and the jacket. It was Ratnayake's position that
the number plates and the jacket given to him were burnt in his backyard and
later he had shown the police the place where these items were burnt,
inspector Liyanage said in his evidence that Ratnayake showed him a place in
his back yard where these items were burnt and on examination he found some
burnt articles such as a metal button in which was inscribed the words "London
Fag", two other buttons, two burnt portions of a zip and some burnt remains of
the size 21/2 by 1 1/2 inches. All these items were marked P39, P39(A),
P39(B), P4 0 , P40(A) and P41 at the Trial.  
  
Ratnayake in his evidence mentioned the fact that about three days after on
5th April 2001 he met the 1 st accused in Negombo. Ratnayake had gone there
with Sisira and one Sunil Gamage. While they were in Negombo, Ratnayake said
that one Mansoor and Sisira had gone in search of a boat to send the 1 st
accused to India. Few days later Ratnayake and Sisira had gone again to
Lellama (Negombo) and on that occasion he had seen Sisira speaking to the 1 st
accused and shaking hands with him in the presence of Mansoor. Witness Sisira
corrborated this evidence when he stated that he went to Negombo with
Ratnayake and met the 1st accused and Mansoor there, and further on that
occasion he (Sisira) went in search of a boat that would go to India. Witness
Sisira also stated that on a later date he went with Ratnayake to Negombo and
met the 1st accused in the night. It is to be noted that there is additional
corroborative evidence provided by witness Anthony Perera who stated that he
took the 1st accused and Mansoor to India by boat.  
  
Ratnayake is further corroborated with regard to the evidence of motive, which
shows that the relationship between the 1st accused and the deceased was not
cordial. Further, the 1 st accused even tried to implicate the deceased on an
allegation of bribery. The main reason for this strained relationship between
the 1st accused and the deceased was the long drawn Customs inquiry that was
proceeding against the 1st accused, where the deceased was giving evidence as
the main witness. Next date of this inquiry was fixed for the 28th March 2001
and the deceased was murdered on 24th March 2001. It is pertinent to note that
Ratnayake's

**375**

evidence that the 1st accused possessed a pistol was corroborated by witness
Sisira and Narayan who gave evidence at the trial. Both these witnesses stated
that they had seen the 1st accused using a pistol. The evidence of Ratnayake
that a motorcycle obtained from the Kirillewala motorcycle sales centre was
used in the crime was corroborated by the police, when it was stated that
consequent to a section 27 statement made by the 2nd accused, the motorcycle
marked P2, was recovered from the house of witness Albert. The motorcycle
marked P2, was identified  by witness Albert who said that the 2nd accused
came and left it at his house to be collected later. Witnesses Gamage Sirisena
and on Nishantha identified P2, as the motorcycle taken by the four persons
who came to the sales centre on the night of 22.03.2001.  
  
The material referred to above shows the extent to which the evidence of
witness Ratnayake who is an accomplice has been corroborated by independent
testimony. These items of corroborative evidence relates to material
particulars, showing very clearly that the accused were fully involved with
the murder in question. Further, Ratnayake's evidence has not been seriously
challenged in court and as a result the defence has not succeeded in
impeaching the credit of this witness. As observed by the Trial at Bar, the
contradictions and the omissions referred to by the defence did not relate to
any substantial matter so as to cast serious doubts on his credibility.
However, an attempt was made by the defence to discredit Ratnayake's evidence
by confronting him with the Attendance and Overtime Registers that were
maintained by the Customs Department. But, it would appear that no weight or
reliance could be given to the entries made in these registers which were not
properly maintained. Further, it is common knowledge that these registers did
not contain material which were reliable, as many of those entries regarding
dates and times were questionable. Some of the entries made specially in the
Overtime Register appeared to be of doubtful nature and made purely for the
purpose of collecting overtime. Surprisingly; some of the entries in the
Overtime Register indicated that all the officers concerned had reported for
duty exactly on time, without even a delay of five minutes. Also it is
apparent that some of the entries in the registers were made by the same
person. The resulting position therefore is that, these entries that were
referred to in evidence cannot be  seriously taken into consideration, either
to discredit or supportany position. They are of a dubious nature and unworthy
of any credit. Hence, it is very clear that the entries made in these
registers and referred to at the trial by the defence cannot be used to
discredit the evidence of Ratnayake.

**376**

In the light of the independent corroboration of Ratnayake's evidence as
referred to above, it is clear that his evidence is reliable and could be
safely acted upon. It must be mentioned here, that, having regard to his
involvement in the crime, Ratnayake would never have volunteered to come out
with the details of the crime at the first opportunity. Further, his
relationship with the 1 st accused was such that he could never have let down
the 1st accused unless there was some pressing need to do so. That is why,
Ratnayake did not disclose to the police in April 2001, the  details of the
plan which resulted in the murder of the deceased Sujith Perera. However, when
Ratnayake found that with the arrest of witness Gamini Rajakaruna, things were
becoming difficult for him to explain, he decided to disclose the material
relating to the murder of the deceased  Sujith Perera. Such conduct is not
something uncommon and the law has made provision to receive such evidence. As
a safeguard, law requires such evidence to be independently corroborated in
material particulars. Therefore, when the evidence of an accomplice is
independently corroborated in material particulars, a court could act on such
evidence with confidence. The Trial at Bar which had the opportunity to
observe the demeanor and deportment of Ratnayake giving evidence made the
following comment about his testimony. "As Ratnayake is held to be an
accomplice it is relevant to observe that Ratnayake in his evidence did not
attempt to curry favour with the prosecution, show off more guilt of the
accused nor tried to purchase immunity by falsely accusing the accused to
minimise his role in the involvement in this murder and the story related by
Ratnayake in relation to the murder of Sujith Prasanna Perera and the related
circumstances connecting the accused to the crime are corroborated by other
witnesses in almost every important area as described above. This gives
additional strength to Ratnayake's evidence and makes it safe to actupon".
Vide page 24 of the judgement. "Considering the demeanour and the manner in
which this witness gave evidence in court and considering the consistency of
his evidence in the absence of any contradiction or ommission in material
facts, we hold that his evidence could be accepted as creditworthy and
reliable to act upon." Vide page 36 of the judgement. Therefore, it is very
clear that the Trial at Bar having treated witness Ratnayake as an accomplice,
and being satisfied that his evidence has been independently corroborated in
material particulars, decided to act on his evidence as being reliable, safe,
and convincing.  
  
In dealing with Ratnayake's evidence counsel for the 1st accused appellant
complained that the Trial at Bar failed to apply the higher standard

**377**

of proof referred to in Liyanage's case to test the evidence of Ratnayake who
was an an accomplice and instead applied the standard that would be ordinarily
used. This is not so. It would appear that the Trial at Bar was very much
mindful of the higher standard of proof required in the case of an accomplice
who has received' a conditional pardon, when it referred to the judgment in
Liyanage's case and stated thus. "The preferable course is for the court to
consider it carefully, even cautiously and to accept it only  
when it is corroborated and found to be convincing" Vide page 19 of the
judgement. This contention of counsel is therefore without any merit.  
  
Having regard to the matters referred to above on the question of the
reliability of Ratnayake's evidence, even the submission of learned counsel
for the 2nd and 3rd accused appellants that Ratnayake's evidence was
unsatisfactorily and therefore the Trial at Bar erred in looking for
corroboration is not tenable. In our view this is a case where corroboration
has been considered in relation to a witness whose evidence is satisfactory.
Further, counsel's submission that Ratnayake has given false evidence and by
the application of the maxim "Falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus" his evidence
should be rejected, is also without merit. Other than a few contradictions and
omissions which were not very material, defence did not succeed in showing
that witness Ratnayake had given false evidence. In relation to this matter,
errors of memory, faulty observations, and even exaggerations must be
distinguished from deliberate falsehood. Besides, this maxim has not been
applied as an absolute rule. It was observed in the case of Samaraweera vs The
Attorney General (6) that divisibility of evidence test is preferred under
certain conditions. In the case of Francis Appuhamy vs The Queen (7) T.
S.Fernando J, in the course of his judgement stated as follows : "Certainly in
this country it is not an uncommon  
experience to find in criminal cases witnesses who, in addition to implicating
a person actually seen by them committing a crime, seek to implicate others
who are either members of the family of that person or enemies of such
witnesses. In that situation the judge or jurors have to decide for themselves
whether that part of the testimony which is found to be false taints the whole
or whether the false can safely be separated from the true."  
  
As highlighted by learned Additional Solicitor General one salient feature in
this case is that there are two admissions made by two accused. One admission
was made to witness Ratnayake and the other was made to

**378**

witness Rajakaruna. It was the evidence of Ratnayake that 2nd and 3rd accused
came to his house in the morning of 24th March 2001, about one hour after
having left his house with the weapon and told him in the presence of the 1st
accused that the job was accomplished, meaning Sujith Perera was murdered and
handed over the weapon and the parcel containing the motorcycle number plates.
Then according to witness Rajakaruna he and the 3rd accused were stationed at
the Pampamadu army camp in Vavuniya. Both of them had gone on leave and
reported for duty on 24th March 2001\. Two or three days after their return to
the Army camp the 3rd accused had told Rajakaruna that he had done a job for
"Aiya" meaning the 1st accused, and told him to read the newspaper. After
having gone through the newspaper and when Rajakaruna inquired from the 3rd
accused whether he was referring to the murder of Sujith Perera, 3rd accused
had admitted it. Therefore in this case there are two clear admissions
relating to the murder of Sujith Perera. One admission was made shortly after
the killing of Sujith Perera and the other was made a few days later.
Admissions and confessions are made admissible in our law against the maker.
Vide Section 17 read with Section 21 of the Evidence Ordinance. Law has made
provision to admit such admissions and confessions against its maker because
there is an inherent guarantee of testimonial trust worthiness and truth. The
evidentiary value of admissions and confessions were considered fully in the
case of Nallaratnam Singarajah vs Attorney General (8) and in the case of
Nagamani Theivendran vs The Attorney General (9). In Nallaratnam Singarajah's
case accused-appellant was convicted purely on a confession made to the
Assistant Superintendent of  Police. In that case Justice Jayasooriya in
dealing with admissions stated thus. "Besides, as convincingly set out by Best
on Evidence there is a  
guarantee of testimonial trustworthiness and truth in its contents in
admitting admissions against its maker. It is for the aforesaid reasons that
admissions and confessions are rendered relevant and admissible against the
maker. Thus there is a presumption and guarantee of testimonial
trustworthiness and truth in law in regard to the contents of a confession."
Confession is a species of admission. On the other hand Justice Mark Fernando
in Nagamani Theivendran's case referred to the evidentiary value of
confessions and accpted the position that solely on a confession an accused
could be convicted. The learned Judge in that case referred to the opinion
expressed by twelve judges in the year 1791, in Rex vs Lambe, which reads as
follows. "Confessions of guilt made by a prisoner to any person at any moment
of time, and at any place.........are, at Common law, admissible in evidence,
as the highest and most satisfactory proof of

**379**

guilt, because it is fairly presumed that no man would make such a confession
against himself if the facts confessed were not true." Therefore it is very
clearthat, if the evidence of Rajakaruna and Ratnayake is accepted the 2nd and
3rd accused could be convicted even without any other evidence for the
commission of the murder of Sujith Perera which is the 2nd count in the
indictment.  
  
A submission was made by counsel for the 2nd and 3rd accused  appellants that
the Trial at Bar misdirected itself with regard to the burden of proof
required in a criminal case. Counsel contended that mere rejection of the
evidence for the defence namely, the dock statements of the accused as false,
did not mean that the prosecution has established its case. He said that the
learned judges constituting the Trial at Bar after having rejected the dock
statements of the accused, should have examined the evidence presented by the
prosecution to see whether the case has been proved beyond reasonable doubt.
Counsel pointed out that, nowhere in the judgment is there any finding to say
that the prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt and therefore
this failure was a serious infirmity that would vitiate the conviction.  
  
Learned counsel was correct when he submitted that no mention in the judgement
has been made that the prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable
doubt. However, this omission did not mean that the Trial at Bar did not give
its mind to the question of the burden of proof requiring  the prosecution to
prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. When one reads the judgment of the
Trial at Bar it would appear that the learned judges have proceeded on the
basis that the prosecution has established its case beyond reasonable doubt
and then considered the dock statements of the accused to ascertain whether
these statements had any effect on the prosecution case. Such a conclusion is
possible in view of the comment the judges of the Trial at Bar made in their
judgment when dealing with the defence evidence more specifically the dock
statements, in the following terms. "The 1 st, 2nd and 3rd accused's denials
in their dock statements, regarding the evidence implicating them, cannot be
accepted due to the reasons set forth above as being truthful and therefore
should be rejected. Hence, whether the statements would create a doubt in the
prosecution case does not arise". Vide page 63 of the judgment. The only
reasonable inference that could be drawn from this passage is that learned
judges were of the considered view that the prosecution has proved its case
beyond reasonable doubt and the defence- evidence did not create any doubt in
their minds in respect of the prosecution case. This matter would have been
clear, if the Trial at Bar referred to the general principle applicable

**380**

in a criminal case namely that the burden of proof rests on the prosecution to
prove its case beyond reasonable doubt and that they were satisfied that the
prosecution has discharged this burden. Anyway, had this case being a trial by
jury where the jurors had to decide this case, the failure to direct them
properly on the burden of proof could in certain circumstances vitiate
conviction. In the present case, three judges consituting the jury, they being
trained judges who are mindful of the presumption of innocence and the
required burden of proof in a criminal case, there is no justification to hold
that the accused were convicted without considering the paramount requirement
that the burden was on the prosecution to prove its case beyond reasonable
doubt. Therefore we are unable to agree with this submission.  
  
On this submission relating to the burden of proof, learned Additional
Solicitor General contended without conceding, that, even if there is any
substance in what the learned counsel for the defence submitted, it is
permissible for the Court to apply the proviso to section 334(1) of the Code
of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15of 1979tosustaintheconviction. In support he
cited the case of Mannar Mannan vs The Republic of Sri Lanka (10) where it has
been held that the provision clearly vests a  discretion in the court and
could be applied even where there is a non direction amounting to a mis
direction in regard to the burden of proof. However, in this case having
regard to the totality of the evidence available against the accused, it is
very clear that the prosecution has established the case beyond reasonable
doubt against the accused. It was never a difficult decision which the judges
of the Trial at Bar had to make. Under these circumstances it would not be
reasonable to hold that the Trial at Bar had misdirected itself with regard to
the standard of proof required in a criminal case.  
  
Another matter referred to by counsel for the 2nd and 3rd accused appellants
was that, there was a failure on the part of the Trial at Bar to judicially
evaluate the circumstantial evidence led in this case. Counsel's contention
was that items of circumstantial evidence such as the selection of the
motorcycle, reporting to witness Ratnayake that the mission was unsuccessful
on 23rd March 2001, and successful on 24th March 2001, handing over of the
number plates, ride in the three-wheeler, hiding the motorcycle etc. were
items of circumstantial evidence which were equivocal in nature and nothing
flowed from such evidence. He further submitted

**381**

 that these items of circumstantial evidence did not clearly connect the
accused. Hence, counsel contended that the Trial at Bar failed to apply the
criteria applicable in a case of circumstantial evidence where the inference
drawn should be irresistible, not only consistent with guilt, but also
inconsistent with innocence, an inference from which there is no escape. It is
true that some of these circumstances referred to by counsel taken separately
may be circumstances only creating suspicion. But the question for
consideration here is whether if these items of evidence are taken
cumulatively, are they sufficient along with the other evidence to rebut the
presumption of innocence. Therefore one has to consider the totality of the
evidence, such as the admissions made by the 2nd and 3rd accused, evidence of
absonding against the 1 st accused, the explanations given by the accused with
regard to the evidence presented against them by the prosecution and come to a
conclusion. It is only then that one could appreciate the value of some of
these circumstances as referred to by counsel . It is well to remember that
the prosecution case did not depend entirely on these circumstances as
referred to by counsel nor did this case depend entirely on the evidence of
Ratnayake. Prosecution led the evidence of many other witnesses and they were
corroborated in several ways. For example take the motorcycle marked P2, in
this case. Dinesh Wljegunatilake said that two persons came in a red coloured
Honda motorcycle 160 series on 24.03.2001, and shot at the deceased. Gamage
Sihsena and Don Nishantha said that on 22.03.2001, four persons came to the
sales centre and selected a 125 cc Honda red coloured motorcycle bearing No.
160-2093. According to Sisira, 1st accused spoke to him from the sales center
and made a request for a motorcycle. The police officer recovered P2
consequent to a section 27 statement made by the 2nd accused from the house of
Albert who identified P2, as the motorcycle the 2nd accused left at his house.
The 2nd and 3rd accused  
admitted to Ratnayake soon after the killing of the deceased, that they
accomplished the job, and returned the weapon and the number plates. Few days
later 3rd accused admitted to Rajakaruna that he did a job for the 1st accused
and for that purpose he got a good bike and a super rider. With all these
material being available to court, it would be a reasonable inference to make
that the motorcycle marked P2, was used in the murder of the deceased. Then,
how could one say that the selection of the motorcycle is equivocal.
Therefore, the contention that the Trial at Bar has failed to judicially
evaluate such' circumstantial evidence cannot succeed.

**382**

It was also urged by counsel for the 2nd and 3rd accused appellants that the
Trial at Bar came to conclusions on speculation and conjecture.  In this
regard, counsel referred to the fact that witness Ratnayake could not explain
the presence of the 2nd and 3rd accused at the Y. M . B. A. Kiribathgoda on
22nd March 2001. Counsel pointed out that without any material the Trial at
Bar concluded that, probably the 1st accused would have told them to come
there. Similarly with regard to the finding of the burnt remains of some
buttons and a zip (vide P38-P41), counsel said that the Trial at Bar had
concluded that probably they were from the  
burnt jacket. He referred to few other matters as well, and contended that
some of these conclusions were mere speculation and conjecture, since there
was no material to support such conclusions. It cannot be said that these
conclusions were arbitrarily drawn by the Trial at Bar in view of the material
that was available. With regard to the presence of the 2nd and 3rd accused at
the Y. M. B. A Kiribathgoda, Ratnayake did not say that the 1 st accused asked
them to come. But what he said was that "I do not know, probably they may have
come on the request of Anura Weerawansa (1st accused) Vide page 164 (v ol.I)
In respect of this matter it is useful to note that Ratnayake had told the 2nd
accused to do whatever Anura Weerasinghe sir (1st accused) requested him to
do. It was also the evidence of Ratnayake that the 3rd accused was very close
to the 1st accused and in fact the 3rd accused spoke to Ratnayake about a
problem " worrying his head" and needed a person who could ride a motorcycle,
Ratnayake's understanding was that the 1 st accused needed a motorcycle rider
to kill the deceased Sujith Perera. In this background, if the Trial at Bar
had drawn the inference that the 2nd and 3rd accused were present at the Y. M.
B. A. Kiribathgoda on 22nd March 2001, at the request of the 1 st accused, it
cannot be said that such an inference was mere speculation and conjecture. In
our view, it was a reasonable inference one could have drawn from the
surrounding circumstances. In fact it was Ratnayake's evidence that the 1 st
accused wanted the job of killing the deceased done within two or three days
time but did not give a reason for it. Vide page  
162 and 163 (vol.I) Similarly it was Ratnayake's evidence that he burnt the
number plates and the jacket given to him by the 3rd accused in his back
garden and showed this place to the police. The police officer having examined
this place found the burnt remains of some buttons and a zip. Therefore, when
the Trial at Bar decided that they were the burnt remains of the jacket that
hat was burnt by Ratnayake, it was not speculation, but an inference that
could have been reasonably drawn from the available facts. Therefore, we are
unable to subscribe to the view put forward by learned counsel.

**383**

For the aforesaid reasons, we are of the view that there is no merit in the
submissions advanced by learned counsel on behalf of the accused appellants.
In the circumstances, we affirm the conviction and the sentence imposed on the
accused appellants and dismiss this appeal.  
  
**WEERASURIYAJ.** \- I agree.  
  
**JAYASINGHE J.** \- I agree.  
  
**UDALAGAMA J.** \- I agree.  
  
**FERNANDO J.** -I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/6.html_  

