##  Wanasundara v. Piyadasa and Others - SLR - 301, Vol 1 of 2003 [2003] LKSC
6; (2003) 1 Sri LR 301 (13 February 2003)

**301**

**WANASUNDARA** ****

**V.** ****

**PIYADASA AND OTHERS** ****



SUPREME COURT

S.N. SILVA.CJ.

EDUSSURIYAJ.AND

J.A.N.DE SUVA, J.

SC APPEAL No. 61/2002

WITH SC APPEAL No.66/2002

C.A. No. 112/89(F)

DC RATNAPURA NO. 2129/L

13 FEBRUARY, 2003



Declaratory Action - Shortcomings in the judgment of the District Court and
the Court of Appeal - Power of Supreme Court to finally decide the matter
where the shortcomings are not material particularly in view of the inordinate
length of the litigation.



The original plaintiff instituted action against the defendant for a
declaration of title to and ejectment from the land in dispute on the ground
that the defendants were licensees on the land and that the plaintiff owned an
undivided 1/3 thereof. The defendants claimed that the 2nd defendant has
acquired a prescriptive title to the land. The District Judge rejected this
claim and gave judgment for the plaintiff but in answering the relevant issue
as regards the relief (viz., issue No 7 which referred to both declaration and
ejectment) said "As prayed for in the plaint, a declaration of title only to
an undivided 1/3"



The defendants appealed. Notwithstanding the vagueness of the District Judge's
answer as to the relief especially as regards ejectment, the Court of Appeal
held that the plaintiff was entitled to institute an action for declaration of
title and ejectment and dismissed the appeal.

Thereafter the defendant's counsel appearing before an Administrative Tribunal
urged that in terms of the Court of Appeal judgment the plaintiff had to file
a separate action for a declaration of title and ejectment. On a joint
application by the parties the Court of Appeal gave a "clarification" and also
deleted the answer to issue 7 as it stood and proceeded to answer the entire
issue

302

in the affirmative . No appeal was lodged from that judgment of the Court of
Appeal; but both parties sought leave to appeal from the order of the Court of
Appeal in "clarification". The defendant, in appeal No. 61/2002 has complained
that whilst the parties sought a "clarification" the court had proceeded to
amend the judgment.

**Held :**



1.                     The Court of Appeal has stepped into an area they ought not to have (by deleting the District Judge's answer to issue 7) since only a "clar­ification" was sought.

2.                     In view of the fact that the litigation was 20 years old the Supreme Court should consider the matter on its merits and set aside the order of the Court of Appeal by way of clarification.

3.                     The appeals are decided on the basis that the District Judge held that the plaintiff was entitled to a declaration of title to the undivded 1/3 share of the land and ejectment of the defedants and costs; and that judgment was affirmed by the Court of Appeal.

**APPEAL** from certain orders made by the Court of Appeal by way of
"clarifi­cation".

_R.C. Gunaratne_ with _J,A. Salwature_ and _A.J.M. Thahir_ for defendant
appel­lants in SC 61/2002 and 3rd defendant respondent in SC 66/2002.

_Gamini Marapana,_ P.C. with _Champaka Ladduwahetty_ and _Navin Marapana_ for
plaintiff-respondent in SC 61/2002 and plaintiff-appellant in SC 66/2002.

# Cur. adv. vult

March 28,2003 **  
J.A.N. DE SILVA, J.**



The original Plaintiff-Respondent (who died during the pen­dency of this
action) by his amended plaint dated 24th February 1983 sought (1) a
declaration of title to an undivided 1/3 of the land described in the schedule
thereto depicted in Plan No. 388 dated 16th October 1978 made by D.W.
Ranatunge, Licensed Surveyor in extent 7A - 2R - 30P, (2) ejectment of the
Defendants, their agents and servants therefrom and damages.

303

The original Plaintiff had pleaded his title to an undivided 1/3 share which
had devolved on him on his parents' death, stating that the original owner his
father, derived title from a Crown Grant to an extent of 6 Acres - 1 Rood - 30
Perches. The original Plaintiff had also pleaded that the 2nd Defendant had
come on the land under his predecessor in title.



The Defendants by their amended answer filed in May 1983 denied that they came
on the land as licensees and claimed that the 2nd Defendant had acquired
prescriptive title to lots 1,2,3 and 4 in extent 7 Acres - 2 Roods - 30
Perches depicted in Plan No. 388.



After trial the claim of prescriptive title was rejected by the learned
District Judge and the Defendants had lodged an appeal.



At the hearing of the appeal the attention of the Court had been drawn amongst
other things to the fact that issues Nos. 11 and 12 had not been answered.



The failure to answer issue No. 11 was immaterial since it was a follow up on
issue No. 10. In the judgment of the Court of Appeal the learned Judge had
dealt with and answered issue No. 12 in favour of the Plaintiff-Respondent.
Thereafter, the Court of Appeal in its judgment had dismissed the appeal of
the Defendants stating that "since the Defendants - Appellants have repudiated
the tenan­cy under the Plaintiff-Respondent, the Plaintiff-Respondent has a
right to institute an action for declaration of title to eject the Defendants-
Appellants and for restoration of possession of the Plaintiff-Respondent".



The Plaintiff-Respondent thereafter had sought a clarification of the above
mentioned passage in the Court of Appeal judgment, because the Counsel
appearing for the Defendants-Appellants at an inquiry before the National Gem
and Jewellery Authority had taken up the position that according to the Court
of Appeal judg­ment the Plaintiff-Respondent had to institute another action
to obtain a declaration of title and ejectment of the Defendants-Appellants
and restoration of possession.



Thereafter the Court of Appeal had expressed a "clarification and deleted the
answer to issue No. 7 as it stood and answered it



304

in the affirmative. Thereafter, both parties filed applications for spe­cial
leave to appeal from the order made in "clarification".



The Defendants-Appellants in appeal No. 61/2002 have taken up the position
that what was sought by the Plaintiff-Respondent was only a clarification but
that the Court of Appeal had in effect amended its judgment. This Court
granted special leave in both appeals in order to arrive at a finality in this
matter which has been pending for the past twenty years.  


It is unfathomable as to how any serious submission could be made, that what
the Court of Appeal meant by the passage in ques­tion was that the Substituted
Plaintiff-Respondent had to file anoth­er action for declaration of title to a
1/3 share of the land described in the schedule to the Amended Plaint of 24th
February 1983 and ejectment in the face of the following facts, namely:



1.                     that the Plaintiff-Respondent had already filed such an action namely, the present action, and that even if as con­ tended by the Counsel for the Defendants-Appellants one were to infer that the relief sought by the Plaintiff- Respondent relating to ejectment and restoration to pos­session had not been granted by the learned District Judge, the Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent had already obtained a declaration of title to 1/3 of the land in dispute. If in fact the Court of Appeal had stated that the Substituted Plaintiff- Respondent had to institute another action for ejectment only, this position may have been different, and

2.                     the passage in the judgment of the Court of Appeal which sets out as follows:



"It is of relevance to note that in view of the averments 6, 7 and 8 of the
plaint and prayer (3) of the plaint which are based on the contractual
relationship of the Plaintiff-Respondent and the 2nd Defendant-Appellant and
in view of the aforementioned rule of estoppel, that _this action_ is not only
an action for declaration of title but also takes the face of an action that
is based on the contractual relationship of the Plaintiff-Respondent and the
Defendants-Appellants, _by_ _which the Plaintiff-Respondent is seeking his
right to restoration of ownership and possession of the corpus._

305

Plaintiff-Respondent who was also lawfully in possession of the corpus was
seeking to eject the Defendants-Appellants as they were disturbing his
possession."



It is as a follow up on this that the learned Judge of the Court of Appeal
stated that the Plaintiff-Respondent has a right to institute an action for
declaration of title to eject the Defendants-Appellants and for restoration of
possession of the Plaintiff-Respondent, there­by referring to the present
action, and as such it is clear the Court of Appeal held that the Plaintiff-
Respondent was entitled to eject­ment and restoration to possession. There is
no appeal filed from that judgment.



It was also contended by the Counsel for the Defendants-Appellants that on a
reading of the answer to issue No. 7 that it was clear that the Plaintiff-
Respondent had only been granted declara­tion of title and not ejectment of
the Defendants-Appellants.

Issue No. 7 reads as follows:



"If the above mentioned issues are answered in favour of the Plaintiff, is the
Plaintiff entitled to the reliefs prayed for in the Plaint"?



The reliefs prayed for in the amended plaint of 24th February 1983 on which
the trial proceeded are as follows:

1.                    That the Plaintiff be declared entitled to an undivided 1/3 share of the land described in the schedule to the plaint, damages

2.                    for ejectment of the Defendants, their agents, servants or all others from the land and the Plaintiff be placed in posses­sion

3.                    costs.



The Answer to issue No. 7 reads as follows:



"As prayed for in the plaint, a declaration of title limited only to an
undivided 1/3"



Following the answer to issue No. 10 the judgment states as follows:



"Judgment is entered in favour of the Plaintiff."

306

It was argued that the prayer for ejectment had not been granted.



In examining this question it is important to refer to section 187 of the
Civil Procedure Code which states that "The judgment shall contain a concise
statement of the case, the points for deter­mination, the decision thereon,
and reasons for such decision".



The answers to issues are almost always monosyllabic and follow up the matters
in issue discussed and decided in the body of the judgment. When one examines
the body of the judgment it is seen that although damages have not been
awarded in as much as no evidence has been led on the same, there is not a
single word in the body of the judgment for disallowing the prayer for
ejectment and further the claim of prescriptive title by the Defendants-
Appellants has been rejected by the learned District Judge in the body of the
judgment, and accordingly the Defendants-Appellants have no right to remain in
possession any longer.



Therefore on a reading of the body of the judgment it is clear that though not
included in the answer to issue No. 7, the Plaintiff-Respondent was entitled
to ejectment of the Defendants-Appellants from the land in question. The
Plaintiff-Respondent is therefore entitled to ejectment of the Defendants-
Appellants on the basis of the reasoning in both the District Court judgment
as well as the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 10th May 2002. Besides
the sole purpose behind the institution of this action was to recov­er
possession following upon a declaration of title.



It was also contended that by the answer to issue No. 2 the learned District
Judge had held that the Plaintiff-Respondent was only entitled to lot 2 in
plan No. 388.



It is obvious that the learned District Judge referred to lot 2 of the
superimposed plan which was made up of an extent of 6A-1R-10P which the
Plaintiff-Respondent's father got on the Crown Grant, because issue No. 1 had
been framed on the Crown Grant and also because he has stated in the judgment
that "for the rea­sons set out above issues, 1,2,3 and 4 have to be answered
in the affirmative", and lot 2 of the superimposed plan is 6 Acres -1 Rood -
10 Perches in extent. However the Plaintiff-Respondent and the other co-owners
had possessed and prescribed to an extent of 7A-

307



2R-30P and this is obvious from the fact that there is a waterway (Ela) both
on the Northern and Eastern boundaries, a Ridge on the South East, a Bank on
the South separating the land in dispute from Palm Garden Estate and a wire
fence on the West enclosing an extent of 7A-2R-30P, which said extent the 2nd
Defendant had been placed in possession of by the Plaintiff's mother according
to the Plaintiff. Though the Defendants-Appellants denied having come into
possession of the land with the leave and license of the Plaintiff-
Respondent's mother, both Courts have rejected this posi­tion. Further, the
Defendants-Appellants have not taken up the position that the extent of
6A-1R-30P was another land to which they had also prescribed. Besides, the
Defendants by their amend­ed answer of 18th May 1983 state quite categorically
that the 2nd Defendant conveyed the land referred to in lots 1,2,3 and 4 in
Plan 388 of 23rd November 1978 to the 3rd Defendant, thereby admit­ting that
they treated lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 as one land. In any event, the learned
District Judge has held that the Plaintiff-Respondent is entitled to an
undivided 1/3 of the land described in the schedule to the plaint which is in
extent 7A-2R-30P.



So that it is clear in the end, that there has been much ado over nothing and
that it was the Defendants-Appellants' Counsel at the Gem and Jewellery
Authority who caused confusion by trying to give a wrong interpretation to the
judgments of the District Court as well as the Court of Appeal who has been
responsible for causing the Substituted-Plaintiff-Respondent to panic and seek
a clarification. The Court of Appeal Judges have thereafter stepped into an
area they ought not to have, since only a clarification was sought.



Therefore I set aside the order made in clarification by the Court of Appeal.
Now, that this matter has been brought to our notice it is our bounden duty as
the highest Court not only to ensure that we leave no room for anyone to cause
confusion by making frivolous submissions but also to see an end to litigation
that has been pending for the past twenty years and therefore I repeat that
the District Court of Ratnapura has held that the Plaintiff-Respondent was
entitled to a (1) declaration of title to an undivided 1/3 share of the land
described in the schedule to the amended plaint of 24th February 1983 and (2)
ejectment of the Defendants-Appellants, their agents, servants, and all those
holding under them

308



from the land described in the schedule to the said amended plaint and costs
and that, that judgment was affirmed by the Court of Appeal and further, that
the Court of Appeal has also held that the Plaintiff was entitled to maintain
this action for declaration of title and ejectment.



For the aforementioned reasons it is not necessary for this Court to deal with
appeal No. 66/2002 and the said appeal is dis­missed.



Parties will bear their costs in both appeals. **  
  
S. N. SILVA, C.J. **- I agree.

  
**EDUSSURIYA, J.** - I agree.

_ _

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/6.html_  

