##  Chandrawathie v. Dharmaratne and Another - SLR - 43, Vol 1 of 2002 [2001]
LKSC 6; (2002) 1 Sri LR 43 (1 November 2001)

**43**

**CHANDRAWATHIE  
v.  
DHARMARATNE AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA, CJ.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
YAPA, J.  
SC (APPEAL) NO. 10/2001  
CA (APPEAL) NO. 312/91 (F)  
DC (COLOMBO) NO. 5161 (ZL)  
MARCH 26 AND SEPTEMBER 7, 2001  
  
_Civil Procedure Code - Dismissal of action for plaintiffs default -
Application for setting aside the order of dismissal - Section 87 (3) of the
Code - Requirement that the petition be supported by affidavit - Sections 168,
181 and 438 of the Code - Whether a defect in plaintiff's own affidavit would
per se disqualify relief.  
_  
The plaintiff instituted action in the District Court against the 1st and 2nd
defendants for declaration of title and ejectment from the land in suit. On
03. 10\. 1988 the case was fixed for trial on 01. 03.1989. The plaintiff was
not present. His registered attorney who was present took down the date as 03.
03. 1989 and informed the plaintiff accordingly. On 03. 03. 1989 the plaintiff
came to know that the case had been fixed for trial on 01. 03. 1989.
Consequently, the plaintiff was absent and unrepresented on 01\. 03. 1989;
whereupon the District Judge dismissed the action. Thereafter, the plaintiff
applied to the District Judge to have the order of dismissal vacated in terms
of section 87 (3) of the Civil Procedure Code. He also tendered to Court an
affidavit from his registered attorney. The 2nd defendant objected to the
application on the ground that the plaintiff's affidavit was not confined to
statements of such facts as the plaintiff was able of his own knowledge and
observations to testify to and; (b) the plaintiff in making his affirmation
failed to profess that he was a non-Christian. Section 168 of the Code also
refers to this requirement for a non-Christian.  
  
**Held :**  
  
Even though the failure of the plaintiff to specify in his affidavit that he
was a non-Christian denudes the document of the essential characteristics of
an affidavit yet, the affidavit of the registered attorney should have been
considered sufficient to explain the facts relevant to the default as the
wrong date was taken down by the registered attorney on 03. 10. 1988.

**44**

The plaintiff was not in Court on that day. He could not therefore, testify to
the relevant matters of his knowledge and observations as required by section
181 of the Code.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
1\. _Simeon Fernando v. Goonesekera_ \- (1946) 47 NLR 512.  
  
2\. _Samarakoon v. Ponniah_ \- (1931) 32 NLR 257.  
  
3\. _Kanagasabai v. Kirupamoorthy_ \- (1959) 62 NLR 54.  
  
4\. _Damayanthi Abeywardene and Another_ v. _Hemalatha Abeywardena and Others_
\- (1993) 1 Sri LR 272.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_A. K. Premadasa, PC_ with _C. E. de Silva_ for appellant.  
  
S. Gunasekera for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 1, 2001  
  
**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
  
**The plaintiff-petitioner-appellant-respondent-respondent (hereinafter
referred to as the 1st respondent) instituted action in the District Court of
Colombo against the 1st defendant-respondent-respondent-respondent-respondent
(hereinafter referred to as the 2nd respondent) and the 2nd defendant-
respondent-respondent-petitioner-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the
appellant) for a declaration of title and ejectment of appellant and 2nd
respondent from the allotment of land known as Kahatagahawatta (marked Lot A3
in Plan No. 5193 made by M. B. de Silva, Licensed Surveyor). On 03. 10. 1988
the case was fixed for trial on 01. 03 1989 (X3 and X3b). When the case was
taken up for trial on 01. 03. 1989, the 1st respondent was absent and
unrepresented and the Additional District Judge, dismissed the action (X4).
Thereafter, the 1st respondent made an application to the District Court,
Colombo, to have the order of dismissal vacated

**45**

(X5 and X6). The 1st respondent had also tendered to Court an affidavit of the
registered attorney for the 1st respondent (X7). The appellant filed her
statement of objection to this application (X8 and X9). The application made
to vacate the order of dismissal was taken up for inquiry on 21. 03. 1991 and
the counsel for appellant raised a preliminary objection. He submitted that as
the affidavit of the 1st respondent (X6) did not conform to the provisions of
sections 181 and 438 of the Civil Procedure Code, the 1st respondent cannot
maintain the said application (X10). The learned Additional District Judge of
Colombo on 07. 05. 1991 rejected the application filed by the 1st respondent
to vacate the order of dismissal (X11). The 1st respondent appealed to the
Court of Appeal against this order (X12). On 30. 11. 2000, the Court of Appeal
allowed the said appeal on the basis that the learned Additional District
Judge should have considered the affidavit of the 1st respondent's registered
attorney. The appellant sought for special leave to appeal from this Court
against the said order.  
  
This Court granted leave to appeal on the following question :  
  
"whether the application to set aside the order of dismissal has been in
compliance with the provisions of section 87 (3) of the Civil Procedure Code."  
  
Chapter XII of the Civil Procedure Code deals with the consequences and cure
(when permissible) of default in pleading and appearing in Court. Section 87
which falls under that chapter is with regard to the non-appearance of
plaintiff. Section 87 (3) of the Code reads as follows:  
  
"The plaintiff may apply within a reasonable time from the date of dismissal,
by way of petition supported by affidavit, to have the dismissal set aside,
and if on the hearing of such application, of which the defendant shall be
given notice, the Court is satisfied that there were reasonable grounds for
the non-appearance of the

**46**

plaintiff, the Court shall make order setting aside the dismissal upon such
terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for
proceeding with the action as from the stage at which the dismissal for
default was made."  
  
The requirements of section 87 (3) of the Civil Procedure Code as to an
application to cure a default are two-fold: Firstly, the plaintiff must make
his application within a reasonable time from the date of dismissal of his
action. Secondly, the plaintiff must make such application by way of petition
supported by affidavit. The affidavit of the 1st respondent, which was in
Sinhala, commenced with the following words:

  
The jurat of the affidavit was worded as follows:  
  
It is, therefore, apparent that the affidavit of the 1st respondent does not
comply with the requirements of section 168 of the Civil Procedure Code which
states that,  
  
".. . witnesses not professing to be Christians or Jews shall be examined on
affirmation. The same rule shall apply to affidavits ..."  
  
The failure to specify, when the deponent was a non-christian, that he was
affirming to the matters therein denudes the document of the essential
characteristics of an affidavit in terms of sections 168 and 438 of the Civil
Procedure Code and Form 75 of the 1st schedule to the Civil Procedure Code.

**47**

The next matter to be considered is whether the affidavit of the registered
attorney that was filed with the petition, satisfies the re­quirements of
section 87 (3). Learned President's Counsel for the appellant contended that a
valid affidavit of the plaintiff in support of the averments of the petition
is an essential component of an ap­plication under section 87 (3) and that the
affidavit of the registered attorney does not satisfy this requirement.  
  
I am in agreement with the learned President's Counsel for the appellant that
the affidavit filed by the 1st respondent is not in  compliance with sections
168 and 438 of the Civil Procedure Code. However, I am unable to agree with
the learned President's Counsel that the affidavit filed by the registered
attorney of the 1st respondent cannot be considered in terms of section 87 (3)
of the Civil Procedure Code.  
  
Section 87 (3) provides for the Court to consider setting aside a dismissal
due to the non-appearance of the plaintiff. For this purpose, the plaintiff
would have to satisfy the Court that there were reasonable grounds for his
non-appearance in Court. The process for invoking the jurisdiction of this
Court in this regard is by way of petition supported with affidavit. Although
it is mandatory that the plaintiff must make his application by way of
petition supported by affidavit, section 87 (3) does not specify that the
affidavit must be that of the plaintiff. The only requirement according to
section 87 (3) is that there should be an affidavit which supports the
petition of the plaintiff, in order to set aside the dismissal.  
  
Section 181 of the Civil Procedure Code, refers to the kind of statements that
an affidavit can contain, which is in the following terms:  
  
"Affidavits shall be confined to the statements of such facts as the declarant
is able of his knowledge and observation to testify  to, except on
interlocutory applications in which statements of his belief may be admitted,
provided that reasonable grounds for such belief be set forth in the
affidavit."

**48**

Section 181 is specific that the affidavit must contain statements of such
facts which the declarant is able to testify of his own knowledge and
observations. In Simeon Fernando v. Goonesekerd (1) it was held that,  
  
". . . an affidavit must be confined to a statement of such facts as the
declarant is able of his own knowledge and observations to testify to."  
  
A similar view has been taken in Samarakoon v. Ponniarp and Kanagasabai v.
Kirupamoorth (2)  
  
The only exception to this provision is with regard to interlocutory
applications in which section 181 provides that statements of the declarant's
belief must be set forth in the affidavit. This position was confirmed in
Damayanthi Abeywardene and another v. Hemalatha Abeywardene and others (4)
where it was held by S. N. Silva J., (as he then was) in the following terms
(at page 278):  
  
"The rule in section 181 which confines an affidavit to 'a state­ment of such
facts as the declarant is able of his own knowledge  and observation to
testify to' is intended to restrict the contents of affidavits to direct
evidence as prescribed in section 60 of the Evidence Ordinance. By necessary
implication it excludes hearsay from such affidavits. The only exception is
that in interlocutory applications a statement of what is believed, as to the
relevant facts, may be included. This exception is subject to a proviso that
reasonable grounds for such belief should also be set forth in the affidavit".  
  
The rule in section 181 of the Civil Procedure Code,' therefore, is that the
affidavit should contain only direct evidence. Referring to the kind of direct
evidence that is expected in an affidavit under section 181 of the Civil
Procedure Code, S. N. Silva J., (as he then was) said in Damayanthi
Abeywardene and another v. Hemalatha Abeywardene and others (supra, at page
279):

**49**

"That is, a statement of such facts as the declarant is able of his own
knowledge and obervations to testify to, in relation to the matters set out or
alleged in the petition."  
  
The 1st respondent's action was dismissed on 01. 03. 1989, and on 03. 03.
1989, the 1st respondent filed a petition informing the Court of the
circumstances relevant to the default. He stated that when the case came up
for trial previously on 03. 10. 1988, he had not attended Court as he was
indisposed. His registered attorney, who was present in Court on that day, had
taken down the next date as 03. 03. 1989 and informed the 1st respondent
accordingly. On 03. 03\. 1989, the 1st respondent came to know that his case
was fixed for trial not on 03. 03. 1989, but on 01. 03. 1989.  
  
In these circumstances, it is clear that the facts relevant to the default
were within the knowledge of the registered attorney and not of the 1st
respondent. The wrong date was taken by the registered attorney on 03. 10.
1988 and it is not disputed that the 1st respondent was not in Court on that
day. In such a situation, the 1st respondent cannot testify to these matters
of his own knowledge and observation as required by section 181. The affidavit
of the registered attorney should therefore be considered sufficient to
explain the facts relevant to the default.  
  
For the aforementioned reasons, I dismiss the appeal and affirm the judgment
of the Court of Appeal.  
  
There will be no costs.  
  
**S. N. SILVA, CJ. -** I agree.  
  
**YAPA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/6.html_  

