##  Priyani, E. Soysa v. Rienzie Arsecularatne - SLR - 179, Vol 2 of 1999
[1999] LKSC 6; (1999) 2 Sri LR 179 (21 May 1999)

**179**

**PRIYANI** ******E.** ******SOYSA** **  
v.  
****RIENZIE** ******ARSECULARATNE**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. SPL LA APPLICATION NO. 141/98  
C.A. APPEAL NO. 173/94 (F)  
D.C. COLOMBO NO. 13035/MR  
MARCH 25, 1999.

_Appeal - Non-compliance with Supreme Court Rules, 1990 - Rules 2, 6 and 8 (6)
- Discretion of the Court to excuse non-compliance \- Criteria relevant to the
exercise of discretion._

The Court of Appeal affirmed the judgment of the District Court against the
petitioner who had been sued for damages on the ground of medical negligence
subject, however, to a difference of opinion between the two Judges in appeal
as regards the quantum of damages. On 28. 07. 1998 the petitioner made an
application to the Supreme Court for special leave to appeal. The petitioner
tendered with the application the requisite notice for service on the
plaintiff respondent. The notice set out the respondent's address as appearing
in the caption to the proceedings in the Court of Appeal. He annexed to his
application copies of, inter alia, judgments of the District Court and of the
Court of Appeal; but no copies of the brief in the Court of Appeal or the
original Court necessary to verify the allegations of fact in the petition as
required by Rule 2 read with Rule 6 were annexed. Nor did the petitioner
obtain the leave of Court in terms of the proviso to Rule 2 to tender those
documents later. But on 16. 9. 1998 the petitioner filed a motion in the
Supreme Court tendering three copies of the Court of Appeal brief and moved
that the same be kept by the Registrar in safe custody and be submitted to the
Court when the special leave to appeal application would be supported on 28.
09\. 1998.

The notice of the application to the respondent was despatched by the
Registrar on 19. 08. 1998 by registered post in terms of Rule 8 (1); the
notice had been delivered to the address given therein, namely 51/4, Halpe
Road, Kandana. It was not returned and hence deemed to have been received by
the respondent. However, by the time the application was filed, the respondent
had changed his residence from Kandana to Colombo. Nevertheless, he used to
periodically visit

180

the Kandana address and collect his mail. The respondent collected his mail
inclusive of the notice on 13. 09. 1998 and lodged his caveat under Rule 8 (6)
on 23. 09. 1998.

When the application came up for hearing the petitioner raised a preliminary
objection that the respondent had failed in breach of Rule 8 (6) to file a
caveat within fourteen days of the receipt of the notice, hence the objection,
of the respondent to the grant of special leave to appeal should not be
entertained. The respondent raised a preliminary objection that the petitioner
had, in breach of Rule 2 read with Rule 6 failed to annex to the petition the
documents which were necessary to verify the allegations of fact in the
application which could not be verified with reference to the judgment of the
Court of Appeal; hence the special leave application should be disimissed in
limine.

**Held :**

1\. In the absence of the intimation by the respondent of a change of address
the petitioner had no option but to treat the address given in the caption of
proceedings last had in connection with the matter as the 'present address' of
the respondent within the ambit of Rule a. For the purpose of Rule 8 (6) the
date of receipt of the notice is ordinarily the date on which the notice is
delivered at such address; and the respondent is deemed to have received such
notice on that date.

2\. If the respondent has failed to file the caveat within the time specified
by Rule 8 (6) but submits an explanation which the Court is prepared to
accept, eg that he was in fact not resident at the address on the date of
receipt of the notice, the Court may in its discretion regard the date of
'actual' receipt of the notice as the relevant date for the purpose of
compliance with the Rule. On a liberal view of the matter, the respondent had
filed the caveat with in time.

3\. Held further, Amerasinghe, J. dissenting : The only lapse of the
petitioner relied upon by the respondent was that the petitioner had failed to
obtain the Court's permission in terms of the proviso to Rule 2 to tender the
copies of the Court of Appeal briefs and the fact that the petitioner filed
three instead of four copies. However, Rule 8 (7) enables the respondent also
to submit the same documents by way of objection whilst Rule 13 (2) empowers
the Court to direct the Registrar to call for the same, and having regard to
the purpose of the Rules, non-compliances of this nature would not necessarily
deprive a party of the opportunity of being heard on the merits at the
threshold stage unless there is some compelling reason to do so.

**181**

**Cases referred to :**

1. __ _Rasheed_ ___Ali_ _v._ _Khan_ _Mohamed_ ___Ali_ __ (1981) 2 Sri LR 29, 32 (C.A).

2. _Chelliah v. Ponnambalam_ (1986) Sriskantha's Law Reports vol. IV 61, 64.

3. _Caldera v. John Keells Holdings Ltd._ (1986) Colombo Appellate Law Reports vol. 1575, 585.

4. _Gangodagedera v. Mercantile Credit Ltd._ (1988) 2 Sri LR 253, 257-258 (CA).

5. _Leelananda v. Mercantile Credit Ltd._ (1988) 2 Sri LR 417, 419 (CA).

6. _Paramanathan v. Kodituwakkuarachchi_ (1988) 1 Sri LR 315, 337 (CA).

7. _Brown & Co., Ltd. v. Ratnayake _(1990) 1 Sri LR 92, 95-96 (CA).

8. _Ibrahim v. Nadaraja,_ (1991) 1 Sri LR 131 (SC).

9. _Kiriwanthe and Another v. Navaratne and Another_ (1990) 2 Sri LR 393.

10. __ _Rasheed_ ___Ali_ _v._ _Khan_ _Mohamed_ ___Ali_ __ (1981) 1 Sri LR 262 (SC).

11. _Collins v. Blantem_ 2  Wils KB 341.

12. _Master v. Miller_ 4 TR 320, 344.

13. _R. v. Wilks_ 4 Burr 2527, 2539.

14. _Duport Steels Ltd. v. Sirs_ (1980) ICR 161, 189.

15. __ _Alice_ ___Kotelawala_ _v. W_ _H._ ___Perera_ _and Another_ (1937) 1 CLJ 58; VII CLW 61.

16. _Rasiah v. Sittamparapillai_ (1920) VII CWR 116.

17. __ _Mary_ ___Nona_ _v. Fransina_ (1988) 2 Sri LR 250.

18. _Karunawathi v. Kusumaseeli_ (1990) 1 Sri LR 127.

19. __ _Fernando_ _v._ _Sybil_ ___Fernando_ __ (1997) 3 Sri LR 1.

20. _Read v. Samusudin_ (1895) 1 NLR 292, 294.

21. _Velupillai v. Chairman_ UDC (1936) 29 NLR 464, 465.

22. _Dulfa Umma et al v._ _UDC_ ___Matale_ __ (1939) 40 NLR 474, 478.

23. _All_ _Ceylon_ _Match Workers'_ _Union_ _v._ _Jauffer_ ___Hassan_ _and Others_ (1990) 2 Sri LR 420.

24. _Jayasuriya v. Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation_ (1995) 2 Sri LR 379.

25. _Piyadasa and Others v. Land Reform Commission_ SC Appeal No. 30/97 SC Minutes 8 July, 1998.

**APPLICATION** for Special Leave to Appeal from the judgment of the Court of
Appeal.

_H. L de Silva,_ PC with _R. K W. Goonesekera, E. D. Wickremanayake, S. C.
Crossette Tambiah,_ _Hugo_ ___Anthony_ __ and  _Aravinda_ ___Athurupana_ __
for the petitioner.

_Romesh de Silva,_ PC with _Palitha Kumarasinghe,_ _Harsha_ ___Amarasekera_ __
and  _Hiran_ ___de Alwis_ __ for the respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult.  
  
_**182**

May 4, 1999.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.**

The Background

Two Judges of the Court of Appeal delivered their separate judgments affirming
the judgment of the District Court on the questions of the appellant's alleged
professional negligence and liability to pay damages. One of the Judges of the
Court of Appeal upheld the award of Rs. 5,000,000 made by the District Court
on the 17th of January, 1994. The other judge held that the respondent was
only entitled to a sum of Rs. 250,000. I am not in the matter before me
concerned with of the correctness or otherwise of the views of the learned
Judges of the Court of Appeal on the questions of liability or quantum. When
the learned Judges of the Court of Appeal delivered their judgments on the
24th of June, 1998, learned counsel for the respondent stated that his client
would accept the sum of Rs. 250,000 but reserved his right to claim the sum of
Rs. 5,000,000 in the event of his case being reviewed by the Supreme Court.
The two Judges of the Court of Appeal made order for judgment in the sum of
Rs. 250,000.

Being aggrieved by the judgments of the learned Judges of the Court of Appeal,
the respondent in the Court of Appeal, sought, and was granted, permission to
formulate the questions of law for an appeal to the Supreme Court. The
questions were tendered to the Court of Appeal with a Motion, but on the date
fixed for support, the two Judges who had delivered the judgments sought to be
set aside in appeal, were not available. The learned Judge before whom the
matter came up referred the matter to a Bench comprising the President of the
Court of Appeal and another Judge of that Court for consideration on a day
that happened to be the last date permitted by the Rules for obtaining leave
from the Court of Appeal. On that day, learned counsel for the plaintiff-
respondent stated that he was opposing the application for leave to appeal.
Learned counsel for the defendant-appellant informed Court that, as one of the
two Judges of the Court of Appeal who had delivered judgment had since been
elevated to the Supreme Court and the other was out of the country,

183

he was withdrawing his application to the Court of Appeal for leave to appeal
and that he would, instead, make an application to the Supreme Court for
Special Leave to Appeal. In the circumstances, the Court of Appeal made no
order on the matter of an appeal to the Supreme Court.

On the 28th of July, 1998, a petition of appeal was filed in the Supreme
Court, stating that the petitioner was aggrieved with the finding of
professional negligence by the Court of Appeal. The grounds for that averment
were set out in paragraph 12 (a) - (h) - (1) - (25) of the petition of appeal.

The application came up before this Court on various dates without a
consideration of the issues before us. However, on the 12th of February, 1999,
learned counsel for the respondent stated that he wished to take a preliminary
objection on the basis of which, he submitted, the petition of appeal should
be rejected in limine. Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the
respondent had failed to comply with the provisions of rule 8 (6) of the
Supreme Court Rules and that therefore he could not be heard. In any event,
learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted, the objections of the
respondent should be made available to him so that he might have an
opportunity of considering them and responding to them.

On the 19th of February, 1999, learned counsel for the respondent, on the
directions of the Court, lodged (1) a document setting out the preliminary
objection of the respondent; and (2) an affidavit and other documents in
answer to the petitioner's objection that the respondent had failed to comply
with Rule 8 (6) of the Rules of the Supreme Court.

On the 25th of March, 1999, the Court had the benefit of a very full argument
on the matters that had been raised by learned counsel.

**The objection of the petitioner**

 Mr. H. L. De Silva, PC., submitted that in terms of Rule 8 of the Supreme
Court Rules, 1990 (published in the Gazette of Sri Lanka,

184

No. 665/32 of June 07, 1991) upon an application for special leave to appeal
being lodged in the Registry of the Supreme Court, the Registrar shall
forthwith give notice, by registered post, of such application to each of the
respondents : Rule 8 (1). Such notice shall be despatched within five working
days after the application has been lodged, and shall specify, the date of the
hearing of the application; and state "that the respondent, if he intends to
oppose the grant of special leave to appeal shall lodge, within fourteen days
of the receipt of such notice a Caveat indicating such intention:" Rule 8 (2).
Rule 8 (6) states : " _The respondent shall, within fourteen days of the
receipt of such notice, enter an appearance in the Registry of the Supreme
Court, and if he intends to oppose the grant of special leave to appeal shall
lodge a Caveat indicating such intention._ " (The emphasis is mine).

The petition of appeal applying, inter alia, for special leave to appeal, was
lodged in the Registry of the Supreme Court on the 28th of July, 1998. The
notice to the respondent was despatched on the 19th of August, 1998, by
Registered Post; and the notice had been delivered to the place to which the
notice was addressed, namely 51/4, Halpe Road, Kandana, on the 21st of August,
1998. The notice was not returned, and it must,  Mr. H. L. de Silva said, be
'deemed" to have been received by the respondent. The respondent's Caveat was
lodged on the 23rd of September, 1998. Learned counsel for the petitioner
submitted that the respondent ought, in terms of Rule 8 (6), to have, within
fourteen days of the receipt of the notice, entered an appearance in the
Registry of the Supreme Court, and if he intended to oppose the grant of
special leave he was required to lodge a Caveat indicating such intention :
That was a mandatory requirement. It was obligatory in consequence of Rule 8
(6).

In the circumstances, Mr. H. L. De Silva, PC learned counsel for the
petitioner, submitted, the objections of the respondent to the grant of
special leave to appeal ought not to be entertained by this Court.

Mr. Romesh De Silva, PC learned counsel for the respondent, submitted that the
objection of the respondent to the grant of special leave ought to be heard by
the Court, for the respondent had in fact complied with the requirements of
Rule 8. That rule, he said, requires

185

that a respondent who intends to oppose the grant of special leave to appeal
shall lodge a Caveat indicating such intention within fourteen days of the
receipt of such notice. The respondent received notice on the 13th of
September, 1998, and filed his Caveat on the 23rd of September, 1998, and
therefore, within the period of fourteen days within which he was required to
lodge his Caveat.

The fact of "receipt" referred to in Rule 8 (6) in my view ought to be
ascertained by reference to the circumstances of each case.

I find myself in agreement with Mr. H. L. De Silva's submission that the
proved delivery of a Registered document at the address of a party should
ordinarily result in such party being deemed to have received such document.
However, such an assumption is, in my view permissible only if the address was
the address of that person. The address to which the notice was sent in this
case was the former address of respondent. At the time of the filing of the
action in the District Court of Colombo and at the time of the institution of
the appeal in the Court of Appeal, the address of the respondent was 51/4,
Halpe Road, Kandana. By the time of the filing of the petition of appeal in
the Supreme Court, however, the respondent had changed his residence to 87,
St. Joseph's Street, Grandpass,  Colombo 14\. The respondent, together with
his affidavit, filed ten documents supporting his assertion that it was a
well-known fact that his address was 87, St. Joseph's Street, Grandpass,
Colombo 14\. However, even today the caption has not been amended to reflect
the fact that the respondent's address is not 51/4, Halpe Road, Kandana, but
87, St. Joseph's Street, Grandpass,  Colombo 14\. Rule 4 requires that in
every application for special leave to appeal to the Supreme Court there shall
be set out in full "the names and present addresses" of all the respondents.
(The emphasis is mine). An application for special leave to appeal to the
Supreme Court marks the commencement of an entirely new stage in a proceeding
when the mechanical repetition of vital information, such as the address of
the respondent, relating to an earlier stage of the proceeding will not
suffice. It was, in my view, incumbent on the petitioner to have furnished the
address of the respondent as at the date of the filing of the application for

186

special leave. It is not without significance that the earlier Rules of 1978
in Rule 20 merely required "the full address" of respondents.

In the matter before me, although the address furnished was not the present
address of the respondent, it was an address at which he happened to collect
mail, albeit not immediately on a daily basis.

The notice in this matter had been sent to the respondent's earlier place of
residence, which was at the time the notice was despatched occupied by his
mother-in-law and her brother, whom the respondent visited from time to time.
Hence, his mail was received and kept for him. The respondent in an affidavit
satisfactorily explains why he came to visit his former place of residence
only on the 13th of September and not earlier, and then collected mail lying
at that address. I have no hesitation in accepting the averment in the
respondent's affidavit dated the 17th of February, 1999, that he "collected
all correspondence addressed to [him] inclusive of the notice" on the 13th of
September. He filed his Caveat on the 23rd of September. The date of receipt
of the notice was the 13th of September.

I, therefore, hold that the respondent filed his Caveat within 14 days of the
receipt thereof, and therefore within the time specified by Rule 8 (6) and
should, therefore, be heard.

Learned counsel's submissions for the respondent were, therefore, heard.

**The Objection of the Respondent**

Mr. Romesh De Silva, PC., submitted that in terms of Rule 2 read with Rule 6
of the Rules of the Supreme Court, the application for special leave should be
dismissed in limine, for the petitioner had failed to annex documents to the
application for special leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, especially the
record of the original Court and/ or the Brief in the Court of Appeal, which
were necessary to verify the allegations of fact in the application which
could not be verified by reference to the judgments of the learned Judges of
the Court of Appeal in respect of which special leave was sought.

187

Mr. H. L. De Silva, PC., did not deny that the allegations of fact contained
in the application for special leave to appeal could not be verified by
reference to the judgments of the Court of Appeal in respect of which special
leave to appeal was sought but, he submitted, that if a petitioner, as the
petitioner in this case had done, annexed an affidavit in support of
allegations of fact which could not be verified by reference to the judgment
of the Court of Appeal, then other documents need not have been annexed, for
Rule 6 provides as follows : "Where any [application for special leave to
appeal to the Supreme Court] contains allegations of fact which cannot be
verified by reference to the judgment or order of the Court of Appeal in
respect of which special leave to appeal is sought, the petitioner shall annex
in support of such allegations an affidavit or [emphasis added] other relevant
document (including any relevant portion of the record of the Court of Appeal
or of the original Court or tribunal). Such affidavit may be sworn to or
affirmed by the petitioner, his instructing attorney-at-law, or his recognized
agent, or by any other person having personal knowledge of such facts. Every
affidavit by a petitioner, his instructing attorney-at-law, or his recognized
agent, shall be confined to the statement of such facts as the declarant is
able of his own knowledge and observation to testify to; provided that
statements of such declarant's belief may also be admitted, if reasonable
grounds be set forth in such affidavit." Mr. De Silva stressed the word "or"
which he submitted should be read disjunctively.

The documents submitted with the petition were the following: (1) A copy of
the Plaint; (2) A copy of the Answer; (3) a copy of the judgment of the
District Court; (4) A copy of the defendant's petition of appeal to the Court
of Appeal; (5) A copy of the judgment of the Hon. Mr. Justice Weerasekera of
the Court of Appeal; (6) A copy of the judgment of the Hon. Mr. Justice
Wigneswaran of the Court of Appeal; (7) A copy of the order made on 24 June,
1998 by Justices Weerasekera and Wigneswaran; (8) A copy of the motion and
questions of law submitted to the Court of Appeal; and (9) A copy of the order
made by Mr. Justice Ismail and Mr. Justice Weerasooriya on the 13th of July,
1998. Those documents, in my view, do not enable the Supreme Court to verify
the questions of fact canvassed in the application for special leave to appeal
to the Supreme Court. Nor is the affidavit of the petitioner helpful in that
regard. The affidavit merely states as follows:

188

"1\. I am the deponent above named and the defendant-appellant petitioner in
the above captioned application to the Supreme Court.

2\. I have perused the petition for Special Leave to Appeal to the Supreme
Court from the two judgments of the Court of Appeal delivered on 24th June,
1998, in CA Appeal No. 173/94 (F).

3\. The said petition was prepared by, my counsel on my instructions and I
declare and swear to the truth of the facts contained therein."

The Court cannot accept the matters stated in the petition to be true merely
because the petitioner believes them to be the truth; the allegations in
paragraph 12 of the petition are to be verified by reference to the facts
established by the evidence.

Admittedly, in terms of the proviso to Rule 2, if the petitioner was unable to
obtain any documents at the time of tendering her petition, she would have
been excused so doing, for the law does not expect petitioners to do what is
not possible. Cf. _ Rasheed Ali v. Mohammed_(1) per Soza, J. She might have
been "deemed" to have complied with the rule if the petitioner had set out the
circumstances in the petition and prayed for permission to tender the document
together with the requisite number of copies, as soon as she obtained the
same, and if the Court was satisfied (a) that the petitioner had exercised due
diligence attempting to obtain such documents; and (b) that the failure to
tender the same was due to circumstances beyond her control. However, in this
case the petitioner did not in her application for special leave set out
circumstances why she was unable to tender the relevant documents with such
application; nor was the permission of the Court sought and obtained to file
the documents subsequently.

What the petitioner did instead was this : on the 16th of September, 1998,
through her registered attorneys-at-law, she filed what purported to be a
Motion in the Supreme Court tendering three copies of the Brief (vols. 1 -
III) in CA Appeal No. 173/94 (F) and moving "that

189

the same be kept by the Registrar of Your Lordships Court in safe custody and

(a) submitted to Their Lordships who will hear the above Special Leave to
Appeal Application which is to be supported on the 28th September, 1998, by
Mr. H. L. De Silva, PC., on behalf of the defendant-appellant-petitioner;

(b) thereafter, submitted to Their Lordships who will hear the appeal in the
event of Special Leave to Appeal being granted."

As pointed out earlier, no explanation for the failure to tender the documents
in time was ever made and no permission of the Court was ever sought or
obtained to tender the documents after the application for special leave had
been made. In fact, the document is not addressed to His Lordship the Chief
Justice and the other Honourable Judges of the Supreme Court. It is in my
view, no more than a memorandum addressed presumably to the Registry with
regard to the safe custody of the documents and a request that such documents
be submitted to the Judges when the matter of special leave was taken up, and
if leave was granted, at the hearing. The Court may in its discretion in an
appropriate case permit the tender of documents after the making of an
application for special leave (rule 2 proviso) but this may be done upon an
application to Court with notice to the other party and with an order of Court
granting permission to do so. ( _Cf. Chelliah_ _v. Ponnambalam_ (2) per
Bandaranayake, J. with Wijetunga, J. agreeing). Where a petitioner fails to
tender a necessary document either with the application or with the leave of
Court subsequently the application is liable to be rejected. Cf. Rasheed Ali
v. Khan Mohamed Ali (supra) followed in _Caldera v. John Keells Holdings
Ltd_.(3), (1986) per Jameel, J., Siva Selliah, J. agreeing. Moreover,
documents annexed to a petition, or tendered later with the permission of the
Court, must according to Rule 2 be four in number and not three as tendered by
the petitioner. Where there has been a non-compliance with rules and there is
no acceptable explanation for non-compliance and the default has not been
cured, in general the application would be rejected. Cf. per Wijetunga, J.
citing Maxwell on the Interpretation of Statutes, 11th ed. (1962)

190

p. 367 in _Gangodagedara v. Mercantile Credit Ltd_ (4) _Leelanada v.
Mercantile Credit Ltd._ (5) (per Anandacoomaraswamy, J. with Wijetunga, J.
agreeing); _Paramanathan v. Kodituwakkuarachchi_ (6) (1988) (per Bandaranayake
J. with S. N. Silva, J. agreeing); _Brown & Co., Ltd. v. Ratnayake_(7) (per
Anandacoomaraswamy, J.); _Cf. also Ibrahim v. Nadaraja_ (8) per Amerasinghe,
J., (Dheeraratne and Gunawardana, JJ. agreeing).

Mr. H. L. de Silva, PC., referred to the judgment of  Fernando, J.
(Dheeraratne, J. agreeing) in _Kiriwanthe and another v. Navaratne and
another_ (9). After comprehensively reviewing the decisions on the subject of
the failure to comply with the Rules of the Court, Fernando, J. at p. 401
said: "I am content to hold that the requirements of Rule 46 must be complied
with, but that strict or absolute compliance is not essential; it is
sufficient if there is compliance which is "substantial" \- this being judged
in the light of the object and purpose of the Rule. It is not to be
mechanically applied, as in the case now before us; the Court should first
have determined whether the default had been satisfactorily explained, or
cured subsequently without unreasonable delay, and then have exercised a
judicial discretion either to excuse the non-compliance, or to impose a
sanction; dismissal was not the only sanction. That discretion should have
been exercised primarily by reference to the purpose of the rules and not as a
means of punishing the defaulter." (The emphasis is mine). Later, at p. 404,
Fernando, J. said : "The weight of authority thus favours the view that while
all these Rules must be complied with, the law does not require or permit an
automatic dismissal of the application or appeal of the parry in default. The
consequence of non-compliance (by reason of impossibility or for any other
reason) is a matter falling within the discretion of the Court, to be
exercised after considering the nature of the default, as well as the excuse
or explanation therefor, in the context of the object of the particular rule."
(The emphasis is mine).

In Kiriwanthe the relevant document, after it had been obtained, was (1)
tendered with the leave of Court, (2) with an acceptable explanation, and (3)
within a time the Court regarded as not justifying the dismissal of the
application. In the matter before me, however,

191

no explanation for non-compliance has been offered. Nor has the default been
cured in terms of the proviso to Rule 2, for the documents were not tendered
with an explanation for the failure to tender them with the petition and with
a prayer for permission to tender them. Nor was there a favourable decision of
the Court obtained with regard to that matter. If the non-compliance is to be
excused, what is the "sanction" to be imposed?

It was not the petitioner's case that the documents should be "deemed" to have
been tendered in time. Indeed the petitioner's submission was that the briefs
containing the evidence were unnecessary and that her affidavit was a
sufficient compliance with Rule 2 read with Rule 6. That was an erroneous
view, having regard to the words of Rule 2 read with Rule 6\. No discretion
can be allowed to a petitioner to decide what are the necessary documents to
be tendered with an application for special leave to appeal: _Rasheed Ali v.
Khan Mohamed Ali_,(10) followed in Caldera v. John Keells Holdings (supra).
The Court has a discretion as to what it may do if rules are not complied
with, as Fernando, J. observed in Kiriwanthe (supra).

Aristotle (Rhetoric, 1.1) said: "It is best, as we may observe, where the laws
are enacted upon right principles, that everything should, as far as possible,
be determined absolutely by the laws, and as little as possible left to the
discretion of judges." However, necessarily many things, especially in the
domain of procedure are left to the discretion of judges; but the maxim is
also observed in our jurisprudence, optima est lex quae minimum relinquit
arbitrio judicis, optimus judex qui minimum sibi \- that system of law is the
best which leaves least to the discretion of the judge; that judge the best
who relies least on his or her own opinion: See per wilmot, CJ. in _Collins v.
Blantern_ ,(11); per Buller, J. in _Master v. Miller_ ,(12). And although
where discretion is left to a judge, he or she is to a great extent left
unfettered in its exercise, Coke's definition (4 Institutes 41) - discretio
est discernere per legem quit sit justum - still holds good. Lord Mansfield in
_R. v._ _Wilkes_ ,(13) said: " **. . .** discretion, when applied to a Court

192

of Justice, means sound discretion guided by law. It must be governed by rule,
not by humour; it must not be arbitrary, vague and fanciful, but legal and
regular". Lord Scarman in _Duport Steels Ltd. v. Sirs_ ,(14) said: "When one
is considering the law in the hands of judges, law means the body of rules and
guidelines within which society requires its judges to administer justice.
Legal systems differ in the width of discretionary power granted to judges;
but in developed societies limits are invariably set beyond which the judges
may not go. Justice in such societies is not left to the unguided, even if
experienced,. sage sitting under the spreading oak tree." "Justice must be
done according to law": Per Maartensz, J. (Abrahams, CJ. agreeing) in  _ Alice
Kotelawala v.  W. H. Perera_ _and another_ (15). The law must be followed
"punctiliously": per Bertram, CJ. in _Rasiah v. Sittamparapiliai_ (16). The
observance of the law minimizes arbitrariness and the appearance of
arbitrariness, and also makes the law certain and predictable. These are
essential features of a good legal system.

The law regulating the way in which the Court could exercise its discretion in
favour of a petitioner who is unable to lodge a required document is set out
in the proviso to Rule 2. Ordinarily a petitioner must tender the necessary
documents with his petition. He is nevertheless "deemed" to have complied with
the rules, "if the court is satisfied that the petitioner had exercised due
diligence in attempting to obtain such **. . .** document **. . .** and that
the failure to tender the same was due to circumstances beyond his control,
but not otherwise **. . .** " (The emphasis is mine). In order to enable the
Court to be satisfied that a petitioner was "unable to obtain any **. . .**
document **. . .** as is required by the rule to be tendered with his petition
the petitioner "shall set out the circumstances in his petition, and shall
pray for permission to tender the same, together with the requisite number of
copies, as soon as he obtains the same." (The emphasis is mine).

In the matter before us, there is nothing either in the petition or any other
document stating that the petitioner was unable to tender the document with
the petition; nor is there a statement of cirumstances why the document could
not be duly tendered: There was not a word

193

of explanation for the inability to tender the documents with the petition
offered by learned counsel for the petitioner nor has permission been sought
to tender them. In the cirumstances, how could the Court satisfy itself that
the petitioner had exercised due diligence to obtain the document and that her
failure to tender the document with the petition was due to circumstances
beyond her control \- the only grounds upon which the Court being, satisfied,
the late tender of a document could in law be "deemed" to have been submitted
with the petition in accordance with Rule 2?

The petitioner was obliged by Rule 2 read with Rule 6 to submit material to
enable the Court to review the alleged erroneous conclusions of the Court of
Appeal based on the misinterpretation or misunderstanding or inadequate
consideration of the facts by the learned Judges of the Court of Appeal. In
order to be able to do so, it was necessary to verify the facts established by
the evidence. Where the Court is unable to review a judgment in respect of
which an appeal is made because of the absence of relevant material for that
purpose, the discretion of the Court should in my view be exercised by
rejecting the application for special leave to appeal: _ Mary Nona_ _v.
Fransina_ (17) and _Karunawathi v. Kusumaseeli_ (18). The rejection of the
application is not by way of a punishment but is the necessary consequence of
the failure of the petitioner to place the Court in a position, by the
submission of relevant documents, to be able to decide whether, having regard
to the evidence, the case is fit for review. Admittedly, some copies of the
relevant documents had been sent to the Registrar and were placed before the
Court but, for the reasons explained, they cannot be documents deemed to have
been admitted in compliance with the rules and, therefore they are not
documents which I can take in judicial cognizance of having regard to the
provisions of Rule 2 read with Rule 6.

The objection, in my view, is based on the breach of a rule, which, having
regard to its purpose, is of a substantial nature and not a mere technicality.
Having regard to the words of the proviso to rule 2, I am permitted by law to
deem the document to have been tendered with the petition, and therefore hold
that there was compliance with the rule in the circumstances set out in the
proviso "but not otherwise". Accordingly, other considerations, such as the
fact that the question

194

to be decided is of public or general importance, are not relevant to the
threshold question whether there is a properly constituted petition which may
be entertained. In terms of Article 128 (2), the Court would be. bound to
grant leave to appeal if it is satisfied that the question to be decided is of
public or general importance. But that is a matter to be determined at the
stage when, after a petition has been accepted, the application made in it for
leave to appeal comes up for consideration. To consider the question of public
or general importance at the stage when it has to be decided whether there is
a properly constituted petition before this court slides two stages into each
other, driving us to lose sight of the issue before the Court at this time. In
my view, to avoid an inaccurate decision from a confusion of matters for
decision, I ought to proceed step by step and not telescope the various stages
of the proceedings in the case. In any event, the rules do not say that where
a matter is of general or public importance the rules need not be observed nor
that the Court may, notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 2, have recourse to
necessary documents that have not been filed with a petition that was,
understandably, not the petitioner's case.

There remains the question of "justice" and the need to avoid technicalities.
In _Fernando v.  Sybil Fernando_(19) I had, at some length, endeavoured to
explain the importance of complying with procedural laws and in doing so
considered the observations of Bonser, CJ. in _Read v. Samsudin_ (20) and of
Abrahams, CJ. in the cases of _Velupillai v. Chairman UDC_ (21); and _Dulfa
Umma et al. v._ _ UDC Matale_(22). I confirm my earlier observations, for
there was nothing learned counsel said in the matter before me to the
contrary. However, in order to dispel any lingering apprehension in that
regard, I do wish to reiterate the assurance that judges do not blindly devote
themselves to procedures or ruthlessly sacrifice litigants to technicalities;
although litigants on the road to justice may act recklessly, or negligently
or inadvertently and do themselves harm.

Having regard to the allusive reference to civil procedure as an indispensable
vehicle for the attainment of justice, perhaps we ought to remind ourselves
that procedural law has a protective character and represents the orderly,
regular and public functioning of the legal

195

machinery and the operation of the process of the law. Procedural law is
important, for, among other reasons, it has the salutary effect of
safeguarding the rights, privileges and legitimate interests of both
plaintiffs and defendants, appellants or petitioners and respondents even-
handedly : The protective character of rules of procedure helps ensure that
one person's justice is not another's injustice. Notions of abstract justice
are alluring, but, in my view they tend to obscure the way to an accurate
decision according to law.

For the reasons stated in my judgment, I hold that the preliminary objection
of the respondent is entitled to succeed and I, therefore, reject the
application for special leave to appeal with costs.

**WIJETUNGA, J.**

I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgment of my brother
Amerasinghe, J. in respect of preliminary objections taken by the defendant-
appellant-petitioner ('petitioner') and the plaintiff respondent-respondent
('respondent') respectively. I regret very much that I am unable to agree with
him that the preliminary objection of the respondent is entitled to succeed
and that the application for special leave to appeal should therefore be
rejected.

I shall first deal with the objection of the petitioner. Learned counsel for
the petitioner submitted that in terms of Rule 8 (6), the respondent should
have entered an appearance at the registry of this Court within 14 days of the
receipt of notice and if he intended to oppose the grant of special leave to
appeal, he should have lodged a Caveat indicating such intention. As the
notice had been delivered at the address mentioned therein on 21.8.98, and as
the respondent's Caveat had been lodged only on 23.9.98, it was submitted that
there was non-compliance with Rule 8 (6), which is mandatory; and that the
objections of the respondent to the grant of special leave to appeal should
not therefore be entertained by this Court.

Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, submitted that the
respondent had in fact complied with the requirements of Rule 8, as he had
received the notice only on 13.9.98 and had filed his Caveat on 23.9.98,
within the specified period of 14 days.

196

I agree with learned counsel for the petitioner that on proof of delivery of a
registered document at the address of a party, such party is 'deemed' to have
received such document. However, if there is material which shows that a
respondent was in fact not resident at that address on the date of receipt of
such document and submits an explanation to Court which it is prepared to
accept, then the Court may exercise its discretion and regard such date of
'actual' receipt of notice as the relevant date for the purpose of compliance
with the Rule.

It is correct that Rule 4 of the present Rules requires the present addresses
of the respondents to be set out in full, whereas Rule 20 of the former Rules
of 1978 required the addresses of the respondents to be set out in full. I do
not think, however, that the present Rule meant to impose an undue burden on a
petitioner to ascertain such present address. It is inconceivable that a party
has to speculate on what the present address of an adverse party is or that he
has to 'go on a voyage of discovery' to ascertain such present address. To my
mind, the present address contemplated by Rule 4 is an address of which due
notice had been given by a respondent to the petitioner, upon changing his
former address. If it were otherwise, the petitioner would be placed in peril,
as a notice which is directed to an address other than the address in the
caption could be challenged by a respondent, on the ground that his present
address is the same as the address in the caption.

In the matter before us, the respondent had ample notice of the fact that the
petitioner intended to make an application to this Court for special leave to
appeal - vide the proceedings before the Court of Appeal on 13.7.98 (A9). In
those circumstances, it was at the least prudent for the respondent to have
notified any change of address to the petitioner. But, I think the matter goes
even further. Rule 8 (3) requires a petitioner to forthwith notify the
Registrar of any change in the particulars relating, inter alia, to the names
and addresses of parties, for the purpose of issuing notice. To enable the
petitioner to comply with this requirement, he should in turn have due notice
of any change of address on the part of the respondents.

197

While I agree with my brother that "an application for special leave to appeal
to the Supreme Court marks the commencement of an entirely new stage in a
proceeding when the mechanical repetition of vital information, such as the
address of the respondent, relating to an earlier stage of the proceeding will
not suffice", I am equally of the view that, in the absence of due intimation
by the respondent of a change of address, the petitioner has no option but to
treat the address given in the caption in the proceedings last had in
connection with the matter (viz. in the Court of Appeal in the instant case)
as the present address of the respondent.

Though the respondent has filed ten documents together with his affidavit, in
answer to the preliminary objection, seeking to support his assertion that his
present address was "well-known", it does not follow that it was even known to
the petitioner. The respondent's change of address may have been "well-known"
in the circles to which he belongs, but one cannot presume it to be so where
the adverse party is concerned.

Rule 8 (5) indicates the duty cast on a petitioner in this regard. It provides
that "the petitioner shall, not less than two weeks and not more than three
weeks after the application has been lodged, attend at the Registry in order
to verify that such notice has not been returned undelivered. If such notice
has been returned undelivered. the petitioner shall furnish the correct
address for the service of notice on such respondent. The Registrar shall
thereupon despatch a fresh notice by registered post **. . .** ". The notice
in this case had admittedly not been returned undelivered. I see no further
duty imposed on the petitioner by the rules.

Therefore, I do not think that the petitioner can be faulted for not having
despatched the notices to an address which is now stated to be the "present
address" of the respondent.

On the other hand, the respondent had, on his own admission, not totally
severed connections with his earlier place of residence,

198

which at the relevant time was occupied by his mother-in-law and her brother,
whom he visited from time to time. He collected his mail on such occasions.
But, that arrangement has been proved to be quite inadequate.

By his affidavit dated 17.2.99, the respondent has sought to set out the
circumstances in which he came to lodge his Caveat on 23.9.98. He states that
he "collected all correspondence addressed to [him], inclusive of the notice"
on 13.9.98. Solely on the basis of the averments in the respondent's affidavit
aforementioned, I am prepared to accept his position that the notice was in
fact received by him only on 13.9.98. I would, however, reiterate that for the
purpose of Rule 8 (6), the date of receipt of such notice is ordinarily the
date on which the notice is delivered at the address of the respondent and he
is deemed to have received such notice on that date. But, in all the
circumstances of this case, I would agree with the liberal view taken by my
brother. Amerasinghe, J. in regard to the Caveat being filed "within time".

That brings me to the preliminary objection raised by the respondent. That
objection relates to non-compliance by the petitioner with Rule 2 read with
Rule 6 of the present Rules. Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that
the application for special leave should be dismissed in limine as the
petitioner had failed to annex the documents which were necessary to verify
the allegations of fact in the application, which could not be verified by
reference to the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

Learned counsel for the petitioner, on the other hand, submitted that as the
petitioner has annexed an affidavit in support of the allegations of fact
which could not be verified by reference to the judgment of the Court of
Appeal, other documents need not be annexed. As Rule 6 provides that the
petitioner shall annex in support of such allegations an affidavit or other
relevant document, he submitted that the word "or" should be read
disjunctively.

199

Admittedly, the petitioner has filed an affidavit, the contents of which have
been reproduced in the judgment of my brother Amerasinghe, J. The other
documents submitted with the petition too have been referred to in his
judgment. He, however, comments that "those documents, in [his] view, do not
enable the Supreme Court to verify the questions of fact canvassed in the
application for special leave to appeal to the Supreme Court. Nor is the
affidavit of the petitioner helpful in that regard". He further observes that
"the Court cannot accept the matters stated in the petition to be true merely
because the petitioner believes them to be the truth **. . .** ".

While I agree that the truth of the matters stated in the petition cannot be
accepted by the Court merely on the basis of the petitioner's belief, I wish
to point out that the Rules provide a further safeguard in Rule 8 (7), which
is as follows :  
  
"Not less than twenty-one days before the date specified in the aforesaid
notice as the date of hearing of the application, any respondent may lodge
(with notice to the petitioner and other respondents) a statement, together
with three additional copies thereof, setting out his objections to the grant
of special leave to appeal or controverting the allegations of fact set out in
the petition; where such statement contains allegations of fact which cannot
be verified by reference to the judgment or order of the Court of Appeal in
respect of which special leave to appeal is sought, affidavits and other
relevant documents shall be annexed in support, and the provisions of Rule 6
shall apply mutatis mutandis."

Thus, a respondent who seeks to controvert the allegations of fact set out in
the petition can do so before the hearing, and even submit other relevant
documents in support, where necessary. Read with section 6, 'other relevant
documents' include any relevant portion of the record of the Court of Appeal
or of the original court.

The Court, at the stage of hearing the application for special leave to
appeal, would therefore be in possession not only of the petitioner's

200

version in regard to the facts, but also of such other material as would have
been furnished by the respondent.

In regard to the purpose of the affidavit contemplated by Rule 6 of the
present Rules, it is useful to look at the corresponding Rule 6 of the Rules
of 1978, pertaining to applications for special leave to appeal, as such
comparison makes the purpose clear.

That Rule states that "an application for special leave to appeal containing
allegations of fact which cannot be verified by reference to any certificate
or duly authenticated statement of the Court from the judgment of which the
application for leave to appeal is preferred shall be supported by affidavit.
Where the applicant prosecutes his application in person, the said affidavit
shall be sworn by the applicant himself and shall state that, to the best of
the deponent's knowledge, information and belief, the allegations contained in
the application are true. Where the applicant is represented by an agent the
said affidavit is sworn by such agent, it shall, besides stating that, to the
best of the deponent's knowledge, information and belief, the allegations
contained in the application are true, show how the deponent obtained his
instructions and the information enabling him to present the application".

The purpose of the affidavit required by Rule 6, in my view, is to ensure that
the petitioner deposes to the truth of the facts contained in the petition for
special leave. That objective could be achieved either by repeating every
averment in the petition for special leave to appeal as an averment in the
affidavit, or, as in this case, by making a blanket declaration of the truth
of the facts set out in the petition.

As rightly observed by Amerasinghe, J. the petitioner has not set out in her
application for special leave "circumstances why she was unable to tender the
relevant documents with such application; nor was the permission of the Court
sought and obtained to file the documents subsequently". Instead, the
petitioner has tendered to Court on 16.9.98 three certified copies of the
Brief (volumes I to III)

201

in the Court of Appeal for submission to the Judges who would hear the special
leave to appeal application and in the event of special leave to appeal being
granted, to the Judges who would hear the appeal. This procedure is not in
compliance with the proviso to Rule 2.

The anxiety of the petitioner that the Registrar of this Court would keep
these documents in safe custody is, however, understandable, as the Cash
Receipts marked Y1 and Y2 show that the said documents cost the petitioner
over Rs. 77,000.

The authorities referred to by Amerasinghe, J. for the proposition that "where
there has been a non-compliance with rules and there is no acceptable
explanation for non-compliance and the default has not been cured, in general,
the application would be rejected" indicate the attitude of the Court of
Appeal at that time to the question of non-compliance. Much water has flowed
under the bridges since then.

The decision of Amerasinghe, J. in Ibrahim v. Nadarajah (supra), referred to
by him, was in respect of a failure to comply with the requirements of Rules 4
and 28 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1978, where he held that "it has always,
therefore, been the law that it is necessary for the proper constitution of an
appeal that all parties who may be adversely affected by the result of the
appeal should be made parties and, unless they are, the petition of appeal
should be rejected". That decision cannot be of much assistance in regard to
the matter before us.

The case of Kiriwanthe and another v. Navaratne and another, (supra) dealt
comprehensively with the decisions pertaining to failure to comply with the
Rules of this Court. My brother has quoted certain passages from that judgment
which indicate that, though the Rules must be complied with, the Court does
not favour an automatic dismissal of an application or appeal of a party in
default, but should exercise its discretion, inter alia, in the light of the
object and purpose of the particular Rule. Said Fernando, J. in the
penultimate paragraph

202

of that judgment : "Even if non-compliance had not been explained, the
discretion of the Court to make an order of dismissal should have been
exercised only after considering the gravity of default in relation to the
issue arising in the case".

In the same case, Kulatunga, J. said in a separate judgment, inter alia that
"in exercising its discretion the Court will bear in mind the need to keep the
channel of procedure open for justice to flow freely and smoothly and the need
to maintain the discipline of the law. At the same time the Court will not
permit mere technicalities to stand in the way of the Court doing justice."

Kiriwanthe's case, to my mind, is a watershed in judicial thinking in regard
to the question of non-compliance with the Rules of the Supreme Court.

This trend is evident even in certain other decisions of the Court. In _All
Ceylon Match Workers' Union v. Jauffer Hassan and others_ (23) where a
preliminary objection was taken that as the petitioner had not filed any
written submissions, thereby failing to comply with Rule 35 (b) of the Supreme
Court Rules, 1978, Amerasinghe, J. upheld that objection and dismissed the
appeal with costs. Again, in _Jayasuriya v. Sri Lanka State Plantations
Corporation_ (24) (decided on 30.5.91), Amerasinghe, J. once again held that
the respondent's delay to file the written submissions in compliance with Rule
35 of the Rules of the Supreme Court was inexcusable and that he could not be
heard.

But, in _Piyadasa and others v. Land Reform Commission_ (25) where a
preliminary objection was taken by learned counsel for the petitioners that
the respondents had filed their written submissions 197 days after the date on
which they were required by Rule 30 (7) to be filed, and it was contended that
the respondents' belated submissions should not be accepted and that the
respondents should not be heard; even though there was no explanation offered
regarding the delay, Amerasinghe, J. overruled the preliminary objection
stating that `in my view Rule 30 is meant to assist the Court in its work and
not to obstruct

203

the discovery of the truth. There were numerous documents that had to be
considered; and, in our view, we needed the assistance of learned counsel for
the petitioner as well as the respondents, including their written
submissions, to properly evaluate the information that we had before us. It
was, therefore, decided that the preliminary objection should be overruled".

In dealing with the procedure applicable to applications for special leave to
appeal to the Supreme Court, we are here concerned particularly with the
requirements of the Rules at the stage when the Court decides whether or not
such leave should be granted.

In this context, one must not lose sight of the salutary provisions of Rule 13
(2) of the present Rules which state that "the Supreme Court may at any time
after an application for special leave to appeal is lodged in the Registry, or
after special leave to appeal is granted, direct the Registrar of the Court of
Appeal to transmit to the Supreme Court the entire record of the proceedings
(including the journal entries, pleadings, evidence, submissions, judgments
and orders, and the documents produced in the Court of Appeal and in the
original court or tribunal) and the Judges briefs, and may give such other
directions as to the Court may seem expedient, and the Registrar shall
forthwith comply with all such directions".

This Court has, on numerous occasions, both before and after special leave to
appeal was granted, given directions in terms of this Rule to the Registrar of
the Court of Appeal, with a view to making a just and fair determination of
the application before it.

Let us now pause to consider the position in regard to the present application
at the stage when it was listed for support: The Court had before it the
following documents which were annexed to the petition for special leave to
appeal:

204

1\. A true copy of the plaint marked A1.

2\. A true copy of the answer marked A2.

3\. A true copy of the District Court judgment marked A3.

4\. A true copy of the defendant's petition of appeal to the Court of Appeal
marked A4.

5\. A certified copy of the judgment or Justice Weerasekera marked A5.

6\. A certified copy of the judgment of Justice Wigneswaran marked A6.

7\. A certified copy of the order made by Justices Weerasekera and Wigneswaran
on 24.6.98 marked A7.

8\. A true copy of the motion and substantial questions of law submitted to
the Court of Appeal marked A8, and

9\. A certified copy of the order made by Justices Ismail and Weerasuriya on
13.7.98 marked A9.

In addition, on 16.9.98 the petitioner had tendered to this Court three
certified copies of the entire brief in the Court of Appeal, in three volumes
containing 3,030 pages.

Thus, at the stage when the matter. came up for support, the Court had all the
necessary material for the due consideration of the application for special
leave to appeal.

The case was mentioned before a Bench of two Judges on 28.9.98, counsel for
the petitioner being present. Order was then made that the matter be supported
on 4.12.98. It could not be supported on

205

4.12.98 as one of the Judges of that Bench had written one of the two
judgments in the Court of Appeal. It was thereafter fixed for support on
12.2.99 when, on an objection being taken regarding noncompliance, the Court
directed counsel for the respondent to formulate the objection in writing and
make such objection available to the petitioner within one week from that
date.

As an objection had already been taken by the petitioner on 25.9.98 that the
proxy and Caveat of the respondent had been filed only on 23.3.98 and was
therefore out of time, the Court fixed 25.3.99 as the date for consideration
of the objections of the petitioner as well as of the respondent.

Even assuming, though not agreeing, that the affidavit filed by the petitioner
under Rule 6 was inadequate and that certified copies of the record of the
Court of Appeal should have been submitted with the original application, the
only lapse then on the part of the petitioner would be that she did not obtain
the permission of the Court to tender the same, under the proviso to Rule 2,
and that she tendered only 3 copies to Court. Having regard to the purpose of
the Rules pertaining to special leave to appeal, it appears that non-
compliance of this nature would not necessarily deprive a party of the
opportunity of being heard on the merits at the threshold stage, unless there
is some compelling reason to do so. As Fernando, J. said in Kiriwanthe's case
(supra), "even if non-compliance had not been explained, the discretion of
Court to make an order of dismissal should be exercised only after considering
the gravity of default in relation to the issues arising in the case".

In the instant case, by the document A, 8 tendered to the Court of Appeal on
6.7.98, eight substantial questions of law were submitted to Court for its
consideration. The eighth question, in subparagraphs (a) to (z), dealt with
alleged "errors of fact which are unsupported by evidence and/or are
inconsistent with the evidence and/or are unreasonable".

206

There was a difference of opinion between the two Judges who heard the appeal
in the Court of Appeal in regard to the quantum of damages. While one Judge
affirmed the order of the District Court awarding a sum of Rs. 5 million, the
other Judge awarded only Rs. 250,000 as damages, on the basis of the medical
expenses incurred by the respondent in respect of his child, whose death was
the subject matter of this action.

Furthermore, this is the first case of its kind in our Courts where a
professional of standing was sued for damages on the ground of medical
negligence.

Viewed in the light of the seriousness of the issues arising in the case, I
think that even if there was a lapse on the part of the petitioner, it should
not stand in the way of the application for special leave to appeal being
considered by this Court.

Over a century ago, Bonser, CJ. in Read v. Samsudin (supra) quoted with
approval the words of Sir George Jessel, Master of the Rolls, (whom he
referred to as "one of the greatest Judges that ever adorned the bench") that
"it is not the duty of a Judge to throw technical difficulties in the way of
the administration of justice, but where he sees that he is prevented from
receiving material or available evidence merely by reason of a technical
objection, he ought to remove the technical objection out of the way, upon
proper terms as to costs and otherwise".

"Those observations of the late Master of the Rolls", said the Chief Justice,
"ought to be borne in mind by every Judge in this Colony".

Abrahams, CJ. in Dulfa Umma et al v. Urban District Council, Matale, (supra)
expressed himself even more emphatically thus:

"It happens, perhaps too frequently in this Court, that the language which the
Legislature has chosen to employ in enacting certain rules of procedure
compels the Court in applying the principles of construction to hold that non-
compliance with a rule

207

is fatal to an action. But, I see no such compulsion on me in this case. Civil
Procedure should be a vehicle which conveys a litigant safely, expeditiously
and cheaply along the road which leads to justice, and not a juggernaut car
which throws him out and then runs over him leaving him maimed and broken on
the road."

Reminding myself of the oft quoted words of Abrahams, CJ. in Velupillai v. The
Chairman, Urban District Council (supra) that "this is a Court of Justice, it
is not an academy of Law", suffice it to say that in the application of Rules
which regulate the procedure before the Court, every endeavour should be made
to ensure that 'justice' is not sacrificed at the altar of procedure, but is
administered generally in harmony with such Rules.

For the reasons aforesaid, I am of the view that this is an appropriate case
for both preliminary objections to be overruled and for the application for
special leave to appeal to be set down for hearing in due course.

I, therefore, make order accordingly. There will be no costs.

**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

I have had the advantage of reading the judgments, in draft, of Amerasinghe,
J. and Wijetunga, J., in respect of the preliminary objections taken by the
defendant-appellant-petitioner and the plaintiff-respondent-respondent,
respectively. I am unable to agree with the reasoning and conclusion of
Amerasinghe, J., but am in entire agreement with the reasoning, findings,
conclusion and order of Wijetunga, J.

_Preliminary objections overruled; Application for Special Leave set down for
hearing._

208

21st May, 1999

We have, on reading the judgment of Amerasinghe, J. on the preliminary
objections, delivered on 4.5.99, observed several paragraphs, (which are
reproduced below), which did not form part of his judgment in draft, sent to
us for our consideration. It was on the basis of his original draft that
Wijetunga, J. responded by way of a dissent, with which Bandaranayake, J.
agreed. The judgment of Wijetunga, J. as well as the decision of
Bandaranayake, J. were delivered by Amerasinghe, J., together with his
judgment in the present form.

We find it necessary to have this material on record, in order that the
judgment of Wijetunga, J. may be read in its proper context.

The Registrar is, therefore, directed to have the same annexed to the judgment
of Wijetunga, J. as an addendum.

He is further directed to submit a copy to Hon. Amerasinghe, J. for his
information.

**A. S. WI** **JET** **UNGA, J.**

**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

The paragraphs are as follows :

"Nor has the default been cured in terms of the proviso to Rule 2, for the
documents were not tendered with an explanation for the failure to tender them
with the petition and with a prayer for permission to tender them. Nor was
there a favourable decision of the Court obtained with regard to that matter.
If the non-compliance is to be excused, what is the 'sanction' to be imposed?

It was not the petitioner's case that the documents should be "deemed" to have
been tendered in time. (at page 8).

209

"Aristotle (Rhetoric 1.1) said: "it is best, as we may observe, where the laws
are enacted upon right principles, that everything should, as far as possible,
be determined absolutely by the laws, and as little as possible left to the
discretion of Judges." However, necessarily many things, especially in the
domain of procedure are left to the discretion of Judges; but the maxim is
also observed in our jurisprudence, optima est lex quae minimum relinquit
arbitrio judicis, optimus judex qui minimum sibi - that system of law is the
best which leaves least to the discretion of the Judge; that Judge the best
who relies least on his or her own opinion: . See per Wilmot, CJ. in Collins
v. Blantem, 2 Wils. K.B. 341; per Buller, J. in Master v. Miller, 4 TR 320 at
344. And although where discretion is left to a Judge, he or she is to a great
extent left unfettered in its exercise, Coke's definition (4 Institutes 41) -
discretio est discemere per legem quid sit justum - still holds good. Lord
Mansfield in R v. Wilkes, 4 Burr. 2527 at 2539 said' . . .discretion, when
applied to a Court of Justice, means sound discretion guided by law. It must
be governed by rule, not by humour; it must not be arbitrary, vague and
fanciful, but legal and regular." Lord Scarman in Duport Steels Ltd. v. Sirs,
1980 ICR 161 at 189 said : "When one is considering the law in the hands of
Judges, law means the body of rules and guidelines within which society
requires its Judges to administer justice. Legal systems differ in the width
of discretionary power granted to judges; but in developed societies limits
are invariably set beyond which the Judges may not go. Justice in such
societies is not left to the unguided, even if experienced, sage sitting under
the spreading oak tree." Justice must be done according to law" : Per
Maartensz, J. (Abrahams CJ. agreeing) in Alice Kotelawala v. W. H. Perera and
another, (1937) 1 CU 58; VIll CLW 61. The law must be followed "punctiliously'
: per Bertram, CJ. in Rasiah v. Sittamparapillai, (1920) VIII CWR 116. The
observance of the law minimizes arbitrariness and the appearance of
arbitrariness, and also makes the law certain and predictable. These are
essential features of a good legal system.

210

Ordinarily a petitioner must tender the necessary documents with his petition.
He is nevertheless "deemed" to have complied with the rules, "if the Court is
satisfied that the petitioner had exercised due diligence in attempting to
obtain such **. . .** document **. . .** and that the failure to tender the
same was due to circumstances beyond his control, but not otherwise **. . .**
" (at page 9). (The emphasis is mine).

In order to enable the Court to be satisfied that a petitioner was "unable to
obtain any **. . .** document **. . .** as is required by the rule to be
tendered with his petition "the petitioner shall set out the circumstances in
his petition, and shall pray for permission to tender the same, together with
the requisite number of copies, as soon as he obtains the same." (The emphasis
is mine).

In the matter before us, there is nothing either in the petition or any other
document stating that the petitioner was unable to tender the document with
the petition; nor is there a statement of circumstances why the document could
not be duly tendered: There was not a word of explanation for the inability to
tender the documents with the petition offered by learned counsel for the
petitioner nor has permission been sought to tender them. In the
circumstances, how could the Court satisfy itself that the petitioner had
exercised due diligence to obtain the document and that her failure to tender
the document with the petition was due to circumstances beyond her control -
the only grounds upon which the Court being 'satisfied', the late tender of a
document could in law be "deemed" to have been submitted with the petition in
accordance with Rule 2?

Admittedly, some copies of the relevant documents had been sent to the
Registrar and. were placed before the Court but, for the reasons explained,
they cannot be documents deemed to have been admitted in compliance with the
rules and, therefore they are not documents which I can take in judicial

211

cognizance of having regard to the provisions of Rule 2 read with Rule 6.

The objection, in my view, is based on the breach of a rule, which, having
regard to its purpose, is of a substantial nature and not a mere technicality.
Having regard to the words of the proviso to Rule 2, I am permitted by law to
deem the document to have been tendered with the petition, and therefore hold
that there was compliance with the rule in the circumstances set out in the
proviso "but not otherwise". Accordingly, other considerations, such as the
fact that the question to (at page 10) be decided is of public or general
importance, are not relevant to the threshold question whether there is a
properly constituted petition which may be entertained. In terms of Article
128 (2), the Court would be bound to grant leave to appeal if it is satisfied
that the question to be decided is of public or general importance. But, that
is a matter to be determined at the stage when, after a petition has been
accepted, the application made in it for leave to appeal comes up for
consideration. To consider the question of public or general importance at the
stage when it has to be decided whether there is a properly constituted
petition before this Court slides two stages into each other, driving us to
lose sight of the issues before the Court at this time. In my view, to avoid
an inaccurate decision resulting from a confusion of matters for decision, I
ought to proceed step by step and not telescope the various stages of the
proceedings in the case. In any event, the rules do not say that where a
matter is of general or public importance the rules need not be observed nor
that the Court may, notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 2, have recourse to
necessary documents that have not been filed with a petition that was,
understandably, not the petitioner's case.

There remains the question of "justice" and the need to avoid technicalities.
in Fernando v. Sybil Fernando, (1997) 3 SLR 1.

212

I had, at some length, endeavoured to explain the importance of complying with
procedural laws and in doing so considered the observations of Bonser, CJ. in
Read v. Samsudin, (1895) 1 NLR 292 at 294; and of Abrahams, CJ. in the cases
of Velupillai v. Chairman UDC (1936) 39 NLR 464 at 465; and Dulfa Umma et al.
v. DDC Matale. (1939) 40 NLR 474 at 478. I confirm my earlier observations,
for there was nothing learned counsel said in the matter before me to the
contrary. However, in order to dispel any lingering apprehension in that
regard, I do wish to reiterate the assurance that Judges do not blindly devote
themselves to procedures or ruthlessly sacrifice litigants to technicalities;
although litigants on the road to justice may act recklessly, or neligently or
inadvertently and do themselves harm.

Having regard to the allusive reference to civil procedure as an indispensable
vehicle for the attainment of justice, perhaps we ought to remind ourselves
that procedural law has a protective character and represents the orderly,
regular and public functioning of the legal machinery and the operation of the
due process of the law. Procedural law is important, for, among other reasons,
it has the salutary effect of safeguarding the rights, privileges and
legitimate interests of both plaintiffs and defendants, appellants or
petitioners and respondents even-handedly: The protective character of rules
of procedure helps to ensure that one person's justice is not another's
injustice. Notions of abstract justice are alluring, but, in my view they tend
to obscure the way to an accurate decision according to law.' (at page 11).

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/6.html_  

