##  Ranjit v. Kusumawathie and Others - SLR - 232, Vol 3 of 1998 [1998] LKSC
6; (1998) 3 Sri LR 232 (20 August 1998)

**232**

**RANJIT  
v.  
KUSUMAWATHIE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT

DHEERARATNE, J.,

WIJETUNGA, J. AND

GUNAWARDANA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 154/97

CA APPEAL NO. 649/86 (F)

D.C. NEGOMBO NO. 1980 P

JUNE 24TH 1998

_Appeal - S. 754 of the Civil Procedure Code - Meaning of judgment for
purposes of appeal - Partition Law, No. 21 of 1977 - Order made by a District
Court on an application made under S. 48 (4) (a) (iv) of the Law - Appeal
procedure._

Where the District Court rejected an application made by a defendant in terms
of S. 48 (4) (a) (iv) of the Partition Law, No. 21 of 1979.

**Held:**

The Order of the District Court is not a judgment within the meaning of
sections 754 (1) and 754 (5) of the Civil Procedure Code for the purpose of an
appeal. It is an order within the meaning of S. 754 (2) of the Code from which
an appeal may be made with the leave of the Court of Appeal first had and
obtained.

**233**

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Subramanium Chetty v. Soysa (1923) 25 NLR 344._

_2\. Palaniappa Chetty v. Mercantile Bank of India et. al (1942) 43 NLR 352._

_3\. Settlement Officer v. Vander Pooten (1942) 43 NLR 436._

_4\. Fernando v. Chittambaram Chettiar (1948) 49 NLR 217._

_5\. Usoof v. Madarakaj Chettiar (1957) 58 NLR 436._

_6\. Usoof v. The National Bank of India Ltd. (1958) 60 NLR 381._

_7\. Arlis Appuhamy et. al. v. Simon (1947) 48 NLR 298._

_8\. Marikar v. Dharmapala Unanse (1934) 36 NLR 201._

_9\. Rasheed Ali v. Mohamed Ali and Others (1981) (1) NLR 262._

_10\. Siriwardene v. Air Lanka Ltd. (1984) (1) SLLR 286._

_11\. White v. Brunton (1984) 2 All ER 606._

_12\. Shubrook v. Tufnell (1882) 9 QBD 621; (1881-8) All ER 180._

_13\. Salaman v. Warner and others (1891) 1 QB 734._

_14\. Bozson v. Atrincham Urban District Council (1903) 1 KB 547._

_15\. Salter Rex & Co. v. Gosh (1971) 2 All ER 865 and 866._

_16\. Standard Discount Co. v. La Grange 1877 3 CPD 67._

_17\. Hunt v. Allied Bakeries Ltd. 1956 3 Aller 513 (1956) 1WLR 1326._

_18\. Anglo Auto Finance (Commercial) Ltd. v. Robert Dick - unreported._

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_Anil Silva_ for 4th defendant-appellant.

_S. F. A. Cooray with C. Liyanage_ for plaintiff-respondent.

Cur. adv. vult.

August 20, 1998

**DHEERARATNE, J.**

In this partition action the original 4th defendant filed his statement of
claim on 14.9.1972. On the day of trial namely 27.9.1982, all parties except
the plaintiff, were absent. Evidence was led for the plaintiff only and the
judgment and the interlocutory decree were entered accordingly. On 4.10.1983,
the original 4th defendant applied to the trial court, in terms of subsection
48 (4) (a) (iv) of the Partition Law, for special leave to establish his
right, interest and title to the corpus, seeking to explain his failure to
appear at the trial.

The 4th defendant died on 5.11.1983 and on 13.4.1984 and 4A defendant (the
appellant) was substituted in his place. The application for special leave was
rejected by the District Court by its order made

**234**

on 6.3.1986. The appellant then preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal
against that order, in terms of subsection 754 (1) of the Civil Procedure
Code, as if that order made by the District Court was a judgment. The Court of
Appeal rejected the appeal on the basis that what was appealed from was an
order within the meaning of subsection 754 (2) of the CPC and that therefore
an appeal could lie only with leave of the Court of Appeal first had and
obtained. This appeal relates to that rejection.

The procedural law relating to appeals in partition actions

In terms of section 67 of the Partition Law, No. 21 of 1977, an appeal lies to
the Court of Appeal against any judgment, decree, or order, made or entered in
a partition action; and all provisions of the CPC are made applicable to any
such appeal as though a judgment, decree, or order, made or entered in any
action as defined for the purposes of the CPC. Thus section 67 of the
Partition Law attracts the provisions of section 754 of the CPC.

Section 754 reads:

(1) Any person who shall be dissatisfied with any judgment, pronounced by any
original court in any civil action, proceeding or matter to which he is a
party may prefer an appeal to the Court of Appeal against such judgment for
any error in fact or in law.

(2) Any person who shall be dissatisfied with any order made by any original
court in the course of any civil action, proceeding or matter to which he is,
or seeks to be a party, may prefer an appeal to the Court of Appeal against
such order for the correction of any error in fact or law, with the leave of
the Court of Appeal first had and obtained.

(subsections (3) and (4) omitted)

(5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Ordinance, for the
purposes of this chapter-

235

Judgment means any judgment or order having the effect of a final judgment
made by any civil court; and

Order means the final expression of any decision in any civil action
proceeding or matter, which is not a judgment.

For the sake of completeness, though not strictly relevant, I may mention here
that since the Partition (Amendment) Act No. 17 of 1997 (certified on 12th
August, 1997) came into operation, an appeal by a person dissatisfied with an
order to enter final decree after summary inquiry by court (a) confirming with
or without modification the scheme of partition; or (b) ordering the sale of
any lot which the commissioner has reported to court that the extent of which
is less than the minimum extent required by written law relating to the
subdivision of land for development purposes; and an appeal by a person
dissatisfied by an order made by court in relation to confirming of a sale
after inquiry, have to be filed with leave of the Court of Appeal first had
and obtained. See new sections 36A and 45A. However, the provisions of the
former section 67 regarding appeals [now amended to read 67 (1)] stand
substantially the same, subject to the provisions of new sections 36A and 45A
(referred to above), and subsection 67 (2) (requiring court to retain
duplicate of plan and report in the event of an appeal) and subsection 67 (3)
(empowering court to make interim orders to prevent waste or damage to the
corpus pending appeal). These amendments brought about by the 1997 (Amendment)
Act have no bearing on any order made under subsection 48 (4), except that, an
application under subsection 48 (4) (a) has now to be made, on or before the
date fixed for consideration of the scheme of partition under section 35; or
at any time not later than 30 days after the return of the person responsible
for the sale under section 42, is received by court.

Learned counsel for the appellant contends that the order made by the learned
trial judge rejecting the 4th defendant's application for special leave under
subsection 48 (4) (a) is a judgment within the meaning of subsection 754 (1)
of the CPC, in as much as the 4th defendant's claim is concerned, that is
finally disposed of.

236

The test to determine a final judgment or order or an order within the meaning
of subsection 754 (5) of the CPC.

The determination whether an order (if may use that word generically) in a
civil proceeding, is a judgment or an order having the effect of a final
judgment; or, an order not having the effect of a final judgment, has not been
an easy task for courts. This problem has cropped up principally in the
consideration by courts of four distinct legislative provisions. The first of
those is the schedule to the repealed Appeals (Privy Council) Ordinance No. 31
of 1909, wherein the term final judgment appears. See eg the cases of,
Subramanium Cherry v. Soysa(1); Palaniappa Chetty v. Mercantile Bank of India
et. al(2) ; Settlement Officer v. Wander Pooten(3) Fernando v. Chittambaram
Chettiar (4); Usoof v. Nadarajah Chettiar(5); and Usoof v. The National Bank
of India Ltd(6); The second, is section 36 of the repealed Courts Ordinance,
wherein the term final judgment or any order having the effect of a final
judgment in relation to the Court of Requests, appears. See eg. the cases of,
Arlis Appuhamy et al. v. Simon(7); and Marikar v. Dharmapala Unanse(8); The
third is Article 128 (1) of the Constitution wherein the term final order
appears. See eg the case of Rasheed Ali v. Mohamed Ali and others(9); The
fourth, is section 754 (5) of the CPC wherein mutually exclusive terms
judgment and order appear. See eg Siriwardene v. Air Ceylon Ltd(10); In most
of those instances judicial interpretations in the UK, where the terms final
order and interlocutory order were considered, had been referred to for
guidance.

There have been two virtually alternating tests adopted by different judges
from time to time in the UK to determine what final orders and interlocutory
orders were. In White v. Brunton(11) Sir John Donaldson MR labelled the two
tests as the order approach and the application approach. The order approach
was adopted in Shubrook v. Tufnell (12), where Jessel, MR and Lindely, LJ.
held that ah order is final if it finally determines the matter in litigation.
Thus the issue of final and interlocutory, depended on the nature of the order
made.

237

The application approach was adopted in Salaman v. Warner & others a , in
which the Court of Appeal consisting of Lord Esher, MR, Fry and Lopes, LJJ.
held that the final order is one made on such application or proceeding that,
for whichever side the order was given, it will, if it stands, finally
determine the matter in litigation. Thus the issue of final or interlocutory
depended on the nature of the application or proceedings giving rise to the
order and not the order itself.

In Bozson v. Altrincham Urban District Council(14) the Court of Appeal
consisting of Earl of Halsbury, Lord Alverstone, CJ. and Jeune P. reverted to
the order approach. I may mention here that Sharvananda, J. (as he then was)
followed Bozson (supra) in Siriwardene v. Air Ceylon (supra). In Salter Rex &
Co. v. Gosh(15) Lord Denning, MR said;

There is a note in the Supreme Court Practice 1970 under RSC Ord 59, R4, from
which it appears that different tests have been stated from time to time as to
what is final and what is interlocutory. In Standard Discount Co. v. La
Grange(16) and Salaman v. Warner (supra) Lord Esher, MR said that the test was
the nature of the application to the court and not to the nature of the order
which the court eventually made. But in Bozson v. Altrincham Urban District
Council (supra) the court said that the test was the nature of the order as
made. Lord Alverstone, CJ. said the test is; at 548, 'Does the judgment or
order, as made, finally dispose of the rights of the parties?' Lord
Alverstone, CJ. was right in logic but Lord Esher MR was right in experience.
Lord Esher, MR's test has always been applied in practice. For instance, an
appeal from a judgment under RSC Ord 14 (even apart from the new rule) has
always been regarded as interlocutory and notice of appeal has to be lodged
within 14 days. An appeal from an order striking out an action as being
frivolous or vexatious, or as disclosing no reasonable cause of action, or
dismissing it for want of prosecution \- every such order is regarded as
interlocutory; see Hunt v. Allied Bakeries Ltd(17) So I would apply Lord Esher
MR's test to an order refusing a new trial. I look to the application for a
new trial not to the order made. If the application for a new trial were
granted,

238

it would clearly be interlocutory. So equally when it is refused, it is
interlocutory. It was so held in an unreported case, Anglo-Auto Finance
(Commercial) Ltd. v. Robert Dick(18) (4th December, 1967), and we should
follow it today.

The question of 'final' and 'interlocutory' is so uncertain that only thing
for practitioners to do is to look up the practice books and what has been
decided on the point. Most orders are now been the subject of decision. If a
new case should arise, we must do the best we can with it. There is no other
way.

Lord Esher's test and the nature of the application of the 4th defendant
leading to the order appealed from.

A party to a partition action making an application in terms of subsection 48
(4) (a) (iv) in order to establish his right, title or interest, has two
hurdles to surmount. First he has to satisfy court, in terms of subsection (c)
that (i) having filed his statement of claim and registered his address, he
failed to appear at the trial owing to accident, misfortune or other
unavoidable cause, and (ii) that he had a prima facie right, title or interest
in the corpus, and (iii) that such right, title or interest has been
extinguished or such party has been otherwise prejudicially affected by the
interlocutory decree. Then only the court will grant special leave. After
granting special leave, in terms of subsection (d), the court will settle in
the form of issues the questions of fact and law arising from the pleadings
relevant to the claim and then appoint a day for trial and determination of
the issues. The second hurdle the party has to surmount is the determination
of those issues by court after trial, in terms of subsection (e).

The order appealed from is an order made against the appellant at the first
hurdle. Can one say that the order made on the application of the 4th
defendant is one such that whichever way the order was given, it would have
finally determined the litigation? Far from that, even if the order was given
in favour of the appellant, he has to face the second hurdle, namely the trial
to vindicate his claim. In the words of Lord Esher in Salaman's case {supra)
at 735:

239

The question must depend on what would be the result of the decision of the
Divisional Court, assuming it to be given in favour of either of the parties.
If their decision, whichever way it is given, will if it stands, finally
dispose of the matter in dispute, I think for the purposes of these rules it
is final. On the other hand, if their decision, if given in one way, will
finally dispose of the matter in dispute, but if given in the other, will
allow the action to go on, then I think it is not final, but interlocutory.

For the above reasons I hold that the order appealed from is not a judgment
within the meaning of subsections 754 (1) and 754 (5) of the CPC. The appeal
is dismissed but in all the circumstances we make no order as to costs.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNAWARDANA, J.** \- I agree.

Appeal dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/6.html_  

