##  Jiffry v. Esufali - SLR - 41, Vol 2 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 61; (1998) 2 Sri
LR 41 (17 March 1998)

**41**

**JIFFRY  
v.  
ESUFALI**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 140/97  
CA APPEAL NO. 95/94(F)  
DC MT. LAVINIA NO. 2516/RE  
JANUARY 13TH, FEBRUARY 2ND AND 16TH AND  
MARCH 3, 1998.  
  
_Rent and ejectment - Recovery of residential premises - Rent Act - Section 22
(2) (bb) (ii) - Prohibition against recovery in section 22 (7) - Right of the
Landlord who acquires ownership of the premises after the commencement of the
tenancy with defendant.  
_  
The plaintiff who was the lessee of the premises in suit let it to the
defendant on 1.8.65. During the subsistence of the tenancy the ownership of
the premises was transferred by the owner to the plaintiff on 2.2.79.
Thereafter the plaintiff instituted action on 16.8.86 for ejectment of the
defendant in terms of section 22 (2) (bb) (ii) of the Rent Act. The defendant
pleaded that the plaintiff acquired ownership of the premises subsequent to
the "specified date" and by reason of the provisions of Section 22 (7) of the
Act, the plaintiff could not have and maintain the action.  
  
**Held:  
**  
1\. Section 22 (2) (bb) (ii) of the Rent Act is intended to benefit a category
of persons who may for convenience be described as "single house owners".
This, however, does not mean that ownership of one house or a part of house is
a condition precedent to the institution of an action in ejectment.  
  
2\. Section 22 (7) is intended to protect a tenant from eviction by a person
who had purchased the premises over the head of the tenant and thus becoming
the new landlord. It was not by acquisition of ownership that the plaintiff
became the landlord of the defendant. The plaintiff merely consolidated his
rights by the subsequent purchase of the premises. The right to sue the
defendant in ejectment had accrued to the plaintiff before he became the owner
of the premises.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
  
**1. _M. l. Aboobakar v. Jeenath Sulaiha Sulaiman_ SC Appeal No. 30/91 S C.
Minutes of 18th December, 1991.  
  
2\. _Aiyathurai v. Shanmugavadivu_ SC. Appeal No. 81/86 SC Minutes of 11th
October, 1991.

**42**

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_N. R. M. Daluwatta, PC with Hemasiri Withanachchi_ for the defendant-
appellant.  
  
_A. A. M. Marleen with A. M. Zameer_ for the plaintiff-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult_

17th March, 1998.  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.  
**  
The plaintiff instituted these proceedings on 16.6.86 seeking, inter alia, the
ejectment of the defendant who was his tenant from the premises in suit. The
ground of ejectment relied on by the plaintiff is section 22 (2) (bb) (ii) of
the Rent Act. The plaintiff averred in his plaint:  
  
(1) that he is the owner of not more than one residential premises;  
  
(2) that the standard rent of the premises exceeded Rs.100;  
  
(3) that he has deposited a sum equivalent to five years' rent with the
Commissioner of National Housing for payment to the defendant. The defendant
in his amended answer pleaded that the plaintiff acquired ownership of the
premises subsequent to the "specified date" and by reason of the provisions of
section 22 (7) of the Rent Act the plaintiff could not have and maintain this
action. The defendant relies on the statutory bar in section 22 (7) of the
Rent Act. Vide Issue No. 8 which (as translated) reads thus: "Do the
provisions of section 22 (7) of the Rent Act constitute a bar to the plaintiff
instituting and/or maintaining this action?"  
  
At the conclusion of the trial, the District Court answered Issue No. 8 in the
affirmative and dismissed the plaintiffs action. The plaintiffs Appeal to the
Court of Appeal was successful; the judgment of the District Court was set
aside and the plaintiff was declared entitled to a decree in ejectment. The
defendant has now preferred an appeal to this Court.  
  
The plaintiff was the tenant of the premises in suit from 1950 under one Mrs.
Daveson. The premises were sold in execution of a money decree against Mrs.
Daveson and her husband. Norman Esufali, the brother of the plaintiff,
purchased the premises on fiscal's conveyance

**43**

dated 8.10.1956 (P8). Subsequent to the purchase of the property by Norman
Esufali, the plaintiff had entered into a lease agreement dated 17.8.59 (P9)
with the aforesaid Mrs. Daveson. Thereafter the plaintiff shifted his
residence to another place and he gave the premises on rent to the defendant
for a period of 4 years by a lease bond dated 15.9.65 (P10). The defendant
came into occupation of the premises on 1.8.65. The premises were transferred
by Norman Esufali to the plaintiff by deed No. 381 of 2.2.79 (P11). On these
facts, which were not in dispute, it is clear (a) that the plaintiff came into
occupation of these premises as far back as 1950 as a tenant under Mrs.
Daveson; (b) that the defendant came into occupation of the premises on 1.8.65
as a tenant under the plaintiff; (c) that the plaintiff acquired ownership of
the premises on 2.2.79 after the defendant came into occupation of the
premises on 1.8.65.  
  
Mr. Daluwatte for the defendant-appellant strenuously contended before us both
in his oral and written submissions that the plaintiff's action must fail for
two reasons. in the first place, a landlord seeking to avail himself of the
provisions of section 22 (2) (bb) of the Rent Act must establish that he is
the owner of one residential premises, or at least a part of such premises,
before the "specified date" as defined in section 22 (7) of the Rent Act. On
the admitted facts, counsel contended that the plaintiff was not the owner of
any residential premises or even a part of such premises before the "specified
date". The second reason urged by counsel is that the plaintiff acquired
ownership of the premises after the "specified date" and accordingly the
statutory bar enacted by section 22 (7) applies.  
  
The material part of section 22 (2) (bb) (ii) and of section 22 (7) reads
thus:  
  
"22 (2) Notwithstanding anything in any other law, no action or proceedings
for the ejectment of the tenant of  
  
(i) any residential premises the standard rent (determined under section 4) of
which for a month exceeds one hundred rupees; or  
  
(ii)
....................................................................................  
  
shall be instituted in or entertained by any court, unless where-

**44**

(a)
....................................................................................  
  
(b)
...................................................................................;
or  
  
(bb) in the case of premises let to a tenant, whether before or after the date
of commencement of this Act, and where the landlord is the owner of not more
than one residential premises  
  
(i)
..................................................................................
, or  
  
(ii) the landlord of such premises has deposited prior to the institution of
such action or proceedings a sum equivalent to five years rent with the
Commissioner for National Housing for payment to the tenant;  
  
22 (7) Notwithstanding anything in the preceding provisions of this section,
no action or proceedings for the ejectment of the tenant of any premises
referred to in subsection (1) or subsection (2) (i) shall be instituted  
  
(a)
....................................................................................
or  
  
(b) where the landlord is the owner of not more than one residential premises
on the ground that  
  
(i)
....................................................................................
or  
  
(ii) the landlord of such premises has deposited prior to the institution of
such action or proceedings a sum equivalent to five years' rent with the
Commissioner for National Housing for payment to the tenant,  
  
Where the ownership of such premises was acquired by the landlord, on a date
subsequent to the specified date, by purchase or by inheritance or gift other
than inheritance or gift from a parent or spouse who had acquired ownership of
such premises on a date prior to the specified date:  
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

**45**

In this subsection, "specified date" means the date on which the tenant for
the time being of the premises, or the tenant upon whose death the tenant for
the time being succeeded to the tenancy under section 36 of this Act or
section 18 of the Rent Restriction Act (No. 29 of 1948), came into occupation
of the premises".  
  
On the question whether the ownership of one house (or at least a part of a
house) is an essential ingredient of the cause of action, Mr. Marleen for the
plaintiff-respondent relevantly cited the case of M. l. Aboobakar v. Jeenath
Sulaiha Sulaiman (1) wherein Dheeraratne, J. expressed himself in the
following terms:  
  
"The second point raised on behalf of the appellant was that in order to come
under subsection 22 (2) (bb) the plaintiff landlord must be a one house owner
and since the plaintiff was the owner only of one half of the premises, the
action should have necessarily failed. The relevant portion of subsection 22
(2) (bb) reads: "in the case of premises let to a tenant ... and where the
landlord is the owner of not more than one residential premises". On a plain
reading of the relevant part of the subsection it is obvious that the maximum
number of premises that a landlord seeking to avail himself of filing action
in terms of that subsection should own is specified. That is one premises, the
landlord may own one or none at all . . ."  
  
I have no doubt that this interpretation is correct. What the law clearly
contemplated was that a landlord who owned more than one house could not have
availed himself of the provisions of section 22 (2) (bb) (ii). It is intended
to benefit a category of persons who may for convenience be described as
"single house owners". This, however, does not mean that the ownership of one
house (or a part of a house) is a condition precedent to the institution of an
action in ejectment. There is no warrant for placing such a construction,
having regard to the wording of the section.  
  
I accordingly hold that the plaintiff in the instant case who was not the
owner of any residential premises prior to the "specified date" was entitled
to sue the defendant for ejectment in terms of section 22 (2) (bb) (ii). Mr.
Daluwatte pointed out that in Aboobakar's case (supra) the plaintiff was the
owner of one half share of the premises. This fact makes no difference to the
interpretation of the section.

**46**

The next submission advanced on behalf of the defendant appellant was that the
plaintiff having acquired ownership of the premises after the "specified
date", the provisions of section 22 (7) of the Rent Act constituted a bar to
the institution of the action. With this submission, I am afraid, I cannot
agree. It seems to me that the provisions of section 22 (7) were intended to
protect a tenant from eviction by a person who had purchased the premises over
the head of the tenant and thus becoming the new landlord. An example would be
where A, the owner of a house lets it to B; A thereafter sells the house to C
who by virtue of the sale becomes the new landlord over the head of the tenant
B. Section 22 (7) could apply in such a situation. In the case before us,
however, the position is significantly different. The reason is that the
plaintiff was at all material times the landlord and the defendant was the
tenant under the plaintiff. What needs to be stressed is that it was not by
virtue of the acquisition of ownership that the plaintiff became the landlord
of the defendant. As far as the defendant was concerned, there was no change
of the landlord by reason of the plaintiff acquiring ownership of the
premises. The plaintiff merely consolidated his rights by the subsequent
purchase of the premises. The right to sue the defendant in ejectment had
accrued to the plaintiff before he became the owner of the premises (vide
Aiyathurai v. Shanmugavadivu (2), where the analogous provisions contained in
the proviso to section 27 (1) of the Rent Act were considered).  
  
The Court of Appeal rightly held that: "the plaintiff in the instant case has
acquired ownership of the said premises while being the landlord of the
defendant . . . and . . . the statutory bar in section 22 (7) of the Rent Act
would therefore not be applicable to him".  
  
For these reasons, the appeal fails and is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs.
1,000. The judgment of the Court of Appeal is affirmed. However, having regard
to the fact that the defendant was in occupation of the premises since 1965
and the acute shortage of housing, I direct writ of ejectment not to issue
till 30th September, 1999. The plaintiff is entitled to take out writ without
notice and to be placed in possession of the premises in suit after 30th
September, 1999.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J. - I agree.  
  
GUNASEKERA, J. - I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/61.html_  

