##  Rajapaksa v. Guruswamy - SLR - 346, Vol 3 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 62; (1998) 3
Sri LR 346 (3 July 1998)

**346**

**RAJAPAKSA  
v.  
GURUSWAMY**

SUPREME COURT

AMERASINGHE, J.,

DHEERARATNE, J. AND

GUNASEKERA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 9/97

C.A. NO. 544/88 (F)

D.C. COLOMBO NO. 6192 RE

MAY 14, 1998.

JUNE 5 AND 15, 1998.

_Rent and ejectment - Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972 - S. 22 (3) (c) of the Act -
Tender of arrears of rent \- Dispatch of money by postal telegraphic money
order._

The date fixed in the summons for appearance of the tenant in court was 30th
April, 1985. On 29th April, 1985, the defendant forwarded to the plaintiff
through the Kotte Post Office by a telegraphic money order the sum due as
rent. The money order was received by the landlord only on the 2nd May, 1985.
It was not the case that the tenant had on earlier occasions tendered rent to
the landlord by money order.

**Held:**

1\. The act of mailing a money order does not amount to tender or payment
until actual receipt of letter by the addressee, unless he has consented to
make the post office his agent of the sender.

2\. Accordingly, the tenant had failed to tender to the landlord arrears of
rent in terms of the Act.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Razik v. Esufally_ (1957) 58 NLR 469 at 471.

_2\. Medonza v. Silva_ (1984) CA (1985) 1 Sri LR 44 at 52.

_3\. Jayakody v. Lilian Perera_ (1993) 2 Sri LR 74.

_4\. Thomas v. Evans_ \- 1808 10 East; 101; 103 ER 714.

_5\. Alexander v. Brown_ \- 1824 I C and P 228 N.P.

_6\. Palmer v. Rhodes_ \- 1888 5 H.C.G. 56, 61.

_7\. Gunby v. Ingram_ \- 57 Wash 97, 36 R.L.A. P 232.

_9\. Ken v. United States_ \- 108F 2d 585, 586 71 App. DC 222.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

347

_Rohan Sahabandu with Ms Dilhani Perera_ for plaintiff-appellant.

_T. B. Dillimuni with Tissa Bandara_ for defendant-respondent.

Cur. adv. vult.

July 3, 1998.

**DHEERARATNE, J.**

The only question which arises in this appeal is whether the defendant-
respondent tenant (the tenant) has, in the eyes of the law, complied with the
provisions of subsection 22 (3) (c) of the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, in duly
tendering arrears of rent to the plaintiff-appellant (the landlord). The
material parts of that subsection read as follows:

(3) The landlord of any premises referred to in subsection (1) of subsection
(2) shall not be entitled ... to proceed with, any action or proceedings for
the ejectment of the tenant of such premises on the ground that the rent of
such premises has been in arrear . . . after it has become due.

(c) if the tenant has, on or before the date fixed in such summons as is
served on him, as the date on which he shall appear in court in respect of
such action or proceedings, tendered to the landlord all arrears of rent.

The date fixed in the summons for appearance of the tenant in court was
admittedly 30th April, 1985. A sum of Rs. 420 representing arrears of rent was
handed over on the 29th April, 1985, by the defendant to the Kotte post office
to be forwarded to the landlord by way of a telegraphic money order. The money
order was received by the landlord only on the 2nd of May, 1985.

Tender is clearly distinguishable from and therefore cannot mean either offer
or pay. Offer would mean mere readiness to pay and pay would mean the tender
on the part of the tenderer followed by acceptance on the part of the
creditor. To constitute tender, the readiness to pay must be accompanied by
production of the money that is offered in satisfaction of the debt. See Razik
v. Esufally(1); at 471, Medonza v. Silva(2) at 52. It may be mentioned here
that the tender should be made to the landlord (or his agent) and it has been
authoritatively decided that payment of arrears to court is not sufficient
compliance with subsections 22 (3) 22 (4); Jayakody v. Lilian Perera(3).

348

It is not the case that the tenant had on earlier occasions tendered rent to
the landlord by money order; if he had done so in the past, different
considerations may have applied. Wessels (The Law of Contract in South Africa,
vol 11, 2nd edition at 649 and 650) says: If the tender is one of money it
must be made in lawful currency, and must be actually produced or the
production waived by the creditor (Thomas v. Evans,(4) Alexander v.
Brown,(5).)

If a tender is made by cheque, the creditor is entitled to refuse it and
insist on the money, but custom of paying large sums by cheque is apparently
judicially recognised, and if the tender is not refused on the ground that it
is by cheque, it will be regarded as a valid tender {Palmer v. Rhodes,(6). See
American case of Gunby v. Ingram (7)).

There is no reason to reject the transfer of money by money order, as a mode
of lawful tender in modern times if the landlord has accepted such a mode of
tender before. In such an event it could have been even contended in this case
that the landlord had consented to make the post office his agent to receive
payment.

Our own investigations on this aspect of the matter has led us to the case of
Ken v. United States (8) where it was held that the act of mailing a money
order does not amount to tender or payment until actual receipt of letter by
addressee, unless he has consented to make the post office his agent to
receive payment, since otherwise the post office is the agent of the sender.

For the above reasons I hold that the tenant has failed to tender to the
landlord arrears of rent in terms of the Act. The appeal is allowed and the
judgment; of the Court of Appeal and the District Court are set aside. Enter
judgment in favour of the appellant as prayed for in the plaint with costs of
the courts below and costs of this court fixed at Rs. 5,000. However I direct
that writ of ejectment shall not be issued till 30th September, 1998; the
appellant will be entitled to obtain writ of ejectment thereafter without
notice to the respondent.

**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

Appeal allowed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/62.html_  

