##  Wakkumbura v. Nandawathie - SLR - 154, Vol 2 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 63;
(1998) 2 Sri LR 154 (31 July 1998)

**154**

**WAKKUMBURA  
v.  
NANDAWATHIE**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.,  
WIJETUNGA, J.,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. (AP). NO. 52/97  
S.C. Spl. LA 156/96  
C.A. (AP). NO. 765/88 (F)  
D.C. HORANA NO. 2612/RE  
JUNE 01 AND JULY 31 1998  
  
_Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972 - Business premises - Excepted premises - Regulation
3 - Premises assessed twice as three separate units and twice as a single
consolidated unit - Applicable annual value._

**155**

The respondent was the tenant in respect of 3 adjacent premises Nos. 83, 81,
83/1, during the period 1958 - 1987. The premises were subject to 4
assessments, twice as three separate units and twice as a single consolidated
unit.  
  
The plaintiff-appellant instituted action against the defendant-respondent to
have her ejected from business premises formerly bearing assessment Nos. 83,
81 and 83/1, and presently assessment No. 81. It was contended by the
plaintiff that the premises No. 81 is a business premises, that it was first
assessed as No. 81 in 1983, and the said premises are excepted premises. The
defendant's position was that the first assessment of the premises as a single
unit and that as business premises was in 1970, and therefore the premises are
not excepted premises.  
  
The District Court held that, the premises are not excepted premises which was
affirmed by the Court of Appeal.  
  
**Held:  
**  
(1) For the purpose of the existence of a new premises it is essential that
some kind of physical alteration to the premises was carried out. In a
situation where there is a physical alteration to a premises the extent and
significance of that physical alteration would certainly have to be taken into
consideration.  
  
(2) The premises are business premises. The first time the premises were
assessed as one unit as business premises after January, 1968, was in 1970.
There is no evidence of substantial physical alteration to the building
thereafter; in this circumstances, it cannot be said that a new premises have
come into existence and therefore the assessment in 1970 will continue to
govern the premises.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
1\. _Ramya Gunawardena v. Pieris_ \- 1995 - 2 S.LR 225.  
  
2\. _Ansar v. Hussain_ \- 1986 1 CALR Vol. I - Part 3 365.  
  
3\. _Hewavitharana v. Ratnapala_ \- 1988 - 1 S.LR 240.  
  
4\. _Weerasena v. Perera_ \- 1991 - 1 S.LR 121.  
  
5\. _Chettinad Corporation Ltd. v. Gamage_ \- 62 N.LR 86.  
  
6\. _Sally Mohamed v_. _Seyd_. - 64 N.L.R 486.  
  
7\. _Premadasa v. Atapattu_ \- 71 N.L.R 62.  
  
_A. K Premadasa, P.C., with C. E. de Silva_ for appellant.  
  
_T. B. Dillimuni with Tissa Bandara_ for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**156**

July 31, 1998  
  
**SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
  
**The plaintiff instituted this action on 03.01.1985 against the defendant,
her tenant, to have her ejected from premises formerly bearing assessment Nos.
83, 81 and 83/1 and presently bearing assessment No. 81, Anguruwatota Road,
Horana. Admittedly, the premises in question are business premises situated
within the Urban Council limits of Horana. The main question in dispute at the
trial was whether the premises are excepted premises or not within the meaning
of regulation 3 of the Schedule to the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972. The learned
trial Judge held in favour of the defendant that the premises in question are
not excepted premises. The Court of Appeal affirmed the judgment of the
learned District Judge and the plaintiff has now appealed.  
  
The facts leading to the filing of this action are briefly as follows:  
  
The respondent had been a tenant of the appellant in respect of 3 adjacent
premises, viz Nos. 83, 81 and 83/1, Anguruwatota Road, Horana. According to
the Assessment Register of the Urban Council, Horana, during the period 1958
to 1987 the premises in suit were subject to 4 assessments, twice as three
separate units and twice as a single consolidated unit (81).

A. 1958 to 1969 -  | assessed under 3 units of assessment.  
83        \- tiled textile shop and land  
73/12   \- tiled tenament and land  
83/1/1  \- tiled studio and land  
---|---  
B. 1970 to 1976 -  | the three sub divisions were consolidated as  
one unit of assessment No. 83, described as  
upstair study and dispensary. The annual value  
of 1970 consolidated assessment was Rs. 1,222/-.  
C. 1977 to 1982 - |  there was a sub division of the assessment  
 into three units as assessment numbers 83,  
 81 and 83/1:  
  
 i. No. 83 was assessed as tiled textile shop  
 and land at an annual value of Rs. 556/-.  
  
**157**

  | ii. No. 81 was assessed as tiled upstair photo  
studio at an annual value of Rs. 444/-.  
  
iii. No. 83/1 was assessed as tiled small house  
and land at an annual value of Rs. 222/-.  
  
---|---  
D. 1983 to 1987 -  |  the three premises were assessed together as  
 assessment No. 81 and described as tiled  
 boutique and land at an annual value of Rs. 2,348/-.  
  
  
It was the contention of learned President's Counsel for the appellant that,
the premises No. 81 is a business premises, that it was first assessed as No.
81 in 1983 at an annual value of Rs. 2,348/- and that for this reason the said
premises are excepted premises in terms of regulation 3 of the Schedule to the
Rent Act. Learned President's Counsel further contended that the question at
issue is the fact of assessment of the premises and not the structural
alterations. Learned counsel for the respondent on the other hand contended
that the first assessment of the premises in suit as a single unit and that as
business premises was in 1970. Regulation 3 of the Schedule to the Rent Act,
No. 7 of 1972, reads as follows:  
  
Any business premises ... situated in any area specified in Column 1 hereunder
shall be excepted premises for the purpose of this Act if the annual value
thereof as specified in the assessment made as business premises for the
purposes of any rates levied by any local authority under any written law and
in force on the first day of January, 1968, or, where the assessment of the
annual value thereof as business premises is made for the first time after the
first day of January, 1968, the annual value as specified in such assessment
exceeds the amount specified in the corresponding entry in column It.

I  
Area  |

II  
Annual value  
---|---  
  
. . . . . . . .  
  |  
  
Town within the meaning of the  
Urban Councils Ordinance  |

Rs. 2,000  
  
**158**

Clearly the assessment in force as at January, 1968, could not be applied
because what existed then were 3 premises 2 of which were business premises
while the other was residential premises. The assessment made in 1977 too
could not be applied for the same reason.  
  
The question at issue then is whether for the purpose of regulation 3 of the
Schedule to the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, the annual value assessed in 1970 is
applicable or whether the annual value assessed in 1983 is applicable.  
  
Several authorities were relied upon by Mr. Premadasa, learned President's
Counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Dillimuni, learned counsel for the
respondent.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the appellant, submitted that three units
which existed from 1977 to 1982 were formally consolidated and a new unit,
namely, No. 81 came into being on 01.01.1983. This was assessed at an annual
value of Rs. 2,3481- and entered in the Assessment Register. His position was
that on this basis, the new unit should be regarded as excepted premises.
Learned President's Counsel for the appellant, submitted that one of the 3
units of assessment that existed immediately prior to the 1983 assessment has
been described as a small house His submission was that when this assessment
is combined with the assessment of the remaining two units of business
premises that co-existed in 1982, the consolidated premises in 1983 should be
considered as a new premises.  
  
Mr. Premadasa relied on the decision of the Court of Appeal in Ramya
Goonewardene v. Peiris (1). In that case 3 units were let to the tenant which
were consolidated under a single assessment number 318, in October, 1980\. The
premises No. 318 was assessed for the first time at an annual value of Rs.
3,750/- thus falling within the ambit of excepted premises. The landlord sued
the respondent-tenant for ejectment. The appellant-landlord relied upon the
entries in the relevant Assessment Register. The learned District Judge relied
on certain letters written by the Acting Chief Assessor to the Chairman, Urban
Council, Panadura, pointing out that the assessment was made by error and
dismissed the action. Grero, J. was of the view that to ascertain whether the
premises are excepted premises, recourse should be had not only to the Rent
Act, No. 7 of 1972, but also to the

**159**

provisions of sections 233, 235 and 237 of the Municipal Councils Ordinance.
He went on to state that:  
  
I am of the view that a consolidation effected under section 233 (1) to any
existing house, buildings etc., need not have physical alterations as
contemplated in section 237 (1) of the Municipal Councils Ordinance. Once such
assessment is made in respect of consolidated premises and the annual value is
entered in the Register, unless it is amended according to the procedure laid
down in section 235 of the Municipal Councils Ordinance, the annual value
remains in force. On the basis of such annual value rates are calculated and
entered in the Assessment Book (Register).  
  
To follow Ramya Goonewardene (supra) in effect would be to take the law back
to the time when the regulation regarding the excepted premises read as 'the
annual value thereof as assessed for the purposes of any rates levied for the
time being by any local authority under any written law exceeds . . . (see
1956 LE chapter 274, schedule).  
  
Learned counsel for the respondent on the other hand relied on Ansar v.
Hussain (2), Hewavitharana v. Ratnapala (3) and Weerasena v. Perera (4), where
it has been consistently and repeatedly upheld that a subsequent assessment
cannot be considered as a first assessment of a premises unless there is
cogent evidence to show that there were substantial alterations and additions
to the premises. In Ansar v. Hussain (supra) the plaintiff instituted action
for ejectment of defendant on the ground that the rents were in arrears for
more than one month in terms of section 22 of the Rent Act. The premises used
as business premises were rent controlled and governed by the provisions of
the Rent Act. They had undergone changes by way of subdivision and
consolidation. After a careful consideration of a series of cases,
Wanasundera, J. was of the view that:  
  
It would be observed that all these judgments deal with varying actual
situations and such situations can be multifarious. A single assessed unit may
be subdivided into two or more units and each separately assessed; two or more
separately assessed units may be consolidated into one. Separately assessed
units may be joined to adjacent units already under assessment. Portions of
such adjacent units may simultaneously undergo changes by division or

**160**

other consolidations. There is no limit to the permutations and combinations
that are possible in this regard. It would be extremely difficult to work out
any kind of general theory to cover all such situations some of which are
known, but there may be others which may be beyond contemplation and arise in
the future.  
  
This decision was followed in Hewavitharana v. Ratnapala (supra), where
Dheeraratne, J. after a careful consideration of all available authorities
held that the 1968 assessment is applicable to the premises in question for
the purpose of regulation 3 and that it does not become excepted premises as a
result of the assessment made in 1975. In this case two adjacent business
premises Nos. 350 and 356, admittedly governed by the provisions of the Rent
Act upto October, 1975, were occupied by one tenant under the same landlord.
The tenant had connected the two premises by an inter communication door. At
the request of the landlord in October, 1975, the Municipal Council gave one
assessment number to both premises and fixed the annual value at Rs. 8,310/-
by addition of the two previous annual values increased by Rs. 10/-. The
landlord filed action against the tenant for ejectment on the basis that the
premises were excepted premises. The question arose as to whether for the
purpose of regulation No. 3 as to excepted premises, the annual value of
January, 1968 or the annual value fixed in October, 1975, should be applied.  
  
This question was discussed again in Weerasena v. Perera (supra). In this case
the plaintiff let to the defendant premises bearing assessment No. 97A,
Stanley Tillekeratne Mawatha, Nugegoda in 1972 and the premises being business
premises assessed for the first time at an annual value of over Rs. 2,000% was
admittedly excepted premises within the meaning of regulation 3 of the
schedule to the Rent Act. The rear portion of the premises, a storeroom was
later separately assessed as 97B. The plaintiff's action for ejectment failed
as premises No. 978 was alleged to be covered by the Rent Act and there being
no valid termination of the tenancy. The Court of Appeal reversed the judgment
and directed ejectment from the full premises. The Supreme Court held that
applying the test in Ansar v. Hussain (supra) in the absence of any physical
alteration to the premises 9713, it cannot be said that a new premises has
come into existence. After a careful consideration of the question before him,
Dheeraratne, J. stated that:

**161**

The problem may also be approached differently by examining the application of
regulation No. 3 of the schedule to the Rent Act to premises No. 9713. It may
be asked whether the assessment of the annual value in force in January, 1968
or the assessment made in July, 1972, is applicable. On this question, it
appears to me that the decided authorities have taken three different
approaches. The first, was to give prominance to the original assessment,
paying little attention to the transformation the premises has undergone
subsequently attracting separate new assessments. This approach is reflected
in the cases of Chettinad Corporation Ltd. v. Gamage(5) and Sally Mohamed v.
Seyd (6). The second was to grant almost absolute sanctity to a new assessment
made by rating authorities and to treat that as giving birth to new premises
in place of the old as reflected in the case of Premadasa v. Atapattu(7). The
third, is that reflected in the judgment of Wanasundera, J. in Ansar v.
Hussain (supra), a via media through which the Court will not only look at the
mere fact of a separate assessment, but also, at the extent and significance
of the change involved and the impact of that change on the valuation and
assessment. This last approach, commends itself to me as a safeguard both
against capricious assessments made by rating authorities affecting rights of
parties to the letting and also against possible manipulations of the
assessments by interested parties with intent to give undue advantages either
to landlords or to tenants (see for example Hewavitharana v. Ratnapala) . . .
Considering the absence of any physical alterations whatsoever made to
premises No. 9713, I am unable to hold that new premises have come into
existence. The original assessment in force as at January, 1968, will continue
to govern the entire premises.  
  
I am in complete agreement with the view expressed by Dheeraratne, J. in
Weerasena v. Perera (supra) that the mere fact of a separate assessment alone
is not sufficient to hold that a new premises has come into existence. For the
purpose of the existence of a new premises it is essential that some kind of
physical alteration to the premises was carried out. In a situation where
there is physical alteration to a premises, the extent and significance of
that physical alteration would certainly have to be taken into consideration.  
  
It is common ground that the premises in question are business premises. The
first time the premises were assessed in one unit as business premises after
January, 1968, was in 1970. There is no

**162**

evidence of substantial physical alteration to the buildings thereafter. In
the circumstances, I am unable to hold that new premises have come into
existence and therefore the assessment in 1970 will continue to govern the
premises in question. For the above reasons, the appeal is dismissed and the
judgment of the Court of Appeal is affirmed. There will be no costs.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J. - I agree.  
  
WIJETUNGA, J. - I agree.  
**  
_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/63.html_  

