##  Peiris v. Wijesuriya, Director of Irrigation and Others - SLR - 295, Vol 1
of 1999 [1998] LKSC 64; (1999) 1 Sri LR 295 (17 November 1998)

**295**

**PEIRIS  
v.  
WIJESURIYA, DIRECTOR OF IRRIGATION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
GUNAWARDANA, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 53/98  
C.A. APPLICATION NO. 458/96  
SEPTEMBER 9, 1998

_Writs of certiorari and mandamus - Retirement subject to Rule 12 (f) of the
Minutes on Pensions._

The petitioner who was a storekeeper in the Irrigation Department was
interdicted on the detection of a shortage of goods. Before disciplinary
proceedings commenced the petitioner reached the age of 55 years; whereupon he
was retired subject to Rule 12 of the Minutes on Pensions. Thereafter a
charge-sheet was served on the petitioner. The petitioner's explanation was
rejected and he was paid a reduced commuted pension after deducting the value
of the shortage. The petitioner urged that no disciplinary inquiry was held
observing the time limits laid down by a circular issued by the Secretary,
Ministry of Public Administration and that the retirement subject to Rule 12
(1) of Minutes on Pensions was illegal as disciplinary proceedings were not
pending or contemplated at the time of his retirement as required by that
Rule.

**Held:**

The time limits laid down by the circular were directory and hence, the
failure to observe them did not make the acts of the respondent invalid and
though no disciplinary proceedings were pending at the time of the
petitioner's retirement disciplinary proceedings were contemplated.

**Case referred to:**

1. _Wilbert Godawela v. Chandradasa_ and _Others_ (1995) 2 Sri LR 338 distinguished.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

**296**

_L. C. Seneviratne, PC_ with _Ronald Perera_ and _Hemantha Situge_ for the
petitioner. __

_Ms. M. N. B. Fernando, SSC_ for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 17, 1998.  
**  
AMERASINGHE, J.**

The petitioner was a Grade I Storekeeper in the Irrigation Department in
charge of the Rambawewa Stores. When the petitioner complained of the loss of
a stock book which had been in his custody, the stores in his charge were
sealed and a stock verification was conducted by a Board of Survey. Shortages
valued in aggregate at Rs. 373,958.41 were reported by the Board of Survey.
The petitioner certified that the verification was carried out in his presence
and that he was satisfied with the survey. The petitioner was interdicted with
effect from 29 September, 1986. The petitioner reached the age of 55 years on
7 August, 1987 and was retired from public service. By his letter dated 20
November, 1987, the Additional Director of Irrigation informed the petitioner
that the petitioner had been retired subject to Rule 12 of the Minutes on
Pension. A charge-sheet dated 14 December, 1987, was served on the petitioner.
The petitioner's explanation was rejected, although the value of the shortages
was reduced to Rs. 190,716/54. After deducting the sum of Rs. 190,716/54, the
petitioner was paid a sum of Rs. 67,304/78 as his commuted pension. An appeal
to the Public Service Commission for relief was refused.

The petitioner then moved the Court of Appeal for -

(a) a Writ of Certiorari quashing the order of interdiction;  
  
(b) Writs of Mandamus directing the respondents to pay (i) the petitioner's
salary and emoluments from the date of interdiction until the date of
retirement; and (ii) the petitioner's salary and

297

emoluments on the basis of extensions in service the petitioner might have
been entitled to until he reached 60 years of age. The Court of Appeal held
that the petitioner was not entitled to the writs prayed for.

The petitioner appealed to the Supreme Court. It was urged on his behalf that
the Order of interdiction should be quashed because it was not made in
conformity with P17. P17 was a Circular Letter issued by the Secretary of
Ministry of Public Administration addressed to "All Secretaries of Ministries
and Heads of Departments: on the subject "Expeditious Disposal of Disciplinary
Inquiries". The letter, among other things, stated that Disciplinary
Authorities were requested to ensure that (i) the charge-sheet against an
officer under interdiction is issued within one month of the date of
interdiction; (2) the Tribunal of Inquiry is appointed within two weeks of
receipt of reply to the charge-sheet: and (3) the disciplinary inquiry is
completed within three months from the date of appointment of the Tribunal.

Admittedly, the recommended time limits were not observed. On the other hand,
the time limits were not inflexible and absolute. They were expected to be
followed in ordinary cases. However, the last sentence of the Circular letter
contemplated cases in which the ideal standards might be departed from, for it
stated that the "limits should strictly be complied with unless there is good
cause which prevents compliance". As explained by the Director of irrigation
in his affidavit, "the facts of this case necessitated investigations of a
considerable length of time which prevented compliance with the said
Circular". In the circumstances, the failure to observe the directory time
limits would not in my view render the acts of the respondents invalid.

The petitioner was retired subject to Rule 12 (1) of the Minute on Pensions
which states as follows: "Where the explanation tendered by a public servant
against whom, at the time of his retirement from public service, disciplinary
proceedings were pending or contemplated in respect of his negligence,
irregularity or misconduct, is unsatisfactory by the competent authority, the
(relevant authority) may either withhold

298

or reduce any pension, gratuity or other allowances payable to such public
servant under these Minutes".

It was not in dispute that the petitioner's explanation was regarded as
"unsatisfactory". Learned counsel for the petitioner, however, submitted that
not only was there no inquiry but that such an inquiry was not "contemplated"
and that therefore retirement under Rule 12 was "illegal, unwarranted, mala
fide, and in excess of the powers of the respondents.

Stock verifications had revealed certain shortages and the petitioner had been
interdicted in September, 1986. There were no pending disciplinary
proceedings; but I am unable to accept the view that disciplinary proceedings
were not "contemplated". What was the purpose of the long-drawn-out
investigations except for the purpose of precisely ascertaining the losses and
fixing responsibility for such losses? This case was quite unlike _Wilbert
Godawela's case_ (1) which learned counsel for the petitioner cited. In that
case there was no disciplinary proceedings pending at the time of retirement;
nor were such proceedings contemplated.

For the reasons stated in my judgment, I affirm the decision of the Court of
Appeal and dismiss the appeal. In all the circumstances, there will be no
costs.

**GUNAWARDANA, J**. - I agree.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/64.html_  

