##  Banda v. Soysa - SLR - 255, Vol 1 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 65; (1998) 1 Sri LR
255 (5 March 1998)

**255**

**BANDA  
v.  
SOYSA**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 68/96  
C.A. APPEAL NO. 157/84 (F)  
D.C. KURUNEGALA NO. 2603/L  
24TH, 25TH NOVEMBER 1997  
13TH, JANUARY 1998, 24TH, FEBRUARY 1998.  
  
_Declaratory action - Temple lands - Praveni and Bandara lands - Right of
trustee to claim Bandara lands - Service tenure register \- Service Tenures
Ordinance.  
_  
Plaintiff as the trustee of Ginikarawa Vihara sued the defendant for a
declaration of title to 17A. 2R.31P. of land depicted in Plan P2 and for
ejectment and damages. The plaintiffs claim was based on a Royal Grant or
Sannasa P1 registered under the Temple Lands Registration Ordinance, 1856. As
per the title plan P4 prepared by the Surveyor-General the total land covered
by the Sannasa is 414 acres in extent. According to the Register prepared
under the Service Tenures Ordinance P3 approximately 126 acres of this land
consisted of Praveni lands. Such land vested in the Praveni Nilakarayas whilst
Bandara or Maruwena lands vested in the trustee of the temple.  
  
**Held:  
**  
1\. When a temple land is not entered in the list of Praveni lands of the
temple the necessary inference, at any rate unless some adequate explanation
is given for the omission, is that the Commissioner had determined that the
tenure of such lands was not Praveni but Maruwena. Accordingly the balance 288
acres of the entire extent of 414 acres shown in P4 were Bandara lands.  
  
2\. The land in dispute depicted in Plan P2 fell within an extent of 300 acres
more or less which had been leased to one Herat on a notarially executed lease
bond in 1906 by the trustees of the Vihara at that time. There was thus
sufficient evidence led on behalf of the plaintiff to prove the title and
identity of the land in dispute.

**256**

Per G. P. S. de Silva, CJ.  
  
"In a case such as this the true question that a court has to consider on the
question of title is, who has the superior title?"  
  
Cases referred to:  
  
1\. _Hewavitarana v. Dangan Rubber Co., Ltd.,_ 17 NLR 49 at 52.  
  
2\. _Tikiri Banda v. Ranasinghe Mudalige Appuhamy_ (1912) S.C. Minutes of 5th
March, 1912.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_P. A. D. Samarasekera. PC with S. C. B. Walgampaya_ for substituted
plaintiff-appellant.  
  
_R. K. W. Goonesekera with Rohan Sahabandu_ for defendants-respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 5, 1998.  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.  
**  
The plaintiff as the trustee of the Ginikarawa Vihara instituted these
proceedings against the defendants for a declaration of title to lots 1 to 4
and 7 to 11 in plan No. 895 dated 6/15th July, 1968 (P2) made by
Perimpanayagam, Licensed Surveyor, for ejectment of the defendants and for
damages. The extent of the lots 1 to 4 and 7 to 11 in the said plan P2 is 17A.
2R. 31P. The plaintiff's claim was based on a Royal Grant or a Sannasa (P1)
which was registered under the Temple Lands Registration Ordinance of 1856.
The land covered by the Sannasa (P1) is shown in title plan No. 92451 of 1867
prepared by the Surveyor-General in terms of the Temple Lands Registration
Ordinance and is in extent 414 acres. The title plan 92451 was produced marked
P4. At the conclusion of the trial before the District Court, judgment was
entered in favour of the plaintiff as prayed for. The defendants preferred an
appeal to the Court of Appeal and the judgment of the District Court was set
aside and the plaintiffs action was dismissed. The plaintiff has now preferred
an appeal to this court.  
  
The ground upon which the Court of Appeal dismissed the plaintiffs action is
that the plaintiff failed to establish title to the subject matter of the
action, or even to identify the land in suit. In the absence of

**257**

proof of title, the Court of Appeal stated that the question of examining the
title of the defendants did not arise.  
  
Upon a consideration of the entirety of the evidence it is clear that there is
no dispute in regard to the following facts :  
  
(1) that the land covered by the Sannasa (P1) is the property of the
Ginikarawa Vihara ;  
  
(2) that the land gifted on the Sannasa (P1) is shown in the title plan P4:  
  
(3) that the lots in dispute, namely, 1 to 4 and 7 to 11 shown in plan P2 fall
within the title plan P4 and are situated in the North-West boundary of the
land shown in P4.  
  
The crux of the case of the plaintiff on the crucial issue of title is that
the lots in dispute are the absolute property of the Vihara. Such property is
known as the Bandara lands of the temple. Admittedly, the 414 acres shown in
the title plan P4 consisted of both Praveni lands and Bandara lands. In the
case of Praveni lands, the land is vested in the Praveni Nilakarayas who are
obliged to render specific services to the temple or to pay commuted dues. On
the other hand, if the land is Bandara land (also called as Maruvena pangu or
muttetu) it is vested in the trustee of the temple. The case for the plaintiff
is that out of the 414 acres of temple land shown in P4, about 126 acres are
Praveni lands and that the balance 288 acres are Bandara lands and that the
lots in dispute fall within the 288 acres of Bandara lands.  
  
Praveni pangu lands are set out in the Service Tenures Register prepared under
the provisions of the Service Tenures Ordinance. The register relating to
Praveni Pangu was produced marked P3 (also marked as 1D3). According to P3,
there are 10 Praveni Nila Pangu comprising fields and gardens and in terms of
the computation adopted by the Land Settlement Department the total extent of
Praveni Nila Pangu is approximately 126 acres. "The entry of any land in the
register prepared under the Service Tenures Ordinance 1870 as a praveni land
belonging to a specific tenant is conclusive evidence as to the nature of the
tenure (section 11) and relevant. . ." Hewavitarana v. Dangan Rubber Co.,
Ltd.(1) at 52.  
  
When a temple land is not entered in the list of praveni lands of the temple,
the necessary inference, at any rate unless some adequate explanation is given
for the omission, is that the Commissioners had

**258**

determined that the tenure of the lands was not praveni, but maruwena". per
Lasclles, CJ. and Grenier, J. in Tikiri Banda v. Ranasinghe Mudalige Appuhamy
(2) cited with approval in Hewavitarana v. Dangan Rubber Co., Ltd (supra).
Thus the District Court concluded that since 126 acres were praveni lands
having regard to the contents of P3 that the balance 288 acres (out of the
entire extent of 414 acres shown in P4) were Bandara lands. It seems to me
that this conclusion is not unreasonable on the facts and circumstances of
this case.  
  
The next question that arises for consideration is where this extent of 288
acres of Bandara lands is situated. On this point the plaintiff relied very
strongly on the lease bond P6. P6 is a notarially executed document dated
23.11.1906 whereby the trustee of the Vihara at that time had given a lease of
300 acres more or less to one Herat for a period of 50 years. Mr. R. K. W.
Goonesekera for the defendants-respondents stressed the fact that there was no
evidence whatsoever to show that P6 was acted upon and that possession
followed upon P6. While it is true that there is no such evidence, yet P6 is a
lease bond executed as far back as the year 1906 and its execution was with
the approval of the President of the Provincial Committee ap­pointed under the
Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance and, what is more, it was approved by the
District Court \- vide the formal application made by Herat to the President
BTO Kurunegala P6 (a) and the approval of the District Court P6 (b). In regard
to the location of the land which was the subject matter of the lease, the
schedule in P6 is relevant and is in the following terms : "An allotment of
high land in extent 300 acres towards the Northern and Western direction of
the temple land belonging to Ginikarawa Vihara containing in extent 414 acres
on the whole according to the figure of survey No. 92451 dated at Survey-
General's Office, Colombo, on 25th September 1873". It is to be noted further
that the schedule gives Kiribath Ela as a boundary on the North-West and
North. The superimposed plan P2 which was prepared for the purpose of this
case on a Commission issued by Court shows Kiribath Ela as the North-Western
boundary of the lots in dispute. It is therefore reasonable to infer that the
disputed lots fell within the 300 acres more or less which was the subject
matter of the lease. The 300 acres could have been leased, as rightly
submitted by Mr. Samarasekera for the plaintiff-appellant, only on the basis
that the land was in the possession of the trustee of the temple, for if it
was praveni land it would have been in the possession of the Praveni
Nilakarayas.

**259**

On a consideration of the above facts I am of the view that the District Court
correctly concluded that lots 1 to 4 and 7 to 11 shown in P2 fell within the
300 acres leased to Herat in 1906. I hold therefore that there was sufficient
evidence led on behalf of the plaintiff to prove the title and the identity of
the lots in dispute.  
  
In a case such as this, the true question that a court has to consider on the
question of title is, who has the superior title? The answer has to be reached
upon a consideration of the totality of the evidence led in the case.  
  
The defendants claim title from one Menikdurayalage Poola. But the name of the
original Praveni Nilakaraya as described in the service tenure register P3
(1D3) is Dangolla Durayalage Poola. The defend­ants do not claim any rights
from Dangolla Durayalage Poola. The defendants therefore do not derive title
from a Praveni Nilakaraya. In short, the paper title of the defendants is not
linked to any Praveni Nila Pangu. Although the defendants trace their paper
title to a fiscal's conveyance, the fiscal's plan was not produced. The
identity of the land is thus not established. The District Judge has further
held that the deeds of the defendants do not apply to the lots in dispute. I
am therefore of the view that the defendants claim of title was rightly
rejected by the District Court.  
  
The Court of Appeal in its judgment did not consider P6 upon which the
plaintiff relied heavily in support of his title. Indeed, not even a bare
reference was made to P6. Consequently the Court of Appeal was in grave error
in its evaluation of the evidence placed before the District Court.  
  
For these reasons the appeal is allowed, the judgment of the Court of Appeal
is set aside and the judgment of the District Court is restored. The plaintiff
(substituted plaintiff-appellant) is entitled to costs fixed at Rs. 1,000 from
the defendants.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J - I agree.**  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J - I agree**.  
  
**_Appeal allowed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/65.html_  

