##  Karunasiri v. Ratnasiri Perera - SLR - 24, Vol 2 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 66;
(1998) 2 Sri LR 24 (17 February 1998)

**24**

**KARUNASIRI  
v.  
RATNASIRI PERERA **

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.,  
PERERA, J.,  
GUNAWARDENA, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 7/9.  
CA NO. 259/91 (F)  
DC COLOMBO NO. 14585/L  
16TH JANUARY, 1998.

**25**

_Registration of Documents - Benefit of prior registration - Loss of benefit
by collusion in obtaining subsequent instrument - Registration of Documents
Ordinance - Section 7.  
_  
Soma who was the owner of an undivided share in a land sold her right title
and interest therein to the defendants pending a partition action, on deed P8.
The said deed was not duty registered due to a defect in registration. After
the final decree was entered in the partition action Soma sold lot 4 allotted
to her in the partition action by deed P3 to K who had been put forward by the
plaintiff to buy the land for him, unknown to Soma. Prior to the sale to K,
Soma told K that she had already sold her interests but K showed a Survey plan
and persuaded her to believe that she was still the owner of a portion of the
land. The valuable consideration for the transaction came from the plaintiff.  
  
**Held:  
**  
The evidence led in the case was insufficient to prove collusion between
parties to obtain the deed P3 within the meaning of subsection 2 of section 7
of the Registration of Documents Ordinance.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
1\. _Karunanayake and Others v. Gunasekera and others_ (1962) 65 NLR 529.  
  
2\. _Lairis Appu v. Tennakoon Kumarihamy_ (PC) (1962) 64 NLR 97.  
  
3\. _Aserappa v. Weeratunga_ (F.B) (1911), 14 NLR 417.  
  
4. _Hall v. Pelmadulla Valley Tea & Rubber Co., Ltd._ (P.C) (1929), 31 NLR 55.  
  
5\. _Appusingho v. Leelawathie_ (1958) 60 NLR 409.  
  
6\. _Ferdinando v. Ferdinando_ (1921) 23 NLR 143 at 148.  
  
7\. _Arumugam v. Arumugam_ (1951) 53 NLR 490.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
P. A D. Samarasekara, P.C with Keerthi Sri Gunawardena for the plaintiff
appellant.  
  
T. G. N. Jacolyn Seneviratne with Damayanthi de Silva for the defendant
respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult_

February 17, 1998  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J.  
**  
The appellant (plaintiff) instituted this action against the respondents
(defendants) in the District Court seeking for a declaration of title to a
land called lot No. 4 of Kahatagahawatta which is 1.03 perches in extent.
Admittedly lot No. 4 was allotted to one Soma Piyawathie Hettiarachchi (Soma)
by the final Decree entered in partition action.

**26**

No. DC Colombo 14251P. Pending the partition action, Soma had sold her right
title -and interest in Kahatagahawatta by deed- PS of 20.7.79 to the
defendants. After the final Decree was entered, Soma sold the divided lot No.
4 allotted to her, by deed P3 of 12.9.1986, to one Katriarachchi a friend of
the plaintiff, who in turn sold it by deed P4 of the same date to the
plaintiff.  
  
The defendants deed P8 was not duly registered in terms of the Registration of
Documents Ordinance (New LE Chap. 135), in that, the new folio in which it was
registered was not properly connected to the folio relating to the previous
registration affecting the same land, with necessary cross-references in the
latter. Although the trial judge held that deed P8 was duly registered, the
Court of Appeal, quite rightly, reversed that finding and both parties were
agreed before us that the Court of Appeal was right on that matter. (see
Karunanayake and others v. Gunasekera and others (1)  re cross-reference in
the prescribed manner). However, it was the finding of the Court of Appeal
that the plaintiff was guilty of collusion in terms of subsection 7 (2) of the
Registration of Documents Ordinance and that he has thereby lost the benefit
of prior registration of deed P3, that was canvassed before us.  
  
Subsection 7 (1) of the Registration of Documents Ordinance provides that
unregistered instruments are declared void against subsequently registered
instruments; subsection 7 (2) reads;  
  
"But fraud or collusion in obtaining such subsequent instrument or in securing
the prior registration thereof shall defeat the priority of the person
claiming thereunder".  
  
It is clear that for this subsection to operate there must be present, one of
the elements fraud or collusion, in one of the acts of either (a) in obtaining
the subsequent instrument or (b) in securing the prior registration. A person
may be guilty of fraud without being guilty of collusion, and vice versa.
Facts of some cases might demonstrate the existence of both elements of fraud
and collusion in any of the acts (a) or (b) above, as exemplified in the case
of Lairis Appu v. Tennakoon Kumarihamy (Privy. Council)(2). However, the
specific position of the defendants as crystallised in the argument before us,
was that the plaintiff was guilty of collusion (but not of fraud) in obtaining
the deed P3 in favour of Katriarachchi (but not in securing prior
registration).

**27**

Let me now refer to some basic facts relating to the execution of the deed P3.
Soma, the executrix of that deed is a close relative of the defendants and was
even called to give evidence at the trial on their behalf. The plaintiff
inquired from Soma whether she would sell her interests in the land to him;
that was before she sold her rights to the defendants. Soma refused. About 7
years after she sold her interests to the defendants, Katriarachchi asked
whether she would sell her interests in the land to him. She told him that she
had already sold her interests. Katriarachchi showed a survey plan to her and
told her that she was still the owner of a portion of that land. She agreed to
sell the land to Katriarachchi for valuable consideration. Unknown to her,
Katriarachchi was put forward by the plaintiff to buy the land for him and
Katriarachchi transferred the property to the plaintiff the same day he
purchased it. The valuable consideration for the transaction came from the
plaintiff.  
  
It is the settled law that mere notice of the existence of a prior deed, or
for that matter, of the fact that such deed was registered in a wrong folio,
will not deprive a subsequent purchaser of property for valuable
consideration, of the benefit of prior registration. See Aserappa v.
Weeratunga; (Full Bench);(3) Hall v. Pelmadulla Valley Tea & Rubber Co., Ltd.
(Privy Council) (4) Appusingho v. Leelawathie (5) and Lairis Appu v. Tennakoon
Kumarihamy (supra). It is contended on behalf of the plaintiff, that if at
all, the evidence of Soma discloses the mere knowledge on the part of
Katriarachchi and the plaintiff, of the existence of a prior deed.  
  
"Collusion" is an agreement between two or more persons to act to the
prejudice of a third party or for an improper purpose (The Oxford Companion to
Law - David M. Walker). In the case of Ferdinando v. Ferdinando   at 148
Bertram: CJ stated "Where, in these circumstances, anything underhand or
anything involving a pretence is done in concert, there is in my opinion,
collusion. And in my opinion both these elements figure in the present case".  
  
The Court of Appeal appears to have thought that the facts of the instant case
were on all fours with those of the case of Arumugam v. Arumugam (6) and it
relied heavily on the dicta of Gratiaen, J. in that case. In Arumugam's case
(supra), the dishonest intention of Thambimuttu, the common seller to both
contesting parties, and a close relative of the 2nd purchaser, was well-
established and

**28**

Gratiaen, J. referred to those circumstances in following terms: "The evidence
clearly establishes that shortly before 1st October, 1947, if not earlier,
Thambimuttu (whose financial condition during that period may be gauged from
the circumstance that at the time of the trial he was drawing a charitable
allowance from the Ceylon Government) conceived the idea of dishonestly
defeating the appellants rights of ownership by purporting to sell again some
part of his interests which were no longer his to dispose of. The plaintiff,
with full knowledge of the true position, fortified by his recent discovery
that the earlier conveyance 102 had in fact been registered in the wrong
folio, agreed to purchase from Thambimuttu a share (which had already been
effectively disposed of) in order that he may secure to himself a personal
advantage to the appellants' detriment. In pursuance of this common design he
secured the execution of the deed 102 and promptly caused it to be registered
in what he had discovered to be the correct folio. In other words, he entered
into a collusive transaction with Tambimuttu and lent himself to the latter's
intended fraud on his previous vendors. This thoroughly disreputable
transaction took place within a short time of the date on which the
appellants' rights under 1 D2 would have been strengthened by the acquisition
of prescriptive title to the 1/4 share purchased by them in 1938".  
  
Learned counsel for the plaintiff contended that in order to demonstrate that
there was "collusion in obtaining such subsequent instrument" within the
meaning of the subsection, at least, it must be shown that Katriarachchi, as
agent of the plaintiff, did collude with Soma the executrix to do something
underhand to the detriment of the defendants. None can collude with oneself. A
suggestion was not even made to Soma, that she was a party to a collusive act.
I find that evidence led in the case is insufficient to prove collusion
between parties in obtaining the deed P3.  
  
For the above reasons I set aside the judgments of the Court of Appeal and the
District Court and enter judgment for the plaintiff as prayed for in the
plaint. The appeal is allowed with costs of this court fixed at Rs 10,000.  
  
**PERERA, J. - I agree.  
  
GUNAWARDANA, J. - I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/66.html_  

