##  Lalitha Padmini v. Jayatunga - SLR - 163, Vol 2 of 1999 [1998] LKSC 67;
(1999) 2 Sri LR 163 (2 April 1998)

**163**

**LALITHA PADMINI  
v.  
JAYATUNGA**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J., AND  
GUNAWARDANA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 87/97  
C.A. APPEAL NO. 330/88 (F)  
D.C. COLOMBO NO. 4521/L  
JANUARY 19, 1998.

_Vindicatory suit - Conflicting title deeds - Determination of superior title
- Principle of exceptio rei vendita et traditae._

The defendant resisted the action on the basis that the land in suit one rood
in extent described in schedule 1 to the plaint was owned by his wife Swarna
Jayanthi on a deed of transfer D1 executed in 1959 by the original owner
Charles Appu. At the time of the execution of D1, Charles Appu did not have
title to the land as he had executed a conditional transfer of the entirety of
the land in favour of one Podi Appuhamy deed P7 of 14. 10. 1957. Podi Appuhamy
by deed P8 of 15. 5. 1961 retransferred the same to Charles Appu. Thereafter,
Charles Appu conveyed the entirety of the land to his wife Charlotte, by deed
P3 of 19. 7. 1961. Subsequently, Charlotte donated her rights to her daughter
the plaintiff. The plaintiff never got possession of the land.

**Held :**

On the principle exceptio rei vendita et traditae, when Podi Appuhamy
retransferred his title to Charles Appu, Charles Appu's title devolved on
Swarna Jayanthi by operation of law. As such Charles Appu had no interests to
convey to his wife Charlotte and consequently Charlotte could not have
conveyed any interests to the plaintiff.

2\. The plaintiff had not established a title superior to that claimed by the
defendant's wife.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_L. V. P. Wettasinghe_ for the plaintiff-appellant.

_Daya Guruge_ for the defendant-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult.  
  
_**164**

April 2, 1998.  
  
**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.**

This is an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal allowing the appeal
of the defendant. The plaintiff filed an application for Special Leave which
was granted by this court, on the following question :

"Did deed D1 executed in 1959 convey title after the execution of deed PS in
.1961 in favour of the original owner on the principle of exceptio rei vendita
et traditae?"

The facts relevant to this appeal are briefly as follows :

Charles Appu was the original owner of the land in extent one rood described
in schedule 1 to the plaint. The said Charles Appu executed a conditional
transfer of this entirety to one Podi Appuhamy on deed 106 of 14. 10. 57 (P7)
which was retransferred on deed 192 of 15\. 05. 61 (P8). In the meantime by D1
Charles Appu transferred this land in 1959 to his daughter Swarna Jayanthi
(said to be adopted) and son-in-law Elias Appuhamy. After the said retransfer,
Charles Appu conveyed the entirety of the land to his wife Charlotte on deed
3806 of 19.07.61 (P3). Charlotte reserving her life interest by P1 donated her
rights to the daughter of Charles and Charlotte, namely Lalitha Padmini the
plaintiff in this case. Subsequently by P6 Charlotte transferred her life
interest too to the plaintiff.

There are two sets of title deeds by which plaintiff and defendant's wife are
alleged to have derived title. Admittedly Charles Appu did not have title when
he transferred the land to his daughter Swarna Jayanthi, but soon after he
derived the title after the retransfer on deed No. 192 of 15.05.61 (P8) from
Podi Appuhamy to Charles Appu, Charles Appu by deed No. 3806 of 19.07.61 (P3)
transferred his rights to his wife Charlotte.

The only question is whether defendant's deed of title 9147 of 12.07.59 (D1)
being prior in time took precedence over deed No. 3806 of 19.07.61 (P3) by
which plaintiff's predecessor Charlotte got title from Charles.

165

According to Roman Dutch Law principle of exceptio rei vendita et traditae
when Podi Appuhamy transferred by P8 his right, title and interest to Charles,
Charles' interest would have by operation of law devolved on Swarna Jayanthi
presently the wife of Jayatunga. In that instance Charles would have had no
interests to convey to his wife Charlotte and consequently Charlotte the widow
could not have transferred any interests to Lalitha Padmini the plaintiff.
Clearly, therefore the plaintiff's title does not supercede the title of the
wife of the defendant and the plaintiff could not be said to have established
a title superior to that claimed by the defendant's wife. Evidence on record
shows Lalitha Padmini the plaintiff never got possession of this land. In
those circumstances I am unable to conclude that the plaintiff had in any
manner proved her title to the land by deeds nor prescribed to the land.

It is the contention of learned counsel for the appellant that deed of
transfer D1 was in fact a gift and the Roman Dutch Law principle of exceptio
rei vendita et traditae did not apply to deed D1. This was the view of the
learned District Judge too, on the ground that no consideration passed on deed
D1, but I find in the Notary's attestation in D1 it is clearly stated that
consideration was acknowledged to have been received earlier. The learned
District Judge's evaluation and his conclusion that the deed of transfer D1
was a gift is not borne out in any manner either by evidence or by any legal
implication.

I am, therefore, of the view that the plaintiff's action must fail and the
judgment of the learned District Judge must be set aside. I accordingly,
affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeal dismissing the plaintiff's action
with costs.  
  
In my view this appeal is frivolous and is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs.
10,500.

**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNAWARDANA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/67.html_  

