##  Jiffry v. Nimalasiri and Five Others - SLR - 45, Vol 1 of 1997 [1997] LKSC
7; (1997) 1 Sri LR 45 (24 January 1997)

45

JIFFRY

v.

NIMALASIRI AND FIVE OTHERS



SUPREME COURT.

G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

ANANDACOOMARSWAMY,J. AND

SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.

S.C. NO.507/95

DECEMBER 16, 1996.



Constitution - Article 13(1) - Arrest - whether proper procedure has been
followed - Section 23(1), and 32(1)b of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.



The petitioner has alleged that his arrest was not according to the provisions
of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act (Code) nor under any other law and
thereby his arrest was not according to the procedure established by law. It
was contended that -



(a) he was taken into custody without a warrant;

  
(b) he was not informed of the reason for his arrest;



**Held:**

** **

(1) The plaint submitted that the petitioner is to be charged for (i) Criminal
Trespass (ii) Criminal Intimidation. Under the Code a person who is suspected
of Criminal Intimidation shall not be arrested without a warrant. However a
person who is suspected of Criminal Trespass may be arrested without a
warrant. Therefore when the Police took him into custody without a warrant
they had acted lawfully and with authority on reasonable grounds.



(2) The respondents stated that the petitioner was informed of the reasons for
the arrest. The petitioner too has made a complaint to the Kohuwela Police on
8.8 95. in that complaint, he explained the incident which took place on
24.07.1995. The events that took place on 24.07.1995, have led the petitioner
to a position where he would have known that sometimes or other the Police
would contact him. The affidavit of the 2nd respondent explains that the
compliant against the petitioner relates to Assault and Criminal Trespass.



The only evidence to the contrary is the affidavit by the petitioners wife
which was affirmed to after a lapse of 7 months.



On a scrutiny of the entirety of the material, it would appear that the case
resolves itself to one of "word against word", the burden of proof lies
clearly on the petitioner.



**45**



**APPLICATION** under article 126 of the Constitution.



**Cases referred to:**

_ _

_1\. Sirisena and Others v Earnest Perera -_ 1991 - 2 SLR 97 at 108  


_2\. Channa Peiris and Others v Attorney-General and Others -_ 1994 - 1 SLR 2

_  
3\. Piyasiri and Others v Nimal Fernando, A.S. P and Others_ 1988 - 1 - SLR
173 at 183.

_  
G. Jayakumar_ for the petitioner

_ _

_Suhada Gamlath S.S.C.,_ for respondents.

_Cur adv vult._



January 24, 1997.  


**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.**  



The petitioner, who is a businessman, alleges that he was taken by the 2nd
respondent around 10.30 p.m. on the 9th August, 1995 to the Kohuwela Police
Station in a Police Jeep. At the Kohuwela Police Station, the petitioner was
informed by the 2nd respondent that the Pettah Police wanted him arrested and
the 1st respondent had directed the 2nd respondent to keep the petitioner
inside the cell at the Kohuwela Police Station. On the 10th August, 1995
around 10.30 a.m., the 3rd respondent, a police officer attached to the Pettah
Police Station, took charge of the petitioner from the Kohuwela Police
Station. While he was inside the cell at the Pettah Police Station, the 4th
respondent appeared before him around 10.30 p.m. on the 10th August, 1995 and
told him that he should give a written undertaking that he will not create
trouble to a person by the name of Sahabdeen. A bail bond was signed and he
was released on the 10th August, around 10.30 p.m.



The petitioner alleges that his arrest was not according to the provisions of
the Code of Criminal Procedure Act nor any other law and thereby his arrest
was not according to the procedure established by law. He claims that 1st to
the 5th respondents have infringed his rights under Article 13(1) of the
Constitution.

**47**



The main contention advanced on behalf of the petitioner is that respondents
did not arrest him according to the procedure laid down by law. Accordingly,
it is submitted that -



(a) he was taken into custody without, a warrant;  


(b) he was not informed of the reasons for his arrest.



Section 23(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act states that -



_" In making an arrest the person making the same shall actually touch or
confine the body of the person to be arrested unless there be a submission to
the custody by word or action and shall inform the person to be arrested of
the nature of the charge or allegation upon which he is arrested"_



It was submitted that the police officers who arrested the petitioner had no
warrant for his arrest. It is important to consider the events that took place
prior to the arrest of the petitioner as it seems that the arrest was one
incident in a sequence of events, in which the petitioner was involved.



On the 24th July, 1995 a person named, Mustapha Mohamed Sahabdeen, made a
complaint (4R1) at the Pettah Police Station. He had stated that the
petitioner had come to his office situated at no. 213, Main Street, Colombo 11
around noon on 24th July and threatened him that if he .does not pay his money
that he would either kill him or abduct him. Sahabdeen had also stated that he
has not got petitioner's address with him but he would furnish it later.
Sahabdeen made a request to the Police to have an inquiry in regard to this
dispute in order to settle it.



On the 9th August, 1995 around 2.30 p.m. the O.I.C., Pettah had sent a radio
message (1 R1) to the Kohuwela Police that the petitioner is needed at the
Pettah Police Station as he is a suspect in an allegation of Criminal Trespass
and Criminal Intimidation. On the same day at 10.42 p.m. a message (1R2) was
sent to the Pettah Police Station by O.I.C. Kohuwela requesting them to send
an officer to take charge of the petitioner who has been arrested.

**48**



The question for decision is whether in these circumstances the proper
procedure laid down by law has been followed in respect of the arrest of the
petitioner. In this regard, a basic allegation put forward by the petitioner
against the respondents is that the petitioner was arrested without a warrant.
The plaint submitted to the Magistrate's Court, Colombo on the 23rd August,
1995 which is produced as 4R3 states that the petitioner is to be charged for
-



(a) Criminal Trespass; and  


(b) Criminal Intimidation.



According to Section 32(1) (b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act -



_" Any peace officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a
warrant arrest any person - who has been concerned in any cognizable offense
or against whom a reasonable complaint has been made or credible information
has been received or a reasonable suspicion exists of his having been so
concerned"._



Furthermore, under the Code of Criminal Procedure Act a person who is
suspected of Criminal Intimidation shall not be arrested without a warrant.
However, a person who is suspected of Criminal Trespass may be arrested
without a warrant. A complaint was made against the petitioner, and the
petitioner was charged both for Criminal Trespass and Criminal Intimidation.
Therefore, when the police took him into custody without a warrant, they had
acted lawfully and with authority on reasonable grounds.



The second allegation by the petitioner is that he was not informed of the
reason for his arrest. The petitioner contends that thereby his fundamental
rights guaranteed and protected by Article 13(1) of the Constitution have been
infringed. Article 13(1) states that



_" No person shall be arrested except according to procedure established by
law Any person arrested shall be informed of the reason for his arrest"_

**49**



In order to support his argument, the petitioner has relied on Sirisena and
Others v. Earnest Perera(1), where it was stated (by Fernando J.)



_" Article 13(1) thus contains a prohibition on deprivation of liberty - no
person shall be arrested. However, there is an exception, that such
deprivation of liberty may be effected "according to the procedure established
by law", (and this is certainly more restrictive than the phrase "except in
accordance with the law') Further, even if a person is arrested in accordance
with the procedure established by law, he must nevertheless be informed of the
reason for his arrest. "_



The petitioner also relied on Channa Peiris and Others v. Attorney General and
Others (2), where it was stated, (by Amerasinghe J.)



_" The right to be deprived of personal liberty except according to a
procedure established by law is enshrined in Article 13(1) of the
Constitution. Article 13(1) prohibits not only the taking into custody but
also the keeping of persons in a state of arrest by imprisonment or other
physical restraint except according to procedure established by law. "_



The petitioner too has made a complaint (P1) to the Kohuwela Police on the 8th
of August, 1995. In that complaint he explained the incident which took place
on the 24th of July, 1995. The petitioner has said that an unknown person had
come to his house on the 8th and had threatened his wife and due to the fear
created in the petitioner's mind he decided to make this complaint.



The arrest of the petitioner by the Kohuwela Police should be considered in
this background. The petitioner was aware of the dispute between Sahabdeen and
himself. He also knew that he too had made a complaint at the Kohuwela Police
Station. The important question is whether the police had informed the
petitioner the reason for his arrest. The 2nd respondent in his affidavit has
stated that when he took the petitioner into custody he explained the purpose
of the

**50**



visit and informed him of the complaint against him. (Assault and Criminal
Trespass). This is also recorded in the Information Book (2R1) maintained at
the Kohuwela Police Station. On the other hand, the petitioner's wife in her
affidavit (P3) stated that the 2nd respondent did not inform the petitioner
the nature of the charge or the allegation on which the petitioner was
arrested on the 9th August, 1995. However, it should be noted that the
petitioner's wife has submitted her affidavit only on the 19th May, 1996,
after a lapse of 7 months from the date of the arrest.



The Counsel for the petitioner, in his written submissions attempted to gain
support from Piyasiri and Others v Nimal Fernando. A.S.P. and Others"'. While
agreeing with the view that "custody does not today, necessarily import the
meaning of confinement but has been extended to mean lack of freedom of
movement brought about not only by detention but also by threatened coercion,
the existence of which can be inferred from the surrounding circumstances", it
should be noted that the facts and circumstances of that case are quite
different from the present case. In Piyasiri's case, the arrest of the
petitioner was highly speculative and was for the purpose of ascertaining
whether any of them could be suspected of having committed an offence of
bribery.



The case for the respondents is that the petitioner was informed of the
reasons for the arrest. The events that took place on the 24th July, 1995,
have led the petitioner to a position where he would have known that some time
or other the police would contact him. The affidavit of the 2nd respondent
explains that the complaint against the petitioner relates to Assault and
Criminal Trespass. The 2nd respondent avers that he explained the charges to
the petitioner. The only evidence (apart from that of the petitioner) to the
contrary, is the affidavit by the petitioner's wife which was affirmed to
after a lapse of 7 months which leaves us in doubt as to the veracity of it.



On a scrutiny of the entirety of the material placed before us, it would
appear that the case resolves itself to one of "word against word". The burden
of proof lies clearly on the petitioner. In this view of

**51**



the matter, I hold that the petitioner has failed to establish the
infringement of Article 13(1) of the Constitution. The application fails and
is accordingly dismissed but, in all the circumstances, without costs.



**G. P S. DE SILVA, C. J.** \- I agree.

** **

**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY J**. - I agree.



_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/7.html_  

