##  Gunasekera v. Jinadasa - SLR - 115, Vol 2 of 1996 [1995] LKSC 7; (1996) 2
Sri LR 115 (7 July 1995)

**115**

**GUNASEKERA  
v.  
****JINADASA**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO, J.  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
WADUGODAPITIYA J.  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. 25/95.  
C.A. 490/84.  
D.C. MATARA 5579/L.  
11 MARCH, 1996.

_Rent Act 7 of 1972 ‑ Attornment ‑ Deposit of Rent in favour of original
land­lord‑Authorised Person? ‑ Ejectment \- Tenancy Action or Vindicatory
Action._

The premises were let __ in 1960 by the Plaintiff Respondent Appellants'
father to the father of the Defendant Appellant Respondent. Later in 1970, the
Plaintiff's father gifted the premises to him, but they __ neither informed
the Defendant's father nor called him to attorn, the latter died in 1973, the
Defendant then attorned to the Plaintiff's father, the Defendant continued to
pay rent to the Plaintiff's father; when the Plaintiff's father refused to
accept rent from 1980, the Defendant deposited the rent with the authorised
per­son, to the credit of the __ Plaintiff's father. The father and son by
their letter of 23.10.81, informed the Defendant of the Transfer and called
upon him to pay rent to the Plaintiff with effect from 16.11.81. The Defendant
did not reply but continued to occupy the premises, he deposited the rent in
the father's name ‑ and continued to do so even after his answer was filed.

The Plaintiff instituted vindicatory action, the Trial Judge held that both
the Plaintiff and his father had called upon the Defendant to attorn, to the
plaintiff and that the Defendant having failed to attorn to the Plaintiff was
a **trespasser,** and gave judgment for the Plaintiff.

On appeal the Court of Appeal reversed the judgment, holding that the
Defendant had become aware of the Plaintiff's title in 1973, and that the
father continued to collect rent as the Plaintiffs agent, and that the
Defendant had not deliberately refused to accept him as landlord and had not
refused to pay him rent; and that therefore the Defendant had not been
transformed from a tenant into a trespasser; on Appeal.

**116**

**Held:**

**_Per_ Fernando, J.**

"I do not agree that simply because the Rent Act now gives tenants more
extensive privileges, the common law should now be interpreted differently,
either to assist the transferee or the occupier, the question before us must
be approached without any predisposition towards an interpretation which would
favour either Plaintiffs or owners, on the one hand or Defendants or tenants
on the other.

(i) While it is legitimate initially to infer attornment from continued
occupation, thus establishing privity of contract between the parties, another
principle of law of contract comes into play in such circumstances to which
the presumption of attornment must sometimes yield. When the occupier
per­sists in conduct which is fundamentally inconsistent with a contract of
tenancy, and amounts to a repudiation of that presumed contract the
trans­feree has the option **either** to treat the tenancy as subsisting and
to sue for arrears of rent and ejectment or to accept the occupiers
repudiation of the tenancy and to proceed against him as a trespasser.

**_Per_ Fernando, J.**

"The court must not apply the presumption of attornment as a trap for the
transferee, allowing the occupier who fails to fulfil the obligation of a
tenant, if used on the tenancy, to disclaim tenancy and assert that he can
only be sued for ejectment and damages in a vindicatory action, but if faced
with an action based on title to claim that notwithstanding his conduct he is
a tenant and can only be sued in a tenancy action, since it is the occupiers
conduct which gives rise to such uncertainty, equitable considerations confirm
the option which the law of contract gives to the transferee.

(ii) Payment to the authorised person in the name of the person who is not the
landlord does not discharge the tenants obligation to the landlord.

**AN APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

**Cases referred to:**

1\. _Seelawathie v Ediriweera_ ‑ 1989‑2SLR 170

2\. _De Alwis v Perera_ ‑ 1951‑52 NLR 433,445

3\. _Silva v Muniamma_ ‑ 1955, 56 NLR 357,358

4\. _De Silva v Abeyratne_ ‑ 1955, 56 NLR 574

5\. _Perera v Costa_ ‑ 1955‑ 57 NLR 283, 284

**117**

6\. _Sabapathipillai v Ramupillai_ ‑ 1956, 58 NLR 367,369

7\. _David Silva v Madanayake_ ‑ 1967, 69 NLR 396, 400

8\. _Perera v Padmakanthi_ ‑ 1987 2SLR 1,7

9\. _Subramaniam v Pathmanathan_ 1984 1 SLR 252, 257

10\. _Violet Perera v Asilin Nona SC_ 63/94 SCM 7.7.95. (1996 1 SLR 1)

11\. _Mensina v Joslin_ 1981 1 SRISK LR 76

12\. _Fernandes v Perera_ 1974, 77 NLR 220

13\. _Fernando v Wijesekare_ 1969, 73 NLR 110

14\. _Naidu v Mudalige_ 1973, 76 NLR 385

_R. K. W. Goonasekera_ with _Ms_ _Shiranthi Jayatilleke_ for
Plaintiff‑Respondent-­Appellant.

_Rohan Sahabandu_ with _Athula Perera_ for Defendant‑Appellant‑Respondent.

_Cur. Adv. vult._

September 13, 1996.

**FERNANDO** , **J.**

The Plaintiff‑Respondent‑Appellant ("the Plaintiff") was granted special leave
to appeal to this Court on the **question** whether tenant who is notified by
his landlord and the landlord's successor in title that the rented premises
had been transferred and that the rent should be paid to the **transferee,**
but who **ignores** that request and continues to deposit rent to the credit
of the **landlord** (with the **" authorised person") **is in law the tenant
of the transferee, and is liable to be ejected **only** upon a properly
constituted tenancy action.

When this appeal first came up for hearing, Mr. Goonasekera for the Plaintiff
submitted that it was necessary to **reconsider** the series of decisions
(referred to in _Seelawathie v Ediriweera,_ (1))in which it had been held that
continuance in occupation by the tenant, with notice of the transferee's
election to recognize him as the tenant, constitutes an exercise of the
tenant's option to acknowledge the transferee as landlord; and also that there
now arose for decision the question left open in _Seelawathie v Ediriweera_ (
_supra_ ) __ whether such a transferee was entitled, either in addition or in
the alternative, to claim relief based on title.

This appeal was thereupon referred to this bench of five Judges in terms of
Article 132 (3) of the Constitution, as an important question

**118**

of law was involved‑ whether in those circumstances a transferee is entitled
to institute a vindicatory action, instead of a tenancy action.

The facts are not in dispute. The premises were let in **1960** by the
**Plaintiff's father** to the **father** of the **Defendant**
Appellant­-Respondent ("the Defendant"); in **1970** the Plaintiff's father
**gifted** the premises to him, but they **neither** informed the Defendant's
father **nor** called upon him to attorn; the latter died in **1973,** and the
**Defendant** then **attorned** to the **Plaintiff's father ;** the
**Defendant** continued to pay rent to the **Plaintiff's father ;** attempts
were then made to get the Defendant to leave the premises, and the Plaintiff's
father refused to accept the rent, whereupon, from **1980,** the Defendant
deposited the rent with the "authorised person" to the **credit** of the
**Plaintiff's** **father. Thereafter,** by their letter dated **23.10.81** ,
father and son informed the Defendant of the transfer and called upon him to
pay rent to the Plaintiff with effect from **16.11.81**. The Defendant did not
reply, but continued to occupy the premises. At that time he had paid the rent
only up to April 1981. __ Thereafter too he deposited the rent (of Rs. 30/‑ __
per month) in the **father's name** **:** on 12.1.82 _,_ the rent for May,
June, and July 1981, __ and on 3.5.82 the rent for the next ten months, August
1981 to May 1982. __ Thus, despite remaining in occupation for six months
after being asked to attorn, he not only failed to pay rent to the Plaintiff,
but deposited the rent for December 1981 to May 1982 ‑ which __ was clearly
due to the Plaintiff, if he was accepted as the landlord ‑ **in favour of the
original landlord.** This he continued to do **after** this action was
instituted, and even after his answer was filed in October 1982. __ The
Plaintiff made no effort to recover these sums from the "authorised" person".

On **11.5.82** the Plaintiff instituted a **vindicatory** action for the
ejectment of the Defendant, averring that the Defendant had failed to accept
him as landlord and to pay him rent; and that the Defendant was in unlawful
possession from 16.11.81. In his answer filed in October 1982 __ the Defendant
averred that he had not possessed the premises otherwise than as tenant, and
that he had never denied the Plaintiff's title.

The principle issue at the trial was whether the Defendant was in unlawful
possession of the premises from about 16.11.81 __ by reason

**119**

of his refusal to accept the Plaintiff's title. The trial Judge held that both
the Plaintiff and his father had called upon the Defendant to attorn to the
Plaintiff; that there was no uncertainty as to the real landlord; and that the
defendant having failed to attorn to the Plaintiff, was a **trespasser.** He
gave judgement for the Plaintiff.

On appeal, the Court of Appeal reversed that judgment, holding that the
Defendant had become aware of the Plaintiff's title in 1973; __ that
thereafter the father continued to collect the rent, acting as the Plaintiff's
agent; that the defendant had not challenged the title of the Plaintiff, had
not deliberately refused to accept him as landlord, and had not refused to pay
him rent (which he had continued to deposit with the "authorised person") ;
and that therefore the Defendant had not been transformed from a tenant into a
trespasser.

On appeal to this Court, Mr. Goonasekera contended that upon a tenant's
failure expressly to attorn, a vindicatory action was the proper remedy, and
not an action for ejectment based on the tenancy and arrears of rent. He
questioned the series of decisions which have, expressly or impliedly, upheld
the presumption of attornment arising from continued occupation: that "a
tenant who remains in occupation, with notice of the (transferee's) election
to recognise him as a tenant, may legitimately be regarded as having attorned
to the (transferee) so as to establish privity of contract between them" _de
Alwis v Perera,_ (2) _Silva v Muniamma,_ (3) _de Silva v Abeyratne,_ (4)
_Perera v de Costa,_ (5) _Sabapathipillai v Ramupillai,_ (6) _David Silva v
Madanayake,_ (7) _Perera v Padmakanthi,_ (8) _Subramaniam v Pathmanathan,_ (9)
_Seelawathie v Ediriweera_ ( _supra_ ) __ and _Violet Perera v Asilin Nona._
(10) __ It was his sub­mission that in those cases the transferee had sued on
the basis of tenancy, whereupon the Defendant had denied attornment, and the
Courts had then drawn the presumption of attornment in favour of the
Plaintiff; now, however, the Rent Act gives tenants extensive privi­leges in
regard to paying up arrears of rent so that it was more ad­vantageous to a
transferee to bring a vindicatory action; and in those circumstances, he
urged, the Courts should not presume attornment from continued occupation.

However, Mr. Sahabandu for the Defendant strongly relied on those decisions as
establishing that the Defendant did become the

**120**

tenant of the Plaintiff. He argued that payment of rent to the Plaintiff's
father did not militate against that presumption or affect the Defendant's
status as tenant. Firstly, he claimed that the Defendant's father became the
Plaintiff's tenant in 1970 when the premises were transferred to the
Plaintiff; that the payments made after 23.10.81 were on the same basis.
Secondly, he submitted that, in any event, payment to the "authorised person"
discharged the tenant's obligation to the landlord. Thirdly, he contended that
continued occupation after 23.10.81 constituted attornment, and that even if
the Defendant had thereafter failed to pay rent to the Plaintiff, yet he was
still a tenant, albeit a tenant in arrears of rent, who could only be ejected
in a tenancy action. Finally, he urged that rent legislation over a long
period of time manifested the special care and concern which the Legislature
had for tenants, and that the Courts should not prefer an interpretation which
would permit a vindicatory action, which would deprive tenants of their
benefits under the Rent Act ‑ such as the privilege of paying up arrears of
rent even after action was filed.

Mr. Sahabandu's submission that the Defendant's father became the Plaintiff's
tenant when the premises were transferred to the Plaintiff in 1970 is
unacceptable. It is settled law that tenancy is a contractual relation, which
may subsist even where the landlord is not the owner of the rented premises.
Hence there is no doubt that the Plintiff's father continued to be the
landlord even after the 1970 transfer, and that the payments made to him
(first by the Defendant's father, and after 1973 by the Defendant) were in the
same capacity, and not as the agent of the Plaintiff **qua** landlord. The
Plaintiff could not have stepped into his father's shoes unless and until
there was an attornment.

As for the submission that payment to the "authorised person" was sufficient,
_Violet Perera v Asilin Nona (supra) is_ authority that payment to the
"authorised person" in the name of a person who is not the landlord does not
discharge the tenant's obligation to the landlord.

Turning to the question of attornment, while Mr. Goonasekera urged that the
presumption had been drawn by the Courts to assist a Plaintiff to rebut the
Defendant's denial of a tenancy, Mr. Sahabandu asked the Court to ****
interpret the law so as to assist a Defendant who

**121**

asserts a tenancy. The decisions which Mr. Goonasekera questioned explained
and applied the common law; they did not seek to "assist" a transfer faced
with a tenant who denied attornment, and I do not agree that simply because
the Rent Act now gives tenants more extensive privileges, the common law
should now be interpreted differently ‑ either to assist the transferee or the
occupier. The question before us must be approached without any predisposition
towards an interpretation which would favour **either** Plaintiffs or owners,
on the one hand, or Defendants or tenants, on the other.

Mr. Goonasekera has not suggested any other reason why those decisions should
be varied or overruled, and **I am of the view that they are correct.** Upon a
transfer of the rented premises, one option which the transferee has is to
take the premises with the tenant; there upon the tenant has two alternative
courses of action ‑ **either** to attorn to the transferee (and to continue in
occupation of the premises under the transferee, but in terms of the original
tenancy) **or** to refuse to attorn (and to leave the premises and to pursue
his contractual rem­edy against the original landlord). The only way in which
the tenant could validly exercise the second option is by quitting the
premises "if he refuses to continue as tenant, his first duty is to quit the
premises. If he chooses to stay in occupation, he remains there as tenant" _de
Silva v Abeyratne, _( _supra_ ) _._ If he does not do that, and instead
continues in occupation, it is a legitimate inference that he is exercising
his first option to remain as tenant. This is the position even if he states,
unequivocally, that he refuses to accept the transferee as his landlord (as in
_David Silva v Madnayake,_ ( _supra_ )) __ and _Mensina v Joslin,_ (11) __ or
requests some clarification (as in _Fernandes v Perera_ (12) _Subramaniam v
Pathmanathan,_ ( _supra_ )) and _Seelawathie v Ediriweera._ ( _supra_ )).

But that presumption may be displaced by the terms of an agreement between the
transferee and the tenant as in _Fernando v Wijesekera,_ (13) __ and _Naidu v
Mudalige_ (14) __ under which the latter is permitted to continue in
occupation otherwise than as a tenant. The **presumption of attornment** is
therefore not **irrebuttable.**

Thus if the only question for decision had been "was the Defendant's
occupation on or about 16.11.81 unlawful?", it would have been legitimate to
infer that his occupation was as tenant, and was

**122**

therefore not unlawful. But that does not dispose of the matter, because the
issue before us is whether the Defendant's occupation was unlawful **in May
1982**. Is the presumption compelling and irrebuttable ? If the occupier by
his words denied the tenancy, and by his acts repudiated it accepting another
as the owner and landlord, or by dealing with the premises as if he were
himself the owner ‑ is he entitled to continue to be regarded as a tenant? Or,
rather, is the transferee **bound** to treat him as a tenant ?

It seems to me that while it is legitimate initially to **infer attornment**
from **continued occupation,** thus establishing **privity of contract**
between the parties, another principle of the law of contract comes into play
in such circumstances to which the presumption of attornment must sometimes
yield. When the occupier persists in conduct which is fundamentally
inconsistent with a contract of tenancy, and amounts to a repudiation of that
presumed contract, the transferee has the option **either** to treat the
tenancy as subsisting, and to sue for arrears of rent and ejectment (as in
_David Silva v Madanayake_ ( _supra_ )) __**or** to "accept" the occupier's
repudiaton of the tenancy, and to proceed against him as a trespasser.

When the Defendant, having **failed** expressly to accept the **plaintiff** as
landlord, thereafter **failed to pay** him the rent for several months **after
16.11.81,** and instead deposited that rent to the credit of the **former
landlord,** he repudiated the fundamental obligation of a tenancy ‑ he denied
the Plaintiff's status as landlord, and did not pay the rent due to him ‑ a
paltry sum of Rs. 30/‑ per month. While it would still have been legitimate to
regard him as a tenant, if the Plaintiff wished to do so notwithstanding his
repudiation of the presumed tenancy, yet if the Plaintiff too no longer
desired continuation of any such tenancy, the principle laid down by Gratiaen,
J., in **_de Alwis v_** _**Perera** (supra) _does not suggest that the Courts
should nevertheless impose on the parties a contractual relationship which
they had disclaimed or denied, or are estopped from asserting.

Hence as at May 1982 when the plaint was filed, it was not obligatory to infer
a tenancy. Any lingering uncertainty in that respect is removed by the
Defendant's conduct in depositing rent to the credit of the **former
landlord** even after **** he filed his answer in which he asserted that he
did not dispute the **Plaintiff's title.**

**123**

This interpretation commends itself to me as being consistent also with
**equity** and **fairness.** The Court must not apply the presumption of
attornment as a trap for the transferee: allowing the occupier who fails to
fulfil the obligations of a tenant, **if sued on** **the tenancy** , to
disclaim tenancy and assert that he can only be sued for ejectment and damages
in a vindicatory action; but **if faced with an action** **based on title** ,
to claim that notwithstanding his conduct he is a tenant and can only be sued
in a tenancy action. Since it is the occupier's conduct which gives rise to
such uncertainty, equitable considerations confirm the option which the law of
contract gives to the transferee.

The position might have been **Different** if the defendant had duly
discharged his tenancy obligations for a period ‑ as for instance by paying
rent to the Plaintiff ‑ and had defaulted only thereafter. But we are not
called upon to decide that point.

I hold that although the Plaintiff had failed to establish his plea that the
defendant was in unlawful possession from 16.11.81, **yet** the evidence
showed that the Defendant was in **unlawful possession** at the time **the
action was** instituted. That was sufficient to entitle the Plaintiff to
succeed in the vindicatory action brought by him upon the issues framed at the
trial.

In _Seelawathie v Ediriweera_ ( _supra_ ) __ I refrained from commenting on
the conclusion in _Fernandes v Perera (supra)_ and _Mensina v Joslin (supra)_
that a vindicatory action did not lie. The former is distinguish­able. There
the tenant became aware of the transfer, and wrote to the transferee in March,
and again in April 1962, inquiring whether he was to send the rent to him; the
transferee's Proctor told him, in May 1962, to remit the rent to the
transferee, and wrote to him again to attorn, and pay rent, to the transferee.
In December 1962, the tenant's Proctor wrote to the transferee's Proctor
saying that he had been the tenant of a third party for 18 years and that he
could not attorn unless the transferee obtained that third party's consent to
the payment of rent to the transferee. The Court took the view that the tenant
never sought to terminate the tenancy, and was always willing to pay the rent,
but was under a genuine difficulty as to the person entitled to receive the
rent; and held that he could not be ejected in a vindicatory

**124**

action, but only in a tenancy action. The judgement does not show that the
tenant in that case either paid rent to the third party after March 1962, or
asserted that the third party was the landlord. There was thus no repudiation
of the tenancy under the transferee. _Mensina v Joslin_ ( _supra_ ) decided
that the transferee could only file a tenancy action, even though the
Defendant had disputed her title. With respect, that decision failed to
recognise that the presumption is one which **" may"** be drawn, and is
neither compelling nor irrebuttable.

**I allow the appeal** , set aside the judgment and decree of the Court of
Appeal, and **affirm** the **decree** of the **District Court** for the
reasons set out. The Plaintiff will be entitled to costs in this Court and in
the Court of Appeal in a sum of Rs. 7,500/‑.

**AMERASINGHE, J. ‑** I agree.

**DHEERARATNE, J**. ‑ I agree.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J**. ‑ I agree.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.

_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/7.html_  

