##  Umbichy Ltd v. Hede Navigation (Pte)Ltd.(Owners of M.V.'Shantha Rohan') -
SLR - 284, Vol 1 of 2000 [1993] LKSC 7; (2000) 1 Sri LR 284 (27 July 1993)

**284**

**UMBICHY LTD  
V.  
HEDE NAVIGATION PTE) LTD  
(OWNERS OF M. V. "SHANTHA ROHAN")**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J. PERERA. J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S. C. APPEAL No. 32/91A  
C. A. No. 103/84  
H. C. COLOMBO No. 18/83  
19TH JULY, 1993.  
  
_Admiralty jurisdiction - Jurisdiction of the High Court of Colombo as on
31.8.1983 -Admiralty Ordinance, No. 2 of 1891 -Admiralty Rules of 1883 - The
(U. K.) Administration of Justice Act of 1956 - Administration of Justice Law
No. 44 of 1973 - Sections 3, 23 and 54 of the Law -Judicature Act No. 2 of
1978 - Sections 13 and 62 of the Act - Interpretation of statutes.  
  
_Prior to 1.1.1974 on which date the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of
1973 ("the AJL") was promulgated, admiralty jurisdiction was exercised by the
Supreme Court as the "Colonial Court of Admiralty" under the Ceylon Admiralty
Ordinance, No. 2 of 1891, having the same jurisdiction as the High Court of
England and applying the Admiralty Rules made by Order-in-Council dated
23.8.1883. Thereafter, admiralty jurisdiction was defined by the (U. K)
Administration of Justice Act of 1956.  
  
Section 3(1)(a) of the AJL repealed the Ceylon Courts of Admiralty Ordinance,
but the Admiralty Rules were kept alive by section 3(2). Section 23(1) enabled
admiralty jurisdiction to be vested in a High Court; and section 54 defined
admiralty jurisdiction to mean "until otherwise provided for by written law,
the admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court of England", and thereby kept in
force the (U. K.) Administration of Justice Act of 1956.  
  
Section 62 of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978 which came into operation on
2.7.1979 repealed Chapter I (which included sections 23 and 54 but not section
3) of the AJL. Section 13(1) vested admiralty jurisdiction in the High Court
to be exercised by a Judge of the High Court sitting in the Judicial Zone of
Colombo; and section 13(2) provided that admiralty

**285**

jurisdiction of the High Court "shall be as provided for by law for the time
being in force". Consequently, the (U. K.) Administration of Justice Act of
1956 ceased to be applicable; and the question arose whether between 2.7.1979
(the effective date of the Judicature Act) and 31.10.1983 (the date
immediately prior to the coming into force of the Admiralty Jurisdiction Act.
No. 40 of 1983) the High Court had jurisdiction over admiralty claims. The
long title of Act No. 40 of 1983 describes it inter alia, as "an Act to amend
and consolidate the law relating to admiralty jurisdiction".  
  
The particular issue between the parties before the High Court of Colombo was
whether it had jurisdiction on 31.8.1983 to entertain and deal with the
appellant's claims for the arrest of the respondent's vessel for damage to
cargo and breach of the contract of carriage.  
  
**Held:**  
  
The High Court of Colombo did have jurisdiction on 31.8.1983 to entertain and
deal with the appellant's claim.  
  
Per Fernando, J.  
  
............. considering the history of admiralty jurisdiction, and the
purpose of the Judicature Act, one cannot discover a legislative intent to
take away a jurisdiction recognized for almost a century; and the fact that
the Admiralty Rules were kept in force contradicts any such intention. The
Judicature Act was intended to ensure or regulate the smooth working of the
judicial system, and the alternative interpretation which will introduce
uncertainty, friction or confusion into the working of the system must be
rejected"  
  
**Cases referred to:**  
  
1\. Bawazir v. M. V. Ayesha (1986) 1 Sri L. R. 314  
  
2\. Shannon Realties Ltd. v. Ville de St. Michel (1924) A. C. 185. 192-3  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgement of the Court of Appeal reported in (1994) 2 Sri
L. R. 54.  
  
_H. L. de Silva, P. C. with Mano Devasagayarn,_ for the plaintiff - respondent
- appellant.  
  
Added defendant - appellant - respondent absent and unrepresented.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**286**

July 27, 1993  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
The question that arises in this appeal is whether the High Court of Colombo
had admiralty jurisdiction during the period 2.7.79 to 31.10.83.  
  
The first statute conferring admiralty jurisdiction on a Sri Lankan Court was
the Ceylon Courts of Admiralty Ordinance, No. 2 of 1891, section 2 of which
declared the Supreme Court to be a "Colonial Court of Admiralty" having the
same jurisdiction as the admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court in England.
Although section 22 of that Ordinance empowered the Judges of the Supreme
Court to make rules, that power was never exercised; section 23 provided that
rules made under the English Vice Admiralty Courts Act, 1863, shall have
effect; accordingly, rules made by Order-in-Council dated 23.8.1883 ("the
Admiralty, Rules") applied to the Supreme Court, as the Admiralty Court.  
  
By virtue of section 2 of the Civil Law Ordinance, No. 2 of 1852, the law for
the time being applicable in England was made applicable in Sri Lanka (unless
and until other statutory provision was made) -  
  
".......... in respect of all contracts or questions arising (in Sri Lanka)
relating to ships and to the property therein, and to the owners thereof, the
behavior of the master and mariners, and their respective rights, duties, and
liabilities, relating to the carriage of passengers and goods by ships
......... and generally to all maritime matters."  
  
Section 2 of the Ceylon Courts of Admiralty Ordinance also required the
Supreme Court to have the same regard as the High Court in England "to
international law and the comity of nations".  
  
On 1.1.74, the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973, was enacted. The
Ceylon Courts of Admiralty Ordinance

**287**

was repealed by section 3(1)(a), but the Admiralty Rules were kept alive by
section 3(2). Section 23(1) enabled admiralty jurisdiction to be vested in a
High Court, and section 54 defined "admiralty jurisdiction" to mean, "until
otherwise provided for by written law, the admiralty jurisdiction of the High
Court of England".  
  
There were various English statutes defining the admiralty jurisdiction of the
High Court in E gland. The (U. K.) Administration of Justice Act of 1956, had
defined that jurisdiction, and this was kept in force by Section 54.  
  
By section 62 of the Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978, which came into operation
on 2.7.79, Chapter I (which included sections 23 and 54, but not section 3) of
the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973, was repealed. Section 13
provided  
  
"13(1) Admiralty jurisdiction is hereby vested in the High Court and shall
ordinarily be exercised by a Judge of the High Court sitting in the judicial
zone of Colombo............ .  
  
(2) The admiralty jurisdiction vested in the High Court shall be as provided
for by law for the time being in force."  
  
In consequence of the repeal of section 54, the (U. K.) Administration of
Justice Act, 1956, ceased to be applicable.  
  
On 1.11.83 the Admiralty Jurisdiction Act, No. 40 of 1983, came into
operation, its long title described it as "an Act to amend and consolidate the
law relating to admiralty jurisdiction, legal proceedings in connection with
ships and the arrest of ships and other property, and to provide for all
matters connected therewith". Section 2 of that Act defined the admiralty
jurisdiction of the High Court, "notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
any other law". There is no doubt whatsoever that thereafter the High Court
had admiralty jurisdiction. A question arose, however, whether the Admiralty

**288**

Rules were yet in force. The contention that they were not in force was
rejected by the Court of Appeal in Bawazir u. M. V. Ayesha(1). It was held
that those Rules had been kept alive by section 3(2) of the Administration of
Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973, notwithstanding the repeal of the principal
enactment.  
  
On 31.8.83 the Appellant applied for a writ of summons and a warrant of arrest
of the Respondent's vessel, in respect of a claim for damage to cargo and
breach of the contract of carriage; the vessel was arrested on 1.9.83. The
Respondent's submission that the High Court of Colombo had no admiralty
jurisdiction under the Judicature Act, was rejected on 30.8.84 by the High
Court, which held that it had the admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court of
England as set out in the Administration of Justice Act, 1956. On appeal, the
Court of Appeal reversed that order on 1.3.91, and this appeal is against that
order.  
  
When this appeal came up for hearing, two years later, Counsel appeared,
instructed by a registered attorney-at-law who held the Respondent's proxy; he
stated that neither he nor his instructing attorney-at-law had instructions
from their client, that the Respondent had not taken steps to enable Counsel
to be retained to appear at the hearing of the appeal, and that he was not
making any application for a postponement. Thereupon another Counsel requested
a postponement, asserting that the Respondent's attorney in Sri Lanka had
sought to retain him to appear at the hearing of the appeal, but that pending
clarification of certain matters he had not in fact been duly retained to
appear; he did not suggest that the Respondent had taken, or had sought to
take, any steps to revoke the proxy granted to the registered attorney-at-law
on record. We indicated to Counsel that he had no status whatsoever to appear;
or to make any application, on behalf of the Respondent. There was no excuse
whatever for the Respondent's failure to take steps to retain Counsel, and we
decided that there was no reason to postpone the hearing. it

**289**

is in those circumstances that the Respondent was absent and unrepresented at
the hearing of the appeal.  
  
The only question for decision is whether the High Court of Colombo had
jurisdiction to entertain the Appellant's action on 31.8.83 and to proceed to
deal with it thereafter. Learned PC for the Appellant submitted that the
undoubted intention of Parliament, in enacting section 13 of the Judicature
Act, was to confer admiralty jurisdiction on the High Court; the fact that the
Admiralty Rules were kept in force confirmed that intention; those Rules
sufficiently indicated the nature of the powers of the Court, and how they
should be exercised, and thus demarcated the scope of the admiralty
jurisdiction of the High Court. In interpreting a statute which purports to
confer jurisdiction, the maxim ut res magic valeat quam pereat was applicable
(Maxwell, 12th ed., p. 45); even if there was an ambiguity, that
interpretation should be preferred which gives effect to the statute rather
than that which would create a lacuna in the law, or reduce the legislation to
futility. He further submitted that rules defining jurisdiction were
procedural, rather than substantive; that the presumption against
retrospective operation does not apply to procedural rules; and that, in any
event, upon the enactment of the Admiralty Jurisdiction Act, No. 40 of 1983,
the High Court must be deemed to have had admiralty jurisdiction as from
31.8.83.  
  
I entertain grave doubts as to the last submission; no principle or precedent
was cited in support of the proposition that an action instituted in a court
which lacked jurisdiction - which action ought therefore to have been
immediately rejected on that ground \- would nevertheless become valid and
proper if jurisdiction was later conferred on that court. I prefer to rest my
decision on other grounds.  
  
Section 13(1) vested "admiralty jurisdiction" in the High Court. That section,
taken as a whole, is capable of two constructions. The first view is that
"admiralty jurisdiction"

**290**

is exhaustively defined by sub-section (2), i. e. as being such jurisdiction,
and only such jurisdiction, as is provided for by law for the time being in
force; there being no such law in force on 31.8.83, the High Court had no
jurisdiction. However, section 13(2) seems somewhat wider than the usual
(exhaustive) definition clause, which would have provided that admiralty
jurisdiction in section 13(1) "means such jurisdiction as is conferred (or
provided for) by the law for the time being in force". Had there been a
statute which provided for admiralty jurisdiction, such statute would have
applied, even if section 13(2) had been omitted; to that extent section 13(2)
is superfluous. In any event, even if it be regarded as a definition clause,
it is more in the nature of an inclusive, rather than an exhaustive,
definition.  
  
The second interpretation is that "admiralty jurisdiction" in section 13(1)
did have a meaning, independently of sub-section (2); namely, the ordinary
meaning of the phrase considered in the context of the preceding one hundred
years, the special characteristic of admiralty jurisdiction, as commonly
understood, was that it recognised an action in rem wherein a vessel could be
arrested, or seized as security for the satisfaction of the claim if
successful; and the nature and extent of that jurisdiction could also be
ascertained by a consideration of the powers conferred or recognised by the
Admiralty Rules. That interpretation, however, renders section 13(2)
superfluous, as even without it Parliament could later have amended or added
to the admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court.  
  
I have therefore to choose between an interpretation which renders section
13(1) a futility, and another which renders section 13(2) superfluous.
Considered in isolation, the first interpretation seems more logical. But
considering the history of admiralty jurisdiction, and the purpose of the
Judicature Act, one cannot discover a legislative intent to take away a
jurisdiction recognised for almost a century; and the fact that the Admiralty
Rules were kept in force contradicts

**291**

any such intention. The Judicature Act was intended to ensure or regulate the
smooth working of the judicial system, and the alternative interpretation
which will introduce uncertainty, friction or confusion into the working of
the system must be rejected (Shannon Realties-Ltd. v. Ville de St. Michel,(2)
Had section 13(1) stood alone, "admiralty jurisdiction" would have had to be
given a meaning, and there is no doubt that it would have included a claim for
loss of or damage to goods carried in a Ship or a claim arising out of any
agreement relating to the carriage of goods in a ship.  
  
I therefore hold that the High Court of Colombo did have jurisdiction on
31.8.83, to entertain and deal with the Appellant's claim. The appeal is
allowed, and the order of the Court of Appeal is set aside. I make no order as
to costs. The High Court of Colombo is directed to hear and determine the
action as expeditiously as possible.  
  
**PERERA. J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_  Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/7.html_  

