##  Samaranayake v. Meddegewatte - SLR - 415, Vol 2 of 1991 [1991] LKSC 7;
(1991) 2 Sri LR 415 (21 July 1991)

**415**



**SAMARANAYAKE**

**v.**

**MEDDEGEWATTE**



SUPREME COURT.

BANDARANAYAKE, J., AMERASINGHE, J. AND KULATUNGA, J.

S. C. APPEAL NO. 5/89.

JULY 21, 1991.

_ _

_Appeal ‑ Registered attorney‑at‑law incapacitated from signing ‑ Name of
registered attorney‑at‑law signed with his consent ‑ Civil Procedure Code, s.
755 (3)._



Where the registered attorney‑at‑law was incapacitated from signing by illness
and his name was signed on the petition of appeal by another with his consent
there is sufficient compliance with the requirements of s. 755(3) of the Civil
Procedure Code. The fact that the appellant also signed the petition does not
invalidate the petition.

**  **

**Cases referred to:**



1\.         _Seelawathie v. Jayasinghe_ [1985] 2 Sri LR 266



2\.         _Perera v. Perera_ [1981] 2 Sri LR 41.



3\.         _Medananda Therunnanse v. Dhammandanda Thero_ 46 NLR 117



4\.         _Nelson Silva v. Casinadar_ 65 NLR 121



**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_H. L. de Silva_ P.C. with _W P. Gunatillaka_ , _I. A. G. Udawatte_ _and C. R.
Samaranayake_ for Respondent



_Bimal Rajapaksa_ for Appellant.



_Cur. adv. vult._



### 416



August 29, 1991.

**  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.**



Special leave to appeal to the Supreme Court was granted on the following
question of law:



Whether the petition of appeal signed by a party to the case at a time when
there is a registered Attorney‑at‑Law on record can be entertained by the
Court of Appeal



As the written submissions on behalf of the appellant had been filed out of
time, order was made that Counsel for the appellant cannot be heard at the
hearing of the appeal. Only Counsel for the respondent was heard.



This case arises from a dispute between two sisters over the width of a
roadway. The case was settled on 30.8.76 and terms of settlement entered.
Consequently a Commission was issued to have the roadway surveyed in terms of
the settlement. Sur­vey Plan No. 706 dated 8.9.77 was presented to the
District Court. Objections were filed by the plaintiff‑respondent to the said
plan No. 706 on the ground that the Surveyor had mate­rially gone outside the
terms of settlement. Upon inquiry the District Judge made an order on 20.7.78.
The defendant appealed from that order to the Court of Appeal. When the appeal
before the Court of Appeal was finally taken up on 26.9.88 preliminary
objections were raised by Counsel for the plaintiff‑respondent that the appeal
was not in order in that __



(i)         _the petition of appeal had not been signed by the Attorney
‑at‑Law on record, and,_



(ii)        _that, instead, the party ‑appellant herself had signed the
petition of appeal although the petition says it is in the name of the
Attorney‑at‑Law on record._



**417**



The Court of Appeal held that these objections must fail for the reason that
(i) there is no requirement in the Civil Procedure Code that a petition of
appeal should be in the name of an Attorney‑at‑Law for the appellant as the
law only requires that the petition should be signed by either the party or
his registered Attorney, and , (ii) in any event, S.759 (ii) of the Civil
Procedure Code permits the acceptance of a petition of appeal which carries an
omission or defect or mistake if the respondent had not been materially
prejudiced.



The Court held that in the absence of any averment of material prejudice the
objections must fail. The Court also held that the appeal not being from the
settlement effected on 30.8.76 but from the order of 20.7.78 there was no
merit in the appellant's objection that one cannot appeal from a settlement.
The Court ordered that the appeal be listed for argument. The
plaintiff‑respondent appeals from that order.



When the Supreme Court granted leave to appeal, the Court also made order that
the petition of appeal be for­warded to the Examiner of Questioned Documents
for exami­nation and report as to whether the name "T. Coomarasamy" appearing
on the petition at the place where the signature of the Attorney‑at‑Law on
record should appear differed from the signatures on the other papers filed by
Mr. Coomarasamy, the Attorney‑at‑Law on record, for example, the answer and
the notice of appeal. The Supreme Court also permitted the parties to file
submissions or objections after the opinion of the Examiner of Questioned
Documents was known.



The report of the Examiner of Questioned Documents con­tained the opinion that
the signature of T. Coomarasamy on XI which was the petition of appeal
differed from the signa­tures of T. Coomarasamy on X3, X4, and X5 which were
the answer, notice of appeal, etc. and also expressed the opinion



### 418



that the signatures of T. Coomarasamy on X3, X4 and X5 had been written by one
and the same person and that the person who wrote the signatures of "T.
Coomarasamy" on X3 X4 and X5 did not write the signature "T. Coomarasamy" on
XI. Consequent to this report learned Counsel for the appellant in written
submissions took up the position that this report was clear evidence of a
fraud having been committed and that the signature on the petition of appeal
XI was a forgery and that in the circumstances, the defendant cannot succeed
in this appeal. Appellant's Counsel in his written submissions also contended
that once there is an Attorney‑at‑Law on record and his proxy has not been
cancelled or revoked but remains valid the party cannot sign the petition of
appeal in place of the Attorney‑at‑Law on record. When there is a registered
Attorney‑at‑Law he must sign all papers including the petition of appeal
because his client has no status whilst the proxy remains unrevoked. Learned
Counsel cited the cases reported in _Seelawathie v. Jayasinghe_ (1) and
_Perera v. Perera_ (12).



Again, consequent to the report of the Examiner of Questi­oned Documents the
plaintiff‑respondent filed affidavits showing:__



(i)         that the Attorney‑at‑Law T. Coomarasamy had suffered a stroke in
1978 and was paralyzed and could not sign, and,



(ii)        Attorney‑at‑Law Nathanielsz who consequently came into the case
appeared for the defendant at the inquiry before the District Judge on the
instructions of Mr. T. Coomarasamy and that he also advised Mr. Nathanielsz to
appeal against the order of the District Judge and that Nathanielsz settled
the petition of appeal and visited Mr. Coomarasamy and showed him the typed
petition of appeal. Mr. Coomarasamy suffered a stroke and was unable to write
or use his hand. Nathanielsz showed the petition of appeal to Mr. Coomarasamy
who read



**419**



it and instructed him to write his name "T. Coomarasamy" on page 5 of the
petition above the typewritten words "Attorney­-at‑Law for the defendant". Mr.
Nathanielsz says he did so in the presence of Mr. Coomarasamy and Mrs.
Coomarasamy and Mr. Kandiah and that on the direction of Mr. Coomarasamy the
defendant‑appellant also placed her signature on the petition of appeal. A few
months after this Mr. Coomarasamy died. On 18th September, 1978 the petition
of appeal was filed before the Registrar of the District Court by Mr.
Nathanielsz.



The matters referred to in these affidavits by Mr. Nathanielsz, Mrs.
Coomarasamy, the defendant‑appellant and by a neighbour Mr. Kandiah who was
also present at the time when Mr. Coomarasamy directed his name to be written
on the peti­tion of appeal had not been controverted in any way. We accepted
the contents of the affidavits as true.



Mr. H. L. de Silva, _P.C._ , for the plaintiff‑respondent referred this Court
to the provisions of S.24 of the Civil Procedure Code. He submitted that there
was no proposition in law that once the party gives a proxy he cannot himself
take any further part in it. Counsel referred us to two cases reported in
_Medananda Therunnanse v. Dhammandanda_ Thero (3) and _Nelson Silva v.
Casinadar_ (4).



In this case we accept the affidavit evidence that the Attorney‑at‑Law on
record Mr. T. Coomarasamy was incapa­citated by reason of illness and was
unable to sign the petition of appeal but that he instructed Mr. Nathanielsz
to write his name in place of his signature. This event is confirmed by the
party appellant and by her, witness. In these circumstances there is no
question of a fraud because Mr. Coomarasamy's name came on the document with
his consent and on his direc­tion. We, therefore, do not have to approach this
case as one



### 420



where there has been a forgery in the document in issue. In point of fact
there is no mistake or omission or defect in the petition of appeal that needs
to be cured. The name of T. Coomarasamy appearing as it does on the petition
of appeal is tantamount to his having placed his signature on the docu­ment in
the circumstances of this case.



In the view we have taken that the provisions of S.755 (3) of the Code have
been thus satisfied, the fact that in addition, the party to the case has also
signed the petition does not make the petition bad in law. The appeal is
dismissed with costs. The Court of Appeal is directed to take the next step in
this action.



**Amerasinghe, J.,      __ ** I agree.



**Kulatunga, J.,      __ ** I agree.



_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/7.html_  

