##  Premalal De Silva v. Inspector Rodrigo and Others - SLR - 307, Vol 2 of
1991 [1990] LKSC 7; (1991) 2 Sri LR 307 (5 September 1990)

**307**

** **

## PREMALAL DE SILVA

**v.**

**INSPECTOR RODRIGO AND OTHERS**

** **

SUPREME COURT.

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J., KULATUNGA, AND DHEERARATNE, J.

S. C. APPLICATION NO. 24/89.

MAY 28, JUNE 21 AND JULY 13, 1990.



Fundamental Rights ‑ Illegal arrest and detention ‑ Torture ‑ Articles 11, 13
(1) and (2) 13 (4) and 14 (1)(g) of the Constitution ‑ sections 32 (1) (b) and
36 and 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979.



The petitioner a Home Guard, was arrested on 19 May 1989 by the Panadura
Police without a warrant on suspicion of being concerned in a robbery at a
cigarette agency which had taken place on 07 May 1989. He was tortured and
subjected to cruel inhuman or regarding treatment or punishment.



**Held:**  
  
(1)        There was cogent evidence that the petitioner was arrested on
19.05.1989 and not on 23.05.1989 as stated by the Police.

  
(2)        The respondents have failed to produce sufficient material to
jus­tify the suspicion that the petitioner was concerned in an offence; and
hence



**308   **

** **

the arrest of the petitioner was unlawful for failure to satisfy the
requirements of section 32(1)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.



(3)        The petitioner's detention after his arrest on the 19th without
sending him before a Magistrate as required by sections 36 and 37 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure Act was unlawful.

(4)        While in Police custody the petitioner was subjected to torture and
inhuman treatment.



(5)        Of the Police Officers involved only 2nd and 3rd respondents have
been adequately identified.



(6)        The arrest of the petitioner is violative of his rights under
Article 13(1) and his detention is violative of his rights under Article 13(2)
and (4). Whilst in police custody he was subjected to torture and inhuman
treatment in breach of Article 11 of the Constitution. The 2nd and 3rd
respondents and the State are jointly and severally liable to compensate the
petitioner.



(7)        If the petitioner has disappeared the compensation is payable to
his legal representatives.



**Cases referred to:**

**  **

1\.         _Velumurugu v. A. G. & Others_ 1 FRD 180, 197 ‑ 199  


2\.         _Goonewardena v. Perera_ [1983] 1 Sri LR 305, 313  


3\.         _Kapugeekiyana v. Hettiarachchi_ [1984] 2 Sri LR 153, 165  


4\.         _Withanachchi v. Cyril Herat, Leelaratne v. Cyril Herat_ S.C. Nos.
144 ‑145/86 S.C. Minutes of 01.07.1988



5\.         _Joseph Perera v. Attorney ‑Generat_ S.C. Nos. 107‑109/86 S. C.
Minutes of 25.05.87



6\.         _Gunasekera v. de Fonseka_ 75 NLR 246



7\.         _Dumbell v. Roberts_ (1944) 1 All ER 326



8\.         _Muttusamy v. Kannangara_ 52 NLR 324, 327, 330



9\.         _Amal Sudath Silva v. Kodituwakku_ [1987] 2 Sri LR 119, 127



**APPLICATION** for violation of fundamental rights by illegal arrest,
deten­tion, torture and inhuman treatment.



_P. D. Gomes_ for Petitioner.



_Kanthilal Kumarasiri_ for 1 to 5 Respondents.



_Hector Yapa D.S._ with _Surath Piyasena S.S.C_ for 6th and 7th respondents.



_Cur.adv. vult._



**309   **

September 05, 1990.



**KULATUNGA, J.:**

The petitioner who is employed as a Home Guard attached to the Mount Lavinia
Police Station was arrested without a warrant by the Panadura Police on
suspicion of being con­cerned in a robbery at a cigarette agency which took
place on 07.05.89. He alleges that he was arrested on 19.05.89 without
following the procedure established by law and without giving any reasons;
that he was unlawfully detained at the Panadura Police Station until the
evening of 23.05.89 during which period he was also subjected to torture and
to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; and that the 1st to
5th respondents have infringed his rights under Articles 11, 13(1), 13(2),
13(4) and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution. He prays for a declaration accordingly
and for damages. At the hearing before us, learned Counsel for the petitioner
informed us that he would not press the claim under Article 14(1)(g).



The petitioner states that on 19.05.89 at about 9.00 p.m. he was awaiting a
bus close to the Panadura bus‑stand when the 1st respondent (OIC Crimes ‑
Panadura Police) and other officers arrived in a jeep. He was ordered to get
into the jeep and was taken to the Panadura Police. No reason for his arrest
was given. One Deepal Perera who had been present states in his affidavit (P2)
that a Police jeep arrived and the petitioner was told to get in . He thought
that as the peti­tioner was attached to the Police he was being given a lift.
On 21.05.89 he learnt that the petitioner had been arrested and visited him at
the Panadura Police Station. The petitioner appeared to be in pain. He later
sent a message about it to the petitioner's house. The petitioner's own
account of the events subsequent to his arrest is as follows:



On 20.05.89 the 2nd, 3rd and 4th respondents took him to a room and ordered
him to remove his shirt. He was taken tied up in a crouched position with his
hands over his knees



##  310



and suspended on a pole passed through his hands and knees. The two ends of
the pole were placed on two tables. The 3rd respondent then rotated him and
the 2nd respondent struck his soles with an iron rod. The 4th respondent too
assaulted him with the iron rod. The 3rd respondent walked on his body and
kicked him. At the same time, they questioned him about a robbery said to have
been committed with one Sisira at a cigarette agency. One Sisira was brought
in and the police questioned him as to whether the petitioner is the other
person who joined in the robbery to which Sisira answered in the negative. As
a result of the assault, he sustained injuries on his hands and legs.



On 21.05.89 Deepal Perera visited him. On 22.05.89 his parents visited him, at
the Police Station with Sisira Kodikara. Attorney‑at‑Law and made inquiries
with a view to securing his release. On 23.05.89 his father Jinson de Silva
visited him. On both days the police said that the petitioner will be
pro­duced before a Magistrate on 23.05.89. His parents waited in the
Magistrate's Court but he was not produced. The petition­er's mother Greta de
Soysa had tried to meet the Deputy Inspector‑General of Police, Western
Province to make a complaint but the Superintendent of Police told her that
she need not do so as the petitioner will be produced before the Magistrate on
23.05.89. In support of some of the averments the petitioner has produced an
affidavit from his father marked P3.



As the petitioner was not produced in Court on 23.05.89 despite the assurance
given by the police the petitioner's mother addressed an affidavit dated
23.05.89 (P4) to the DIG, Western Province wherein she gives an account of the
arrest of the petitioner on 19.05.89 and the subsequent torture by the police
and requests that he be produced before a Court and given necessary medical
treatment.



In the afternoon on 23.05.89 the police produced the peti­tioner before the
D.M.O. Panadura where he was x‑rayed and



##  311



given some injections. Thereafter, he was produced before the Magistrate at
her residence and was remanded to fiscal cus­tody. This is admitted by the 2nd
respondent (Sub Inspector Ratwatte). On 24.05.89 on a motion filed on behalf
of the peti­tioner (P5) the Magistrate directed that he be produced before the
Judicial Medical Officer, Colombo for examination. The JMO examined him on
26.05.89 and made his report (P6). The short history given by the petitioner
and recorded in P6 is as follows:__



"Assault by S.I. Ratwatte and two other police officers with iron rods after
tying his hand and feet and suspend­ing him on two tables with a bar passed
behind his knees on 20.05.89".



The petitioner had the following injuries:__



            l.          Ligature mark across the dorsum of  R/wrist      21/2" X 1/2".  


2\.         Ligature mark across the dorsum of L/wrist 21/2"  X 1/2.



3\.         Healing wound 3" X 1" __ front of the L/Low upper arm, extending
down to the elbow;  


4\.         Healing wound 1" X 1/2" anterior __ lateral upper ‑L/forearm;



5\.         Lacerated wound 1/2"  __ Low, on the R/palm at the base of the
right ring finger;  


6\.         Healing wound 3" __ 11/4" on the back and level aspect of the
L/knee;  


7\. & 8\. Infected lacerations ‑ each 1" long in front of the lower R/leg 1"
apart;



9\.         Contused abrasions __ 1/2"  X 1/2"  front of mid left leg;  


10.       Healing wound __ 3/4" X 1/2" back of the lower R/leg;  


11\.       Healing wound (laceration) 1/2"  long on the big toe of the R/foot.

           

The JMO states that the injuries 1‑11 are consistent with the history given by
the petitioner.



##  312



            According to the notes of investigation by the police (marked A') at the time of the petitioner's arrest the only injuries he had were a bleeding injury (abrasion) and an abra­sion of the big toe both on the left leg attributed to a fall on the railway track along which the petitioner ran in a bid to escape arrest. If so, the injuries observed by the JMO on 26.05.89 have been caused subsequent to the arrest. It is not suggested that they were self inflicted or caused after the petitioner was remanded to fiscal custody on 23.05.89. 



In the circumstances, Mr. Kumarasiri, Counsel for the 1st to 5th respondents
was constrained to concede that an assault may have taken place at the Police
Station; and he confined much of his argument to the submission that even if
an assault has been proved no personal liability on the part of any of the
respondents has been established.



The respondents admit the arrest of the petitioner but deny the allegation
that the petitioner was arrested on 19.05.89. According to them, the
petitioner was suspected for a series of robberies. On 23.05.89, Police
Sergeant Wickremanayake acting on information received from a subordinate
officer regarding the whereabouts of the petitioner obtained the permission of
the OIC (Crimes) and left on inquiry at about 9.30 a.m. with PS 13953 and PC
15212. They spotted the petitioner around 12.30 p.m. in the Panadura town.
When the police moved towards the petitioner, he started running along the
railway track and fell down. Thereafter, he jumped towards a lower area in the
river. He was arrested with the use of minimum force and after explaining to
him the charge he was produced at the Police Station at 1.25 p.m. Thereafter
his statement was recorded at 3.30 p.m. He was produced before the DMO and
brought back to the Police Station at 4.00 p.m. was produced before the
Magistrate at 5.20 p.m. at her residence where he was remanded to fiscal
custody. In between the police gave him his lunch and dinner (Vide the notes
of investigations marked `A' and entries regarding prisoners detained



**313    **

** **

Marked B'). It is the submission of the petitioner's Counsel that documents
A' and B' are not a truthful record of events regarding the petitioner.

           

On 02.06.89 the petitioner was subjected to an identification parade at which
the witnesses failed to identify him and he was enlarged on bail on 08.06.89
on a condition that he should report to the Panadura Police Station once a
week. On 19.06.89 he filed this application. No plaint has been filed charging
him with any offence. In the meantime, on 02.02.90 a brother of the petitioner
complained to this Court that the petitioner reported to the Panadura Police
Station on 31.12.89 accompanied by his mother. As they delayed returning,
their father also went to the Police in search of them but none of them
returned. During an inquiry into this complaint by this Court, it transpired
that the petitioner had reported to the Police Station on 31.12.89 but the
respondents denied that the petitioner or his parents were detained at the
Police Station. It also transpired that a message has been relayed to all
Police Sta­tions regarding the petitioner but he has not been traced. At the
hearing before us, the Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the
petitioner and his parents have disappeared. However, there is no evidence for
holding that the respondents are responsible for such disappearance.



To revert to the case for the 1st ‑ 5th respondents each of them has denied
personal involvement in the impugned arrest, detention and ill treatment of
the petitioner; and their Counsel has submitted that even if this Court were
to hold that the petitioner has proved his allegations he has failed to
establish personal liability on their part. During the argument, Counsel
produced marked `Y' a statement made by the petitioner before the Magistrate
on 28.06.89 and drew our attention to certain contradictions between that
statement and Deepal Perera's affidavit (P2). It was also submitted that
between the petitioner's affidavit and his statement Y' there are certain
contradictions. Counsel submitted that in view of these con-­

** **

#### 314





tradictions, this Court should dismiss the allegations against individual
respondents.



In his statement Y' the petitioner states that at the time of his arrest on
19.05.89 he was told to get into the jeep and when he inquired why, he was
forcibly dragged and taken away; that on 20.05.89 the 2nd respondent Ratwatte
took him upstairs; the 4th respondent PC 13820 and the 3rd respondent
Piyaseeli Silva (probably a typing mistake for Piyasiri Silva) tied up and
suspended him with a pole between two tables; the 2nd respondent struck him
with an iron rod and questioned him about a robbery at a cigarette agency; he
was also shown one Sisira and asked whether he knew him; then the 4th
respondent struck him with the iron rod; the 3rd respondent also struck him
with the iron rod.



It is pointed out that the statement Y' makes no reference to the 1st
respondent; that it refers to a forcible arrest whereas Deepal Perera in his
affidavit (P2) says that he thought that the petitioner was being given a
lift; that in the statement Y' the petitioner states that the 3rd respondent
struck him with an iron rod whereas in his petition he states that the 3rd
respondent kicked him. More relevantly, the petition describes the 4th
respondent as PC 13520. It does not disclose his name. The statement Y' makes
no reference to any Police Constable bearing distinctive number 13520 but
refers to a Police Con­stable bearing number 13820\. Here too the name of the
Con­stable has not been disclosed but the acts attributed to PC 13520 (the 4th
respondent) in the petition are now attributed to PC 13820. Consequently PC
13820 Cyril Jayaratne came forward and filed an affidavit answering the
allegations made against the 4th respondent in the petition even though the
peti­tioner has not taken steps to join him by an amendment to the petition.



This Court has to make its determination in respect of the allegations
concerned in the petition on the basis of the above material and in the light
of the applicable principles of law, in



##  315



particular as regards the nature and the degree of proof required of the
petitioner. On this question, the rule is that the petitioner must prove his
allegations to the satisfaction of this Court. The degree of proof is not so
high as in a criminal case. The test is that applied in civil cases but the
degree of proof could vary depending on the subject matter. Thus where the
allegation is a serious one such as torture and inhuman treat­ment by the
executive and administrative authorities of the State a high degree of
probability proportionate to the subject matter is necessary.



_Velumurugu v. A.G. & Others_ (1) _Goonewardena v. Perera_ (2) _Kapugeekiyana
v._ _Hettiarachchi_ (3)



Upon a careful consideration of the available evidence, I accept the
petitioner's version that he was arrested on 19.05.89. The petitioner is
corroborated by Deepal Perera and his parents. All of them have given a day to
day account of events from the 19th to 23rd which does not savour of a
fabri­cation and is intrinsically probable. No doubt there is a con­tradiction
between the petitioner and Deepal Perera as to the manner of arrest in that
whilst the petitioner states that he was forced into the jeep Deepal Perera
thought that the police were giving the petitioner a lift when he was asked to
get into the jeep. This in my view is not a material contradiction. The
expression used by the police is equivocal and it is possible that at 9.30
p.m. after sighting the police party Deepal Perera himself may not have
remained long enough at the scene to witness everything that happened. In any
event, the account given by the petitioner's parents as to the events is
convincing. In consequence of information given by Deepal Perera they visited
the Police Station on the 22nd with Sisira Kodikara, Attorney‑at‑Law. Counsel
for the respondents commented that no affidavit from Sisira Kodikara has been
produced but that by itself does not affect the credibility of the witnesses.
The record in MC Panadura 82836 shows that

** **

##  316



although Mervyn Silva Attorney‑at‑Law represented the peti­tioner before the
Magistrate, Sisira Kodikara too had taken certain action on his behalf. Thus
on 31.05.89 he has applied for a certified copy of proceedings had before the
Magistrate. This was followed by a motion for calling the case to enable the
petitioner to make a statement. The interest that this law­yer had evinced in
so assisting the petitioner tends to support the averment in the petition that
on 20.05.89 he had accom­panied the petitioner's parents to the Panadura
Police Station with a view to securing the release of the petitioner.



It is highly improbable that all the investigations purport­ing to have been
conducted by the police from the arrest to the remanding of the petitioner
could have been carried out between 12.30 p.m. and 5.20 p.m. on the 23rd. In
this connec­tion, I accept the submission of the learned Deputy Solicitor
General that the fact that the petitioner's mother was ready with her
affidavit to the DIG Police (P5) on the 23rd supports the allegation that the
petitioner had been arrested prior to that day. It seems to me that this
submission is decisive on the point and has considerably assisted this Court
in making its finding as to the date of the arrest. I wish to express my
appreciation of the assistance given by the Deputy Solicitor General and his
fair presentation of the case.



Whilst the available evidence considered with the attendant circumstances is
cogent enough to establish the date of the arrest, the evidence as to who
arrested the petitioner is not so cogent. The petition implicates the 1st
respondent but the peti­tioner's subsequent statement (Y) makes no reference
to him. The 1st respondent's own affidavit states that on 23.05.89 he was the
Acting OIC of the Police Station, Horana. This would not help him as that
alibi does not cover any previous period; but that alone is not sufficient to
turn the scales against him, in the circumstances of this case. No motive has
been alleged as to why the 1st respondent is implicated. Yet there is a
pos­sibility that he became involved by reason of his being the



##  317

  

OIC (Crimes). I would therefore exonerate him but express concern over the
manner in which the petitioner was treated by officers attached to his branch.
Even if he was not con­cerned in the petitioner's arrest, it is quite
unsatisfactory if subordinate officers were able to detain the petitioner for
over 4 days and ill treat him without the 1st respondent being aware of it. It
certainly shows that the crimes branch was without supervision.



I shall now consider the question whether the petitioner's arrest has been
effected according to the procedure established by law. The petitioner's
arrest must satisfy the requirements of the provisions of Section 32(1)(b) of
the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979 which states __



"Any peace officer may without an order from a Magis­trate and without a
warrant arrrest any person

(a)        ..........

(b)        who has been concerned in any cognizable offence or against whom a
reasonable complaint has been made or credible information has been received
or a reasonable suspicion exists of his having been so concerned".



The petitioner was arrested in the course of investigations into a robbery
which took place on 07.05.89 by unidentified persons. According to PS
Wickremanayake who claims to have effected the arrest, the petitioner was
suspected of a series of robberies within the Panadura Police area and he was
wanted for questioning. No material has been placed before us to jus­tify such
suspicion or more particularly a suspicion that the petitioner was concerned
in the robbery which was under investigation. Despite this, the Counsel for
the 1st to 5th respondents strenously contended that it Was, unlawful for the
police to have arrested the petitioner for purposes of investiga­tion. It
appears to be the Counsel's submission that if it is proved that the police
did in fact entertain a suspicion on the



#### 318



basis of information in their possession this Court must uphold the arrest in
the interest of investigation. I cannot agree with this submission.



It is settled law that the reasonability of the arrest in such cases has to be
tested by Court. To enable the Court to do so, the police must furnish
relevant material to the Court. If such material is furnished it is not the
duty of the Court to deter­mine whether on the available material the arrest
should have been made or not. The question for the Court is whether there was
material for a reasonable officer to cause the arrest. _With­anachchi v. Cyril
Herat, Leelaratne v. Cyril Herat_ (4). Proof of the commission of the offence
is not required. A reasonable suspicion or a reasonable complaint of the
commission of an offence suffices. The test is an objective one. _Joseph
Perera v. Attorney ‑General_ (5) _Gunasekera v. de Fonseka_ (6). Police are
not required before acting to have anything like a prima facie case for
convicting. _Dumbell v. Roberts_ (7).



A suspicion is proved to be reasonable if the facts disclose that it was
founded on matters within the police officers' own knowledge or on the
statements made by some other persons in a way which justify him giving them
credit _Muttusamy v. Kannangara_ (8). Gratiaen J. considering whether the
arrest of the accused without a warrant was lawful said (p. 330) 



"On the facts of this case, the legality of the arrest depended upon whether
the accused were persons against whom a reasonable complaint had been made or
credible information had been received or a reasonable suspicion existed of
their having been concerned in the commission of the offence of theft (Section
32(1)(b) of the Criminal Procedure Code). Inspector Kannangara has nowhere in
the course of his evidence referred to any complaint or information or
suspicion the reasonable­ness of which could have been tested by the learned
Magistrate, whose function it was to inquire into the officer's state of mind
at the time that he ordered the arrest".



##  319



Applying these principles to the case before us, I hold that the arrest of the
petitioner is unlawful for failure to satisfy the requirements of Section
32(1)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. He was arrested on 19.05.89
and detained without sending him before a Magistrate as required by Sec­tion
36 of the Act. By producing the notes of investigation marked A' and entries
from the register of prisoners detained  B' ‑ the respondents sought to
clinch the issue as to the date of arrest. No other material having the effect
of discredit­ing the petitioner's version that he was arrested on the 19th has
been produced. If so, the only way in which the police can exculpate
themselves on the charge of illegal detention is by resorting to the simple
devise of making entries of the kind evidenced by documents A' and B',
shifting the date of the arrest, which entries would in the absence of
convincing evi­dence as to the date of arrest appear to be genuine. I am
satisfied that there is convincing evidence that the petitioner was arrested
on the 19th and that the documents A' and B' do not constitute a truthful
record of events. I hold that the peti­tioner's detention after his arrest on
the 19th without sending him before a Magistrate as required by Sections 36
and 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act is unlawful.



On the basis of the available evidence including the medical evidence (P6) I
have no doubt that the petitioner, whilst he remained in police custody was
subjected to torture and inhu­man treatment. As regards personal
responsibility, I hold that no case has been proved against the 4th, 5th and
6th respond­ents. The 4th respondent has to be exonerated in view of the fact
that he has been drawn into this case only as a result of the petitioner's
statement marked Y' and he has not been identified on the face of the
petition itself. The 5th and 6th respondents are made parties purely by reason
of their status as Headquarters Inspector Panadura Police and the Inspector
General of Police respectively. Such status by itself would not constitute
sufficient evidence to give rise to personal responsi­bility for an alleged
violation of fundamental rights. The 2nd

####  

#### 320



respondent has been identified by name in the petition, in the petitioner's
statement to the JMO (P6) and in his statement Y'. There is ample evidence to
hold him personally responsi­ble.



The 3rd respondent has also been identified by name in the petition and in the
statement Y'. However; there is a conflict between the petition and the
statement Y' as regards the part played by this respondent when the
petitioner was assaulted. According to the petition, he trampled and kicked
the peti­tioner. According to 'Y' he struck the petitioner with an iron rod.
Yet on one matter the petitioner is consistent namely, that the 3rd respondent
helped the 2nd respondent to prepare him for torture. There is another matter
which is significant namely that the distinctive number assigned to this
respondent in the petition is 16237 but it appears from the affidavit of this
respondent that the correct number is 16225\. This would mil­itate against the
suggestion that he has been falsely implicated. If that were so the petitioner
who refers to him in the petition by name would have taken the care to
ascertain the correct number before he filed his application. In my view, the
erroneous reference to the number is probably due to faulty observation or
recollection.



I determine that the arrest of the petitioner is violative of his rights under
Article 13(1) and hiss detention is violative of his rights under Article
13(2) and 13(4). I also determine that the petitioner was, whilst in police
custody, subjected to tor­ture and inhuman treatment in breach of Article 11
of the Constitution; and that the 2nd and 3rd respondents and the state are
jointly and severally liable to compensate the peti­tioner.



It remains to consider what relief may be granted to the petitioner. The
decision of this Court in _Amal Sudath Silva v. Kodituwakku_ (9) is of
relevance in this regard. In that case, the petitioner who had been arrested
and detained for 5 nights



##  321



by the Panadura Police had been subjected to torture and cruel treatment by
the police.



Atukorale J. said (p. 127) 



"The facts of this case have revealed disturbing features regarding third
degree methods adopted by certain police officers on suspects held in police
custody. Such methods can only be described as barbaric, savage and inhuman.
They are most revolting to one's sense of human decency and dignity,
particularly at the present time when every endeavour is being made to promote
and protect human rights. Nothing shocks the con­science of a man so much as
the cowardly act of a delinquent police officer who subjects a helpless
suspect in his charge to depraved and barbarous methods of treatment within
the confines of the very premises in which he is held in custody. Such action
on the part of the police will only breed contempt for the law and will tend
to make the public lose confidence in the ability of the police to maintain
law and order. The petitioner may be a hard‑core criminal whose tribe deserves
no sympathy. But if constitutional guarantees are to have any meaning or value
in our democratic set‑up, it is essential that he be not denied the protection
guaranteed by our Constitution".



I am in respectful agreement with these views. I wish to add that if the
police continue with the practice of taking into custody suspects on
speculation or merely on the ground that they are persons of bad repute, in
the hope of getting a break in the investigations by interrogating them, it
would end up in the use of third degree methods. This presumably is what
hap­pened in the case before us.



In _Sudath Silva's_ case the Court ordered compensation in a sum of Rs.
10,000/‑ and costs fixed at Rs. 1000/‑ to be paid to the petitioner. Neither
the pronouncements of the Court nor



##  322



the award made appears to have deterred the police in resort­ing to the
illegalities established in the instant case. In all the circumstances, I
determine that the petitioner is entitled to a sum of Rs. 20,000/‑ as
compensation and a further sum of Rs. 2,000/‑ as costs from the 2nd and 3rd
respondents and the State, jointly and severally. I direct that payment be
made accordingly. I dismiss the application against the 1st, 4th, 5th and 6th
respondents without costs.



In view of the material which has been placed before this Court to the effect
that the petitioner has disappeared I have considered whether this Court
should make any direction as regards the payment of the sums ordered herein,
in the event of it being established that the petitioner is dead. Under
Article 126(4) the Supreme Court has the power "to grant such relief or make
such directions as it may deem just and equitable in the circumstances in
respect of any petition". Thus the power of this Court is very wide and would
include the power to make a direction as to the payment of the sums ordered,
in the circumstances set out by me. Accordingly, I direct that in the event of
it being established that the petitioner is dead, the compensation and costs
ordered in this judgment be paid to the petitioner's legal representatives.



I also direct that a copy of this judgment be forwarded to the
Inspector‑General of Police who is the 6th respondent to these proceedings to
enable him to consider further steps, by way of disciplinary action or
otherwise, in the light of the find­ings of this Court.



**H. A. G. de Silva, J. __** I agree.



**Dheeraratne, J. __** I agree.



_**Application allowed. Compensation ordered.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1990/7.html_  

