##  Mendis v. Abeysinghe and Another - SLR - 262, Vol 2 of 1989 [1989] LKSC 7;
(1989) 2 Sri LR 262 (3 November 1989)

**

262

MENDIS  
v.  
ABEYSINGHE AND ANOTHER

**

SUPREME COURT  
H, A. G. DE SILVA, J.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND FERNANDO. J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO- 49/88 - CA (LA)  
S.C. 24/88 - CA NO 329/79 (F)  
D.C. COLOMBO A/33/M.  
4 AND 5 SEPTEMBER 1989

_

Appeal - Leave to appeal - Grant of leave_ ox _mero motu Rules 35, 36(b) and
40 of the Supreme Court Rules - Failure to comply with Rules 35(b) and 35(d) -
Failure to show clue diligence.

_

A reading of Article 128 of the Constitution shows that leave to appeal can be
granted by the Court of Appeal ex mero motu. Sometimes in the judgment itself,
in an appropriate case, the Court of Appeal gives leave to appeal ex mero motu
and it is for the parties, if they so desire to avail themselves of such
leave. In such a case the parties are not heard before leave ex mero motu is
granted. An interpretation of Article 128 taken with the Supreme Court Rules
do not compel one to the view that one should read into them a procedure not
provided for in them and make it obligatory, in all cases, whatever the
circumstances, that the respondent should be heard before leave to appeal is
granted by the Court of Appeal. There is not at this stage a final
determination affecting the rights of parties and the respondent would at a
later stage be heard and could then put forward all the material and arguments
which he could have preferred al the hearing of the leave to appeal
application. No injustice has been suffered by him in not being heard at this
stage. No doubt in an appropriate case the Court would give such an
opportunity to the respondent if the circumstances warranted such a step

**263**

2\. In Rule 35(b) there is no provision for automatic dismissal of an appeal
where there was a failure on the part of the respondent to serve the written
submissions on the respondent. The Rule provides only that no party to an
appeal shall be entitled to be heard if he has not previously lodged written
submissions. Thus the penally, and the only penalty, for default has been
prescribed. The Rule contemplates that this court will proceed to hear the
appeal. All that it does is to disentitle the party in default from claiming a
right to be heard, but preserves the undoubted discretion of the Court to give
such party such hearing as it thinks appropriate. If that be the only
consequence of the failure to lodge written submissions, it is impossible to
interpret the Rules as requiring a more severe penalty for a far less default,
namely the failure to give notice of the lodging of written submissions to the
respondent together with a copy thereof in terms of Rule 35{e). That Rule
omits even the penalty set out in Rule _35(b).

_

3\. Further as the Rules are not silent as to the consequences of default, and
therefore it cannot be implied that non-compliance must result in dismissal.
Secondly the real intention or the general object of the Rules is to restrict
the right of a party in default to be heard, but not to deny him a just
determination of the appeal.

4\. Though the penalty for default prescribed by Rule 35 is not dismissal, the
appeal may be dismissed where an appellant fails to comply with Rule 35(b) or
Rule 35(e) provided the conditions prescribed by Rule 40 are satisfied:
however mere  
non-compliance is not sufficient and there must be a failure to show due
diligence.  

Failure to show due diligence must refer, not to the initial default, but to a
subsequent default after he has become aware he is in default. A mistake of
fact or law as to the correct procedure for lodging written submissions will
not always  
be a failure to show due diligence.

**

Cases referred to:

**_

1\. State Graphite Corporation _v. _Fernando_ [1982] _2_ Sri L.R. 590.

_

2\. Pearlberg _v. _Varty_ (Inspector of Taxes) [1972] 2 All E. R 06, [1972] 1
W.LR. 524.

_

3\. Cooper _v. _Wandsworth Board of Works_ (1863) 14 CB (NS) 180, 190, 194.

_

4\. Wiseman _v. _Borneman_ et al [1969] 3 All E.R. 275, 277.

_

5\. Edward _v. _de Silva_ 46 NLR 342.

_

6\. Wimalasekera _v. _Parakrama Samudra Co-operative APSS Society_ 58 NLR 298.

_

7\. Mylvaganam _v _Reckitt & Colman S.C. _Appeal No. 154/87 with S.C. Appeal
No.16A/87 - S.C. Minutes of 8.7.1987.

8\. _Samarawickrama_ v. _Attorney General_ 1 Sri kantha L.R. 27  

**PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS** re grant of leave to appeal.

_

P. A. O. Samarasekera, P.C. _with _Jayampathy A. Gunaratne_ and _I.P.
Wickremasinghe_ for 1st plaintiff-respondent-appellant.

_

Dr H.W. Jayewardcne, Q.C. _with _Jucolyn Seneviratne. Harsha Amerasekera_ and
_Harsha Cabraal_ for defendant-respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**264**

November 03, 1989

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.

**

The Plaintiff-Appellant instituted this action in the District Court of
Colombo in which he claimed that the Defendant-Respondent was in breach of an
agreement to sell and transfer to the Appellant and to one G. Speldwinde
(deceased) a portion of a land called Galla Estate at Ekala. The Appellant had
made the 2nd Respondent, who was the executrix of the Estate of the said G.
Speldwinde a party defendant, but subsequently upon an application made by the
2nd Respondent she was added as a Plaintiff in the said action. After trial,
judgment was entered in favour of the Appellant in a sum of Rs. 163,296/-, and
in favour of the 2nd Respondent in a sum of Rs. 107,500/-. The 1st Respondent
appealed from the said judgment of the District Court to the Court of Appeal.
That Court set aside the judgment of the District Court but entered judgment
in favour of the Appellant in a reduced sum viz: Rs. 28,296/-. The Appellant
sought from the Court of Appeal leave to appeal to this Court against the
judgment of the Court of Appeal, and it was allowed on the ground that there
were substantial questions of law involved in the appeal.

By a motion dated 30.6.89, the Respondent moved that the appeal be dismissed
as no copy of the Appellant's written submissions had been served on the
Respondent. This objection was amplified by a further motion dated 25.8.89,
which was the subject-matter of the hearing before us. These objections were
as follows:-

(1) that the leave to appeal purported to have been granted by the Court of
Appeal ex parte without the Respondent being noticed or informed of the
grounds of appeal is void and is of no effect in law.

(2) that there has been non-compliance with Rule 35 of the Supreme Court Rules
in as much as the Appellant has failed to serve on the Respondent a copy of
his written submissions.

The judgment in this case was delivered by the Court of Appeal on 5.8.1988 by
Dheeraratne, J. with Palakidnar, J. agreeing. The application for leave to
appeal to the Supreme Court was taken before the same two judges on 7.10.88.
on which date learned President's Counsel appeared for the Petitioner and the
Court made order granting leave to appeal to the Supreme Court on the grounds

**265**

set out in paragraph 17 of the petition. It is conceded that notice of that
application had not been given to the Respondent either by the Appellant or by
the Court, and on 7.10.88 the Respondent was unrepresented. The fact that the
leave to appeal to the Supreme Court was granted by the same two Judges who
heard the appeal is of some importance as they were fully conversant with the
facts and it cannot be said that the exercise of the jurisdiction of the Court
was arbitrary. In State Graphite Corporation v. Fernando (1) it was held that:

"the Court of Appeal can dispense with a hearing in granting leave ex mero
motu. In other cases where a party wishes to be heard or the issues involved
are such that the Court ought not to make an order without hearing a party
affected, a proper hearing and determination would generally require a hearing
however summary or brief that hearing may be...."

It was further observed that the Bench which gave leave was the same Bench
which gave judgment and was fully conversant with the case.

It was the contention of learned Queen's Counsel that the fact that Rule 20 of
the Supreme Court Rules dealing with all applications for leave to appeal to
the Supreme Court made in the Court of Appeal requires that -

"Every application for leave to appeal shall name as respondent in the case of
a civil cause or matter, the party or parties in whose favour the judgment
complained against has been delivered or adversely to whom the application is
preferred or whose interest may be adversely affected by the success of the
appeal and shall set out in full the address of such respondents.",

inferentially meant that the Respondents must be given notice of such
application so that they may oppose it or make submission to Court to assist
the Court in coming to a correct decision as to whether such application
should be allowed or not. He submitted that natural justice which is really
"airplay in action" requires such notice to be given and a decision made
behind the back of a Respondent is a denial of natural justice.

A reading of Article 128 of the Constitution which gives a right of appeal to
the Supreme Court -

"From any final order, judgment, decree or sentence of the Court of

**266**

Appeal in any matter or proceedings, whether civil or criminal, which involves
a substantial question of law, if the Court of Appeal grants leave to appeal
to the Supreme Court ex mero motu or at the instance of any aggrieved party to
such matter or proceedings," shows that the Court of Appeal can in the
appropriate case grant leave ex mero motu. In fact, sometimes the Court of
Appeal judges in their judgment itself, in an appropriate case, give leave to
appeal ex mero motu and it is for the parties, if they so desire, to avail
themselves of such leave. In such a case, the parties are not heard before
leave ex mero motu is granted. _( State Graphite Corporation vs. Fernando,
supra)_ In _Pearlberg vs. Varty (Inspector of_ 7"axes)(2) where  
  
"in 1957 the Revenue, on finding that the tax payer had made no return at all
on his income between 1937 and 1957, made assessment on him for the year
1951-52 ('the normal year1 within the meaning of Section 51(1) of the Finance
Act 1960}. In 1967 the Revenue decided to make an assessment under Section
51(1 )(3) of the 1960 Act for each of the five years preceding the normal
year' to recover tax allegedly lost due to the 'wilful default or neglect' of
the tax payer. Prior to 1965 such late assessments were made by the
Commissioner but where the assessment was for a year ending earlier than six
years before the end of the normal year, Section 51(4) provided that it could
only be made with the leave of the Special or General Commissioner, and under
Section 51(7), the person to be assessed was entitled to appear and be heard
when the application for leave was made. The Income Tax Management Act 1964
however relieved the Commissioner of the function of making assessments ....
but Section 6(1) provided that such assessments could only be made with the
leave of a Commissioner 'given on being satisfied by an Inspector or other
officer of the Board that there are reasonable grounds for believing that tax
has or may have been lost to the Crown owing to the fraud or wilful default or
neglect of any person'. In accordance with Section 6(1) the Revenue applied to
a Commissioner for leave to make assessments on the taxpayer for the years in
question and the Commissioner granted leave without giving the taxpayer an
opportunity to be heard .... The taxpayer claimed that those assessments were
invalid on the ground that the Commissioner had acted ultra vires in granting
leave without giving him an opportunity to appear and be heard- It was held
(i) that Section 6(1) to Section 51(7) which specifically gave the tax payer a
right to

**267**

appear and be heard....the wording of Section 6(1) describing the procedure
whereby the Commissioner must be satisfied by an Inspector or other officer of
the Board was more naturally to be understood as meaning that the application
was to be ex parte and that the tax payer therefore had no right to be heard:
(ii) the function of the Commissioner in granting leave under Section 6(1) was
administrative and not judicial .... (iii) the decision of the Commissioner to
give leave did not make any final determination of the right of the taxpayer;
where the person affected by the decision could be heard and could then put
forward all the objection which he could have preferred on making of the
application, it by no means followed that he suffered an injustice in not
being heard on that application".

Learned Queens Counsel contended that though Article 128 did not state
specifically, the procedure to be followed and whether it would involve giving
the Respondent an opportunity of being heard before leave to appeal was
granted, the dictum of Byles J, in _Cooper vs. Wandsworth Board of Works (3)_
that -

"although there are no positive words in a statute requiring that the parties
shall be heard, the justice of the common law will supply the omission of the
legislature" would apply; but in _Wiseman vs. Borneman et al_ (4) Lord Reid at
page 277 says that -

"Natural justice requires that the procedure before any Tribunal which is
acting judicially shall be fair in all the circumstances, and I would be sorry
to see this fundamental general principle degenerate into a series of hard and
fast rules. For a long time the Courts have without objection from Parliament
supplemented procedure laid down in legislation where they have found that to
be necessary for this purpose. But before this unusual kind of power is
exercised it must be clear that the statutory procedure is insufficient to
achieve justice and that to require additional steps would not frustrate _the_
apparent purpose of legislation".

An interpretation of Article 128 taken with the Supreme Court Rules do not
compel one to the view that one should read into them a procedure not provided
for in them and make it obligatory, in all cases, whatever the circumstances,
that the Respondent should be heard before leave to appeal is granted by the
Court of Appeal. As

**268**

was stated in Pearlberge vs. Varty (2) there is not at this stage d final
determination affecting the rights of parties and the Respondent would at a
later stage be heard and could then put forward all the material and arguments
which he could have preferred at the hearing of the leave to appeal
application. No injustice has been suffered by him in not being heard at this
stage. No doubt in the appropriate case the Court would give such an
opportunity to the Respondent, if the circumstances of the case warranted such
a step.

Learned Queen's Counsel cited _Edward vs._ c/e _Silva (5)_ and _Wimalasekera
vs. Parakrama Samudra Co-operative A. P. S. S. Society (6)_ in support of his
contention that the Respondent should have been noticed before leave to appeal
was granted. The principle involved in those decisions was that, upon an
appeal being filed in a higher Court, the inferior Court ceases to have
jurisdiction over the action, and can take no further proceedings in the
action, save as expressly permitted by law. That principle has no application
here, because the jurisdiction of this Court had not yet _been_ invoked at the
time the Court of Appeal granted leave, and that Court undoubtedly continued
to have jurisdiction: a jurisdiction expressly granted by Article 128.
Further, in those cases writs of execution were issued ex _parte,_ after
appeals had been filed: orders for the issue of writs of execution directly
and immediately affect the proprietory rights of parties with a degree of
finality which the grant of leave to appeal does not have. The fact that the
Respondent was not noticed does not affect the jurisdiction of the Court of
Appeal to grant leave to appeal. I am of the view that no prejudice has
resulted to the Respondent and I accordingly over-rule this objection.

The second matter raised by the learned Counsel for the Respondent is that the
written submissions have not been served on the Respondent by the Appellant as
required by Rule 35(e) of the Supreme Court Rules which states that -

"The appellant shall, as soon as may be, and in any case within fourteen days
of the grant of special leave to appeal or the filing of an appeal lodge his
submissions, and forthwith give notice; thereof to each Respondent serving on
him a copy of submissions".

The Appellant filed his petition of appeal in the Supreme Court on 3rd
November 1988 and on 17th November 1988 his written submissions were filed in
the Supreme Court Registry with a copy thereof to be served on the Respondent.
This copy was withdrawn by

**269**

the Appellant on a date prior to the 8th August 1989 after the Respondent had
filed a motion on 30th June 1989 stating that the Appellant's written
submissions had not been served on the Respondents in terms of Rule 35. These
written submissions had been subsequently sent to the Respondent by registered
post on 7.8.1989.

Learned Queen's Counsel for the Appellant submitted that there was a failure
on the part of the Respondent to serve the written submissions on the
Respondent in compliance with Rule 35 which is mandatory and hence he could
not be heard in terms of Rule 36(b). He cited in support the unreported
judgment of this Court in _V. Mylvaganam vs. Reckltt & Colman (7) _where
admittedly written submissions were filed well out of time and in
contravention of Rule 35 of the S.C. rules. Apart from that, no excuse had
been tendered for the delay. It was held that this Court has consistently
taken the view that in circumstances such as this, the appeal should be
dismissed for non-compliance with the rule which is imperative.

Learned Queen's Counsel also relied on Samarawickreme vs. Attorney--General
(8) in support of his contention that Rule 35(e) was imperative, and that upon
the Appellant's failure to prove that due notice had been given to the
Respondent of the lodging of the Appellant's submissions, the appeal has to be
dismissed. In that case, the order of dismissal was made after "considering
al! the circumstances of (the) case": the circumstances, however, are not set
out in the judgment. In regard to this decision, as well as Mylvaganam vs.
Reckitt & Colman, it would appear that the express provisions of Rule 35(b)
have not been sufficiently considered. Article 136(1 )(a) of the Constitution
authorized the making of Rules providing for the dismissal of appeals for non-
compliance with such Rules. However, in making Rule 35 (b). no provision was
made for automatic dismissal of an appeal upon such non-compliance; instead
that Rule provided only that "no party to an appeal shall be entitled to be
heard" if he had not previously lodged his written submissions. Thus the
penalty, and the only penalty, for default has been prescribed. This must be
regarded as deliberate, and one can well understand the reason: where either
the Court of Appeal (upon an application to that Court for leave to appeal) or
this Court (upon an application for special leave) has considered that a
question fit for adjudication by this Court does arise, the failure to take a
subsequent step will not inevitably or automatically, prevent this Court from
determining a

**270**

serious question of that nature. The Rule contemplates that this Court will
proceed to hear the appeal: at that it does is to disentitle the party in
default from claiming a right to be heard, but preserves the undoubted
discretion of this Court to give such party such hearing as it thinks
appropriate. If that be the only consequence of the failure to lodge written
submissions, it is impossible to interpret the Rules as requiring a more
severe penalty for a far less serious default, namely the failure to give
notice of the lodging of written submissions to the Respondent together with a
copy thereof in terms of Rule 35(e). That Rule omits even the penalty provided
in Rule 35(b), and it is not open by a process of interpretation to read into
Rule 35(e) an implied penalty, either that the right to be heard is to be
denied or that the appeal is to be dismissed. In coming to this conclusion, it
is necessary to bear in mind that Rules 36(b), (e) and (f) apply to the
Respondent as well: it would be a discriminatory interpretation to hold that
where the Appellant is in default, the appeal must be dismissed, but where the
Respondent is in default, there is no corresponding requirement that the
appeal be allowed. On the other hand, to hold that upon the Respondent's
default, the appeal must be allowed would be both arbitrary and absurd, for
the questions of law involved must be answered by this Court correctly, on the
merits, and not by reference to the failure of one party or the other to
comply with the Rules. While it is an established rule of construction that
enactments regulating the procedure in courts are usually construed as
imperative, this is a principle based upon the assumed intention of Parliament
on questions necessarily arising out of an enactment on which Parliament has
remained silent; and even then "it is the duty of Courts of Justice to try to
get at the real intention of the Legislature by carefully attending to the
whole scope of the statute to be construed" "to look to the subject-matter,
consider the importance of the provision that has been disregarded, and the
relation of that provision to the general object intended to be secured....and
(then) decide whether the matter is what is called imperative or only
directory". Maxwell, Interpretation of Statutes, 12th edition, pages 314, 315
and 320. The object of Rule 35{e) appears from Rule 35(f) namely to identify
the date of receipt of notice of the lodging of the Appellant's written
submissions as the date from which the time for lodging the Responds. it's
submissions is to be reckoned. Thus, applying these principles oil
interpretation of statutes to the Rules, it is seen, firstly, that the Rubies
are not silent as to the consequence of default, and therefore it cannot be
implied that non-compliance must

**271**

result in dismissal, and secondly, that the real intention or the general,
object of the Rules is to restrict the right of a party in default to be
heard, but not to deny him a just determination of the appeal.

Learned Queen's Counsel also relied on Rule 40, contending that the Appellant
had failed "to show due diligence in taking al! necessary steps for the
purpose of prosecuting the appeal and that this Court should "declare the
appeal to stand dismissed for non-prosecution" in terms of that Rule. Though
the penalty for default prescribed by Rule 35 is not dismissal, I agree that
an appeal may be dismissed, where an Appellant fails to comply with Rule 35(b)
or Rule 35(e), provided the conditions prescribed by Rule 40 are satisfied:
however, mere non-compliance is not sufficient, and there must be a failure to
show due diligence. In the context of Rule 35(b) and (e) and in relation to a
default there under, "failure to show due diligence" must refer, not to the
initial default, but to a subsequent default after he has become aware that he
is in default. Clearly, a mistake of fact or law, as to the correct procedure
in lodging written submissions, will not always be a "failure to show due
diligence". In the present case, the Appellant intended to give notice, but by
an error tendered to the Registrar the notice intended for the Respondent;
within about one month of his becoming aware of this mistake, he took steps to
rectify his error. I doubt whether, in the context of the Law's delays today,
such a delay can be regarded as a "failure to show due diligence"; even
otherwise, this Court has a discretion under Rule 40, and I am of the view
that this is not an appropriate case for the dismissal of the appeal as no
prejudice whatsoever has been caused to the Respondent.

I would therefore hold that the default on the part of the Respondent is not
of such a nature as to disentitle him from being heard. I accordingly over-
rule this objection too. The main appeal should now be listed for argument
before any Bench. Costs of this hearing would be costs in the cause.

**

BANDARANAYAKE, J. **\- I agree.

**

FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree.

**_Preliminary objections overruled._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/7.html_  

