##  The Manager, Bank Of Ceylon, Hatton v. The Secretary, Hatton Dickoya Urban
Council - SLR - 1, Vol 3 of 2005 [2005] LKSC 7; (2005) 3 Sri LR 1 (7 December
2005)

**1**

**THE MANAGER, BANK OF CEYLON, HATTON  
VS  
THE SECRETARY, HATTON DICKOYA URBAN COUNCIL**

SUPREME COURT.  
BANOARANAYAKE, J.  
AMARATUNGAJ.AND  
MARSOOFJ.  
SC APPEAL 67/2004.  
H. C. (CENTRAL PROVINCE).  
MAGISTRATE'S COURT (HATTON).  
30TH MAY, 13TH JULY AND 30TH SEPTEMBER, 2005.

By laws under Urban Councils Ordinance - Urban Councils Ordinance, sections
164, 165, 165B and 165C - Whether the appellant Bank is liable to pay licence
fees separately for money lending and pawn brokering-Meaning of "Banking'
under common law and statutes such as the Bank of Ceylon Ordinance and Banking
Act, No. 30 of 1988- Existence of doubt regarding the meaning of "Banking"
(whether money lending and pawn brokering can be separated) Interpretation of
statutes - Doubts in taxing statutes to be resolved in favour of the tax payer
- Validity of the Magistrate's order on the appellant Bank to pay licence fees
on pawn brokering in addition to payment for money lending.

On the application of the respondent Secretary aforesaid, the Magistrate,
Hatton ordered the recovery of Rs.3,375 from the appellant Bank as licence
fees for pawn brokering with GST whilst the Bank had already paid Rs. 3000 (or
money lending for the year 2000 on Document XI.

**HELD:**

1\. Having regard to the common law and statutes such as the Bank of Ceylon
Ordinance and the Barking Act, No. 30 of 1988 and the meaning of "Banking",
the Bank of Ceylon is carrying on banking business including money lending and
pawn-brokering. These two activities cannot be separated.

2\. In any event there is a doubt whether money lending and pawn-brokering may
be separated. In the circumstances the doubt should be resolved in favour of
the Bank being the tax payer. Taxing statutes should be strictly construed in
favour of the tax payer.

**2**

3\. As such, the order of the Magistrafe that the appellant is liable to De
additionally taxed for pawn-brokering and the order of the High Court
affirming that order are invalid and cannot be sustained.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court.

Cases referred to ;

1\. United Dominions Trusts. Kirwood (1966) 2 QB 431.

2\. State Saving Bank of Victoria Commissioners vs. Per. Mewan Wright and Co.
Ltd. (1915) 19CLR459.

3\. Tuck and Sons vs. Priesrer(1887) 19 QBD 629.

M. K. Muthukumar with Jinadasa Gamage for appellant.

S. Mandaleswaran with P. Peramunagama for respondent.

_Cur.adv. vult._

7 December, 2005.

**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

This is an appeal from the order of the High Court of the Central Province
dated 21.05.2004. By that order the learned High Court Judge had affirmed the
judgment of the learned Magistrate of Hatton and dismissed the appeal. The
respondent - appellant - appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant
Bank) appealed against the said order on which this Court granted special
leave to appeal.

The facts of this appeal, albeit brief, are as follows :

The complainant - respondent \- respondent (hereinfter referred to as the
respondent), being the Secretary of the Hatton - Dickoya Urban Council, filed
a complaint against the appellant Bank in the Magistrate's Court of Hatton to
recover the tax due under section 165B(3) of the Urban Councils Ordinance for
conducting the business of pawn-brokering. The respondent had claimed in the
said complaint that the appellant Bank was liable to pay Rs. 3,000 as the
licence fees for pawning business, Rs. 375 as goods and services tax and Rs.
625 being charges for office expenses, totalling to a sum of Rs. 4,000.
Learned Magistrate by his order dated 23.01.2001 allowed the respondent's
application and imposed a fine of

**3**

Rs. 3,375 payable to the respondent Urban Coucil, which order was affirmed by
the learned High Court Judge of the Central Province by his order dated
21.05.2004.

Both counsel agreed that the only question that has to be examined in this
appeal is whether the respondent is entitled to levy a tax from the appellant
Bank separately for the business of pawn brokering carried on oy the appellant
Bank in Hatton apart from various businesses of banking carried on by the
appellant Bank in the said area.

Learned Counsel for the respondent contended that the respondent is entitled
to levy a tax under section 165B(1) of the Urban Councils Ordinance for the
two businesses carried on by the appellant Bank, namely money lending and pawn
brokering set out in item 2 and item 7 of the third Schedule to the Gazette
notification dated 14.02.1997, published in terms of the Urban Councils
Ordinance. He further contended that the sum of Rs. 3,000 paid by the
appellant by document marked XI for the year 2000 was for the business of
money lending and that the present claim was for the recovery of the taxes for
the business of pawnbrokering in terms of section 165B(3) of the Urban
Councils Ordinance.

It is common ground that the appellant Bank is a branch office of the Bank of
Ceylon established under the Bank of Ceylon Ordinance No. 53 of 1938 as
amended, it is also common ground that the Bank had paid Rs. 3,000 as licence
fee for the year 2000 (x). The contention of the respondents is that the said
payment of Rs. 3,000 was made by the appellent Bank for carrying on the
business of money lending and that a further sum has to be paid in terms of
schedule II! of the Gazette notification dated 14.02.1997 (P1) published under
section 165 of the Urban Councils Ordinance for carrying on the business of
pawn-brokering.

The Gazette notification dated 14.02.1997 (P1) refers to the by -laws made by
the Urban Council in terms of sections 164,165,165Band 165C of the Urban
Councils Ordinance. The said by -laws refer to 3 Schedules. The first Schedule
deals with the licence duty referred to in section 164 of the Ordinance (or
the use of the premises for the specific purpose set out therein. The second
Schedule refers to the tax imposed and levied on the trade, set out in section
165 of the Ordinance. The third Schedule deals with the tax imposed and levied
on the business set out in section 165B of the Ordinance. It is apparent that
none of these schedules refer to

**4**

banking business. The third Schedule, which deals with the business in the
area, has 23 listings, but has not included banking business. However, the
third Schedule refers to money lending and pawn-brokering among the other type
of business.

Section 5 of the Bank of Ceylon Ordinance makes provision for the said Bank to
establish and maintain branches in Sri Lanka or elsewhere. Part 1 of the first
Schedule to the said Ordinance refers to the business, which the Bank is
authorized to carry on and transact, subject to the limitations mentioned in
Part II of the first Schedule. In fact,section 71 of the Bank of Ceylon
Ordinance, clearly refers to the scope of its business, which reads as
follows:

"Subject to the provisions of this Ordinance the business which the Bank is
authorized to carry on and transact shall be the several kinds of business
specified in Part I of the first Schedule subject to the limitations mentioned
in Part II thereof."

It is thus evident that the Bank of Ceylon is empowered to carry on and
transact business relating to money lending and pawn-brokering. However, it is
apparent that none of the provisions in the Money Lending Ordinance, or the
Debt Conciliation Ordinance or the Pawnbrokers Ordinance shall apply to such
transactions. Sections 68 and 69, which are reproduced below, had quite
clearly laid down that such Ordinance has no application to debts which are
due to the Bank.

"Section 68- Nothing in the Money Lending Ordinance or the Debt Conciliation
Ordinance shall apply or be deemed to apply to any debt due to the Bank, or to
prejudice or affect the rights of the Bank in respect of the recovery of any
such debt.

Section 69 - The Pawnbrokers Ordinance shall not apply to the Bank where the
Bank carries on the business of a pawnbroker".

The claim made by the respondent was on the basis that the appellant Bank had
been carrying on different businesses in terms of the Bank of Ceylon
Ordinance. The respondent therefore was of the view that money lending and
pawn-brokering are two different business. In fact learned Council for the
respondent contended that in terms of the definition given under section 165B
of the Urban Council's Ordinance, the financier, money lender

**5**

and pawnbroker are regarded as three different entitiies and therefore took up
the position that the appellant Bank, being a establishment which carried on
money lending as well as pawn-brokering, should pay the relevant taxes for the
said businesses separately.

A careful examination of the definition given to the word "takings" under
section 165B(b) indicates that the statute has referred to financier, money
lender and a pawnbroker not as three different entities, but as a single
person. The wording in the aforesaid provision, which is referred to below,
clearly shows this position.

"takings in relation to any business, means the total amount received or
receivable from transactions entered into in respect of that business or for
services performed in carrying on that business, and includes - (a) in the
case of financier, moneylender or pawnbroker the money given out by him as
loans, the interest received or receivable by him on such loans, and the sums
received by him as fees or other charges in respect of such loans."

What the definition referred to above, explains is that, takings should
include the total amount received from the transactions relating to financier,
moneylender or the pawnbroker. When one refers to these three items, it is
apparent that a modern day Bank would be forced to carry out all these
transactions. Moreover, it is to be borne in mind that considering the
characterietics of banking takings, in relation to a Bank would undoubtedly
include handling deposits as well as make use ol such deposits by lending it
out at interest or investing it on mortgages etc. This was the view taken by
Lord Denning M. R. in United Dominios Trustvs. Kirkwood (1) where reference
was made to the characteristics of banking in the following terms :

"Seeing that there is no statutory definition of banking, we must do the best
we can to find out the usual characteristics which go to make up the business
of Banking. In the eighteenth century, before cheque came into common use, the
principal characteristics were that the banker accepted the money of the
others on the terms that the persons who deposited it could have it back again
from the banker when they asked for it, sometimes on demand, at other times on
notice, according to the stipulation made at the time of deposit, and
meanwhile the

**6**

banker was at liberty to make use of the money by lending it out at interest
or investing it on mortgage or otherwise (emphasis added)."

A similar view was taken as far ba£k as in 1914, by Issacs, J. in the High
Court of Australia in State Savings Bank of Victoria Commissioners v Permewan
Wright and Co. Ltd.,2 With regard to the definition of Banking, Issacs, J.
thus stated that-

"The essential characteristics of the business of banking... may be described
as the collection of money by receiving deposits on loan, repayable when and
as expressly or impliedly agreed upon, and the utilisation of the money so
collected by lending it again in such sums as are required (emphasis added)."

Thus it is apparent that the business of Banking would include the acceptance
of deposits of money as well as utilisation of such money so collected by
lending them on interest. This position is clearly laid down in the definition
given to 'banking business' in Section 86 of the Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988,
where it is stated that.

"banking business means the business of receiving funds from the public
through the acceptance of money deposits payable upon demand by cheque, draft,
order or otherwise, and the use of such funds either in whole or in part for
advances, investments or any other operaton either authorized by law or by
customary banking practices."

The question that would arise at this juncture is that, if lending is part of
the banking business, whether that would include pawning as well. The
Pawnbrokers Ordinance, No. 8 of 1893 defines the pawnbroker in wide terms that
includes every person who carries on the business of taking goods in pawn. The
Encyclopedia Britannica (Vol. 15-pg. 354) refers to pawnbrokering and states
that-

"the oldest security device that is common everywhere is the pledge (or pawn).
The borrower delivers the goods to be charged to the lender, who keeps them
until repayment of the secured loan.... But pawnbrokers continued to operate
on a minor scale,

**7**

and Banks keep documents of title (such as property deeds) as security."

On an examination of the Pawnbrokers Ordinance it is clear that the Ordinance
does not speak of security for loans as only gold article. A pledge is defined
as an article pawned with a pawnbroker obviously of value. Thus in simple
terms the pledge is the security for the purpose of the money borrowed and
when the pledge is with a movable item such as gold, it could not change the
nature of the main business of money lending carried out by a Bank.

The tax in question was imposed by the respondent, in terms of section, 165A
of the Urban Councils Ordinance. Section 165A reads as follows:

"An Urban Council may by resolution impose and levy annually on every person
who.... carries on any business for which no license is necessary under the
provisions of this Ordinance ... a tax according to the takings of the
business."

As the appellant Bank came under the category that was carrying on a business
for "which no licence was necessary", the respondent could impose only a tax.
When such tax was imposed, the appellant Bank had duly paid the relevant and
assigned amount for which a receipt was issued stating that the amount was
paid for the purpose of payment for business licence (). The contention of the
respondent is that the Council is entitled to levy a tax from the appellant
Bank separately for the business of pawnbrokering carried on by the Bank apart
from the various businesses of Banking carried on by the appellant Bank.

It is not disputed that the question at issue is regarding whether the
appellant Bank has to pay for separate business licences to carry out business
pertaining to money lending as well as for pawn brokering. It is also not
disputed that the appellant Bank has already paid Rs. 3,000 being the payment
as conceded by the respondent for business licence. As referred to earlier,
section 165A of the Urban Councils Ordinance states that a business entity
would be liable to pay a tax 'according to the takings of the business*.
Depending on the 'takings' the amount that has to be paid as tax would be
decided. Non payment of such tax would create a pecuniary burden on the person
liable to pay such tax in terms of section 165B(3) of the Urban Councils
Ordinance.

**8**

Referring to such statutes which incur pecuniary burdens, Maxwell is of the
view that they should be subject to strict interpretation. It was further
stated that (Interpretation of Statutes, 11th Edition, Sweet Maxwell p. g.
278)

"Statutes which impose pecuniary burdens, also, are subject to the same rule
of strict construction. It is a well settled rule of law that all charges upon
the subject must be imposed by clear and unambiguous language because of some
decree they operate as penalties. The subject is not to be taxed unless the
languages of the statute clearly imposes the obligation.

In a Taxing Act one has to merely look at what is clearly said. There is no
room for any intendment. There is no equity about a tax. There is no
prescription as to a tax. Nothing is to be read in, nothing to be implied. One
can only look fairly at the language used. A construction for example, which
would have the effect of making a person liable to pay the same tax twice in
respect of the same subject matter would not be adopted unless the words were
very clear and precise to that effect. In a case of reasonable doubt the
construction most beneficial to the subject is to be adopted (emphasis added)'

In fact Lord Esher, M. R. InTuck and Sons vs Priester (3) referring to strict
construction in construing penal Saws, stated that,

"if there is a reasonable interpretation which will avoid the penalty in any
particular case, we must adopt that construction. It there are two reasonable
constructions we must give the more lenient one. That is the settled rule for
the construction of penal sections."

On a careful consideration of the issue before us, it is clear that the
appellant Bank is carrying on banking business, which includes money lending
as well as pawn-brokering. Both money lending and pown-brokering are part and
parcel of the banking business of the appellant Bank and pawn-brokering cannot
be separated from the money lending business of the appellant Bank. Therefore
the respondent could levy a tax on the basis

**9**

of the issuance of business licence for the banking businesses of the
appellant Bank which in turn would include money lending as well as pawn-
brokering carried out by them.

It is common ground that the appellant Bank has already paid money for its
business license (XI). In the circumstances there cannot be any basis for the
respondent to levy a further tax tor the business of pawn-brokering carried
out by the appellant Bank.

For the aforementioned reasons I answer the question in the negative This
appeal is accordingly allowed and the order of the learned Magistrade Hatton
dated 23.11.2001 and the order of the learned High Court Judge of the Central
Province, dated 21.05.2004 are set aside.

I make no order as to costs.

**N. G. AMARATUNGA, J.** -I agree.

**SALEEM MARSOOF, J.** I  agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2005/7.html_  

