##  Madan Mohan v. Carson Cumberbatch & Co Ltd. - SLR - 75, Vol 2 of 1988
[1988] LKSC 7; (1988) 2 Sri LR 75 (3 August 1988)

**75**

**

MADAN MOHAN  
v.  
CARSON CUMBERBATCH & CO. LTD.

**

SUPREME COURT  
TAMBIAH, J., L. H. DE ALWIS. J., SENEVIRATNE, J.,  
H. A. G. DE SILVA, J., AND BANDARANAYAKE, J.,  
S.C. REFERENCE NO. 2/88.  
D.C. COLOMBO 2828/Spl.  
JULY 6, 7, 11, 12, 14, 15, 18 to 22, 1988.

_

    Court sittings - Are sittings in Chambers sittings in Public? - Affidavits - Can affidavits under section 213(3) of the Companies Act No. 17 of 1982 be in the English Language? - Articles 106(1), 24(1) and 125 of the Constitution -Difference between English and Sinhala texts of the Constitution - Affidavits Act No. 73 of 1953.

_

The Additional District Judge referred the following questions under Article
125 of the Constitution to the Supreme Court:

(1)  Was the interim order issued against the 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents in
a room which is not an open Court on 05.02.1988, a violation of Article 106 of
the Constitution.

(2)  Is the affidavit filed by the 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents in accordance
with the provisions of section 213(3) of the Companies Act of 1982, an
affidavit that can be produced before a Court in accordance with Article 24(1)
of the Constitution.

Under Article 106 the sittings of every court shall be held in public and all
persons shall be entitled freely to attend such sittings.

Article 24(1) stipulates that the official language shall be the language of
the courts throughout Sri Lanka, and accordingly their records and proceedings
shall be in the official language and "record" (article 24(5)) includes
pleadings, orders and other judicial and ministerial acts. The Official
Language is Sinhala.

The Supreme Court is vested with sole and inclusive jurisdiction relating to
the interpretation of the Constitution.

**

Held: (Seneviratne J. dissenting)

**

(1)  The District Judge shall apply the provisions of Article 106 and decide
the questions of whether the sittings were in public and all persons were
entitled freely to attend such sittings.

**76**

(2)  By virtue of the Affidavits Act No. 23 of 1953 an affidavit can be filed
in the English Language and it does not violate the Constitution. The
affidavit filed by the 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents under section 213(3) of
the Companies Act is a valid affidavit which could be tendered to **** Court.

**

Cases referred to

** _

1. Dilworth v. Commissioner of Stamps _[1899] A.C. 99, 105, 106

_

2. Ludovici v.Nicholas Appu _4 NLR 12, 15

_

3. Shanmugam v. Commissioner for Registration of Indian and Pakistani Residents _64 NLR 30, 33

_

4. Tasmania v. Commonwealth _[1904] I C.L.R. 329

_

5. Science House (Ceylon) Ltd. v. IPCA Laboratories Private Ltd. _[1987] _1 Sri L. R. 185, 200

6. Mcpherson v. Mcpherson _[1936] A. C. 177

_

7. Coomaraswamy v. Shanmugaratna Iyer _Vol. 1 Sri Kantha's Reports 159

_

8. H.M.T Wickremaratne v. Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Ceylon and another _S.C. Ref. No. 2/86 - S.C. Minutes of 06.12.1986

**

REFERENCE** to the Supreme Court under Article 125(1) of the Constitution.

_

Faiz Mustapha P .C._ with _T. Parathalingam, Daya Wettasinghe_ and _Zainul
Luthafi_ for petitioner.

_

Dr. H. W Jayewardene Q.C._ with _H. L. de Silva P .C., K N Choksy P.C., K.
Kanag-Iswaran P.C., Dinal Phillips, Nihal Fernando_ and _And Anil Tittawella_
for 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents.

_

Dr. Colvin R. de Silva_ with _Edward Deraniyagala, Lyn Amarasuriya, Lalantha
de Silva_ and _Kushan deAlwis,_ for 4th respondent.

_

Romesh de Silva, P.C.,_ with _Palitha Kumarasinghe_ and _Miss S. Samarasekera_
for the 5th respondent.

_

Rohan Jayatilleke, Deputy Solicitor-Genera/_ with _Miss Kumuduni Kumarasinghe,
State Counsel_ and _Miss. Lilanthi Jayawardena,_ Assistant State Attorney for
the Attorney-General as _amicus curiae.

_ _

Cur. adv. vult

_

**77**

**

August 03, 1988  
Determination of the Court (Seneviratne J. dissenting)  
TAMBIAH, J.

**

The petitioner made an application in terms of Sections 210 and 211 of the
Companies Act. No. 17 of 1982, seeking inter alia, reliefs against the 2nd,
3rd and 10th respondents and also the interim orders set out in the prayer to
the petition. The Court by its order dated 28.01.1988 directed the issue of an
order nisi in respect of the substantive reliefs sought for in the said
petition, and also issued interim orders as prayed for in the said petition.
The order nisi and interim orders were served on the abovenamed respondents.

On 02.02.1988, the 4th respondent made an application in terms of s.213(1) of
the Companies Act seeking, inter alia, an interim order restraining the 2nd
and 3rd respondents from functioning or acting as Directors or in any capacity
whatsoever or in any manner howsoever of the 1st Respondent Company, pending
the final orders of Court, in the said proceedings. This application came up
in the District Court of Colombo, (Court No. 5) before Mr Leslie Abeysekara,
Additional District Judge, who, according to the journalised entry, directed
that this case be called before Mr Wimal Dassanayake, Additional District
Judge. The reason being that Mr. Wimal Dassanayake had earlier made certain
orders in this case.

According to the order dated 12.5.1988 delivered by Mr. Leslie Abeysekera, on
05.02.1988 "the application of the 4th respondent was supported before
Additional District Judge Mr. Wimal Dassanayake in his official chambers. The
said learned Judge made the order in issue also in chambers. As there are
several Additional District Judges in Colombo District Court, more than the
available Courts, certain Additional District Judges conduct their inquiries
in their personal chambers." It was mentioned to us during the hearing that on
05.02.88, there were 9 Judges of the District Court of Colombo, but only 6
"Court Houses" or "Court Rooms". It was also agreed by all Counsel that on
this day, the application of the 4th respondent came up for support before Mr.
Wimal Dassanayake who was seated in a part of the chambers of Court No. 1 of
the District

**78**

Court of Colombo, where he had his chambers.

The recorded proceedings of this date show that the 4th and 5th respondents
were present, that 4 Counsel with the instructing attorney appeared for the
4th respondent; that 3 Counsel appeared for the 5th respondent; that the
proceedings were recorded by a Stenographer and an Interpreter was present to
assist the Court; and that submissions were made by Senior Counsel for the 4th
and 5th respondents in support of the application and questions were asked by
Mr. Wimal Dassanayake in clarification of certain matters before he made the
order that is being questioned now.

After hearing Counsel, Mr. Wimal Dassanayake, ADJ., issued the interim order
asked for ex-parte, against the 2nd and 3rd respondents.

Thereafter, the 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents made an application under s.
213(3) read with s. 213 (2) of the Companies Act and sought the vacation of
the said interim order, on the grounds; inter alia, that the sittings and
proceedings held on 05th February, 1988, in chambers were illegal and null and
void by reason of contravention of Article 106(1) of the Constitution of Sri
Lanka. This application was made by a joint petition in the Sinhala Language,
supported by a joint affidavit in the English Language. To this application, a
counter affidavit was filed by the 4th respondents. At the inquiry had before
Mr. Leslie Abeysekera, ADJ. the 5th respondent who filed no counter-affidavit
took the objection that there was no valid affidavit in support of the
application as it was not in the Sinhala language as required by Article 24
(1) of the Constitution and therefore there was no valid application to vacate
the said interim order.

The learned Judge in his order dated 12.5.1988 sets out the rival contentions
of parties and states .why it has become necessary for this Court to interpret
Articles 106(1) and 24(1) of the Constitution.

(1) Learned Counsel for the 2nd and 3rd respondents argued that every Judge
exercising judicial functions should do so

**79**

in open Court in terms of Article 106(1). If a trial is held in chambers, all
are not permitted to freely enter such a place. The order made in chambers is
a violation of a provision in the Constitution.

Counsel for the other parties argued that no person is prohibited from
entering the chambers, and on that occasion any person could enter the
chambers. In the Colombo District Court and in other Courts, Judges very often
conduct trials in rooms which are not Courts. There is no violation of Article
106(1). "Therefore, it has become necessary to interpret Article 106(1) of the
Constitution."

Further, there is a discrepancy between the English and Sinhala versions of
Article 106. It is very important that the Supreme Court should consider the
difference of meaning in the 2 versions.

(2)  An interpretation of the Constitution is necessary regarding the question
whether an affidavit in English could be produced in respect of an application
under s. 213(3) of the Companies Act.

Here too there is a discrepancy between the English and Sinhala versions of
Article 24(1) and "therefore it is necessary that s. 24(1) be interpreted."

On 7.6.1988, the learned Judge, referred 2 questions to this Court for
interpretation in terms of Article 125(1) of the Constitution:

(1)  "Was the interim order issued against the 2nd and 3rd respondents in a
room which is not an open Court, on 5.2.88, a violation of Article 106 of the
Constitution?"

(2)  "Is the affidavit filed by the 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents in accordance
with the provisions of s. 213 (3) of the Companies Act of 1982, an affidavit
that can be produced before a Court in accordance with Article 24(1) of the
Constitution?"

All Counsel who appeared before us have stated that this Court could proceed
on the basis that there is no discrepancy between the English and Sinhala
versions of Articles 106(1) of the Constitution.

**80**

Article 106 reads:

(1) The sittings of every court, tribunal or other institution established
under the Constitution or ordained and established by Parliament shall subject
to the provisions of the Constitution be held in public, and all persons shall
be entitled freely to attend such sittings.

(2) A Judge or presiding officer of any such court, tribunal or other
institution may, in his discretion, whenever he considers it desirable-

in proceedings relating to family relations, in proceedings relating to sexual
matters,

(c) in the interests of national security or public safety, or

(d) in the interests of order and security within the precincts of such court,
tribunal or other institution, exclude therefrom such persons as are not
directly interested in the proceedings therein.

All Counsel agree that it is for the learned Judge to apply the provisions of
Article 106 and decide the first question that has been referred to us for our
determination. We, therefore, return the first issue formulated by the learned
Judge, to be decided by him.

We come to the second question that has been referred to us for our
determination.

Article 18 of the Constitution reads: "The official language of Sri Lanka
shall be Sinhala." Article 24 (1) reads: "The official language shall be the
language of the Courts throughout Sri Lanka and accordingly their records and
proceedings shall be in the official language." Article 24(5) defines the
term. "Record": 'Record' includes pleadings, judgments, orders and other
judicial and ministerial acts." The 13th Amendment to the Constitution amended
Article 18 of the Constitution and made Tamil also an official language and
gave English the status of a "Link Language".

**81**

While Mr. Romesh de Silva, P.C., contended that there is a discrepancy between
the English and Sinhala versions of Article 24 (1), Dr. Jayewardene, Q. C., on
the other hand, contended there is no such discrepancy. Mr. Faiz Mustapha,
P.C., for the petitioner, however, stated in answer to Court that the Tamil
version of Article 24(1) is identical with the English version. One has,
therefore, to proceed on the basis that the English version is a correct
version.

S. 213 (3) read with sub-section (2) of the Companies Act, No. 17 of 1982,
requires that an application to revoke or vary an interim order "shall be made
by petition supported by affidavit." Accordingly, the 2nd, 3rd and 7th
respondents filed a joint petition in Sinhala and a joint affidavit in English
to set aside the interim order made on 5th February, 1988. The 2nd and 7th
respondents are Tamils and the 3rd respondent is a Burgher. When the matter
came up for inquiry the learned District Judge directed the parties to file
written submissions and all parties filed written submissions in the English
Language. Along with their written submissions, the 2nd, 3rd and 7th
respondents annexed a Sinhala translation of their original affidavit which
was in the English language.

The definition of "Record" in Article 24 (5) uses the word "includes". Lord
Watson observed in _Dilwarth v. Commissioner of_ _Stamps_ (1) ...........
'include' is very generally used in interpretation clauses in order to enlarge
the meaning of the words or phrases occurring in the body of the statute, and
when it is so used these words and phrases must be construed as comprehending,
not only such things as they signify, according to their natural import, but
also things which the interpretation clause declares that they should
include." Similarly, Bonser, C. J., observed in _Ludovici v. Nicholas Appu_
(2) _,_ "Now, as I had occasion to remark before, the words "shall include" in
a definition clause mean 'shall have the following meaning in addition to
their popular meaning'." We agree with the submission of Dr. Jayewardene,
Q.C., that by the use of the word "includes" in Article 24 (5), the
Constitution gave the term "Record" an extended meaning, in addition to its
ordinary meaning that a "Record" is a document kept by Court in terms of s.92
of the Civil Procedure Code.

**82**

Dr. Colvin R. de Silva and Mr. Romesh de Silva, P.C., contended that s. 213
(3) requires an application "by petition supported by affidavit", and,
therefore, the petition and affidavit is one pleading document and is one
package; that Article 24(1) demands that a pleading shall be in the official
language and not in the English language. Mr. Romesh de Silva, P.C., further
contended that a pleading is a part of "proceedings". Dr. Jayewardene, Q.C.,
and Mr. H. L. de Silva, P.C., on the other hand, contended that the 'petition
is the pleading and that the affidavit is a document which supports the
averments in the pleading; that an affidavit is written evidence on oath and
is supporting evidence and not part of the pleading and therefore does not
attract the provisions of Article 24(1). Both learned Counsel further
submitted that 'proceeding' is what takes place in a Court; that an affidavit
is a document prepared and sworn of affirmed outside Court and tendered to
Court, and is, therefore, not part of "proceeding" in Court.

It is unnecessary for us to consider the validity of the rival submissions of
learned Counsel by reason of the view we have formed in regard to the
continued operation of the Affidavits Act, No. 23 of 1953, (C. L. E. Vol. 1.
Cap. 18). Nor is it necessary fog us to consider the reasoning of
Samerawickreme, J. (with whom 4 other Judges agreed) in Election Petition
Appeals, Nos. 2 of 1977 (Medawachchiya), 3 of 1977 (Kotmale), and 2 of 1978
(Anamaduwa) - (S. C. Minutes of 9.8.1978), which reasoning was adopted by
Soza, J., in S.C. Appeal Nos. 10 of 1981-13/81 (S. C. Minutes of 3.9.1982) and
also adopted by Sharvananda, C.J. in S.C.2 of 1986 (S.C. Minutes of
1.12.1986), and see whether the reasoning could equally be applied to
affidavits.

S. 2(1) of the Affidavits Act states: "Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in any other written law, an affidavit required for any purpose
whatsoever may be written, and sworn or affirmed in the Sinhala or Tamil or
English Language."

Article 168 of the Constitution states -

(1)  Unless Parliament otherwise provides, all laws, written laws and
unwritten laws, in force immediately before the

**83**

commencement of the Constitution, shall, mutatis mutandis, and except as
otherwise expressly provided in the Constitution, continue in force.

(3)  Wherever the Constitution provides that any law, written law or unwritten
law or any provision of the Constitution shall continue in force until or
unless Parliament otherwise provides, any law enacted by Parliament so
providing may be passed by a majority of the Members present and voting.

Article 170 defines "existing law" and "existing written law" to mean "any law
and written law, respectively, in force immediately before the commencement of
the Constitution which under the Constitution continue in force."

Dr. Colvin R. de Silva submitted that the Affidavits Act was enacted in 1953
when English was the language of the Courts; that when Article 11(1) of the
1972 Constitution enacted that "the language of the Courts shall be Sinhala
throughout Sri Lanka" the English language ceased to be a language of the
Courts; that when the present Constitution commenced in 1978, the Affidavits
Act which permitted an affidavit to be written and sworn or affirmed in the
English language ceased to be part of the existing law, by reason of Article
11(1) of the 1972 Constitution; that the 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents cannot
avail themselves of the provisions of s. 2(1) of the Affidavits Act.

With this submission, we cannot agree. A Constitution must be read as a whole,
and the whole Constitution has to be examined without giving undue weight to
any part. The 1972 Constitution contained a provision similar to Article 168
(1) and (3) of the 1978 Constitution, viz, Article 12 which reads:

12 (1) Unless the National State Assembly otherwise provides, all laves,
written and unwritten, in force immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution, except such as are specified in Schedule 'A' shall, mutatis
mutandis, and except as otherwise

**84**

expressly provided in the Constitution, continue in force. The laws so
continuing in force are referred to in the Constitution as "existing law".

(3) Wherever the Constitution provides that any provision of any existing
written law or of the Constitution shall continue in force until or unless the
National State Assembly otherwise provides, any law of the National State
Assembly so providing may be passed by a majority of the members present and
voting.

Schedule 'A' of the 1972 Constitution mentioned the Ceylon (Constitution and
Independence) Order-in-Council, 1946 and 1947, the Royal Titles Act and
contain sections of the Royal Powers and Seals Act, and these were therefore
expressly repealed.

"Express repeal of a Statute is usually made by stating that the earlier
Statute or a particular provision therein is thereby repealed. Usually
enactments repealed are mentioned in a Schedule attached to the repealing
Statute. Sometimes the expressions used in the later Statute for such purposes
runs:

All provisions inconsistent with the Act are repealed, or All Acts and parts
of Acts in conflict with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, or
All laws and parts of law in conflict herewith are expressly rejected'."

_

(Bindra_ on _"Interpretation of Statutes, 7th Edn, page 902)._

" 'Express provision' is provision the applicability of which does not arise
by inference." _(Per_ Lord Radcliffe, in _Shanmugam v. Commissioner for
Registration of Indian and Pakistani Residents_ (3)

On a reading of the provisions of Article 168 of the present Constitution it
seems to us that the scheme or thinking of the draftsman was that existing
laws continue in force unless (1) the Constitution itself expressly repeals or
alters an existing law. There can be no implied repeal, (2) the Parliament, in
the future,

**85**

by a simple majority enacts a law, repealing or altering an existing law. As a
case of express repeal, we refer. Article 169 (1) and (2) of the present
Constitution, where there is a direct reference to the Administration of
Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973, and the Article expressly provides that the
provisions of Law No. 44 of 1973, which are inconsistent with the Constitution
are deemed to be repealed, and that the Supreme Court established under that
.law will cease to exist and any reference in any written law to the Supreme
Court shall be deemed to be a reference to the Court of Appeal.

An "existing law" has to be expressly repealed if it has to be effaced or its
existence wiped out by a specific law enacted by Parliament. Otherwise it
subsists and continues to remain law. The 1972 Constitution did not contain
any express provision repealing or in any way altering the Affidavits Act. Nor
did the National State Assembly enact any law repealing or changing the
Affidavits Act. The Act therefore, was in force immediately before he
commencement of the 1978 Constitution. The latter Constitution too contained
no express provision repealing or altering the Affidavits Act. Nor has the,
present Parliament a law to repeal or effect changes in the Act. Both
Constitutions and both Legislatures have kept the Affidavits Act alive. The
Act continues to be in operation and is "existing law" within the meaning of
Article 168(1) read with Article 170 of the Constitution. The 2nd, 3rd and 7th
respondents were, therefore, entitled to tender to Court an affidavit in the
English Language.

Accordingly, our determination is that the affidavit filed by the 2nd 3rd and
7th respondents under s. 213(3) of the Companies Act is a valid affidavit
which could be tendered to Court, and does not contravene the provisions of
Article 24(1) of the Constitution. Our answer to the 2nd question posed to
this Court therefore in the affirmative.

The Record is returned to the District Court. We make no order costs.

**

L.H.** **DE ALVIS, J.** I agree. **  
H.A.G. DE SILVA, J.** I agree **  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.** I agree

**86**

**

August 03, 1988  
SENEVIRATNE, J.

** _

_ The petitioner, made a complaint to the District Court, Colombo in terms of
Sections 210 & 211 of the Companies Act No. 17 of 1982 that the affairs of the
1st Respondent-Company are being conducted in a manner prejudicial to the
interests of the Company. On this application the District Court made certain
**** orders.

The 4th Respondent-Petitioner made an application to the District Court on
5.2.1988 in terms of Section 213(1), (2) & (3) of the Companies Act praying
for certain interim orders restraining the 2nd and 3rd respondents from
functioning as acting Directors or in any other capacity in respect of this
Company or its Subsidiaries and Associate Companies. At a later stage the 5th
respondent supported this application of the 4th Respondent-Petitioner. The
7th respondent later joined the 2nd and 3rd respondents in objecting to the
above application of the 4th Respondent-Petitioner.

The application made by the 4th Respondent-Petitioner came up on 5.2.1988 in
the District Court of Colombo (Court No. 5) before Leslie Abeysekera,
Additional District Judge. He has minuted that this case be called before the
Additional District Judge Wimal Dassanayaka. The reason for this it is said
was that Dassanayaka, Additional District Judge had earlier made certain
orders in this case. One must at this stage take into account how the above
minute would have operated. For this, one has to rely on the practice in the
courts. Leslie Abeysekera, Additional District Judge would have announced the
contents of his minute to the lawyers who appeared in this application before
him, and the Interpreter would have announced in the court room that the case
is being sent before Dassanayaka, Additional District Judge. However, an
accepted fact by both parties is that shortly after that the case was called
before Dassanayaka, Additional District Judge. The most important factor in
this reference, as admitted by all parties, is that at this time Wimal
Dassanayaka, Additional District Judge had no court room for his use, for the
sittings. He was sharing a part of the, [I should say an inner room]

**87**

Chambers of the District Judge Colombo (Court No. 1), along with another
Additional District Judge Jayasena. Both Dassanayaka, Additional District
Judge and Jayasena, Additional District Judge sat in this inner room or part
of the Chambers of the District Judge on this date. In fact it is revealed,
that at the time Dassanayaka, Additional District Judge took up this matter
referred to him, Jayasena, Additional District Judge had also taken up a
matter for hearing. The part of the Chambers of the District Judge Colombo
(called an inner room) used on this day by Dassanayaka, Additional District
Judge and Jayasena Additional District Judge was within the Chambers of the
District Judge and had access to it through that part of the Chambers used by
the District Judge. It is admitted that one means of entry to the Chambers of
the District Judge was through the door of the Chambers which opened to the
District Judge's Court room, i.e. (Court No. 1). There is reference to another
entrance from a corridor, but that is not necessary for this purpose.

The application referred to Dassanayaka, Additional District Judge was taken
up by him in the room which I have described above. The proceedings show that
a Stenographer was present and recorded the proceedings. The interpreter must
have been necessarily present. The 4th and 5th Respondents-Petitioners were
present. The 4th Respondent produced the documents with which the application
was supported. Two Queens Counsel and several other lawyers had appeared for
the 4th Respondent-Petitioner. A President's Counsel with Mr. Romesh de Silva
P.C and another Attorney-at-law appeared for the 5th respondent. Some papers
filed also indicate that about half an hour later counsel for the petitioner
also appeared and took part in the proceedings. The proceedings show that Mr.
Navaratnaraja, Q. C., .has made some lengthy submissions in support of the
application. The Court has asked questions from the learned Queen's Counsel.
Then the Additional District Judge has made the interim order prayed for and
issued notice for 4.3.1988.

The 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents filed objections to this application dated
9.2.1988 in terms of section 213(3) of the

**88**

Companies Act No. 17 of 1982. As required by this section the petition
containing the objections was "supported by affidavit". This affidavit by the
2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents was filed in the English Language. The main
objection taken by they respondents to the application was that "the
application made the 4th respondent was supported in Chambers of the District
Court No. 1 (and not in open court) before the Additional District Judge Wimal
Dassanayaka". (Paragraph 5). The consequential objection taken in paragraph
8(a) is as follows: -

"The proceedings and the order made on 5.2.1988 were illegal and null and void
and by reason of the contravention of Article 106(1) of the Constitution of
Sri Lanka in as much as the proceedings of 5.2.1988 were not held in public".

8(b) -  "The Chambers of the District Judge of Colombo are not a place where
the public and all persons are entitled to have access or attend".

Due to this and other grounds the Respondent-Petitioners prayed that the
"proceedings and order made on 5.2.1988 in the Chambers of the District Court
of Colombo be set aside and/or revoked and/or declared null and void and of no
force or effect in law".

When this matter came up for inquiry before Leslie Abeysekera, Additional
District Judge the parties have been requested to file written submissions. In
the written submissions the 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents urged that the
proceedings on 5.2.1988 were invalid as it violated Article 106 of the
Constitution. The 5th respondent raised the objections that the affidavit
filed by the 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents violated Article 24 of the
Constitution as an affidavit filed in the English Language was not an
affidavit that could be accepted by the Court. Leslie Abeysekera, the learned
Additional District Judge having considered the written submissions by his
order dated 12.5.1988 decided to make reference to this Court under Article

**89**

125 of the Constitution as follows: -

(1)  Was the interim order issued against the 2nd, 3rd, and 7th respondents in
a room which is not an open Court on 5.2.1988, a violation of the Article 106
of the Constitution.

(2)  Is the affidavit filed by the 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents in accordance
with the provisions of section 213(3) of the Companies Act of 1982, an
affidavit that can be produced before a Court in accordance with Article 24(1)
of the Constitution?.

This is the reference that has been heard before this Divisional Bench of five
Judges. The hearing began on 6.7.1988 and continued till 22.7.1988 (except one
day on which the Court did not sit). Before the hearing commenced Dr. Colvin
R. de Silva for the 4th respondent submitted that he will raise a preliminary
matter i.e. that the question of interpretation of the Constitution did not
arise in respect of item No. 1. referred to this court by the Additional
District Judge. Mr. Faiz Mustapha for petitioner agreed with Dr. de Silva on
this submission. The learned Queen's Counsel for the 2nd, 3rd and 7th
respondents did not agree with this preliminary submissions made by Dr. de
Silva. As such the hearing commenced on the basis that Dr. de Silva will be
heard on this preliminary submission at the stage at which he will address
court.

After the hearing commenced the court suggested that a reference be made to
the Additional District Judge Wimal Dassanayaka for his observations and
invited the counsel to make their own suggestions on which matters such
reference ought to be made. All parties filed written submissions on which
matters reference should be made to the said Additional District Judge for his
observations. The court having considered these suggestions on 7.7.1988
referred these two matters for the observations by the Additional District
Judge Wimal Dassanayaka, to wit: -

(1)  Were the members of the public entitled to freely attend the proceedings
in D.C. Colombo Case No. 2828/Spl. on

**90**

5th February, 1988, held by Mr. Wimal Dassanayaka, ADJ., Colombo, in part of
the Chambers of Court No. (1) of the District Court of Colombo.

(2) Could the members of the public have been reasonable aware that they were
entitled to freely attend the said proceedings of that date.

The learned Additional District Judge by his letter 8.7.1988 sent his
observations. I will refer to the observations later.

After the observations were received and submissions wet made for a few more
days the learned Queen's Counsel for the 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents also
agreed that item No. 1 referred to this court by the learned Additional
District Judge Leslie Abeysekera was not a matter that needed interpretation
this court, i.e. Article 106 of the Constitution. Later the learned Queen's
Counsel for the 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents also submitted that the answers
to the queries made by this court from the learned Additional District Judge
were his mere observations and this court should not act on such observations
as it was not evidence in this Reference. The learned counsel of the 4th
respondent submitted that the court had called for the observations from the
learned Additional District Judge and that the court must and has a right to
take into account then observations and act on such observations. I must
observe that it **** is a long standing practice of the Superior Courts to
call for observations of the Judges of first instance on matter within ****
their own knowledge or on matters of record on which **** clarifications are
required, and when the court receives such observations and clarifications it
is a long standing practice lot such Courts to act on such observations and
clarifications. I hold that this Court has the power and the right to take
into account the observations made by the learned Additional District Judge
Wimal **** Dassanayaka and act on them and I will do so.

Item No. 1. has been referred to this Court for interpretation by the learned
Additional District Judge due to a difficulty, in interpreting, that article,
i.e, a difficulty in interpreting the twos limbs of Article 106: -

**91**

(1) "The sittings of every court . . . . . . . . shall be held in public,

(2) and all persons shall be entitled freely to attend such sittings".

This difficulty is made obvious by the fact that learned Queen's Counsel for
2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents addressed this court on the interpretation of
these words for nearly 10 days and cited authorities from Alberta in Canada to
England. Article 125 of our Constitution is as follows: -

"The Supreme Court shall have sole and exclusive jurisdiction .........
relating to the interpretation of the Constitution".

What is interpretation?

Our Interpretation Ordinance No. 21 of 1901 calls it an ordinance "for
defining the meaning of certain terms". The Interpretation Act of 1889 of
England calls it "an Act . . . . . . . relating to the Construction of Acts of
Parliament". Maxwell on the Interpretation of Statutes, 11th Ed. states as
follows: -

"The object of all interpretation of a statute is to determine what intention
is conveyed, either expressly or impliedly, by the language used, so far as is
necessary for determining whether the particular case or state of facts
presented to the interpreter falls within it". (Page 2).

Craies on Statute Law, 6th Ed. states as follows: -

"The cardinal rule for the construction of Acts of Parliament is that they
should be construed according to the intention expressed in the Acts
themselves". Note 7 _-"In Tasmania v. Commonwealth_ (4) __ on a question as to
the meaning of the Constitution of the Australian Commonwealth, O'Conner J.
said (at page 358):" I do not think that it can be too strongly stated that
our duty in interpreting a statute is to declare and administer the law
according to the intention expressed in the statute itself. In

**92**

this respect the Constitution differs in no way from any Act of the
Commonwealth or of a State". (Page 66).

I am of the view that Article 106 of the Constitution needs interpretation as
set out in Article 125 of the Constitution.

**REFERENCE NO** : 1 -Article 106(1)-

"The sittings of every Court, tribunal or other institution established under
the Constitution or ordained and established by Parliament shall subject to
the provisions the Constitution be held in public, and all persons shall
entitled freely to attend such sittings".

The limb "shall subject to the provisions of the Constitution" explanatory in
Article 102(2) - sittings under this condition is described as sittings "in
Camera". In this matter the court is concerned with Article 106(1) only.
According to the order made by the Judge, it appears that he has addressed
this Court for the interpretation of the limbs -

(1)  "The sittings of every Court shall be held in public,

(2)  And all persons shall be entitled freely to attend such sittings".

According to his Reference the learned Additional District Judge has consulted
the text of the Constitution in the Official Language \- Sinhala and has found
a difference in the phrases in the Sinhala text of Article 106(1) and the
English text of Article 106(1). It is also for this reason that the Judge has
referred to this Court the interpretation of this Article.

In this context Article 23(1) of the Constitution is relevant-

"all laws shall be made in both National Languages with a translation in the
English Language", and further states that "in the event of any inconsistency
between any two texts, the text in the Official Language shall prevail".

As regards, the interpretation of the phrase "be held in

**93**

public" numerous authorities were cited explaining what is meant by "sitting
in public", and also that it is a fundamental requirement that the court
should" sit in public".

Before discussing Article 106(1), it is necessary to refer to the definition
of the word "court" in legislation. The term "court" has been defined in the
following Enactments-

(1)  Courts Ordinance No. 1 of 1889, Section 2.

(2)  Civil Procedure Code No. 29 of 1889, Section 5.

(3)  Administration of Justice (Amendment) Law of 25 of 1975. Section 674(2).

(4)  Civil Procedure Code (Amendments up to 1977) Chap. 101 Section 5.

The definition of the word "Court" in all the above enactments is identical. I
shall only refer to the definition of the term "Court" in the Civil Procedure
Code (Amendments up to 1977) Chap. 101.

Court means -  "a Judge empowered by law to act judicially alone, or a body of
Judges empowered by law to act judicially as a body, when such Judge or body
of Judges is acting judicially".

The other matter that has to be referred to are the provisions of law as to
where the court will be held or sit. These provisions are found in the
following Enactments -

(1)  Courts Ordinance, Sections 52 & 53.

(2)  Administration of Justice Law No. 44 of 1973, Section 16.

(3)  Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978, Section 5(3) and Proviso.

These laws are also to the same effect. The Judicature Act Section 5(3) states
that the court may be held at a convenient place within the judicial district
as the Minister by regulations shall appoint. By Gazette No. 43/4 of July 2nd
1979 the Minister has by regulation determined that the District Court of
Colombo may sit at Hulftsdorp. It will be noted that only the place of sitting
is determined, the buildings or its location have not

**94**

been determined, i.e. to be more explicit it is not determined by regulation
that the District Court shall sit in Court rooms 1 - 6 situated at Hulftsdorp.
In fact the proviso to Section 5(3) provides for the Judge - "to hold court at
any convenient place within his territorial jurisdiction". In addition to the
above provisions in the interests of justice the law has provided that they
sittings of courts "be held in public", The contents of Article 106 is not a
new concept brought in by the (1978 Constitution), but it is a concept which
has always found its place in our relevant laws. Public sittings of the courts
have been provided for in -

(1) Courts Ordinance No. 1 of 1889, Section 85.

(2)  Administration of Justice Law No. 44 of 1973, Section 7.

(3) (1978) Constitution, Article 106.

Thus to constitute the sitting of a court three factors are necessary: -

(1) a Judge empowered by law to act judicially,

(2) the court must sit in a determined place - within a District, Division or
Zone,

(3)  the sittings of the court must be public sittings.

Article 106 of the Constitution deals with "public sittings". All authorities,
both local and foreign show that the meaning of the limb "shall . . . . . . .
. be held in public" means that the sittings of the court should be open court
sittings, so that any member of the public can attend a court sitting. The
next limb "and all persons shall be entitled freely to at such sittings",
further emphasises the requirement that the sitting of a court "shall be held
in public". "Shall be held in public" further means that any person
constituting the public whether he has a particular or special interest in the
case or not, or not directly interested in the case, can attend court when the
court is sitting. "Shall be entitled to freely at such sittings" further means
that there can be no restriction or impediments to any person attending a
court sitting except factors such as the accommodation available in the court,
or when due to factors, set out in Article 106(2) of the Constitution the
court excludes people not directly interested in

**95**

the proceedings. The opposite of this concept is that the court cannot usually
sit "in camera", i.e. without the public being permitted to attend court
except in the instances permitted by the law. The question that has arisen for
interpretation in this Reference No. 1 is whether in this instance Wimal
Dassanayake, Additional District Judge, held sittings which complied with
Article 106(1). I will deal with this matter later.

The learned Additional District Judge Leslie Abeysekera has stated that there
is a "difference in meaning" in the English text and the Sinhala text. As
pointed out earlier "in the event of such, an inconsistency" the text in the
Official Language must prevail. Is there such an inconsistency? The learned
Additional District Judge has particularly drawn attention to the English text
**** "sittings of every court . . . . . . . . shall be held in public" and the
Sinhala text

There is no difference in the rendering set out in the two texts. ****
"Sittings of every court" is the idiomatic rendering in English used to
describe the holding of a court to hear trials, inquiries, and applications
etc., That idiom "Sittings of every court" has been rendered in the Sinhala
text as, which literally means hearing of trials. The learned Additional
District Judge has misconstrued this phrase and commented as follows:
"According to the English version what should be held in public is sittings of
every court as stated in the Sinhala version of the Constitution is "trials of
cases" . . . . . . . On 5.2.88 in Chambers was a sitting of court but that day
there was no trial of a case. That day though a judicial function was
exercised ordinarily as stated by us there was no trial what happened was
supporting of an application exparte and issuing an order in respect of same.
I believe that it is very important that the Supreme Court should consider the
difference of meaning in the English Constitution and the Sinhala
Constitution". The learned Additional District Judge has fallen into an error
in these observations, in that the Sinhala text has been literarily translated
by the learned Additional District Judge as "trials of cases". I have earlier
mentioned the English idiomatic meaning "of sittings of every court". The
Sinhala idiom for "sittings of court" is

**96**

expressed as . This idiom is an all embracing one. The expression includes
hearing of trial cases, inquiries and hearing of applications etc. The Sinhala
version has not used the words (inquiries), (Applications), but used what I
call and all embracing phrase So that actually there is no difference in the
Sinhala text and the English text. In other instances in this Constitution the
Sinhala text uses a different phrase to express the English phrase "sittings
of the Court". See Article 132 Sinhala. Article 132 of the Sinhala text is as
follows: (sittings of the Supreme Court) - (Marginal Note 132). The S.C. Rules
Part 5, Rule 62(1) deals with "suspension of sittings of Courts". Rule 62(1)
states as follows: -

"The sittings of the Supreme Court . . . . . . will be suspended". The Sinhala
text of Rule 62(1) is as follows: . It will be noted that the phrase "sittings
of the Supreme Court" is rendered in the Sinhala text in the above instances
as and It appears that Sinhala text of Article 106(1) "sittings of every
court" has been expressed in the literal sense ashearing of cases or trials of
cases. I have set out above the determination, relating to the interpretation
of the Constitution", Article 106(1) - Reference Item No. 1. The learned
Additional District Judge will have to relate the facts and circumstances
pertaining to the sittings of the court held by Dassanayake Additional
District Judge on 5.2.88 to the interpretation of Article 106(1) which has
been rendered by me above.

REFERENCE NO: 2- Affidavit filed in English - Article 124 of the Constitution.

The 5th respondent has taken the objection that the affidavit dated 9.2.88
filed by the 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents in the English Language is violative
of Article 24(1) of the Constitution, and as such should be rejected.

Article 24(1) is as follows: -

"The Official Language shall be the language of the courts **** throughout Sri
Lanka, and accordingly their records and proceedings shall be in the Official
Language".

**97**

The Constitution by the Thirteenth Amendment has now enforced two official
Languages.

Article 24(5) of the Constitution defines "record" as follows: -

"Record" includes pleadings, orders and other judicial and ministerial acts".

Submissions have been made by the learned President's Counsel for the 5th
respondent that this was an application made by the 4th respondent under
section 213(2) of the Companies Act No. 17 of 1982, and as such the 4th
respondent had filed a petition "supported by affidavit". Section 213(3) - of
the Companies Act No. 17 of 1982, requires the same procedure to be followed
in filing objections. As such these respondents have filed objections
"supported by affidavit". The learned President's Counsel strenuously
submitted that the petition supported by affidavit are the pleadings by which
the jurisdiction of the court is invoked - the same principle applied to the
invocation of the jurisdiction of the court by the objector. The petition and
affidavit so filed thus become pleadings by which the jurisdiction of the
court is invoked. The petition and affidavit constitute one indivisible or
inseparable pleading. The learned President's Counsel in support of this
submission relied on the dicta of Bandaranayaka J - in the case of _Science
House (Ceylon) Ltd. v. IPCA Laboratories Private Ltd._ (5) _._ In this case
Bandaranayaka, J. dealt with the function or I should say the status of an
affidavit filed in terms of Section 705 Civil Procedure Code - Chapter L III,
of Summary Procedure On Liquid Claims, and held as follows: - "but the plaint
must be accompanied by an affidavit. Section 705 requires that both must co-
exist. So a person cannot have the plaint, he presents accepted under Chap. 53
Procedure unless an affidavit is also presented together with the plaint
verifying the claim . . . . . The two sections (Section 703 and 705) are
therefore co-related. They are inseparable and must co-exist:. They either
exists together or not at all . . . . . This is doubtless because the
affidavit is the foundation of the action". The filing of the petition alone
will not be sufficient compliance with the relevant section 213 Companies Act
and will not invoke the jurisdiction of the court. The learned

**98**

President's Counsel submitted that the affidavit of 9.2.88 filed these by
these objecting respondents is covered by Article 24(1), in that it was both
the record and proceedings in the case for the following reasons: -

(a)  It is a part of the pleadings by which the jurisdiction of the court is
invoked,

(b)  The affidavit was the proceedings because it is taken cognisance by the
Judge. Even evidence on oath such as the affidavit which the court considers
as evidence comes within the term "proceedings".

(c)  As such the affidavit becomes a part of the record, whether as pleadings
or as a document of evidence.

Due to these reasons the affidavit filed had to be in the Sinhala Language.
The Affidavits Act No. 23 of 1953 on which the 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents
based their right to file their affidavit in the English Language was only an
"act to enable the affidavits required for any purpose, whatsoever to be filed
in the Sinhalese or Tamil Language". This enabling Act was necessary because
prior to this Act an affidavit could be filed only in the English Language. He
submitted that this Act however does not enable the respondents to file
affidavit in the English Language which is not the Language of the court. I
will deal with this submission later.

Dr. Colvin R. de Silva for the 4th respondent also supported the contention
that the affidavit in question comes within Article 24(1) and (5) of the
Constitution, and as such is a part of they record and proceedings, and as
such it must be in the Official, Language, Sinhala.

Dr. H.W. Jayewardene Q.C., for the 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents contended that
the affidavit cannot be considered a part of the record and proceedings in
terms of Articles 24(1) and (5) of the Constitution. His submission was that
the affidavit was not a part of the pleadings. It is in fact documentary
evidence prepared outside court and filed in the Court. Both H.L. de Silva P.C
and Dr. Jayewardene Q.C. submitted that the function of the

**99**

pleadings was to invoke the jurisdiction of the court. H.L. de Silva P.C
further submitted that the affidavit filed is neither a pleading, nor a
document as contemplated in Article 24(2). Halsbury, Laws of England - 4th Ed.
Volume 36, Part 1, Page 3 is as follows: - 1. "Meaning of Pleading" - the term
"pleading" is used in civil cases to denote a document in which a party to
proceedings in a court of first instance is required by law to formulate in
writing his case or part of his case in preparation for the hearing".

Dr. Jayewardene Q. C., and H. L. de Silva P.C relied heavily on the
submissions that by virtue of the Affidavits Act No. 23 of 1953, an affidavit
.can be filed in the English Language and it does not violate the
Constitution. The contention was that firstly Section 12(2) of the (1972)
Constitution and later Article 168(1) of the present Constitution kept alive
the Affidavits Act as the Parliament has not otherwise provided.

This argument was countered by Dr. Colvin R. de Silva, and Romesh de Silva
P.C. These learned Counsel submitted that when Article 12(2) of the (1972)
Constitution made Sinhala the Language of the Courts, the Affidavits Act which
permitted an affidavit to be filed in court in the English Language was to
that extent repealed and revoked. Section 24(1) of the (1978) Constitution
which made Sinhala the Language of the Courts had the same effect. As the
(1978) Constitution is the "supreme law", that part of the Affidavits Act must
be considered to be directly repealed by the provision for the Language of the
Courts to be Sinhala. If not directly so repealed at least of must be
considered to have been repealed by implication. The Legislature which
provided in Article 24(1) (1978) Constitution "that the Official Language
shall be the Language of courts throughout Sri Lanka", i.e. Sinhala, cannot be
said to have also intended to leave a gap for affidavits alone to be filed in
the English Language. After a careful consideration I entirely agree with the
submission that the provision of the Affidavits Act, enabling to file an
affidavit in English, has no effect whatever in respect of the Language of
Courts. The derogation of Article 24(1) of the (1978) Constitution which is a
part of the "supreme law" of the land cannot be permitted by an insignificant
act called the Affidavits

**100**

Act. All affidavits filed in court have to comply with Article 24(1) of the
Constitution and must be filed in the Official Language. Section 439 of the
Civil Procedure Code provides for the manner in which a person illiterate in
the Sinhala Language can make an affidavit in the Sinhala Language. In fact
the 2nd respondent has filed a subsequent affidavit in these proceedings in
the Sinhala Language complying with Section 439.

The determination in respect of item 2 of the Reference is that the affidavit
filed in the English Language by the 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents cannot "be
produced before the court in accordance with Article 24(1) of the
Constitution," as it is violative of this Article.

Article 125 of the Constitution provides for the interpretation of the
Constitution by this court and Article 125(2) of the Constitution enables this
court to "make any such consequential order as the circumstances of the case
may require".

I have given my anxious consideration as to whether I should make such
consequential orders as will flow from the two determinations I have made. The
consequential order if any in respect of Reference No. 1 - can be based only
on questions of fact and law. A consequential order in respect of the
determination on Reference No. 2 will be an order based purely on the legal
consequences of the determination.

As regards the facts pertaining to Reference No. 1 i.e. whether there was a
public sitting of the court of Dassanayaka, Additional District Judge on
5.2.88, I will record only the undisputed facts revealed in this Reference.

(1)  The learned Additional District Judge Leslie Abeysekera in his reference
dated 12.5.88 has made these following observations: -

(a)  the order was not supported and issued in open Court but in the Official
Chambers. (I have described earlier the situation of the Chambers used by
Wimal Dassanayaka, Additional District Judge, based on the admissions made by
the parties)

**101**

(b)  as there are more Additional District Judges than the number of available
court rooms certain Additional District Judges conduct their inquiries in
Chambers.

Counsel submitted that this violated Article 106 of the Constitution as the
proceedings were riot in open Court.

The answers to the questions posed to Wimal Dassanayaka, Additional District
**** Judge forwarded by him are as follows: -

(a) members of the public were entitled freely to attend the proceedings in
the above case heard by me in part of the Chambers of Court No. 1 of the
District Court of Colombo.  

(b) because of the fact that Mr. Leslie Abeysekera who called this case in the
open Court No. 5 on 5th February 1988 had mentioned that this case will be
heard by me and directed the parties before me, the members of the public
could have been reasonably aware that they were entitled to freely attend the
said proceedings of that date".

I must also add another well known and accepted fact which has been mentioned
in these proceedings. That is, that not only in Colombo, even in some
outstation Courts there are more Judges sitting than the number of court rooms
available. The Kandy courts is a fine example of this situation. Some court
buildings have been burnt and Judges have to sit in improvised court rooms. In
roost of the courts there is only one court room as in the case of a Combined
Court, two court rooms, where there is a District Court and a Magistrate
Court. Due to the overload of the work in the Courts, Supernumerary Judges are
attached to the Courts. The question of accommodation for court sittings also
arises when a Judge who has gone on transfer comes back to the former station
to hear part-heard cases. There are instances where both the District Judge
and Magistrate who have gone on transfer have come back to the station on the
same day to hear part-heard cases. It is most common and a regular occurrence
for courts to sit in Chambers, in a verandah, or any enclosed partitioned room
when more Judges than the number of court rooms available have to sit. From
time immemorial this practice

**102**

has prevailed, and I must with some reservation state, that I have had this
experience for nearly 17 years when I held a post of a District Judge or a
Magistrate. When a court is held in an improvised Court-room, say the
Chambers, all parties and lawyers representing them are present and who ever
wishes to follow proceedings have a right to attend and they do attend. If
court is held in the, Chambers, at that time temporarily or provisionally it
becomes an open court room. Any interpretation **** of Article 106(1) must be
made in this background, taking into **** account the situation and
circumstances which prevail in this country, pertaining to the functioning of
Courts. In this country Article 106 cannot operate on an utopian open court
principle. Dr. Colvin R. de Silva made a submission which I fully approve. He
submitted that "the circumstances must modify application of principles. A
principle cannot be reduced to an absurdity".

The Additional District Judge Wimal Dassanayake who heard, this application
specifically states that members of the public were entitled freely to attend
the proceedings. This does not necessarily mean that the public were present,
but it necessarily means that there was no bar or impediment to the presence
of the public meaning any person who wanted to be present when this
application was taken up. In the case cited _Mcpherson v. Mcpherson_ (6) __ it
has been decided as follows: - "The actual presence of the public is never
necessary; on some occasions a there may be no members of the public available
to attend, but the court must be open to any who may present themselves for
admission". In this matter which is under Reference; to this Court neither a
party to this case, nor any person from the public has complained that he was
kept away from the court sittings, i.e. that the court sittings were not open
to him. This application in my view, is a devise by the 2nd, 3rd and 7th
respondents to overcome the order made on 5.2.88. The above observations were
made by me in the public interest and in the interests of the members of the
original court judiciary who have to function often under miserable
conditions.

In terms of Article 4(c) of the Constitution "the judicial power of the people
shall be exercised by Parliament through courts . . . .". Courts have sat in
this manner from time immemorial and

**103**

the "people" who created the courts both under the (1972) Constitution and
under the (1978) Constitution have not made any complaint in any instance that
the court sittings were not in public. A few Company Directors against whom an
order has been made has thought it fit to make this complaint as a devise to
overcome the adverse order of 5.2.88. All facts indicate that Dassanayaka
Additional District Judge held the sittings of the court in public on 5.2.88.

As regards the question whether I should make a consequential order in terms
of Article 125(2), there is precedent for such a course of action. Both
precedents have been created by no less a person than the former Chief Justice
when he was only Sharvananda, J. Sharvananda, J. made consequential orders
after a determination under Article 125 - in the ease of _Coomaraswamy v.
Shanmugaratna Iyer,_ (7) __ In this determination he held that pleadings can
be filed in the Tamil Language in the District Court of Colombo and directed
the Additional District Judge, to accept the pleadings. The case of _H. M. T.
Wickremaratne v. Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Ceylon and another_ (8)
__ was a Reference by the Court of Appeal to the Supreme Court under Article
125. Sharvananda, J. held that an application to the Labour Tribunal can be
made in the English Language, and set aside the order of the President, Labour
Tribunal rejecting an application made in the English Language. The
consequential order made was as follows: -

'This court sees no useful purpose in remitting the case to the Court of
Appeal. It makes the following consequential order. The order of Labour
Tribunal is set aside and record remitted to Labour Tribunal with a direction
to try the application early". Following these eminent precedence under
Article 125(2) of the Constitution I make the following consequential orders:-

(1) I direct the District Judge Colombo to proceed to the hearing of the
application made by the 2nd, 3rd and 7th respondents acting on the basis that
Wimal Dassanayake, Additional District Judge, Colombo held the sittings of the
Court in public and has made a valid order in open court on 5.2.88.

**104**

(2)  To reject the affidavit filed in the English Language by the 2nd, 3rd and
7th respondents.  
  
In the circumstances of this Reference no order is made for costs.

In making this order I have respectfully, but without regrets, dissented from
the majority view of this Bench.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/7.html_  

