##  Manawadu v. The Attorney General - SLR - 30, Vol 2 of 1987 [1987] LKSC 7;
(1987) 2 Sri LR 30 (26 March 1987)

**

30

MANAWADU** **  
v.** **  
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, CJ, ATUKORALE. J. AND SENEVIRATNE, J.  
S.C. No. 77/85. C.A. No. 643/83.  
M.C. NUWARA ELIYA No. 37665.  
FEBRUARY 11, 1987.

_

Forest Ordinance, ss. 24 (1) (b), 25(1), 40-Confiscation of lorry used for
transport of 'illicit' timber- S.7 of Act No. 15 of 1982-Natural justice-
Forfeited means liable to be forfeited-Audi alteram partem._

**

Held** **:** (Seneviratne, J. dissenting):

By s. 7 of Act No. 13 of 1982 it was not intended to deprive an owner of his
vehicle used by the offender in committing a forest offence without his
(owner's) knowledge and without his participation. The word "forfeited" Must
be given the meaning "liable to be forfeited" so as to avoid the injustice
that would flow on the construction that forfeiture of the vehicle is
automatic on the conviction of the accused. The amended subsection 40 does not
exclude by necessary implication the rule of audi alteram

**31**

partem. The owner of the lorry not a party to the case is entitled to be heard
on the question of forfeiture of the lorry. If he satisfies the court that the
accused committed the offence without his knowledge or participation, his
lorry will not be liable to forfeiture.

The Magistrate must hear the, owner of the lorry on the question of showing
cause why the lorry is not liable to be forfeited. If the Magistrate is
satisfied with the cause shown, he must restore the lorry to the owner. The
Magistrate may consider the question of releasing the lorry to the owner
pending inquiry, on his entering into a bond with sufficient security to abide
by the order that may ultimately be binding on him

**

Cases referred to:**

(1) _Inspector Fernando v. Marther -_ (1932) 1 CLW 249.  

(2) _Sinnetamby v. Ramalingam -_ (1924) 26 NLR 371  

(3) _Rasiah v. Thambiraj -_ (1951) 53 NLR 574.  

_

(4) Wiseman v. Borneman -_ (1969)3 All ER 275 _._  

(5) _Cooper v. Wandsworth Board of Works -_ (1863) 14 CB NS 180, 194  

(6) _Durayappah v. Fernando -_ (1966) 69 NLR 265, 269- Appd. by P.C. in (1970)
73 NLR 289.  

(7) _Commissioner of Police v. Tanes -_ (1957-58) 68 CLR 383, 385 _._  

(8) _Twist v. Rendwick, Municipal Council-_ (1976) 136 CLR 106, 109-110  

(9) _In Re Hamilton -_ [1981] AC 1038  

(10) _Abdul Rahuman v. Sarath Silva -_ CA 1810/79 CA minutes of 11.11.1979 (M
C Amparai 17039).  

(11) _Wicks v. Firth -_ (1982)2 All ER 9, 14.  

(12) _Courts & Co. v. I.R.C._ [1953] AC 267, 281.  

(13) _Re Morgan- Wilson's Will Trust_ -(1968) Ch. 268, 282.  

(14) _A. G. v. Parsons_ -(1956) AC 421.  

(15) _Re Lucy's Trust -_ (1885) 30 Ch. D. 119, 124-5.  

(16) _R v. Chief Immigration Officer_ -(1976). 3 All ER 843, 847.  

(17) _Arumugamperumal v. Attorney-General -_ (1947) 48 NLR 510 _._  

(18) _De Keyzer v. British Railway Traffic and Electric Co., Ltd_ [1936] 1 KB
224,  

(19) _Attorney-General v. Nagamany -_ (1949) 51 NLR 149.  

(20) _Palasamy Nadar v. Lanktree -_ (1949) 51 NLR 520.  

(21) _D. L. Jayawardane v. V. P. Silva, Assistant Collector of Customs_ \-
(1969) 72 NLR 25.

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

H. L. de Silva, P.C._ with _V. E. Selvarajah, Miss Lakmali de Silva, Chanaka
de Silva, Shenaka de Livera_ and _N. Sivendran_ for appellant. __  

_

Nihara E. Rodrigo, S. C._ for the Attorney-General

_

Cur. adv vult._

**32**

March 26, 1987.  
  
**SHARVANANDA, C.J.**

One Ekmon Wijesuriya was charged on 17.5-1983 in the Magistrates Court, Nuwara
Eliya with having on 15.5.83 at Gorden in Pussellawa transported out of this
area a load of rubber timber to the value of Rs. 600 in lorry No. 26 Sri 2518,
without a permit from an authorised officer, in contravention of Regulations
made under section 24(1) (b) of the Forest Ordinance (Cap. 451) and with thus
having committed an offence punishable under section 25(1) read with section
40 of the Forest Ordinance. The accused pleaded guilty to the said charge and
was sentenced to term of three months rigorous imprisonment suspended for five
years and to a fine of Rs. 500\. The Magistrate also ordered the confiscation
of the lorry No. 26 Sri 2518, in which the timber was alleged to have been
transported.

The appellant-petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the petitioner) is the
owner of the said lorry bearing No. 26 Sri 2518. He was not a party to the
proceedings in which the order of the confiscation of his lorry was made, nor
was he given an opportunity by the. Magistrate of showing cause against the
order of confiscation. He states that the said lorry is worth approximately
Rs. 350,000.

The petitioner moved the Court of Appeal to revise the order of confiscation
made by the Magistrate, on the ground that he was not given an opportunity of
showing cause against the confiscation of his lorry, that there was a
violation of the principle of 'audi alteram partem' and consequential denial
of justice to him. The Court of Appeal held that the order of confiscation by
the Magistrate was valid in law in that section 40 of the Forest Ordinance as,
amended by section 7 of the Act No. 15 of 1982, provided that any vehicle used
for the commission of a Forest Offence (whether such vehicle was, owned by the
person charged or not) shall by reason of his conviction be forfeited to the
State and that the legislature had, expressly withdrawn any right of the owner
to show cause against forfeiture of the lorry. Accordingly, the petitioner's
application for Revision was dismissed.

The petitioner has preferred this appeal against the judgment of the Court of
Appeal. At the hearing before this Court counsel for. the petitioner has urged
that the order of confiscation was wrong for the reason that the confiscation
of the petitioner's lorry was made without the observance of the rule of 'audi
alteram partem' and that section 7

**33**

of the Amending Act No. 15 of 1982 did not dispense with the principle of
natural justice that the owner of the lorry should be heard before any
judicial order causing loss of his property is pronounced against him.

Counsel for the-state has submitted that there is a legislative history behind
the various amendments made to section 40 of the Forest Ordinance and that the
legislature after addressing itself to the fact that the owner of the vehicle
would be gravely prejudiced, by the automatic forfeiture, deliberately
provided for the order of forfeiture of the lorry, which was made use of for
the transporting of illicit timber, automatic on the conviction of the accused
whether he was the owner or not of the vehicle.

To appreciate the contention of the State Counsel it is necessary to set out
the provision of section 40 of the Forest Ordinance and the amendments thereto
made from time to time, to show the increasing concern of the legislature to
arrest the illicit felling of timber from State lands. Section 40 of the
forest Ordinance (principal enactment) reads as follows (Cap. 451)

when any person is convicted of a Forest offence, all timber or forest produce
which is not the property of the Crown in respect of which such offence has
been committed and all tools boats, carts, cattle, motor vehicles used in
committing such offence shall be liable, by order of the convicting Magistrate
to confiscation. Such confiscation may be in addition to any other punishment
prescribed for such offence."

Section 40 of the principal enactment was amended by section 12 of the Act
No.13 of 1966, by the substitution, for all the words form "shall be liable",
to the end of that section, of the following.

"Shall, in addition to any other punishment prescribed for such offence, be
confiscated by the order of the convicting Magistrate. Provided that in any
case Where the owner of such "tools, boats, carts, cattle or motor vehicles is
a third party, no order of confiscation shall be made if such owner proved to
the satisfaction of the court that he had used. all precautions to prevent the
use of such tools, boats, cattle or motor vehicles, as the case maybe for the
commission of the offence.

Section 40 was later amended by section 9 of Act No.56 of 1979 by the repeal
of the proviso to that section. This amendment was later

**34**

repealed by Act No. 13 of 1982, and the following section was substituted by
section 7 of Act No. 13 of 1982

The amended section 40 reads as follows:

"Upon the conviction of any person for a Forest Offence

(a) all timber or forest produce which is not the property of the State in
respect of which such offence has been committed and

(b) all tools, boats, carts, cattle and motor vehicles used in committing such
offence (whether such tools, boats, carts, cattle and motor vehicles are owned
by such person or not).

shall by reason of such conviction be forfeited to the State.

(2) Any property forfeited to the State under sub-section shall-

(a) if no appeal has been preferred to the Court of Appeal against the
relevant conviction, vest absolutely in the State with effect from the date on
which the period prescribed for preferring an appeal against such conviction
expires,

(b) if an appeal has been preferred to the Court of Appeal against the
relevant conviction, vest absolutely in the State with effect from the date on
which such conviction is affirmed on appeal. In this subsection, "relevant
conviction" means the conviction in consequence of which any property is
forfeited to the State under subsection (1).

The Court of Appeal has held that since the accused Ekmon Wijesuriya did not
appeal against his conviction under the amended section 40,. the forfeiture of
the lorry bearing No. 26 Sri 2518 was automatic and that the lorry had vested
absolutely in the State. It has so held on the assumption that-the legislature
had withdrawn the right of the owner to show cause against forfeiture of the
lorry to the State, by section 7 of Act No. 13 of. 1982.

The burden of Counsel for the petitioner's submission before this court. was
that the court should' imply into' section 40 as amended by section 7 of the
Act No. 13 of 1982, the condition that a forfeiture of property can take place
only after rules of natural justice have been observed in respect of the
person whose property is sought to-be forfeited.

**35**

In Inspector Fernando v. Marther (1) Akbar, J., in construing section 51 of
the Excise Ordinance, which corresponded to section 40 of the Forest Ordinance
Cap. 451, quoted with approval the following statement of Schneider J., in
Sinnetamby v. Ramalingam (2):

"Where an offence has been committed "under the Excise Ordinance no order of
confiscation should be made under section 51 of the Ordinance as regards the
conveyance used to commit the offence e.g. a boat or motor car unless two
things occur.

(1) That the owner should be given an opportunity of being heard against it;
and

(2) Where the owner himself is not convicted of the offence, no order should
be made against the owner, unless he is implicated in the offence which render
the thing liable to confiscation."

The vehicle involved in that case did not belong to the accused but had been
hired under an Hire-Purchase Agreement. Akbar, J., held that since the
registered owner was not implicated in the commission of the offence, no order
confiscating the car could be made. Though this opinion was expressed when
construing the words "shall be liable to be confiscated" yet it highlights the
principle of construction of confiscatory legislation.

In the case on Rasiah v. Thambiraj,(3) Nagalingam, J. stated:

"The main question is whether the learned Magistrate was right in ordering the
confiscation of the cart without an inquiry having been held by him before
making the order. The order in this case would appear to have been made in
terms of section 40 of the Forest Ordinance. That section, it is true does not
prescribe for an inquiry or for any special proceedings to be taken by the
Magistrate before ordering the confiscation of the property. Learned State
Counsel contended that an order of confiscation can automatically follow an
order of conviction. This contention can be upheld if one limits the rule to
property of the person who has been convicted of the offence......... In these
cases where the accused person convicted of the offence is not himself the
owner of the property seized, an order of confiscation without the previous
inquiry would be tantamount to depriving the person of his property without an
opportunity being given to him to show cause against the order being made."

**36**

Nagalingam, J. proceeded

"It is one of the fundamentals of administration of justice that a person
should not be deprived either of his liberty or of his property without an
opportunity being given to him to show cause against such an order being made.
To take a case, which cannot be regarded as an extreme one, where an owner
lends. or hires his cart without knowing that the borrower or hirer intends to
use it for the purpose of committing an offence, would it be right to
confiscate the cart merely because it has been so used. I think that if the
owner can show that the offence was committed without his knowledge and
without his participation in the slightest degree, justice would seem to
demand that he should be restored his property."

Maxwell Interpretation of Statutes 11th Ed. page 358, underlines the
presumptions of fair procedure in connection with the exercise of judicial
powers:

"In giving judicial powers to affect prejudicially the rights of persons or
property, a statute is understood as silently implying, when it does not
expressly provide, the condition or qualification that the power is to be
exercised in accordance with the fundamental rules of judicial procedure,
such, for instance as that which requires that, before its exercise, the
person sought to be prejudicially affected shall have an opportunity of
defending himself."

In Wiseman v. Borneman (4), the House of Lords underscored the inherence of
rules of natural justice in the exercise of powers. Lord Guest said at page
279:

"It is reasonably clear from the authorities that where a statutory tribunal
had been set up to decide the final question affecting party's rights and
duties, if the statute is silent on the question, the courts will imply into
the statutory provision a rule that the principles of natural justice should
be applied. This implication will be made on the basis that the Parliament is
not to be presumed to take away parties" rights without giving them an
opportunity of being heard in their interest. In other words the Parliament is
not to be presumed to act unfairly. The dictum of Byles J., in Cooper v.
Wandsworth Board of Works (5) is clear to this effect and has been followed in
many subsequent cases."

**37**

Lord Morris said at page 278

"That the conception of natural justice should at all stages, guide those who
discharge judicial functions is not merely an acceptable but is an essential
part of the philosophy of the law."

Lord Reid said at page 277

"Natural justice requires that the procedure before any tribunal which is
acting judicially shall be fair in all the circumstances .... For a long time
the courts have, without objection from Parliament, supplemented the procedure
laid down in legislation where they have found that to be necessary for this
purpose. But before this unusual kind of power is exercised it must be clear
that the statutory procedure is insufficient to achieve justice and that to
require additional steps would not frustrate the apparent purpose of the
legislation."

Lord Upjohn in Durayappa v. Fernando (6) P.C. said:

"... upon the question of audi alteram partem, the statute can make itself
clear upon this point and if it does cadit quaestio. If it does not, then the
principle stated by Byles J., in Cooper v. The Board of Works for the
Wandsworth District, 14 C.B.N.S. 180 at 194 (5) must be applied. He said

A long course of decisions beginning with Bentley's case and ending with some
very recent cases establish that, although there are no positive words
requiring that the parties should be heard, yet justice of the common law will
supply the omission of the legislature.

Dixon C.J., in Commissioner of Police v. Tanls, (7) underlined this canon of
interpretation

"It is a deep-rooted principle of the law that before anyone can be punished
or prejudiced in his person or his property by any judicial or quasi-judicial
procedure, he must be afforded adequate opportunity of being heard.... It is
hardly necessary to add that its application to proceedings in the established
courts is a matter of course. But the rule is subject to a sufficient
indication of an intention of the legislature to the country. Such an
intention is not to be assumed nor is it to be spelled out from indirect
references, uncertain references or equivocal considerations. The intension
must satisfactorily appear form express words of plain intendment "

**38**

In Twist v. Rendwick Municipal Council (8) Barwick C.J., clarified the
principles of construction :

"The common law rule that a statutory authority having power to affect the
right of a person is bound to hear him befog exercising the power is both
fundamental and universal. But the legislature may displace the rule and
provide for the exercise of such a power without any opportunity being
afforded to the affected person to oppose its exercise. However, if that is
the legislative intention it must be made unambiguously clear. In the event
that the legislation does not clearly preclude such a course, the court will
as it were itself supplement the legislation by insisting that the statutory
powers are to be exercised only after an appropriate opportunity has been
afforded the subject whose person or property is the subject of the exercise
of the statutory power. But, if the legislation has made provision for that
opportunity to be given to the subject before his person or property is so
affected, the court will not be warranted in supplementing the legislation;
even if the legislative provision is not as full and complete as the court
might think appropriate... But if it appears to the court that the legislature
has not addressed itself to the appropriate question, the court in the
protection of the citizen and in the provision of natural justice may declare
that statutory action affecting the person or property of the citizen without
affording the citizen an opportunity to be heard before he or his property is
affected is ineffective. The court will approach the construction of the
statute with a presumption that the. legislature does not intend to deny
natural justice to the citizen. Where the legislature is silent on the matter,
the courts may presume that the legislature has left it to the court to
prescribe and enforce the appropriate procedure to ensure natural justice."

The principle that no man is to be condemned in his person or property without
being heard is fundamental to justice. Parliament is presumed to act justly
and reasonably, and not to intend injustice. The court should therefore strive
to avoid a construction of enacted law which leads to injustice. It should
further the ends of justice. The aim of rules of natural justice is to secure
justice or to put it negatively to prevent miscarriage of justice. They do not
supplant the law but supplement it. Unless the contrary intention appears, an
enactment by implication imports the principle of the maxim audi alteram
partem; this principle is basic to justice. But, if on the other hand, a
statutory provision either specifically or by necessary implication excludes
the

**39**

application of any or all of the rules of natural justice then the court
cannot ignore the mandate of the legislature or read into the concerned
provision the principles of natural justice.

The issue in this appeal relates to the proper construction of section 40 of
the Forest Ordinance as amended by Section 7 of Act No. 13 of 1982. Does this
amended section dispense with the maxim of audi alteram partem when it
mandates the forfeiture of the vehicle used in committing the forest offence
in the case where the said vehicle is not owned by the accused who is
convicted of the offence? The House of Lords in re Hamilton (9) has stressed
that:

"One of the principles of natural justice is that a person is entitled to
adequate notice and opportunity to be heard before any judicial order is
pronounced against him, so that he, or someone acting in his behalf, may make
such representations if any, as he sees fit. This is the rule of audi alteram
partem which applies to all judicial proceedings unless its application to a
particular class of proceedings has been excluded by Parliament expressly or
by necessary implication."

There can be no doubt that the construction of the amended section 40
contended for by State Counsel and upheld by the Court of Appeal will
grievously affect an owner of the vehicle who is not implicated in the
commission of the offence. Principles of fairness and justice certainly
militate against such construction, such construction should be avoided unless
the legislative intention to impose an automatic forfeiture of the vehicle
quite irrespective of the guilt or innocence of the owner in respect of the
offence charged, is unambiguously clear. In the amended section 40 the rule of
'audi alteram partem' has not been excluded by Parliament expressly, nor has
that rule been excluded by necessary implication.

The basis of the decision in Inspector Fernando v. Marthar (supra) (1) and in
Rasiah v. Thambiraj (supra) (3) is that an order of forfeiture of the vehicle
used to commit the offence should not be made, where the owner himself has not
been convicted of the offence, if (a) the owner of the vehicle was not given
an opportunity of being heard against the forfeiture (b) the owner is not
implicated in the offence which renders the thing liable to confiscation.
Justice Akbar and Justice Nagalingam founded their decision on fundamental
principles of constitutional importance and not on the narrow ground "shall be
liable to confiscation." They emphasised that where the owner can

**40**

show that the offence was committed without his knowledge and without his
participation in the slightest degree, justice demanded that he should be
restored his property. The proviso in the Forest (Amendment) Act No. 13 of
1966 embodied in statutory form the above basic defence of the owner. But
amendment Act No. 56 of 1979 repealed the said proviso. The effect of the
repeal came up for consideration before the Court of Appeal in Abdul Rahuman
v. Sarath Silva (10). The Court expressed the view that it is difficult to
believe that a vehicle is to be confiscated regardless of the innocence of the
owner and held that the confiscation of the lorry without the owner being
given a hearing was wrong. " The court agreed with the submission of Counsel
for the owner that the effect of the repeal of the proviso was that "when an
owner is convicted of the offence of transport, when the proviso stood, he
could yet urge that he should be heard before confiscation but now without the
proviso he cannot make such a plea, but confiscation would be automatic."
These decisions underscore the importance that the courts attached to the
principle of 'audi alteram partem' and to the interests of justice, that an
innocent owner should not be penalised for the offence committed by a third
party.

State Counsel relevantly pointed that section 7 of the Amending Act 13 of 1982
repealed amended section 40 of the Forest Ordinance and substituted a new
section in terms of which-

"Upon the conviction of any person for a forest offence..... the motor vehicle
used in committing such offence (whether such motor vehicles are owned by such
person or not), shall by reason of such conviction be forfeited to the State."

He submitted that the forfeiture of the vehicle is automatic on the conviction
of the offender irrespective of the fact that the owner of the vehicle is
innocent and the owner is no party to the commission of the offence. He
referred to the espousal of the object that the Minister had in mind when
introducing the Bill for effecting the Amendment No. 13 of 1982. Vide Hansard
dated 25.2.1982, Vol. 9 Part 19 at pages 1558-1559 the Minister said. "It is
necessary in the situation that we are faced, where forest resources are fast
depleting to see that strong and firm action is taken although in the process
some innocent people might suffer." I see the force of Counsel's argument.
However a construction which offends justice and is repugnant to the Rule of
Law that permeates our Constitution should yield to an alternate construction
which is harmony with justice and human rights. It is too much ,to believe
that Parliament intended by this amendment to

**41**

jettison the in-built principles of natural justice highlighted in the
judgments of our courts and of courts of other civilised countries. The
Constitution assures justice to all people. Arbitrary forfeiture without
reference to the owner's culpability is the negation of justice. The courts
assume that the legislature does not intend injustice and seek to avoid a
construction that produces or spells injustice. However it is the duty of the
court to accept the prescription decided on by Parliament even though the
court considers the result unjust, provided it is satisfied that Parliament
did intend that result: Oliver L. J., correctly said in Wicks v. Pirth (11)
"That is quite clearly the purpose and it is not for this court to question or
to evaluate the social justification for the legislation."

But as Lord Reid in Courts & Co. v. l. R. C. (12) said: "If it is alleged that
a statutory provision brings about a result which is so startling, one looks
for some other possible meaning of the statute which will avoid such a result,
because there is some presumption that Parliament does not intend its
legislation to produce highly inequitable results." "There are certain objects
which the legislature any of them is therefore to be avoided." Maxwell
interpretation of Statute's 12th Ed. at page 105\.

"If the court is to avoid a statutory result that flouts common sense and
justice it must do so, not by disregarding the statute or overriding it, but
by interpreting it in accordance with the judicially presumed parliamentary
concern for common sense and justice." Per Ungood-Thomas J., in Re Morgan-
Wilson's Will Trust (13). However, it should be borne in mind that a Judge's
duty is to interpret and apply the law and not to change it to meet his idea
of what justice requires.

There is some presumption that Acts passed to amend the law are directed
against defects which have been disclosed about the time the amending
legislation was enacted. An amendment is not passed in a vacuum, but in a
framework of circumstances so as to cure a defect in a legislative scheme. The
court has to take judicial notice of the previous state of the law to
ascertain the intention of Parliament in amending the law.

Statutes will be construed to avoid absurdity or injustice. The courts are
accustomed to act on certain basic rules which the text-writers call
presumptions in applying canons of construction to statutes. A case where the
meaning of a word was "stretched" occurred in A. G. v.

**42**

Parsons (14) where , the Mortmain and Charitable Uses Act 1888 provided that
certain land transferred to the Irish Company "shall be forfeited to Her
Majesty." The, House of Lords considered the consequences of these words if
they were mandatory, and held that "forfeited" meant "liable to be forfeited"
in the context of the Act, and so avoided the absurdity. A construction was
arrived at with reference to the; consequences which must follow from it.

If the construction contended for by State Counsel is right the consequences
of that interpretation are indeed far-reaching, it would follow that if a
thief steals a person's vehicle and uses the vehicle to commit a forest
offence, the owner of the vehicle will have his car forfeited for no fault of
his. That appears to be a strange conclusion because the owner had done no act
himself. Further such a construction. will render the owner, helpless against
collusion or conspiracy between the prosecutor and the accused to deprive the
owner: of his vehicle. The admission of the accused or the finding against the
accused that a certain vehicle had been used in connection with the commission
of the offence does not bind the owner of the vehicle so as to divest him of
the vehicle. The owner is a third party and he should not be precluded from
showing that the admission or the finding is contrary to facts and that his
vehicle was never used for the illegal purpose. The vehicle will be forfeited
only if it was actually used to transport the prohibited timber. The owner
should be afforded an opportunity to satisfy court that, in fact, his vehicle
was not so used. On State Counsel's submission the owner would have no such
opportunity as according to counsel on conviction of the accused, the vehicle
vests automatically in the State. These eventualities throw into focus the
arbitrariness of the law on the construction contended for by State Counsel.

In Re Lucy's Trust (15) Kay, J., explained the meaning of the word forfeited.
The word forfeit, the noun substantive is defined in Dr. Johnson's Dictionary
to be "something lost by the commission of a crime:-

something paid for the expiation of the crime, a tine, a mulct." By the same
authority the verb "to forfeit" is defined to mean "to lose by some breach of
condition, to lose by some offence....." "Forfeit", the principal adjective is
defined to be liable to .... seizure; alienated by crime...... clearly the
word "forfeit" means not merely that which is actually taken from a man by
reason of some breach of condition, but includes also that which becomes
liable to be so taken..."

**43**

It is significant that Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance finds its place in
Chap. Vll which deals with Penalties and Procedure. It provides for the
penalty when a person is convicted of a forest offence-a penalty in addition
to the punishment provided for by section 25. If the offender happens to be
the owner of the vehicle used, the forfeiture of the vehicle is a legitimate
penalty So also, if the owner participated in the commission of the offence by
allowing it to be used with knowledge that it was going to be used-for that
purpose, forfeiture of the vehicle is a justifiable penalty. But if the owner
had no role to play in the commission of the offence and is innocent, then
forfeiture of, his vehicle will not be penalty but would amount to arbitrary
expropriation since he was not a party to the commission of any offence.

Among the important rights which individuals traditionally have enjoyed is the
right to own property. This right is recognised in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights (1948). Article 17 (1) of which states that everyone has the
right to own property and Article 17(2) guarantees that no one shall be
arbitrarily deprived of his property. The contention of State Counsel negates
this right. An intention to provide for arbitrary infringement of human rights
cannot be attributed to the legislature unless such intention is uneqivocally
manifest. When Parliament is enacting a statute, the courts will assume that
it had regard to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and intended to
make the enactment accord with the Declaration and will interpret it
accordingly (Vide Lord Denning in R v. Chief Immigration Officer (16)).

In the light of the above principles, I am unable to accept the submission of
State Counsel that the legislature by Section 7 of Act No. 13 of 1982 intended
to deprive an owner of his vehicle that had been used by the offender in
committing a forest offence without the owner's knowledge and without his
participation. Having regard to the inequitable consequences that flow from
treating the words 'shall by reason of such conviction be forfeited to the
State' as mandatory. I am inclined to hold, as the House of Lords did in A. G.
v. Parsons (supra) (14) that "forfeited" meant "liable to be forfeited. " and
thus avoid the injustice that would flow on the construction that forfeiture
of the vehicle is automatic on the conviction of the accused. Having regard to
the above rules of construction, I am unable to hold that the amended
subsection 40 excludes by necessary implication the rule of 'audi alteram
partem'. On this construction the petitioner, as owner of lorry bearing No. 26
Sri 2518 is entitled to be heard on the question of

**44**

forfeiture and if he satisfies the court that the accused committed the
offence without his knowledge or participation, his lorry will not be liable
to forfeiture.

I set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal. I set aside also the Order of
the Magistrate declaring lorry No. 26 Sri 2518 forfeited and direct him to
hear the appellant-petitioner who is the owner of the said lorry on the
question of showing cause why the said lorry is not liable to be forfeited. If
the Magistrate is satisfied with the cause so shown, he shall restore the said
lorry to the appellant-petitioner. The Magistrate may consider the question of
releasing the lorry to the petitioner, pending inquiry, on the petitioner
entering into a bond with sufficient security to abide by the order that may
ultimately be binding on him.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** -I agree.  

**

SENEVIRATNE, J.**

The submission of the learned President's Counsel was that Section 40 of the
Forest Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13 of 1982, Section 7 did not provide
that the owner of the vehicle should not be heard as such the rule of audi
alteram partem applied and the owner must be heard before the forfeiture of
the lorry. The learned State Counsel submitted that on the plain construction
of this section the forfeiture must be automatic upon the conviction that when
the accused in this case pleaded guilty for the offence, by the operation of
this section 41 (a) & (b) forfeiture took automatic effect. My Lord the Chief
Justice has agreed with the submissions made by learned President's Counsel
with which view I very respectfully disagree. I will give the reasons for my
view.

The rule of audi alteram partem is not an inflexible rule and in addition to
that the rules of interpretation also provide that it is the duty of the Court
to give effect to the plain meaning of a section whatever the consequences
will be to a party. The dicta that the rule audi alteram partem is not an
inflexible one and will have to be varied or not taken it into account are
contained in the dicta of several cases referred to by My Lord the Chief
Justice in support of this point of view. The exception to this rule is set
out in the following cases cited by His Lordship the Chief Justice-

**45**

(1) Commissioner of Police v. Tanes (supra) (7): Having set out the principle
that the other party must be heard as "a deep rooted principle", the judgment
adds as follows:-.

"But the rule is subject to a sufficient indication of an intention of the
legislature to the contrary.....; the intention must satisfactorily appear
from the express words of plain intendment".

(2) Twist v. Rendwick, Municipal Council (supra) (8): Barwick C.J

"The common law rule that a statutory authority having power' to affect the
right of a person is bound to hear him before exercising the power, is both
fundamental and universal.... ... But the Legislature may displace the rule
and provide for the exercise of such a power without any opportunity being
afforded to the affected person to oppose its exercise However, if that is the
Legislature's intention it must be unambiguously clear".

His Lordship the Chief Justice has cited in Re Hamilton (supra) (9) which laid
down as follows:

"The rule audi alteram partem applies to all judicial proceedings ..... unless
.... excluded by Parliament expressly or by necessary implication".

Having cited this dicta, His Lordship the Chief Justice states:

"unless the contrary intention appears an enactment by implication imports the
principle of the maxim audi alteram partem. This principle is basic to
justice"

Then, His Lordship the Chief Justice states:

"in the amended section 40 the rule of audi alteram partem has not been
excluded by Parliament expressly", and His Lordship the Chief Justice poses
the question "Has that rule being excluded by necessary implication?".

I shall now deal with the question whether

(a) Section 40 the present amendment excludes the said rule unambiguously, or

(b) it does so by necessary unambiguous implication.

To determine whether the relevant amendment section 7 of Act No. 15 of 1982
expressly excluded the rule audi alteram partem section 40 of the principal
enactment (Cap. 451) and the subsequent amendments have to be considered.
Section 40 of the principal enactment had the phraseology ".... shall be
liable ... to

**46**

confiscation". In the cases cited by His Lordship the Chief Justice the
Supreme Court held that the phraseology, "shall be liable" in section 40 of
the principal enactment (Cap. 451), gave a discretion to the Magistrate as
regards the confiscation of the vehicle. Thus, it follows that to use the
discretion the Magistrate had to hear the parties. For this exercise, the
Magistrate had necessarily to hear the owner of the vehicle, who was not a
party to the offence, to determine whether the vehicle was liable for
confiscation. Following from this interpretation, the Supreme Court also held
that the said section 40 did not exclude the principal of audi alteram partem.

This Law was amended by the next amendment section 12 of Act No. 13 of 1966.
The effect of the amendment was that the phrase "shall be liable" was deleted,
and was substituted as follows:-" "shall. . . be confiscated by the order of
the convicting Magistrate". The necessary conclusion that can be drawn from
this amendment is that this amending section cast an imperative duty on the
Magistrate to confiscate the vehicle. Having so framed the section the
Legislature for the first time added a proviso to bring this section in line
with the Supreme Court decisions that a party must be heard before the vehicle
was confiscated. The proviso was to the effect that no order of confiscation
was to be made if the owner of the vehicle proved that he had used all
precautions to prevent the commission of the offence. Thus, this Section made
two provisions;

(1) it made the confiscation imperative,

(2) made provision to hear the owner of the vehicle before such an order was
made.

Due to the problems created by this proviso section 40 was subsequently
amended by section 9 of Act No. 56 of 1979. This was a simple amendment, which
merely stated that section 40 of the principal enactment was amended by repeal
of the proviso. This amendment, on the face of it, took away the statutory
duty cast on the Court to hear the owner before confiscation. This amendment
section 9 of Act No. 56 of 1979 was interpreted by the Court of Appeal in the
Application - Abdul Rahuman v. Sarath Silva (10). In this case the learned
Magistrate had confiscated the lorry without hearing the owner. The Court of
Appeal set aside the order holding that this amendment did not remove the
right of the owner of the vehicle who was not a party to the case to be heard,
and directed the Magistrate to hear the owner before any order to confiscate
the vehicle was

**47**

made. This interpretation in fact upset the law which the Legislature intended
to frame when it dropped the proviso included in the 1966 amendment.

It is the above decision, and such other decisions which made the Legislature
again to amend section 40, by the drastic Amendment Act No. 13 of 1982 Section
7. The amended section 40(1) (a) provided that ................... vehicles
used in committing such, offence (................. are owned by such person
or not) shall by reason of such conviction be forfeited to the State. The
important relevant phraseology in this section for its interpretation are the
following limbs of this section:

(1) "Whether such ........... motor vehicles are owned by such person or not",

In this limb the term "such person" refers to "conviction of any person in
Section 41 ".

(2) Shall by reason of such conviction be forfeited to the State.

Thus, whether the vehicle was owned or not by the person convicted it was made
subject to forteiture. In the second limb the phrase in the original Section
40 "shall be liable", which words were interpreted as casting a discretion on
the Magistrate have been- dropped. The second limb is framed in a manner that
the forfeiture by the Magistrate is made imperative and to take automatic
effect from the conviction ipso facto. I hold that on the plain construction
of this section in issue in this case this Court cannot, but come to the
conclusion that this section expressly excluded the rule of audi alteram
partem. An argument has been adduced in the present appeal before this Court,
and in earlier appeals that such an interpretation to this section causes
irreparable hardship to the "innocent owner" of a vehicle, and as such it
cannot be contemplated that the Legislature intended to perpetrate such an
injustice on a citizen, (in this particular instance to confiscate a vehicle
allegedly of value Rs. 350,000/- without hearing its owner, the petitioner -
appellant). His Lordship the Chief Justice has referred to the Hansard which
contains the proceedings in the Parliament when this amendment was introduced.
I am now referring to these proceedings in the Parliament, not with the
purpose of assisting this Court in the interpretation of this amendment, which
matter this Court cannot take into consideration on the accepted rules of
interpretation of a statute. I am citing a portion of the speech of the Hon.
Minister of Lands & Land Development, who has moved this amendment only to
show that the State has taken into account the hardship that would be

**48**

caused to persons by amending the Law in this manner. The Hon. Minister has in
his speech stated as follows: "Sir, the Hon. Members for .....................
all being lawyers, made some representations about the possibility that some
innocent persons, may suffer as a result of some provisions of this law. I am
aware that it might happen. These amendments were discussed at length in the
Cabinet. But we felt that the situation was so serious .......................
we must bring the law", and the Hon. Minister further developed this theme as
follows: "so we felt that we can adequately monitor the type of prosecutions
that will be launched. But it is necessary in the situation that we are faced,
where the forest resources are fast depleting to see that strong and firm
action is taken although in the process some innocent people might suffer".

I will now consider whether by implication also the relevant amendment under
discussion has excluded the rule of audi alteram partem. It was held by the
Supreme Court that the principal enactment section 40 gave a discretion to the
Magistrate regarding the confiscation of the vehicle, and also that on the
construction of the section the owner of the vehicle had a right to be heard
before such an order was made. In view of the Supreme Court decisions the Law
was amended in two respects. The first amendment section 12 of Act No. 13 of
1966 made the confiscation of the vehicle imperative, but with a proviso
granting the third party a right to be heard. The history of this legislation
shows that the State then discovered that the law pertaining to Forest
Offences particularly illicit felling was nor sufficiently stringent and
severe to deter Forest Offences. As such the second amendment that of section
9 of Act No. 56 of 1979 was introduced. This amendment abrogated the proviso
which gave a right to a third party to be heard before confiscation. The
intention of the State in introducing this amendment seems to have been to
make the confiscation of the vehicle imperative and remove the. right of the
owner of the vehicle to be heard in that exercise. But the Court of Appeal
decision in Rahuman's case (10) (cited above) upset the intention, the
Legislature seems to have had in introducing the 1979 amendment. In addition
to that, it appears that the incidence of Forest Offences increased both in
number, nature, and in intensity that the State contemplated further stringent
measures to remedy this mischief. In introducing the 1982 amendment the Hon.
Minister of Lands and Land Development has stated as follows:-Vide Hansard
cited above-"it was felt by a Committee of Officials that very severe

**49**

and punitive measures had to be introduced to see that the meagre forest
resources of our country are preserved in order to preserve the catchment
areas of our forests and also to preserve the environment and the ecological
balance of our country'". As I see it because the amendment of 1979 did not
have the desired effect due to the interpretation made in Rahuman's case,
(supra) (10) to remedy the situation, the 1982 amendment has been introduced
in its severity and stringency taking into account that innocent persons' may
suffer. In the earlier Supreme Court decisions and particularly is Rahuman 's
case (supra) (10) it has been stated how an innocent owner can suffer from the
severity of the law. This argument was also brought forward in the present
appeal before this Court. But this line of reasoning is looking only at one
facet of the problem. Just as collusion between the driver of a vehicle, and a
detecting officer can create mischief for the owner of the vehicle, it is also
possible that an owner of a vehicle engaged in unlawful transport of timber
can with the connivance of his own servant, the driver of the vehicle,
connivance and assistance of the law enforcement officers save the vehicle
from confiscation by concocting a false position that he was not a party to
the offence. I hold that it is clear that even by implication the amendment
Which is the subject matter of this appeal has excluded the rule audi alteram
partem.

The view I have taken regarding the scope and effect of the relevant 1982
amendment is fortified by a long line of decisions of the Supreme Court in
interpreting similar (I should say like) sections in the Customs Ordinance to
wit - Sections 34(1), 44, 47, 50, 107, 129, 120 and such like sections. All
these sections deal with forfeiture of property on the commission of offences
under the Customs Ordinance to wit

Section 34 - "............. and all goods and unladen, landed, or removed
......... contrary to the directions ........ shall be forfeited".

Section 44 - "If any person exports or attempts to export or take out of
Ceylon any goods ......... such goods shall be forfeited."

A long line of decisions of the Supreme Court have held that -these sections
provide for automatic forfeiture on the happening of the event, i.e. the
breach of the Customs Law or regulations. In the case of Arumugaperumal,
appellant and the Attorney General (17), the Supreme Court considered the
scope and effect of section 128 (A) to

**50**

(i) of the Customs Ordinance (presently sections 131(1) & (2) of the Customs
Ordinance) - "any sip . . . . . . . . knowingly used ............. of any
goods prohibited of import or export, .............. or conveyance of any
goods with intent to defraud the revenue, shall be forfeited". In this case
the Boat transported to Ceylon from South India a load of 88 bundles of
beedies which were contraband goods. The Boat was in charge of the tindal
Balasunderam. As such this Boat was seized by the Custom Officers. Later the
boat was advertised for sale in the Government Gazette, then the owner of the
boat Arumugaperumal gave notice to the Attorney General, and filed action
claiming the boat. Mr. Choksy appearing for the plaintiff-appellant contended
that before a ship could be forfeited under sub section (1) of this section
the guilty knowledge of the owner in the importation of prohibited goods must
be established. There was no proof in the present case that the plaintiff had
any knowledge that goods were being imported without payment of prescribed
Customs duties. There was an absence of any intention to defraud the, revenue.
In meeting this argument Howard C.J. held as follows: "In the circumstances I
am of opinion that the boat was forfeited under the provisions of Section
128(A), and that such a forfeiture was valid irrespective of the guilty
knowledge of the owner. (The underlining is by me for emphasis). In this
connection I would refer to the case of De Keyzer v. British Railway Traffic &
Electric Co. Ltd. (18). His Lordship cited the headnote of this case and
followed the principles laid down therein. As this English case has been
referred to in the subsequent cases, l will later deal with this case in
detail. In the Customs Ordinance which has several sections providing for the
forfeiture of goods, in some sections the word "knowingly" has been used. It
would be noted that Section 128(A) has the phrase "knowingly" used in the
importation. Sections 34(1), 44, 47, 50 & 107(1) do not have the word
"knowingly", whereas Section 129 has the phrase "knowingly harbour",
"knowingly permit", "forfeit treble the value of the goods " .

Section 130 states - "who shall be knowingly concerned in any fraudulent
evasion shall forfeit treble the value of the goods".

The case of Attorney General, appellant v. Nagamany, respondent, (19) -
considered the provisions of Sections 128 and 128 (A) (1) of the Customs
Ordinance (presently sections 131(1) & (2) of the Customs Ordinance). It is
the same identical section considered in Arumugaperumal's case (supra) (17),
where the term used in the

**51**

relevant section is "knowingly used in the importation ....... shall be
forfeited". In this case Gratiaen; J. ruled that in order to justify the
forfeiture of a sailing vessel under section 128(A)(1) of the Customs
Ordinance, it is not essential to prove guilty knowledge on the part-of the
owner. Further, Gratiaen, J. ruled that the ,word "knowingly" is introduced
only to ensure that the penalty of forfeiture shall not be exacted if, unknown
to the owner or the person, in. control. of a vessel, prohibited goods are
surreptitiously smuggled on board. In both Arumugaperumal 's case (supra) (17)
and in this case the contraband goods were' transported with the knowledge of
the person in control of the vessel in 'question. In the case of Palasamy
Nadar and Lanktree (20) - Gratiaen, J: considered the effect and scope of
section 46 of the Customs Ordinance (presently section 44 of- the. Customs
Ordinance) which is as follows

"If any person exports ,.... any goods enumerated in the table ...... Schedule
e B in' contravention of the prohibitions ...... such goods shall be
forfeited".

Gratiaen, J. in course of the judgment has, laid down as follows:-

"I am prepared to concede that the draftsman must be given credit for having
intended the terms "forfeited" and "liable to forfeiture" to convey different
meanings. If goods are declared "to be forfeited" as opposed to "liable to
forfeiture" on the happening of a given event, their owner is automatically.
and by operation of law divested of his property in the goods as seen as the
event occurs. No adjudication declaring the forfeiture to have taken place is
required to implement the automatic incident of forfeiture". His Lordship then
refers to decisions in two cases in England in which these principles have
been followed.

The leading case on the interpretation of these sections providing for
forfeiture in the Customs Ordinance is the Judgment of the Court by H. N. G.
Fernando, C.J., Samarawickreme, J. and Weeramantry, J. in the case of D. l.
Jayawardane, petitioner and V. P. Silva, Assistant Collector of Customs (21).
This case dealt with forfeiture of property exported from Ceylon in
contravention of Section 130 of the Customs Ordinance. This section laid down-
who shall knowingly evade such duties shall forfeit treble value of the goods,
and thereby the value of goods imposed as forfeiture in this case was Rs.
5,010,504, not a mere 350,000/= as in the present appeal before this Court.
This judgment of the Court firstly explained and adopted the principle decided
in the case of Palasamy Nadar v. Lanktree (supra) (20) (cited

**52**

above) as follows:- "In the case of Palasamy Nadar v. Lanktree (supra) (20)
this court considered the effect of-a provision in section 46 (new section 44)
of the Customs Ordinance and construed this provision to mean that on the
happening of some event" the owner of the goods is automatically and by
operation of law divested of his property in the goods as soon as the event
occurs". The court further held that "no adjudication declaring the forfeiture
to have taken place is required to implement the automatic incident of
forfeiture". The decision in this case followed the. construction placed in De
Keyzer v. British Railway Traffic & Electric Co. Ltd., (supra) (18) on the
language of section 202 of the English Customs Consolidation Act of 1876".

Section 130 of the Customs Ordinance provides that on the breach of this
section the exporter shall "forfeit either treble the value of the goods or be
liable to a penalty of Rs. 1000 at the election of the Collector of Customs".
The Judgment of the Court held that when the Collector of Customs uses his
discretion regarding the alternative penalties to be imposed" the principle
audi alteram partem, as discussed in Durayappah v. Fernando (supra) (6) does
not apply in the case of election authorised or required by Section 130 of the
Customs Ordinance. The Judgment of the Court at page 42 states-"We upheld the
objection to the issue of the Writ which was, taken by the youthful counsel
who led for the Crown,. and we express our appreciation of the assistance
which we have derived from his able and lucid arguments".I regret that I am
not persuaded by the submission made by the President's Counsel for the
appellant the then youthful counsel in Jayawardane's case, (supra) (21) who
has led for the appellants in this appeal. This decision was approved by the
Privy Council in (1970) 73 NLR 289.

I will now deal with the English case De Keyzer v. British Railway Traffic &
Electric Co.. Ltd, (supra) (18) referred to in the Supreme Court case's (cited
by me above). In this case the Court interpreted a like section' in Custom's
Consolidated Act 1876 Section 202 "All ...conveyances,........ made use of in
the importation, ......... removal ....of any uncustomed, prohibited,
restricted, or other goods liable to forfeiture under the Customs Acts shall
be forfeited ........ This case has considered the, forfeiture of a
conveyance-a

**53**

motor tank wagon seized by officers of the Customs under the Customs Act. In
dealing with the submissions Lord Hewart, C. J. laid down as follows:-

"there is no opportunity for mercy with to a conveyance which has been
forfeited, ...... All that was argued on behalf of the respondents was that
they did not know of the wrongful use for which the lorry was being employed.
That circumstance was wholly irrelevant to the proceedings before the
justices. It did not affect the purpose for which the lorry had been used. If
that sort of argument were to be open to the owner of a conveyance in such a
case as the present, the result might be, in the case of two partners, where
one was aware of the wrongful use to which the vehicle was being put and the
other was not that the vehicle might be excused from condemnation because of
the innocent mind of one of the partners, that result enuring for the benefit
of the guilty, partner. In the present case the argument adduced before the
justices, which was really an argument in mercy, that the owner of the vehicle
was not aware of the illegal use to which it was being put, was wholly
irrelevant to the only question which the justices had to consider".

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) Article 17(1) states-that
everyone has the right to own property and Article 17 (2) guarantees that no
one should be arbitrarily deprived of property. The Human Rights Declaration
as regards the rights to own property is not of that significance to Sri
Lanka. But that limb of the Article, that no one should be arbitrarily
deprived of property is nevertheless of great significance to us. The Article
right to own property is more significant to the capitalist based economy of
the United States of America, United Kingdom and such countries where the
right to property is enthroned. What is of significance to Sri Lanka is that
the Constitution Chapter 3-Fundamental Rights contains no Article guaranteeing
the right to private property. The particularly relevant Articles 14 (1) (a )
to (i) guarantee "several freedoms, but it has to be noted that such freedoms
do not at all include the right to own property. The restriction on
unrestrained right to property seems to be in accordance with the spirit of
our Democratic Socialist Republic. It is also of much significance that the,
Constitution of India in its Chapter on Fundamental Rights does not have an
article guaranteeing the right to private property. Our Constitution and other
laws have provisions the implementation of which will result in no one being
arbitrarily deprived of his private property guaranteed by Human Rights. In my
view the

**54**

relevant section of the Forest Ordinance is not arbitrary deprivation of
property, but the deprivation of property by due process of law, to deal with
an economic crime.

My view of the interpretation of the relevant provisions of the Forest
Ordinance is also supported by the rules of Interpretation of Statutes adopted
in our courts. The following passages from the authority- Craies on Statute
Law (7th Ed.) are relevant for consideration in the interpretation of the
amendment in question "But where the words of an Act of Parliament are plain
the Court will not make any alteration in this because injustice may otherwise
be done. Where the language of an Act is clear and explicit, we must give
effect to it, whatever may be the consequence, for in that case the words of
the Statute speak the intention of the Legislature". (Page 87). Craies further
states "where the language is explicit, its consequences are for Parliament,
and not for the Courts to consider. In such a case the suffering citizen must
appeal for relief to the law giver and not to the lawyer" (Page 90).

In view of the reasons I have given above, I uphold the judgment of the Court
of Appeal and dismiss this appeal in the Application in Revision with costs
fixed at Rs. 1,500.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1987/7.html_  

