##  In Re Arthenayake, Attorney At Law - SLR - 314, Vol 1 of 1987 [1986] LKSC
7; (1987) 1 Sri LR 314 (18 December 1986)

**

314

IN RE ARTHENAYAKE, ATTORNEY-AT-LAW

**

SUPREME COURT.  
ATUKORALE, J., L. H. DE ALWIS, J. AND SENEVIRATNE, J.  
S.C. RULE No. 1 OF 1986.  
SEPTEMBER 26, OCTOBER 15, 22, AND NOVEMBER 5, 6 AND 7, 1986.

_

Rule-Malpractice-Failure to aver jurisdiction-Failing to appear-Failing to
take sufficient interest in ensuring service of summons- Unduly delaying
taking of steps to revoke proxy-Making accusations and allegations against
client and using language unbecoming of an attorney-at-law and a gentleman in
correspondence with client-S. 42(2) and s. 42(3) of Judicature Act No 2 of
1978-Failure to submit observations to complaint on being called upon by the
Supreme Court-Rule 80(3).

_

Mr. A. C. Alles, a former Supreme Court Judge complained to the Supreme Court
that R. N. J. Arthenayake Attorney-at-Law (referred to as the respondent) whom
he (Mr. Alles) had retained to institute and prosecute proceedings for
infringement of copyright in the District Court of Mount Lavinia against nine
defendants had committed professional malpractices in the institution and
conduct of the said proceedings in that

(a) in the plaint filed (in Sinhala) the respondent had failed to ensure the
inclusion of the pleading averring jurisdiction which had been set out in the
English draft of the plaint prepared by counsel.

(b) the respondent had failed to appear in court on behalf of Mr. Alles, more
specifically on 30th July, 1984 when the case was called and failed to take
sufficient interest in having summons served on the defendants.

(c) the respondent acted in a manner detrimental and/or prejudicial to Mr.
AIIes in the matter of instituting and prosecuting the action and unduly
delayed steps for the revocation of the proxy granted by Mr. AIIes to him.

(d) while being his registered attorney the respondent made accusations and
allegations against Mr. Alles and engaged in correspondence with him in
language unbecoming of an attorney-at-law and a gentleman.

**

Held :

**

(1) The omission to aver jurisdiction in the plaint though unintentional was
due to utter negligence.

(2) Although the Court made an erroneous order calling for an affidavit which
was unnecessary where a permanent injunction was being prayed for there was an
overriding duty to court cast on the registered attorney to ensure that the
order was corrected. The resultant delay of over two months to obtain an order
to issue summons was due to lack of prudence and diligence on the part of the
respondent.

(3) The respondent had neglected to appear for Mr. AIIes on 30.7.1984 and his
explanation for his failure is unconvincing and unacceptable.

**315**

(4) The respondent had unduly delayed the steps for revocation of his proxy.

(5) In his correspondence with Mr. Alles the respondent had indulged in,
language unbecoming of an attorney-at-law and a gentleman. The respondent's
allegation of dishonesty on the part of Mr. Alles was demonstrably baseless
and made recklessly and irresponsibly.

(6) The respondent's failure to file his observations on being called upon by
the Supreme Court even after obtaining extensions of time, shows he did not
have respect and regard for the Supreme Court.

(7) Every negligent act on the part of an attorney-at-law, would not amount to
a malpractice within the meaning of s. 42(2) of the Judicature Act but the
conduct and negligence of the respondent amount to professional misconduct and
malpractice within the meaning of s. 42 of the Judicature Act.

Apart from its statutory powers the Supreme Court has inherent power to deal
with delinquent attorneys-at-law.

Professional misconduct which is improper or deplorable or reprehensible when
judged in relation to accepted standards of propriety and competence amounts
to malpractice.

**

Cases referred to:

**

(1) _Re Edwin Beven-_ (1897) 3 NLR 67.  

(2) _Re Siman Appu' s Plaint_ -(1900) 4 NLR 127.  

(3) _In re a Proctor-_ (1933) 36 NLR 9.  

(4) _Solicitor-General v. Jayawickrema_ -(1952) 53 NLR 320\.  

(5) _In re S. Dharmalingam-_ (1968) 76 NLR 94.  

(6) _In re a Proctor-_ (1943) 44 NLR 558.  

(7) _. Re a Solicitor-_ [ 1972] 2 All ER 811.  

(8 _) Re M-_ [1930] NZLR 285.  

(9) _In the matter of a Proctor of the Supreme Court and in the matter of
section 19 of the Courts Ordinance,_ 1889-(1928) 30 NLR 65.  

(10) _Brenden v. Spire-_ (1938) IKB 176.  

(11) _In re Moonesinghe_ -(1917) 4 CWR 370.  

_

K. M. M. B. Kulatunge, P.C. Solicitor-General_ with _Miss M. N. B. Fernando,
S.C._ for  Attorney-General.  

_

Eric Amerasinghe, P.C._ with _I. G. N. de Seneviratne, W. P. Gunatilaka, S.J.
Mohideen   _and _Miss D. Guniyangoda_ for the Bar Association of Sri Lanka. __  

_

A. C. Gooneratne, O. C_ with _P. A. D. Samarasekera, P.C. K. Shanmugalingam,
J. E. P. Deraniyagala_ and _Upali Gooneratne_ for the respondent. _

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**316**

December 18, 1986  
**ATUKORALE, J.

**

This inquiry arises out of a Rule issued on the respondent, an attorney-at-
law, in terms of s. 42(3) of the Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978, in the
exercise of the disciplinary powers conferred on this court by virtue of s. 42
(2) thereof. The Rule states:

`WHEREAS a complaint has been laid with this Court by MR. ANTHONY CHRISTOPHER
ALLES of No. 8, Cambridge Terrace, Colombo 7, supported by his affidavit dated
18th July 1985 that MR. R. N. J. ARTHENAYAKE, Attorney-at-Law and Notary
Public, has committed certain acts of malpractice.

AND WHEREAS his complaint discloses that:

(a) You were the registered Attorney-at-Law of the said Mr. Anthony
Christopher AIIes, the Plaintiff in D.C. Mount Lavinia Case No. 325/Spl. ;

(b) In or about June 1983 you were entrusted with a draft plaint in English
prepared by Mr. A. Mahendrarajah, P.C. for the purpose of instituting the
above mentioned action.

(c) You were required by law to tender to court the plaint in the Sinhala
language. You subscribed and filed a plaint in Sinhala as so required but
omitting the averment setting out the jurisdiction of the court to hear and
determine the action which appeared as paragraph one (1) in the English draft
plaint which had been prepared by Mr. Mahendrarajah P.C. and was entrusted to
you for the purpose of filing action;

(d) You acted in a manner detrimental and/or prejudicial to your client the
said Mr. Anthony Christopher Alles in instituting action No. 325/Spl. D.C.
Mount Lavinia without complying with the requirement of the law and the
instructions of Senior Counsel to set out the jurisdiction of the court to
hear and determine the action,

(e) You being the registered Attorney of the said Mr. Anthony Christopher
Alles the Plaintiff in D.C. Mount Lavinia Case No. 325/Spl. failed to appear
on his behalf in court, more specifically on the 30th day of July 1984 when
the said case was called in open court. You also failed to take a sufficient
interest in having summons served on the defendants;

(f) You having acted in a manner detrimental and/or prejudicial to your client
in so instituting and prosecuting the said action did unduly delay the steps
for the revocation of the proxy granted to you by the said Mr. Anthony
Christopher Alles;

(g) Whilst being the registered Attorney of the said Mr. Anthony Christopher
Alles the Plaintiff in D.C. Mount Lavinia Case No. 325/Spl. you did make
accusations and allegations against your said client and engage in
correspondence with him in language unbecoming of an Attorney-at-Law and a
gentleman.

**317**

AND WHEREAS the written complaint lodged with this Court was forwarded to you
on or about the 22nd of July 1985 calling for your observations and you
requested time till 30th September 1985 to file your observations;

AND WHEREAS you were informed that you were granted time to forward your
observations by 30th September 1985 and that no further time will be allowed;

AND WHEREAS you have failed without sufficient excuse to file your
observations as so directed and have thereby shown scant respect to this
Court;

AND WHEREAS the said complaint laid by the said Mr. Anthony Christopher Alles
and your subsequent conduct discloses that you have committed acts of
malpractice falling within the ambit of s.42(2) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of
1978;

AND WHEREAS this Court has decided that proceedings for suspension or removal
should be taken against you under s.42(2) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978
read with the Supreme Court Rules 1978,

THESE ARE THEREFORE to command you in terms of s.42(3) of the Judicature Act
No. 2 of 1978 to appear before this Court at Hulftsdorp, Colombo in person on
the 7th day of July 1986 at 10 o'clock in the forenoon and show cause why you
should not be suspended from practice or removed from office of Attorney-at-
Law of the Supreme Court of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka in
terms of s.42(2) of the Judicature Act aforesaid

Accompanying the Rule was a list of witnesses and documents.

According to the respondent the Rule was served on him on 22.6.1986. He
appeared in Court on 7.7.1986 in response to the rule and through his counsel
tendered to Court an apology for his failure to submit his observations to the
complaint of Mr. Alles (hereinafter referred to as the complainant) when he
was required to do so by the Registrar of this Court upon the direction of his
Lordship the Chief Justice. He also requested for a date to show cause. The
Court then fixed the matter for hearing on 26.9.1986 and directed the
respondent to comply with rule 80(3) of the Supreme Court Rules, 1978, on or
before 12.9.1986 which required him, if he intended to rely on evidence, to
file a list of witnesses and documents on or before the date fixed by Court
but not less than seven days before the date of hearing with seven copies
thereof to be furnished to Court and one copy to be served on the Attorney-
General. The respondent failed to comply with the direction of Court and/or
rule 80(3). By his letter of 25.9.1986 addressed to the Registrar of this
Court the respondent forwarded his affidavit together with certain annexure
which apparently the Registrar declined to accept as the hearing was fixed for
the next day. On 26.9.1986 the respondent's counsel moved to tender this
affidavit of the respondent together with the annexure and craved the
indulgence of Court to accept the same. As there were no

**318**

objections from either the learned Solicitor-General or learned counsel
representing the Bar Association of Sri Lanka and in view of the serious
nature of the present proceedings and of the consequences that may flow
therefrom to the respondent, the affidavit and the annexure were, as a matter
of indulgence, received and accepted by us although there was no explanation
for the respondent's failure to comply with the direction and/or the rule
aforesaid.

In his affidavit the respondent, by way of showing cause against the Rule
issued on him, stated, inter alia, as follows:

1\. I am the affirmant abovenamed.

2\. I appeared before Your Lordships' Court on 7th July 1986 upon the notice
served on me on 22nd June 1986 (Sunday) by a Process Server and I was
represented by Mr. K. Shanmugalingam, Attorney-at-Law, and obtained a date to
show cause.

3\. I tendered an apology through my Counsel to Your Lordships' Court for my
failure to comply and my failure to reply does not mean that I have no respect
to Your Lordships' Court.

4\. I have from time to time requested for further time as I was awaiting
several documents which would be in my favour and had I complied immediately I
would not have had the advantage and/or the benefit of the said documents and
the documents are:

  1. the written submissions of the Counsel for the Plaintiff (Mr. A. C. Alles) in District Court of Mt. Lavinia Case No. 325/SPL filed herewith marked "A" (a copy of the said document "A" was sent by me to the Registrar of the Supreme Court about one month ago).   


  2. the Order of the learned District Judge in District Court of Mt. Lavinia Case No. 325/Spl. dated 4th July, 1986 delivered after the receipt of written submissions of Counsel for the Plaintiff and the Defendant. The said Order is filed herewith marked "B...... (the said Order of the learned District Judge was delivered three days prior to the date to show cause-7th July, 1986). 

5\. I submit that the Draft Plaint in English was translated into Sinhala by a
person who usually translates all legal documents from English to Sinhala and
Sinhala to English and in whom I have always found the translations to be
reliable and accurate at all times.

6\. I compared the translation With the English Draft Plaint in respect of the
relevant paragraphs considered necessary and embodying the cause of action and
such other causes but presumed that the Jurisdiction Paragraph would be
automatically in order.

7\. A copy of the Sinhala Plaint and the Draft English Plaint were left by me
at the residence of the Complainant several days prior to the institution of
the action.

**319**

8\. I did not hear from the complainant thereafter in respect of the plaint or
any complaint that there is a problem in respect of the jurisdiction paragraph

9\. It is stated in the affidavit of the complainant at paragraph 20 that the
omission was discovered only on the date of trial.

10\. I admit that the omission was an oversight and not due to any wilful
negligence or any malpractice and I have not acted in any manner detrimental
and/or prejudicial to the plaintiff in the aforesaid action.

11\. I have not delayed in the service of summons but the subject clerk did
not issue summons as there was no affidavit attached to the plaint and the
summons to the defendants were issued only after Mr A. C. Gooneratne Q.C.
appeared before the learned District Judge in Chambers and explained to the
learned District Judge that an affidavit is not necessary in this case. Vide
proceedings of 18.10.83......

12\. I issued summons on the Defendants thereafter and the Fiscal Process
Server, Balapitiya, in his report dated 24th July 1984 stated that the 1,
2,5,8 & 9th Defendants are in Haputale, the 3rd Defendant is in Saudi Arabia,
4th Defendant is in Kalutara, 6th Defendant is in Ja-ela and the 7th Defendant
is in Kollupitiya and on my examining the record subsequently that the Fiscal
Report was missing from the Court Record and I requested Mr. A. C. Alles to
bring this matter to the Notice of the authorities. He showed no such
interest.

13\. I was not present in Courts on the 30th July 1984 when the case was
called but I did make arrangements with Mrs. Ranjani Keragala, Attorney-at-
Law, to appear in my case but when she was to mark her appearance she found
Mr. Earle R. de Zoysa Attorney-at-Law appearing in my case and the said Mrs.
Keragala did not enter an appearance as it would have embarrassed Mr.De Zoysa.
Mrs. Keragala till recently looked after my Roll Work in that Court and
attended to all matters in connection with my legal works.

14\. It is admitted by the complainant I was present in Courts on the 27th
August 1984. Vide complainants document marked "8"

15\. I did not authorize and/or consent to Mr. Earle R. De Soysa, Attorney-at-
Law appearing for the plaintiff in the said case and he had not obtained my
consent to do so. Vide my letter dated 2.10.84 to Mr. Alles marked -E". I have
sent a written complaint to the then President of the Bar Association of Sri
Lanka (Mr. Herman J. C. Perera, Attorney-at-Law about this conduct and I have
not received even an acknowledgment to this day).

16\. I sent a motion to revoke my proxy to the complainant and drew his
attention to it thereafter as he has failed to comply and thereafter I
received a registered letter from the complainant without any contents therein
but he all along was of the view that he did sign and return the revocation. I
sent the carbon copy of the motion to revoke the proxy which was in my file
thereafter. The complainant's conduct did surprise me and I was compelled to
refer to him as an untruthful person.

**320**

17\. The complaint made by Mr: A. C. Alles dated 8th July 1985 is contradicted
by the written submissions tendered to court as his Counsel refers to a
judgment of a Divisional Bench of three Judges in Hassan v. Peiries (34 NLR
238) and states that 'in this case the plaintiff relies on the residence of
the 10th defendant within the local limits of the jurisdiction of: this court
to give it jurisdiction' (vide page 3 of the plaintiff's written submissions).
The complainant Mr. A. C. Alles by his affidavit dated 4th August 1986 states

'I am not responsible for the statements contained in the written submissions
of my Counsel'.

Complainant's document marked "L".

It is, untenable that a plaintiff who is an Attorney-at-Law and a former
Supreme Court Judge would have not associated himself with his counsel in the
preparation of the written submissions. He has now decided not to associate'
himself with the written submissions as I have sent him a letter to sue him
for damages as the written submissions contradict the averments in his
affidavit to Your Lordships' Court.

18\. I further submit that in the Order of the learned District Judge dated
4th July 1986 it is stated at page 1

"Plaintiff states that in the English version of the plaint it is stated that
the 10th defendant is residing within the jurisdiction of this Court and that
due to an oversight it is not stated in the Sinhala version."

It is further stated in the said Order:

"I am satisfied that the averments duly stated in the English version have
been inadvertently omitted from the Sinhala version. In paragraph one of the
English version jurisdiction is clearly stated. Therefore I allow the plaint
in Sinhala to be amended."

19\. I have not acted in any manner detrimental and/or prejudicial to the
plaintiff in instituting action No 325/SPL in the District Court of Mount
Lavinia and I have - not committed acts of malpractice and have not conducted
myself in a manner unbecoming of an Attorney-at-Law and a gentleman and have
not acted in a manner so as not to respect Your Lordships' Court and I
therefore state that action under section 42(2) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of
1978 read with the Supreme Court Rules. 1978 should not be taken against me.'

On a perusal of the respondent's affidavit showing cause against the `Rule
issued on him, it is quite clear that he has not only denied the charges laid
against him therein but also has sought to justify his conduct, the subject
matter of the Rule, and even attempted to

**321**

apportion on the complainant a part of the blame for certain acts of omission
on his part. It therefore becomes necessary to set out in some detail the
salient facts (which do not appear to be controverted) relied upon as
constituting acts of malpractice, upon which the Rule is founded.

The complainant retained the services of the respondent and duly appointed him
to act on his behalf for the purpose of instituting and prosecuting action No.
325/Spl against the defendants in the District Court of Mt. Lavinia. In June
1983 a plaint drafted in English by Mr. Mahendrarajah, P.C. was given to him
for the purpose of filing the action. The respondent on 5.8.1983 filed in
courts a Sinhala plaint subscribed by him together with a copy of the English
draft plaint which was not subscribed by him. On 6.8.1983 he informed the
complainant that he had instituted action on the plaint drafted by Mr.
Mahendrarajah -vide document 7. The Sinhala plaint, however, did not contain
the averment relating to jurisdiction which was the first averment in the
draft English plaint.

The Sinhala plaint-was accepted by court which ordered, owing to a
misconception of the correct legal position, that an affidavit be filed in
support of the claim for a permanent injunction contained in the prayer to the
plaint. No order was made at that stage for the issue of summonses on the
defendants. On 18.10.1983 Mr. C. Gooneratne, O. C. saw the learned judge in
chambers and explained that summonses could issue without an affidavit
whereupon summonses were ordered to be issued on the defendants returnable
21-.11.1983. They were in fact tendered to court only on 27. 2. 1984 when the
court directed them to be issued returnable 26.3.1984. On 26.3.1984 the 1st
defendant appeared in, court in response to the summons served on him. The 1st
to the 9th defendants were not present and as there was no return from the
fiscal relating to the service of summonses on them the court directed the
case to be called on 30. 9\. 1984. On that day the complainant was present in
court but not the respondent. Finding that the respondent was absent the
complainant retained the services of Mr. Earle de Zoysa, an Attorney-at-Law
practising in the Mt. Lavinia courts, to watch his interests and to obtain an
early date for the re-issue of summonses and to ensure that they were served
on the 1st to 9th defendants. This was done by Mr. de Zoysa. Summonses were
reported by the fiscal to be served personally on them and they appeared in
court on

**322**

27.8.1984 on which date the respondent, attended court. The complainant by his
letter of 28. 8. 1984 (document 8) informed the respondent of this position
and the steps taken by Mr. de Zoysa and that Mr. de Zoysa would continue to
watch. his interests and report to him the progress of the case. This letter
appears to have been the primary, cause of the displeasure and the differences
that subsequently arose between the complainant and the respondent. The
respondent took objection: to the complainant's conduct in having retained the
services of Mr. de Zoysa without reference to him and in the course of his
reply (document 9) he stated that he had no objection to Mr. de Zoysa watching
the case on' behalf of the complainant but that he could extend` it further by
stating that the complainant would have to revoke the proxy to enable Mr. de
Zoysa or any other lawyer of his choice to appear for him. He also expressed
surprise that summonses had been, served personally on the 1st to the 9th
defendants who, according to the earlier fiscal report, had left their
residences to their places of business in various parts of the country and one
of whom was in Saudi Arabia. He stated that he would: pursue this matter
further particularly if it was the same fiscal officer who made both reports
to court. He concluded by stating that he would forward the revocation papers
for the complainant's signature: The next letter placed before us is document
10; a letter written by the respondent to the complainant, in which the
respondent, referring to the wish expressed by the complainant in his. letter
of 24.9.1984 that the respondent should revoke the, proxy granted to him,
states, inter alia, that. he would be. doing so with pleasure. He also
forwarded therewith the revocation papers with a request to the complainant to
return the same to him duly signed to enable him to file them in court so that
he would have the satisfaction of knowing that it was done and not wait to
hear about it". This letter is dated 25.10.1984. The complainant alleges that
he replied to this letter by his letter of 29.10.1984 (document 12). This
reply, which also, as usual, has been sent under registered post to the
respondent, acknowledges receipt of the respondent's letter of 25.10.1984 and
states that the complainant is returning there with the revocation papers duly
signed by him and reminds the respondent that in doing so he is only giving
effect to the suggestion contained in the respondent's letter (document 9)

**323**

informing him that the respondent was taking steps to forward the revocation
papers for his signature. The complainant makes the following. further
observations:-

"1. I have no objections to your taking action with the appropriate
authorities to investigate the alleged tampering with the Court Record: I
agree that if these allegations are well founded it is a serious matter that
needs probing and suitable action taken against the parties concerned.

2\. .....................

3\. When you advised me that I had to pay extra stamp duty I was surprised as
I had not prayed for an interim injunction in my plaint. It was I who
contacted Mr. Gooneratne and requested dim to make the necessary
representations on my behalf to the Judge which he successfully did. Mr.
Gooneratne refused to accept a fee from me.

4\. I asked Mr. Earle de, Zoysa to watch my interests in the case since in
spite of repeated requests to you over the telephone you did not seem to take
an interest in my case. You were not present in Court on July 30 and it was
due to Mr. Zoysa's efforts that an early date was obtained for the re-issue of
summons

5 .........................

The next letter before us is the letter dated 27.12.1984 sent by the
respondent to the complainant (document -13) in which he states, inter alia,
as follows

"I have agreed to revoke your proxy in the above case ........... You have not
revoked my proxy so far ............. I would like to finalise this matter as
I do not wish to act for you anymore ............."

To this the complainant replied by his letter of 2.1.1985 (document 14)
stating:

"I am surprised at your letter of December 27, 1984. To your letter of October
27, 1984 which conveys the same request to that contained in your letter of
December 27, 1 sent you a prompt reply on October 29th enclosing the
revocation papers duly signed by me. A photostat copy of my letter and a copy
of the registered postal receipt is enclosed for your information.

I must assume in the absence of my letter and the revocation papers being
returned to me that you have duly received these documents.

If you have misplaced the revocation papers please prepare fresh papers and
bring them to me personally to be signed and returned to you to be filed. in
Court. I cannot take the risk of communicating with you even by registered
post after what has , transpired which has caused me considerable annoyance
and embarrassment. I shall also thank you .......... to make an appointment
with me either by telephone or letter to fix a date and time for the signing
of fresh revocation papers. I should like to finalise all matters with you
within a week of the receipt of this letter."

**324**

The respondent replied by his letter dated 18:01..1985 (document 15):

"I acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated 2nd January 1985 without the
usual salutation and the ending of a letter in the usual form. Rather
surprising that a man of your education and as a man who held a high position
in our Supreme Court should conduct himself in such a petty minded manner.

You further surprise me by denying the receipt of my letter dated 25th October
1984 which in particular contained the Revocation papers. That's dishonesty.

Enclosed please find another revocation with my signature therein. You can
hand it over to your next Attorney-at-law who will file the Revocation, Formal
Revocation and his Proxy in the above case. l trust you will do that on
receipt of this letter as it is my wish that I close this chapter with you and
whilst doing so regretting that you became my client even for a short period.

Lastly, I must state that under no circumstances you should have instructed Mr
Earle R. de Zoysa, Attorney-at-Law, to appear in the above case and he should
not have appeared even on a calling date without my instructions. Mr. de Zoysa
has so far failed to disclose to me that he appeared for you in the above
case."

Acknowledging receipt of the above letter, the complainant wrote to the
respondent letter dated 28.01.1985 (document 16) which contained, inter alia,
the following

"A - This is the first occasion in my entire career that an allegation of
dishonesty has been made against me and that too by a professional man. Your
allegation is false, baseless and made with no sense of responsibility. In
order that you may realise the utter falsity of your allegation I will quote
from the correspondence between us in regard to your allegation that I have
denied the receipt of your letter dated October 25 which contained the
original revocation of the proxy. Let there be no ambiguity or quibbling on
this issue

1 - On October 29, 1984 1 sent you by registered post the original of the
revocation of the proxy duly signed together with a letter which commenced as
follows

I am in receipt of your registered letter of October 25 and am returning the
revocation papers duty signed by me'

You have received my letter and original revocation motion since these
documents were not returned to me by post .............

2 .On January 2, 1985 I wrote to you by registered post in the following terms

'To your letter of October 27 (this is a typing error for October 25) which
conveys the same request to that contained in your letter of December 27 /
sent you a prompt reply on October 29 enclosing the revocation papers duly
signed by me'.

**325**

With my letter I sent you a photostat copy of my letter of October 29
containing again the statement referred to in (1) above. This registered
letter of January 2 has been acknowledged by you in your letter of 18 January
1985.

3 - In the face of the material referred to in (1) and (2) above you have
stated in the second paragraph of the present letter of January 18 as follows

'You further surprise me by denying the receipt of my letter dated 25th
October 1984 which in particular contained the revocation papers That's
dishonesty'.

When therefore you wrote your letter of January 18 you had information that I
acknowledged receipt of your letter of October 25, 1984 and the original
revocation notice. How can you in the face of these incontrovertible facts
which I have set down in writing be surprised and make such a false, wicked
and irresponsible allegation of dishonesty against me? The surprise is on my
part that you have so blatantly and recklessly sought to make such a statement
in writing against me. I must demand an immediate written apology from you
withdrawing this false allegation. Otherwise I shall be compelled to have
recourse to other measures to safeguard my honour and reputation.  
  
B- ..............

C - If I had not asked another Attorney-at-Law to watch my interests in Court
I would still be looking for some of the defendants in various parts of the
country and in Saudi Arabia to have the summons served on them.

I will expect a written apology from you forthwith for what you have falsely
stated in the second paragraph of your letter of January 18 and I shall be
more than glad to sever relations with you thereafter and consider the chapter
closed. This is the first occasion in my life that I have become a litigant
and my first experience of a lawyer retained by me has most distressing and
only forcibly demonstrated to me the unfortunate plight which many a client
suffers at the hands of some lawyers."

To this letter, which is the last in the series of correspondence between the
complainant and the respondent, there was no reply. Thereafter the complainant
signed a fresh proxy authorising Mr. Earle de Zoysa to act on his behalf in
the case. The case was taken up for trial on 29.5.1985 when counsel for the
defendants raised an objection to the jurisdiction of the court to hear and
determine the action. Counsel for the complainant then moved to amend the
plaint. This was objected to by counsel for the defendants and the matter was
fixed for inquiry on 9.7.1985 on which date, owing to the fact that the Judge
was indisposed, the inquiry was postponed for 3.9.1985. Pending this inquiry,
on 19.7.1985, the complainant lodged his complaint in this Court alleging
professional misconduct on the part of the respondent. His affidavit of
complaint is dated 18.7.1985 and contains substantially a statement of the
facts

**326**

(supported by documents including the letters referred to above) forming the
basis upon which the Rule has been laid against the respondent.

On 4. 8 1986, after the Rule was served on the respondent, the complainant
filed an additional affidavit with two annexures marked "L" and "M". Document
marked "L" is a letter dated 24.5. 1985 sent by the respondent to the
Administrative Secretary, Bar Association of Sri Lanka, in connection with a
complaint made by the complainant's son against the respondent to the Bar
Association. Document "M" is a letter dated 3.6.1986 sent by the respondent to
the complainant threatening to take legal action against the latter for
swearing the affidavit of complaint upon which the present proceedings were
initiated which, the respondent states, contains averments inconsistent with
the written submissions filed in the District Court on behalf of the
complainant by his registered Attorney-at-Law. This letter (M) reads as
follows:

"You had sworn an affidavit against me to the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court directly in July 1985 in respect of the Sinhala Plaint filed in the
District Court of Mount Lavinia Case No. 325/SPL.

You had thereafter through your Registered Attorney-at-Law in the above case
filed written submissions in the above case which is different from the
averments in your affidavit.

I obtained a certified copy of the written submissions from Courts and
tendered same to the Registrar of the Supreme Court and a photocopy of same
was tendered to the Attorney-General.

I have already handed over the aforesaid documents and several other documents
connected thereto to my lawyers who will be sending you a letter of demand as
instructed by me claiming damages against you and in the event of your failure
to comply with the demand, legal proceedings will be instituted by me against
you to recover damages from you."

In reference to this letter "M" the complainant, in his additional affidavit,
states that his original affidavit was filed in this Court in July 1985 and
that his counsel made written submissions in the District Court much later to
persuade the court to allow his application for the amendment of the plaint
and that he (the complainant) is not responsible for the statements contained
in the written submissions of his counsel. In regard to the letter "L" the
complainant, in his additional affidavit, states that it contains two false
allegations made by the

**327**

respondent against him, namely, that he failed to send to the respondent the
motion revoking the proxy in 1985 and that he was ready to condone a dishonest
act of a court officer. The relevant passage in letter "L" reads as follows

"In 1983 Mr. A. R. Alles informed me that his father, Mr. A. C. Alles. wanted
me to file an action on his behalf against some persons for an alleged breach
of copyright of his book reporting famous trials. The breach was alleged to
have been committed by the producers of the film 'Dadayama'. Mr. Alles gave me
a draft plaint which he stated was prepared by Mr. A. Mahendrarajah, Attorney-
at-Law (a recently appointed President's Counsel) and that he also consulted
Mr. K. N. Choksy, Attorney-at-Law (now President's Counsel). Hewanted me to
file the plaint in the District Court of Mt. Lavinia. It was filed as
instructed and was numbered 325/Special. Summons was issued on the Defendants
and the returnable date was on the 30th July 1984. The Fiscal, Balapitiya had
reported that the 1st, 2nd, 5th, 8th and 9th Defendants are reported to be in
Haputale, the 3rd Defendant in Saudi Arabia, the 4th Defendant in Kalutara,
the 6th Defendant in Ja-ela and the 7th Defendant in Kollupitiya. I
accordingly informed Mr. A. C. Alles of this by letter. Mr. A. C. Alles
intimated to me by his letter dated 28th August 1984 that he had retained Mr.
E. R. de Zoysa, Attorney-at-Law who is practising mainly in Mount Lavinia
Courts, to watch his interests. He also informed me that Mr. E. R. de Zoysa
had obtained a short date to serve summons and that he had effected service of
summons. I once more checked the record and found that the Fiscal Report
referred to earlier was missing from the record in the Mt. Lavinia Courts. I
made an application to the District Judge, Balapitiya, and obtained a copy of
the aforesaid Fiscal Report dated 24- 7.1984. I thereafter wrote to the
Registrar of the District Court. Mt. Lavinia on 13.12.1984 and asked him for a
copy of the Fiscal Report of 24.7.1984 but was informed that there was no such
report.

I thereupon informed Mr. A. C. Alles that the officers of the Court appeared
to have acted dishonestly and that I intended reporting this to the District
Judge and the Ministry of Justice to take appropriate action. I also indicated
to Mr. Alles that I would expect him to co-operate with me in this matter to
enable the true facts to be ascertained. However, in view of the attitude
taken by Mr. A. C. Alles (I informed him) that I would be revoking his proxy
and would no longer act for him. This was in September 1984. I sent him the
motion to revoke the proxy, but he failed to return it. I thereafter sent him
the carbon copy of my original revocation, and informed him that his new
Attorney could file it in Court.. .. ...... Mr. A. C. Alles's reaction to an
Inquiry about the Fiscal Report was surprising. I could not understand his
attitude as a retired Supreme Court Judge. Mr. A. R. Alles states that he had
discussed this matter with his father 'who is. much distressed that a member
of the honourable profession should have acted in this dishonourable manner.'
It seems strange that his father who was ready to condone a dishonest act of a
Court Officer was talking of ethics of the profession....'

**328**

In addition to the above material, part of which, it will be observed,
comprises of matter placed before this court after the date of the Rule
(9.6.1986), it is also necessary to refer to the respondent's failure to
submit his observations to this court upon the complaint lodged against him,
though called upon to do so. On a direction by His Lordship the Chief Justice
the Registrar of this court forwarded to the respondent a copy of this
complaint and requested him to submit his observations thereon to His Lordship
the Chief Justice within 3 weeks. This letter is dated 22.7.1985. The
respondent by his reply of 3.9.1985 addressed to the Registrar informed him
that the letter reached his hands only 4 days ago and requested for time till
30.9.1985 to submit his observations. The Registrar then wrote to . him on 11.
9.1985 stating that he has been directed by this court to grant the respondent
time till 30.9. 1985 and that no further time will be granted. On 21.2.1986
the respondent wrote to the Registrar enclosing a certified copy of the
written submissions tendered to the District Court of Mt. Lavinia on behalf of
the complainant (the plaintiff in the case) and requesting for further two
weeks' time to send in his observations "in view of the contents of the
written submissions". To this letter the Registrar replied stating that he has
been directed by this court to draw the attention of the respondent to his
letter of 11. 9.1985 informing the respondent that no further time would be
given to him beyond 30.9.1985 to forward his observations.

At the hearing before us learned President's Counsel for the Bar Association
did not, (I think it was not necessary for him to do so) seek to make any
submission or express any opinion on the correctness or otherwise of the facts
as alleged in the Rule. He confined himself to one submission, namely, that
the facts set out therein, even if accepted, did not constitute in law a
malpractice in terms of s.42(2) of the Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978. Learned
Queen's Counsel for the respondent, too, did not appear to me to seriously
canvass the facts set out in the Rule. His main contention was also that the
facts disclosed in the Rule fell short of establishing any malpractice on the
part of the respondent. This legal submission advanced by both counsel will be
considered by me later on in the course of my order. But for a full and proper
appreciation of the implications arising out of the facts alleged in the Rule
I think it very necessary that I should record my findings of facts together
with the reasons therefor on the material placed before us by and on behalf of
the complainant as well as the respondent.

**329**

They are as follows

(a) The respondent, has admitted his omission to aver in the Sinhala  plaint
which is the official plaint, facts setting out the jurisdiction of the Mt.
Lavinia Court to hear and determine the action, which is a positive
requirement of the law - vide s.35 of the Civil Procedure Code. This omission,
though unintentional, cannot be brushed aside as being due to an oversight on
the part of the respondent as averred by him in his affidavit. In my view it
was due to none other than his utter negligence. This is the only reasonable
inference that can be drawn from his statement in the affidavit that he
compared the Sinhala translation with the English draft plaint in so far as
the paragraphs relating to the cause of action were concerned but did not do
so in regard to the averment relating to the jurisdiction which, according to
him, he presumed to be 'automatically in order'. There is in this statement an
implied admission . by the respondent that he failed to carry out his bounden
duty as the registered attorney-at-law of the plaintiff of perusing fully and
carefully, the several paragraphs in the plaint to. which he had subscribed
his signature and which constituted the legal foundation of the plaintiff's
claim. It is not a duty that an attorney-at-law can delegate to any one else.
In a matter of such grave importance it can never be open to an attorney-at-
law to disown responsibility by stating that he had faith in his clerk or
translator, however reliable or efficient he may have found him to be. The
failure or omission to peruse diligently a legal document such as a plaint
before it is filed by him in court constitutes a breach of duty which he owes
not only to his client but also to court. The respondent's further statement
in his affidavit that he left a copy of the Sinhala plaint at the
complainant's residence several days prior to the institution of. the action
but that he received no complaint or information from him concerning any
problem about the averment relating to jurisdiction, far from providing any
excuse for his lapse, appears to me to savour of an unwarranted attempt on his
part to foist the blame or part thereof on the complainant, his client.

(b) A period of about 2 months or more has lapsed between the date of the
institution of the action and the order of court for the issue of summons on
the defendants. The respondent in his affidavit seeks to attribute this delay
to the fact that the subject

**330**

clerk did not issue summons as there was no affidavit accompanying the plaint.
It may well have been that, according to the common practice, the subject
clerk did make the minute and the Judge signed it thereafter. But once it is
so signed it becomes the order of court- A subject clerk has no right to issue
or to refuse to issue summons except in compliance with the order made by
court. Thus -the order made in the instant case was an order of court refusing
to order the issue of summonses on the defendants upon the acceptance of the
plaint for the reason that there was no affidavit accompanying the plaint.
This order was clearly an erroneous one since the plaint had not prayed for an
interim injunction. It was incumbent on the respondent on becoming aware of
this order to have taken prompt and diligent steps to appraise the court of
the correct position and to have moved for the issue of summonses. A
registered attorney-at-law has an overriding duty to court to take such steps
as are necessary to ensure that its orders are in compliance with correct
legal procedures. In the instant case the respondent without making any
attempt to ascertain for himself the correctness of the order made by court
called for additional stamp duty from his client for an affidavit which was
unnecessary. I accept the uncontradicted statement in the complainant's
affidavit to this court that it was he who requested Mr. A. C. Gooneratne, Q.C
to represent matters to court on his behalf in consequence of which the court
directed the issue of summonses without an affidavit. I am of opinion that the
delay of over two months was due to the lack of prudence and diligence on the
part of the respondent.

(c) The respondent failed to appear in court on behalf of his client on
30.7.1984 which was the date fixed for the filing of the answer of the 10th
defendant and for the return of the Fiscal regarding the service of summons on
the other defendants. The respondent, in his affidavit, whilst admitting that
he was not present in court on that day, states that he had made arrangements
with Mrs. Ranjani Keragala, Attorney-at-Law, to look after his work in that
court and that when she was about to mark her appearance in the case on that
date she found Mr. Earle de Zoysa already appearing in the case and she did
not therefore enter an appearance as it would have embarrassed Mr. de Zoysa.
This explanation of the respondent has to be

**331**

considered and evaluated in the light of all the attendant circumstances. By
his letter of 28.8.1984 (document 8) the complainant informed the respondent
that he retained Mr. de Zoysa to watch his interests in the case on 30.7.1984
and that he was most helpful and succeeded in getting summons served on-the
defendants. This letter evoked a vehement protest from the respondent who
found fault with the complainant for dealing through other attorneys without
reference to him and even threatened to forward the revocation papers to him.
But it is very significant that in this reply (document 9) the respondent
offers no explanation whatsoever for his non-appearance in court on that date.
Nor is there any mention of the fact that he had requested Mrs. Keragala to
appear in the case or that she was present and was ready to mark her
appearance. Not even in his letter of 25.10.1984 (document 10) is there any
reference to this alleged arrangement with Mrs. Keragala. In fact the only
reference thereto is contained in his affidavit filed belatedly in this court
on 26.9.1986. In my view the explanation adduced to this court for his failure
to appear in the District Court on 30.7.1984 is unconvincing and therefore
unacceptable.

(d) The respondent had unduly delayed the steps for the revocation of the
proxy granted to him by the complainant. Although by his letter of 29.8.1984
(document 9) the respondent informed the complainant that he would forward the
revocation papers for his signature, they were in fact forwarded only on
25.10.1984 (document 10). The complainant has maintained that he replied to
the respondent enclosing these papers duly signed by him to enable the
respondent to file them in court by his letter of 29.10.1984-(document 12). On
a reading of the respondent's letter of 18.1.1985 (document 15) it would
appear that the revocation papers were not returned to him by the complainant.
According to the correspondence that has passed between the parties the
respondent's position appears to have been that he did not receive these
revocation papers, which, according to the complainant, he forwarded to the
respondent under registered cover by his letter of 29.10.1984. However in his
affidavit filed in this court the respondent states that he received a
registered letter from the complainant but that it was an empty letter without
any contents. This, in my view, cannot but be a reference to the registered
letter sent by

**332**

the complainant on 29.10.1984 addressed to the respondent. So the only
question is whether it was an empty letter or not. I might mention
straightaway that in the correspondence between the parties there is no
reference, at any stage, by the respondent of having received by registered
post from the complainant a letter without any contents in it. If he did
receive such a letter it would have been extremely unlikely that the
respondent would have allowed it to pass without comment, at least, in his
last letter wherein he has made accusations of pettimindedness and even
dishonesty against the complainant. Learned Solicitor-General described the
respondent's statement in his affidavit that he received an empty letter as a
half truth; in which event, it must necessarily be also a half untruth,
although I did not hear him say so. Whatever that may be, I am firmly of the
view that this statement in his affidavit has been made by the respondent with
a view to wriggling himself out of the otherwise defenceless charge that he
was solely responsible for unduly delaying the steps or the revocation of the
proxy.

(e) The respondent as the registered attorney-at-law of the complainant has
made accusations and allegations against and engaged in correspondence with
his client in language which is unbecoming of an attorney-at-law and a
gentleman. On this aspect of the matter it would, I think, suffice if I refer
to the passages in the respondent's letter of 18.1 .1985 (document 15)
reproduced by me and which contains the accusations of pettimindedness and
dishonesty against the complainant. It is manifest that the language employed
by the respondent in those two paragraphs is unrestrained and undignified. An
allegation involving moral turpitude is founded on one's belief (however
honest it may be) of turpitudinous conduct on the part of another. The very
fact and thought that one may be wrong in forming such a belief is of itself
sufficient reason to cause one to desist from giving expression to such a
belief. Such an accusation involving as it does a grave breach of moral
standards and discipline on the part of another should, whenever possible, be
avoided. It should never be made unreasonably or irresponsibly. No man of good
repute (and this includes an attorney-at-law) should permit himself to casting
moral aspersions on another, whether high or low, for which

**333**

there is no cogent and sufficient basis. The imputations made by the
respondent in the instant case rest on such slender, and even baseless,
grounds that I find it difficult to resist the conclusion that they were made
not for the reason that the respondent saw any justification in making them
but to embarrass, if not humiliate the complainant. The reference to the
position the complainant once held in the Supreme Court was totally irrelevant
and unwarranted. The allegation of dishonesty is demonstrably baseless. The
respondent himself by his letter of 18.1.1985, in which the allegation was
made, acknowledged receipt of the complainant's letter of 2.1.1985 wherein the
complainant specifically stated that in response to the respondent's letter
dated 25.10.1984 (mistakenly given as 27.10.1984) he sent a prompt reply on
29.10.1984 returning the revocation papers after signature. In the face of
this letter of 2. 1.1985 (the receipt of which the respondent acknowledged) it
was preposterous for the respondent to have alleged in his letter of 18.1
.1985 that the complainant was denying receipt of the respondent's letter of
25.10.1984 which contained the revocation papers for the complainant's
signature. The position was clarified and put beyond any manner of doubt by
the complainant in his final letter of 28.1.1985 (document 16) to which there
was neither a reply nor even an acknowledgment by the respondent. I am quite
satisfied that the accusation of dishonesty levelled by the respondent against
his client, the complainant, was completely baseless. It has been made
recklessly and irresponsibly. It was unbecoming and unworthy of the respondent
as an attorney-at-law to have made such a baseless charge against the
complainant, who was his client.

I might pause here for a moment to state that I have based my findings on the
contents of the documents as a whole which have been read before us including
the explanation made by the respondent in his belated affidavit of 25.9.1986
since it is my view that a matter of this nature has to be judged upon a
consideration of all the facts and circumstances placed before us. I have,
however, for this purpose, refrained from taking into consideration the
contents of any document tendered to court in support of the Rule after the
date of its issue.

**334**

I will now proceed to consider the consequences of the failure and/or omission
on the part of the respondent to make the jurisdiction averment in the Sinhala
plaint, to appear in Court on 30.07.1984 and to take steps without delay, for
the revocation of the proxy granted to him. It is not denied and there is
little doubt that they resulted not only in unnecessary delay and expense to
the complainant but also in placing the entire claim of the complainant in
real jeopardy of being dismissed. I therefore hold that in instituting and
prosecuting the action in the District Court of Mount Lavinia the respondent
has acted in a manner detrimental and/or prejudicial to the interests of his
client, the complainant. I am thus of the view that the matters enumerated in
paragraphs (a) to (g) of the Rule have been established except the allegation
relating to the respondent's failure to take sufficient interest in having
summons served on the defendants since it is the duty of the Fiscal to effect
service of summons for which the respondent cannot be held responsible.

(f) The respondent has failed without sufficient cause to file his
observations on the complaint that was made against him (a copy of which was
forwarded to him) although he was directed to do so by the Registrar of this
court upon a direction made by His Lordship the Chief Justice. By his letter
of 03.09.1985 the respondent asked for and obtained further time till
30.09.1985 but yet failed to comply with the direction of this court. At that
stage he adduced no reason or explanation for his failure. He remained silent
until 21 .02.1 986 when he wrote to the Registrar enclosing a copy of the
written submissions tendered on behalf of the complainant in the District
Court and asking for further two weeks' time "in view of the contents of the
written submissions". In his affidavit to this court he states that his
failure to comply was due to the fact that he was awaiting certain documents,
namely the written submissions aforementioned and the order of the learned
District Judge on the application to amend the plaint, which were advantageous
to him and the benefit of which he would not have had if he filed his
observations earlier. These documents, in my view, bore no relevance to the
observations that were called for by this court, which were in respect of the
statement of specific facts (all within the knowledge of the respondent
himself) contained in the complainant's affidavit to this court. The
respondent was made aware that his observations were called for upon a
direction made by His Lordship the Chief

**335**

Justice pertaining to a matter of his professional conduct. He could not have
failed to appreciate the fact that his observations were required, without
delay, to enable this court to determine whether a Rule should or should not
issue against him upon the allegations made against him. In so far as this
court was concerned, the matter was one of utmost importance and urgency.
Although in his letter of 21.02.1986 he asked for two more weeks" time to file
his observations, eventually he did not file them at all. These circumstances
disclose. that the respondent did not have due respect and regard for this
court.

I have set out above in detail my findings on the facts. I shall now turn to
the legal submissions of respective counsel. It is conceded that the law
governing this matter is contained in the Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978, which
came into force on 02. 07. 1979. S. 40(1) of this Act empowers this court, in
accordance with rules for the time being in force, to admit and enrol as
attorneys-at-law 'persons of good repute and of competent knowledge and
ability'. S.42(2) empowers this court to suspend from practice or remove from
office every person admitted and enrolled as an attorney-at-law who shall be
guilty of 'any deceit, malpractice, crime of offence'. The charge against the
respondent is that he committed the acts enumerated in the Rule and that he is
thereby guilty of a malpractice. My finding is that he has committed those
acts except one. The question of law is whether the acts which the respondent
has committed amount to a malpractice within the ambit of s.42(2) of the
Judicature Act. It is, I think, proper to state at once that no allegation of
dishonesty was made against the respondent in the conduct of his affairs, with
the complainant. On behalf of the Bar Association it was contended by learned
President's Counsel that the word, in its context, means professional
misconduct which is rooted in dishonour or moral turpitude, that malpractice
constitutes the failure on the part of an attorney to practise his profession
in an honourable or reputable way and that it imports or involves professional
conduct of a dishonourable or turpitudinous nature. He contended that although
every act of malpractice amounts to professional misconduct yet every act of
professional misconduct does not amount to a malpractice. He submitted that
professional misconduct not involving moral turpitude falls short of a
malpractice. He further maintained that negligence per se (however serious it
may be) would not amount to malpractice. He also drew our attention to s.35 of
the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973, which

**336**

immediately preceded s.42(2) of the Judicature Act, and pointed out that that
section enlarged the scope of the disciplinary powers of this court to punish
an attorney who was guilty of any deceit, malpractice, offence or conduct
unworthy of an attorney-at-law. S.35, he stated, was wider than s. 17 of the
Courts Ordinance which preceded it and was introduced deliberately to catch up
misconduct not involving moral turpitude. He submitted that as the legislature
had omitted the words 'other conduct unworthy of an attorney-at-law' in
s.42(2) of the Judicature Act, it was clear that the word 'malpractice' had to
be given a restricted meaning so as to apply only to such misconduct where the
element of mens rea was present. He further contended that the word 'deceit',
being as it were the key-word, tainted or tarnished the meaning of the words
following it, namely, 'malpractice, crime or offence', with the flavour of a
turpitudinous nature. He concluded that in this view of the law the Rule did
not disclose any malpractice on the part of the respondent. Learned Queen's
Counsel for the respondent, relying on the definition of the word
'malpractice' in the Concise Oxford Dictionary (6th Edition, 1976), submitted
that malpractice being the opposite of good practice connotes a 'wrong-doing'
in law. It signifies an illegal or unlawful action by an attorney for his own
benefit. He maintained that to constitute a malpractice, the act must be a
wilful act which is contrary to law and done by an attorney in the course of
his practice for his own benefit. On the other hand learned Solicitor-General,
who appeared in support of the Rule and who was good enough to make available
to us the benefits of his valuable research into the history of the
disciplinary powers of the Supreme Court, himself relying on the definition of
the work 'malpractice' contained in Black's Law Dictionary (Revised 4th
Edition, 1968), maintained that malpractice means an act of professional
misconduct or an unreasonable lack of skill or fidelity in the course of
professional duty. He submitted that the grounds specified in s.42(2) of the
Judicature Act warranting the exercise of disciplinary power are all species
of misconduct, that malpractice is an act of professional misconduct and that
the words 'any...... malpractice' would embrace every act of professional
misconduct, whether turpitudinous or not and whether it is done willfully or
negligently. He cited several local as well as English decisions in support of
his submissions He also urged that in determining whether the respondent is
guilty of malpractice or not, we should have regard to the facts and
circumstances taken as a whole and not in isolation. Viewed in this light of
the law and facts, he submitted that the entire

**337**

course of conduct of the respondent was most deplorable and unbecoming of an
attorney. He thus maintained that the charge of malpractice had been made out
against the respondent.

The Royal Charter of 1801, by Article XXIV, conferred on the Supreme Court of
Judicature the authority and power 'to approve ' admit and enrol such and so
many persons, being properly qualified according to such rules and
qualifications as the said court shall for that purpose make and declare, to
act both as advocates and proctors, or in either of such capacities, in the
said court .... as to the said Supreme Court shall seem meet, and the said
advocates and proctors, on reasonable cause to remove . . ..' It contained no
express " provision for the suspension of advocates and proctors from
practice. The Royal Charter of 1833, by Article 17, authorised and empowered
the Supreme Court 'to admit and enrol as advocates or proctors in the said
Supreme Court, all such persons being of good repute as shall upon examination
by one or more of the said Justices of the said Supreme Court, appear to be of
competent- knowledge and ability ... ." This Charter, however, contained no
express provision for either removal or suspension of advocates or proctors.
The Courts Ordinance (Chap. 6, Vol. 1, L.E.), which came into force on
2.8.1890, empowered the Supreme Court to admit and enrol as advocates or
proctors persons of good repute and of competent knowledge. and ability. It
also provided for the suspension from practice or removal from office any
advocate or proctor who shall be guilty of any deceit, malpractice, crime or
offence. This Ordinance was repealed by the Administration of Justice Law, No.
44 of 1973, which, as indicated above, by s.35 provided for the suspension and
expulsion of attorneys who shall be guilty of any deceit, malpractice, offence
or other conduct unworthy of an attorney-at-law. This Law by s.33 retained the
same provisions as existed under the Courts Ordinance in regard to the
admission and enrolment of attorneys. Chapter 1 of this Law which contained
sections 33 and 35 was repealed by the Judicature Act which re-introduced
substantially the same provisions that existed under the Courts Ordinance for
the admission and enrolment of attorneys as well as for their suspension and
expulsion. The legal grounds relating to the exercise of the disciplinary
jurisdiction of this court being the same under the Courts Ordinance as well
as the present Judicature Act, some guidance on . the matter arising for our
determination in this case may be obtained from decisions of the Supreme Court
under the Courts Ordinance

**338**

which afford illustrations of instances of malpractice and indicate the nature
and character of the misconduct which has been held to amount to malpractice.

In the case of in Re Edwin Beven (1) the respondent was required to show c:
use why he should not be suspended from practice on the ' charge that he has
been guilty of malpractice in that he furnished to his clients books
containing blank letters of demand which bore his signature and permitted them
to fill in the said letters of demand the names of the debtors and the amount
of claim against them and so to use them or suffer others to use them as if
they actually emanated from him. He stated in defence that the practice of
leaving such signed letters of demand in the hands of standing clients to be
filled by them as the necessity arose was not uncommon. The Supreme Court took
the view that this practice was wrong, 'reprehensible', "improper" and
'unprofessional conduct. He was suspended from practice for a period of three
months. It is to be noted that no moral turpitude was alleged or disclosed in
the conduct of the respondent which was condemned by court.- In the case Re
Siman Appu' s Plaint (2) a rule was issued on a proctor to show cause why he
should not be struck off the roll for improper conduct in that he
countersigned a private plaint presented to the Police Court of Kegalle which
had been drawn up by a petition drawer and not by himself. He explained the
circumstances under which he came to countersign the complaint and stated that
he was unaware that his conduct in signing a plaint drafted or drawn by any
person other than the proctor countersigning was unprofessional. He was
suspended from practice for a period of three months for 'unprofessional
conduct' which obviously could only have. been on the basis that he was guilty
of malpractice, though the charge , did not so specify. In the case of In re a
Proctor (3) a proctor appropriated. for his use certain monies belonging to
his client. There was no evidence to show that in doing so he had any
dishonest or criminal intention. His conduct appeared to be the result of
great carelessness and negligence on his part of his client's interests and a
failure to appreciate his duty in respect of trust funds received by him on
his client's behalf. The court held that the appropriation 'of his client's
money was 'an act of professional misconduct on his part, a malpractice within
the meaning of s.1 7 of the Courts Ordinance-'. He was suspended from practice
for a period of six months. In Solicitor-General v. Jayawickreme (4) an
advocate's professional conduct in dealing directly with a lay client without
the intervention of a

**339**

proctor was held to be improper. He was held to be guilty of professional
misconduct amounting to malpractice. In re S. Dharmalingam (5) the respondent,
a proctor, was given a sum of Rs. 75 to be deposited as survey fees in a
partition action. He failed to do so and misappropriated the money: He was
held to be guilty of malpractice. These decisions of the Supreme Court do not
seem to support the contention advanced by learned President's Counsel for the
Bar Association that there can be no malpractice unless the act of
professional misconduct involves or, is grounded in dishonour or turpitude.
Nor do they lend support to the contention of learned Queen's Counsel for the
respondent that malpractice postulates an illegal or unlawful act, a
transgression of the law I also see no justification for holding that the word
'deceit' (which learned President's Counsel labelled as the key word) taints
the meaning of the words that follow it. If his contention is correct, no
order of suspension or expulsion of an attorney can be made unless the crime
or offence of which he is guilty involves an element of turpitude. No
authority was cited in support of this proposition. On the contrary there is a
decision which militates against such a proposition. In the case of In re a
Proctor (6) a proctor was charged with and convicted of the offence of
escaping from lawful custody, an offence punishable under s. 220A of the Penal
Code. His detention was purely upon an order issued by the Governor 'under
regulation 1 of the Defence (Miscellaneous No. 3) Regulations and riot in
consequence of a conviction on a criminal charge. The offence lie committed,
though criminal, did not involve any moral turpitude. He' was suspended from
practice for a period of two years as his conduct was considered to be most
reprehensible and he, as an officer of the court, had shown a deplorable
example.

The legal position in England in regard to conduct of solicitors which would
warrant an expulsion from office or a suspension from practice is summarised
in Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edition, Vol. 44 at para. 297 page 222:

"Non-statutory grounds for disciplinary proceedings generally. Where a
complaint is made to the Solicitors Disciplinary Tribunal in respect of a
solicitor it is customary to allege that the solicitor has been guilty of
conduct unbefitting a solicitor. Apart from criminal convictions, conduct that
was such as to support an action for want of skill is not, generally speaking,
sufficient to constitute a ground for striking a solicitor's name off the roll
or for suspending him from

**340**

practice. For this purpose his conduct must be judged by the rules and
standards of his profession, and it must be shown that he has done something
which would be reasonably regarded as disgraceful or dishonourable by
solicitors of good repute and competency. or of having been. guilty of such
conduct as to render him unfit to remain a member of an honourable profession
or of conduct which is inexcusable and such as to be regarded as deplorable by
his fellows in the profession...."

In support of the propositions laid down in this passage several references to
English decisions have been cited. It is not necessary for me to refer to them
except to cite the following passage from the judgment of Lord Denning, MR in
Re a Solicitor (7).

On the second charge (of professional misconduct in not keeping the books in
proper form) counsel for the solicitor challenges the finding ,of professional
misconduct. Counsel has quoted cases to show that professional misconduct
should only be found when the solicitor has been guilty of conduct which is
disgraceful or dishonourable and is such as to be condemned by his colleagues
in the profession. I do not think that definition is exhaustive. In my opinion
negligence in a solicitor may amount to professional misconduct if it is
inexcusable and is such as to be regarded as deplorable by his fellows in the
profession. We were referred to a case in New. Zealand (Re M - 1930, NZLR 285)
(8) in which it was said that the failure of the solicitor to have his trust
accounts audited amounted to professional misconduct. In that case it was
argued that his failure was due merely to carelessness, and that as there had
been no dishonesty it was not professional misconduct. But the Court of Appeal
in New Zealand held that neglect amounts to professional misconduct. So here,
the negligence of the solicitor was reprehensible."

Thus in England negligent conduct on the part of a solicitor in the practice
of his profession, if inexcusable, would amount to professional misconduct so
as to render him liable to disciplinary action. Whilst under our law, no
doubt, every negligent act on the part of an attorney in the pursuit of his
profession would not amount to malpractice within the meaning of s.42(2) of
the Judicature Act, our decisions have, in considering what misconduct amounts
to malpractice, given a less stringent and more liberal construction to the
words 'professional misconduct' or 'unprofessional conduct' than the

**341**

English decisions. Hence I can see no reason or justification for upholding
the contention of learned President's Counsel that a negligent act, whatever
its character, can never constitute malpractice under our law. Without
endeavouring to embark on a precise definition of the word malpractice in
s.42(2) of the Judicature Act, it is my view that to warrant the exercise of
the disciplinary powers of this court on the ground that an attorney is guilty
of malpractice the professional misconduct complained of must' be of such a
character as, in the opinion of this court, could fairly and reasonably be
regarded as being improper or deplorable or reprehensible when' judged in
relation to the accepted standards of professional propriety and competence.
Adopting this as an appropriate, but not a decisive, test I hold that, in the
light of my findings enumerated above, the respondent is guilty of the charge
of malpractice contained in the Rule.

What remains for consideration is the measure of punishment that should be
imposed on the respondent. In so far as his conduct is. concerned the only
mitigating circumstance appears to be the absence of any element of moral
turpitude on his part. As against this, his entire course of conduct betrays a
deplorable indifference in the discharge of his professional duties and
obligations towards his client, in consequence of which he has jeopardised the
very interests he was retained to protect. Another grave objectionable feature
in his conduct is the blunt and baseless accusations he made against his own
client who while protesting his innocence afforded the respondent an
opportunity of making amends which the respondent failed to avail himself of.
If he had done so, he would not have placed himself in the situation in which
he finds himself now. Far from showing any repentance for his conduct towards
his client, he has, after the present complaint was made by his client to this
court, threatened him with legal action and proceeded to level a further
accusation against his client of having attempted to condone the dishonest
conduct of a fiscal officer in a communication which he addressed to the Bar
Association over another complaint lodged against him. His failure to make
compliance with the direction and the order of this court is reprehensible and
deserves to be severely condemned by this court. The affidavit that he filed
in this court in answer to the charge laid against him in the Rule only helped
to confirm his guilt. The sole authority of admitting and enrolling persons of
good repute and competency as attorneys-at-law has been and is the Supreme
Court. Once so admitted and enrolled they become officers of court whom

**342**

the court holds out to the public as its officers who can safely be entrusted
with their affairs. The disciplinary powers vested in the court are designed
to safeguard the interests of the public and the profession and to ensure that
attorneys maintain the high standards of conduct expected of them as members
of an honourable profession. Suitors and other members of the- public have,
to: be protected from improper conduct of attorneys who act in ,flagrant
breach of their professional duties and obligations. It is necessary for me to
add that the apologies which the respondent, through his counsel, so lavishly
bestowed on this court became quite meaningless in. the absence of any
explanation of the circumstances which culminated in his default to comply
with .directions of this court., Any person who expects this court to accept
an apology which is tendered by him must necessarily satisfy this court that
it is one that is worthy of acceptance by this court. Otherwise it will remain
a mere empty and bare apology to which no weight or consideration can be
given. Taking into account all these matters I am of the opinion that the
respondent should . be suspended from practising his profession as an
attorney-at-law for a period of. two years. Accordingly we. direct that the
respondent be suspended from practice for a period of two years with effect
from 1st January 1987. He will also deposit in this court a sum of Rs. 1,050
as costs of this application.

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J. -** I agree.  
  
**SENEVIRATNE, J.

**

This Court has issued a Rule in terms of section 42 of the Judicature Act No.
2 of 1978 against R. N. J. Arthenayake, Attorney-at-Law and , Notary Public
the respondent to this Application. The Rule contains several charges to wit-
paragraphs (b), (c) and (d), (e), (f) and (g). After the charge (g), there is
a charge that the respondent on being directed by His Lordship The Chief
Justice, failed without sufficient .cause to file observations as so directed
and has thereby. showed scant respect to this Court. After the recitation. of
the above charges the. Rule sets out that the respondent has committed acts.,
of malpractice within the. ambit, of section 42(2) of the. Judicature Act No.
2 of 1978. 1 must- at the outset observe that the learned President' s Counsel
for the Bar Association submitted that the allegation that the respondent has
shown scant respect to this Court was not one of the charges against the
respondent in this Rule. This

**343**

submission is not a valid submission. On the construction of the Rule issued
against the respondent the above allegation is undoubtedly one of the charges
against the respondent, though it had- not been given a marking as a separate
paragraph. In fact his allegation is a separate paragraph, and I shall for the
purpose of my order mark it as (h)

"Whereas the written complaint lodged with this Court was forwarded to
you...... -,....you have failed without, sufficient excuse to file your
observations as so directed and thereby shown scant respect to this Court".

I have had the advantage of perusing the- findings of Atukorale, J. and I
agree with him that the charges in paragraphs numbered (c) to (g) except (e)
in the Rule and as (h) by me in this order have been established.

In my judgment I will deal with two submissions made by the learned Queen's
Counsel and the President's Counsel for the respondent and the Bar Association
respectively to wit

(1) the interpretation of the term "malpractice" in section 42(1) Judicature
Act No. 2 of 1978 and (2) that this Court does not have any "inherent power"
to deal with attorneys-at-law.

The Rule states-that the "complaint made by the said A. C. Alles and your
subsequent conduct discloses that you have committed the act of malpractice
falling within the ambit of Section 42(2) Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978".

Learned President's Counsel on behalf of the Bar Association and learned
Queen's Counsel on behalf of the respondent strenuously made submissions-on
the, construction of the term "malpractice" on which this Rule is grounded. It
is sufficient for this purpose of the order to begin with reference to section
17 of the Courts Ordinance No. 1 of 1889, which sets out that an attorney-at-
law "who shall be guilty of deceit, malpractice, crime or offence may be
suspended or removed ..... ". The next enactment which dealt with this matter
is the Administration of Justice Law No. 44 of 1973. Section 35 of this Law
sets out as follows:

"Every attorney-at-law who shall be guilty of any deceit, malpractice, offence
or other conduct unworthy of an attorney-at-law, may be suspended or removed:
....."

**344**

The Administration of Justice Law was abrogated and the present law is
contained in the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978 section 42 (2),  which sets out
as-follows:

"An attorney-at-law who shall be guilty of any deceit, malpractice, crime or
offence may be suspended or removed....... . .".

It will be seen that the term "malpractice" in respect of an attorney-at-law
has been common to all these enactments dealing with professional conduct of
an attorney-at-law. Both, on behalf of the Bar Association and on behalf of
the respondent, it was strenuously submitted that the term "malpractice,
connotes conduct involving moral turpitude, that is turpitudinous conduct. In
my view the words used in the above enactments pertaining to professional
conduct' of attorneys-at-law must be understood in the light of the plain
meaning of the words as used in the ordinary English language. If any special
meaning or connotation was to be attached to these words, then these
enactments would have defined in an interpretation section what was deceit,
malpractice. The prefix "mal" means bad, improper, illegal action, wrongdoing.
Among the meanings attached to the word "malpractice"-in the Concise Oxford
Dictionary (6 ED. 1976) is "wrongdoing". A study of the decisions pertaining
to the Rules issued on attorneys-at-law, both in England and in Sri Lanka show
that, the term "misconduct" has been used. It will be seen that-in the local
enactments referred to above the term "misconduct" is not included in the
relevant sections, but the decisions of the Supreme Court have always used the
term "misconduct". The prefix "mis"- "means badly, wrongly, improper,
unfavourable". Thus, the word misconduct will mean bad conduct, improper
conduct. The ex facie meaning of the words malpractice, misconduct, do not
contain the element of moral turpitude. To consider these two terms involved
moral turpitude, one has to graft that connotation into these two words which
do not contain the meaning moral turpitude. No authority has been cited to
show that the words-malpractice, misconduct have been held,' by the '
authorities in England or in Sri Lanka to essentially involve the element of
moral turpitude.

There is local authority which shows that the Supreme Court-has not
interpreted the word "malpractice".. to involve an element of: moral
turpitude. The case of Solicitor-General v. Jayawickreme (supra) (4) was an
instance of a Rule issued under section 17 of the Courts

**345**

Ordinance against an Advocate, who dealt directly and accepted fees from a lay
client without the intervention of a Proctor. (This is a' case before the
amalgamation of the then two branches of the profession by the Administration
of Justice Law No. 43 of 1973:) In the Judgment of Rose, C.J. it is stated
that counsel on behalf of the Bar Council which was represented informed Court
that the Bar Council always assumed such conduct as was disclosed in the
proceedings as professional misconduct amounting to malpractice. Rose, C. J.
Nagalingam, S.P.J. and Pulle, J. agreeing held that the respondent was "guilty
of professional misconduct amounting to malpractice, and has thus rendered
himself liable to the penalties prescribed by section 17 of the Courts
Ordinance". In the matter of a Proctor of the ' Supreme Court and in the
matter of section 19 of the Courts Ordinance, 1889 (9) a Rule was issued
against a Proctor on the ground that he wilfully neglected to tax his bill of
costs against a client, who called upon him to do so under the direction of
the Supreme Court. Drieberg, J. with whom Fisher, C.J. and Jayawardene, A.J.
agreed, held that the Proctor was guilty of misconduct. The head note shows
that the Rule issued under section 19 of the Courts Ordinance on the Proctor
was to show cause why he should not be suspended from practice or removed from
the Roll of Proctors on the ground of misconduct: As stated earlier the term
"misconduct" is not one included in the relevant section of the Courts
Ordinance, presently section 17. The term used in the Courts Ordinance of 1889
and the subsequent like enactments is the term "malpractice". In the case In
re Jayawickrema, (supra) (4) the Court used the term "misconduct" and held
that such misconduct amounted to malpractice, the term in the relevant section
of the Courts Ordinance. In the latter case of the Rule ! on a Proctor the
Court has used the term misconduct as synonymous . with the term malpractice
in the relevant section of the Courts Ordinance. The other striking feature of
these two cases is that the facts of both cases show that no moral turpitude
as such was involved, i.e. the kind of moral turpitude involved in the
term-"deceit", "crime" or "offence" used in the relevant sections of the three
enactments referred to above. Due to these reasons I hold that the . term
"malpractice" in section 42(2) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978 does not
necessarily involve the idea of moral turpitude or turpitudinous conduct. The
word "malpractice" has been used in the section in its ordinary per se
meaning.

**346**

My brother Atukorale, J. cites several decisions of the Supreme Court to
illustrate instances in which the Supreme Court has held lawyers to be guilty
of malpractice in respect of acts which did' not involve turpitudinous
conduct. One such case cited is the case of-In re S. Dharmalingam (supra) (5):
I have to disagree with the interpretation of this case by Atukorale, J. On
the facts of this case the Supreme Court sums up as follows:

"We are satisfied that the respondent has been proved to be guilty of
malpractice in that he misappropriated and failed to deposit in Court a sum of
Rs. 75 given to him by his client for the` purpose of being so deposited as
survey fees in a partition action."

The facts in the case disclose criminal misappropriation an offence under
section 386 Ceylon Penal Code, and the facts also come within the terms "crime
or offence" in the Courts. Ordinance.

Another submission made by the learned President's counsel for the Bar
Association and the learned Queen's Counsel for respondent was that this Court
has no inherent power now to deal with charges in respect of professional
conduct of lawyers. Such power was now a statutory power found in the
Judicature Act section 42(2). It, was submitted that though at one time there
may have been such inherent power in the Supreme Court, at present such power
is granted to the Supreme Court by the Statute, as such there is no inherent.
power. The position in England is that the Courts. in England always acted on
the premises that it had. inherent power to deal with the professional conduct
of the lawyers practising in the Courts. In recent times there are Statutes
granting such power, in respect of Solicitors, to the Courts in England, and
in respect of Barristers the Courts have delegated its power to the Inns of
Court. But still the position is that the Courts in England always act on the
premise that, though there are such Statutes, and power has been delegated to
the Inns of Court, that the Courts in England do still enjoy such'' inherent
power. Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol. 44 (4th Ed.) Para. 252-Disciplinary
Jurisdiction, page 1911 sets out as follows

"The Supreme Court possesses an inherent disciplinary jurisdiction over the
Solicitors, as being its officers. Under this

**347**

jurisdiction action may be taken against a solicitor both for his own
misconduct and for actions of his clerk within the scope of his authority even
where the solicitor is not personally implicated.

Note 2.-The High Court, the Crown Court, and the Court of Appeal respectively,
or any division or Judge of these Courts, may, subject to the provisions of
the Solicitors Act of 1974, exercise, the same jurisdiction in respect of
Solicitors as any one of the Superior Courts of Law or equity from which the
Supreme Court was constituted might have exercised immediately before the
passing of the Supreme Court of Judicature Act of 1873 (repealed) in respect
of any Solicitor, Attorney, or Proctor admitted to practise there: Solicitors
Act 1974 Section 50 (2)."

Halsbury-Laws of England (4th Ed.) Vol. 44-Para. 1132 sets out the position or
the inherent jurisdiction of the Courts-i.e. Powers of the Court over Counsel
Barristers.

It has always been taken for granted that he conventions, practice and
etiquette of the Ceylon Bar was moulded on the lines of such traditions,
conventions and practices of the English Bar. In matters pertaining to
lawyers, considered by the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka, also as officers of the
Court, the Supreme Court and the Bar Council, now Bar Association, have always
resorted to the traditions, conventions and practice of the English Bar in
determining such like matters. T. Nadaraja The Legal System of Ceylon In Its
Historical Setting (1972), Chapter VI-Page 228-states as follows:

"Consequently, the organisation and the convention of the legal profession,
the forms and ceremonial followed in the administration of justice .........
tendered to adapt themselves to the English pattern."

In the case of Brendon v. Spiro (10) decided in 1937 it was held that-

"A judge of the High Court, before whom an action has been filed has inherent
jurisdiction to entertain an application that a solicitor

**348**

who has acted for a party who, on the alleged ground of professional
misconduct, pay personally the costs ordered to be paid by that party.......
."

There is, as far as it could be ascertainable a decision of the Supreme Court
dealing with the inherent power of the Supreme Court in respect of Proctors.
The case of in re Moonesinghe (11) was an application made by a proctor struck
off the Roll for professional misconduct to be readmitted to the Bar. Wood
Renton, C.J. decided as follows:

"No express power of reinstatement is conferred upon us by section 19 of the
Courts Ordinance. But both in England and South Africa the view has been
adopted that a Court which has the right to remove the name of a solicitor
from the Rolls, has also an inherent discretionary power to readmit him where
he has subsequently expiated the offence of which he may have been guilty and
redeemed his character.'

Learned counsel for the respondent sought to submit that the basis for re-
admission of a lawyer struck off from the Roll, is that it is considered as a
new admission. I do not agree with this submission as it is quite clear that a
lawyer once struck off from the Roll is not admitted to the Bar on the same
considerations as one seeking an admission to the Bar for the first time.
Before a lawyer struck off is admitted to the bar, i.e. readmitted, he must
show that "he has subsequently expiated the offence of which he may have been
guilty and redeemed his character.' This is the golden thread of the principle
running through all readmissions to the Bar of those who have been struck off.
From the Charter of 1833 to the Courts Ordinance 1889 there was no statutory
provision enabling the Supreme Court to deal with the professional conduct of
lawyers. Can it be said that during that hiatus any `lawyer could have
committed acts of professional malpractice/misconduct with impunity? In that
situation the Supreme Court would have undoubtedly used its inherent power to
deal with such a delinquent adopting the convention of England where the
Courts had such inherent power.

I must firmly state. that on my part I will not readily entertain a purely
legal argument to restrict the accepted powers of this Court, which

**349**

this Court has traditionally and conventionally exercised unless it is shown
to me that such power has been specifically restricted by Statute Law.

It has been submitted vehemently that there is no precedence for the issue of
a Rule on charges as contained in this Rule. In respect of this argument I can
only console myself, and also the learned counsel with this quotation from the
book "Discipline of Law" - Lord Denning, M. R. as follows

"What is the argument on the other side? Only this, that no case has been
found in which it has been done before. That argument does not appeal to me in
the least. If we never do anything which has not been done before we shall
never get anywhere. The law will stand whilst the rest of the world goes on
and that will be bad for both.'

Lastly I must make the observation that with the increase of the numbers of
the Sri Lanka Bar there is and there will be a proliferation of the instances
of professional malpractice, as such it is in the interests of the Bar itself,
and that of the public, that the relevant section 42(2) Judicature Act should
be amended by the addition of the words "......... or other conduct unworthy
of an attorney-at-law" which words were found in the now repealed like section
35 of the Administration of Justice Law No. 44 of 1973.

I agree with my brother Atukorale, J. that the respondent is guilty of the
charges of malpractice set out in the Rule issued and I agree with sentence of
suspension only (for two years) as no "deceit", crime or offence" is involved,
and I also agree with the order made re costs.  
  
The Rule is affirmed.  
  
_Rule affirmed.  
  
Respondent suspended for two years. _

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/7.html_  

