##  Mackie C.W and Co., Ltd. v. Hugh Molagoda, Commissioner General of Inland
Revenue and Others - SLR - 300, Vol 1 of 1986 [1985] LKSC 7; (1986) 1 Sri LR
300 (1 November 1985)

**

300

C.W. MACKIE & CO., LTD.  
v.  
HUGH MOLAGODA, COMMISSIONER-GENERAL OF INLAND REVENUE AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
S. SHARVANANDA, C.J., ATUKORALE, J. AND TAMBIAH, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION No. 85/85,  
SEPTEMBER 20, 1985 AND OCTOBER 1, 1985.

_

Business Turnover Tax - Fundamental Right to equality - Articles 12(1) and
126(4) of Constitution- Turnover Tax Act, No. 69 of 1981 \- Order of Minister
of Finance and Planning published in Gazette Extraordinary No. 247/11 of
1.6.1983 - Excepted articles - Is order of Minister retrospective? - Is
refusal to refund B.T.T. discriminatory? - Equality.

_

The order of the Minister of Finance and Planning (Gazette Extraordinary No.
247/11 of 1.6.1983) making certain items, amongst them rubber, excepted
articles for the purpose of levy of Business Turnover Tax is not retrospective
in operation. Any undertaking given by the Commissioner-General of Inland
Revenue to make administrative arrangements not to recover turnover tax from
rubber dealers up to 31.12.1982 would be illegal. The Commissioner-General is
not empowered to grant exemption or waiver of such taxes which are legally
due. There is no provision in the Turnover Tax Act, No. __ 69 of 1981 to
refund any tax paid in accordance with the law. The only instance when a
refund can be made is when a person has paid turnover tax in excess. The
excess can be refunded (s. 49).

**

301

**

In order to sustain the plea of discrimination based upon Article 12(1) a
party will have to satisfy the court about two things:

(1)  that he has been treated differently from others,

(2) that he has been differently treated from persons similarly circumstanced
without any reasonable basis.

Fundamental to this postulate of equal treatment is that it should be
referable to the exercise of a valid right, founded in law in
contradistinction to an illegal right which is illegal in law. The Article
12(1) does not require the authorities to act illegally in one case because
they have acted illegally in other cases. The Constitution only guarantees
equal protection of the law and not equal violation of the law.

The Court cannot issue directions to the Commissioner-General to deduct the
amount paid by the petitioner as B.T.T from future taxes because that would
amount to giving directions to act contrary to the law.

Before relief on a just and equitable basis can be granted under Article
126(4) the applicant must first establish infringement of his fundamental
right to equality. To succeed the petitioner must establish discrimination in
the performance of a lawful act.

_

Per_ Sharvananda, J. -

"Illegality and equity are not on speaking terms".

**

Cases referred to:

**

(1) _Venkata Subbiah Setty v. Bangalore Municipality AIR 1968 Mysore 251.

_

(2)  _Ram Prasad v. Union of India AIR 1978 Rajasthan 131._

(3)  _Chief Commissioner v. Kitty Puri AIR 1973 Delhi 148,153.

_

(4)  _Narain Dass v. Improvement Trust AIR 1972 S.C. 865.

_

(5) _ Sioux City Bridge Company v. Dakota County, Nebraska (1923) 200 U.S.
441.

_

**

APPLICATION** for alleged violation of the Fundamental Right of equality.

_

K. N. Choksy, P.C._ with _Ronald Perera_ for the petitioner.

_

Sarath Silva, D. S. C._ with _A. Kathirsan, S.C._ for 1st to 3rd respondents.

**302**

November 1, 1985. **  
SHARVANANDA, C.J.

**

The petitioner is a Company carrying on business, inter alia, of a Rubber
Dealer and Exporter.

After the enactment of the Turnover Tax Act, No. 69 of 1981 (herein referred
to as the Act) on 12.11.81 and the regulations made thereunder, all local
sales and transactions in rubber became liable for payment of Business
Turnover Tax (herein referred to as B.T.T.). Prior to that Business Turnover
Tax was payable on such sales and transactions under Part 12 of the Finance
Act, No. 11 of 1963.

The Petitioner states that it had paid a total sum of Rs.2,109,001.43 as
B.T.T. for all local sales and transactions of rubber for the period 1.4.80 up
to 31.12.82.

By Gazette Extraordinary No. 247/11 dated 1.6.1983 (P1) the Minister of
Finance and Planning made an order under section 8 of the Turnover Tax Act,
making certain items, amongst them rubber, excepted articles for purposes of
the said Act.

By letter dated 23.11.83, the petitioner's auditors wrote to the Assessor of
the Turnover Tax, requesting a refund of the total sum of Rs. 2,109,001.43,
which had been paid by the petitioner as Turnover Tax, on the basis that the
aforesaid order made by the Minister of Finance under section 8 of the
Business Turnover Tax Act, that rubber be treated as an excepted article, had
retrospective operation and the Turnover Tax under that Act should never have
been levied in respect of rubber and that consequently all Turnover Tax which
had been paid, prior to the publication of the aforesaid Gazette Extraordinary
No. 247/11 dated 1.6.1983, should be refunded. By his letter dated 25th
October, 1984, the Deputy Commissioner, Unit 2, replied that the order making
rubber an excepted article was not retrospective but applied only from 1st
June 1983 and therefore the question of refund did not arise.

Thereafter the petitioner wrote letter dated 18.3.85 to the Commissioner-
General of Inland Revenue enclosing ( _a_ ) copy of a letter dated 10.1.83
**** sent by the Sri Lanka (All Ceylon) Rubber Dealers' Association to the
Commissioner-General of inland Revenue and

**303**

(marked P10A) ( _b_ ) __ copy of a letter dated 24.1.83 sent by the then
Commissioner-General of Inland Revenue to Secretary, Sri Lanka (All Ceylon)
Rubber Dealers' Association (marked P10B) and asked for a refund of the
Business Turnover Tax duly paid by it. P10B runs as follows:

"Department of Inland Revenue,

Inland Revenue Building,

Colombo 2.

24th January, 1983.

The Secretary,  
Sri Lanka (All Ceylon) Rubber Dealers' Association,  
285, Grandpass Road,  
Colombo 14.

Sir,

_

Turnover Tax on Rubber

_

I refer to your letter of 10th January, 1983.

1\.  Administrative arrangements will be **** made not to recover any

**304**

turnover tax on rubber from rubber dealers up to December 31, 1982.

I confirm the position set out in your letter of 10th January, 1983 relating
to the passing down of the refund of turnover tax made to Shippers.

2\. The scheme of taxation of the plantation sector is being reviewed for the
Budget 1983. Your representations will be given carefull consideration in
formulating the scheme.

Yours faithfully,

_

Sgd._ J. A. F. Felix,

Commissioner-General of Inland Revenue.

The petitioner states that from the contents of the aforesaid letters P 10A &
P 10B it was clear that: ( _a_ ) on 5.1.83 a deputation from the Sri Lanka
Rubber Dealers' Association had met His Excellency the President and the
members of the Cabinet Sub-Committee on Economic Development and urged the
abolition of the turnover tax on rubber and after a full discussion "on your
suggestion it was agreed that you will make administrative arrangements not to
recover any turnover tax on rubber from the rubber dealers up to December 31,
1982," and ( _b_ ) __ the then Commissioner-General of Inland Revenue agreed
to make administrative **** arrangements not to recover any turnover tax from
rubber dealers up to December 31, 1982. The petitioner further states that it
was and it is not a member of the Sri Lanka (All Ceylon) Rubber Dealers'
Association, and was unaware of the agreement until it wrote this letter dated
18.3.85 (P10)

The 1st respondent (the present Commissioner-General of Inland Revenue) by
letter dated 20.3.83 (P11) wrote to the petitioner stating that the petitioner
had paid the turnover tax as it was legally due and as there was no provision
in the Turnover Tax Act for refunds as His Excellency the President had not
ordered a refund of Turnover Tax already paid, no refund of the tax already
paid by the petitioner could be made. The 1st respondent further added:

"Your claim then can only be considered on an extra legal basis and I have
therefore forwarded your submissions together with my observations to the
Secretary, Ministry of Finance, in December  1984\. I have received no
directions in regard to this matter thereafter. In the circumstances, I
regret, I am unable to grant you a refund as requested and would advise you to
pursue this matter with the Secretary, Ministry of Finance and Planning "

By letter dated 24.6.85 (P15) the Deputy Commissioner of Inland Revenue
informed the petitioner that the Deputy Secretary, Treasury had not sanctioned
the refund. Though this letter was dated 24.6.85 it was received by the
petitioner by registered post only on 11.7.85.

By its application dated 23rd July 1985, to this court, under Article 126 of
the constitution the petitioner states that B.T.T. had not been charged or
recovered from the rubber dealers who are members of the Sri Lanka (All
Ceylon) Rubber Dealers' Association up to 31.12.82 and that the petitioner had
Paid a sum of Rs. 2,109,001.43, as B.T.T. on rubber up to date and that in the
circumstances, the 1-3rd respondents (namely Commissioner-General of Inland
Revenue, Secretary, Ministry of Finance and Planning, Deputy Secretary to the
Treasury respectively) had wrongfully refused to refund the said sum of money
or to set it off against future, other taxes payable by the petitioner.

The petitioner complains that the denial of the refund of the turnover tax
**** paid by it was mala fide and constitutes unlawful discrimination and that
the 1-3rd respondents have in refusing **** to refund the turnover tax paid by
the petitioner whilst not collecting or enforcing the

**305**

payment of the turnover tax from other dealers in rubber, who are similarly
placed and liable to pay the said tax, acted in breach of the petitioner's
constitutional right to equal treatment. The petitioner grounds his
application on the plea that there has been a violation of its fundamental
rights of equal protection of the law guaranteed to it by Article 12 (1) of
the Constitution.

The 1st respondent in his affidavit states by way of explanation of the
aforesaid letter P 10A and P10B that-

"The Sri Lanka (All Ceylon) Rubber Dealers' Association had made
representations that certain dealers in rubber had not added the Turnover Tax
to their local sales and as such encountered difficulty in making quarterly
payments of such taxes. Therefore an administrative arrangement was made not
to recover such taxes up to 31.12.82 under the provisions of the Act until
this scheme of taxation of the plantation sector is reviewed in the Budget.
The letter P10(B) is not an exemption or waiver of such taxes. The
Commissioner-General of inland Revenue is not empowered under the Act to grant
any such exemption or waiver of taxes that are legally due."

The 1st respondent, whilst denying the allegation of mala fide and unlawful
discrimination and violation of the petitioner's fundamental right of equality
before the **** law and equal **** protection of the law further states -

(1) that the turnover tax in respect of local sales of rubber was subject to
Business Turnover Tax for the periods in respect of which the petitioner is
seeking a refund... and the order P1 made by the Minister operates from the
date it was published in the Gazette and has not affected the legal liability
to pay taxes in respect of the period prior to such publication;

(2) that according to the records of the Department of Inland Revenue for the
period 13.11.81 to 31.12.82, twenty-five rubber dealers other than the
petitioner have paid turnover tax on local sales of rubber ;

(3) that no refunds have been made to any rubber dealer in respect of Business
Turnover Tax or Turnover Tax lawfully paid for the period in respect of which
the petitioner is claiming a refund ;

**306**

(4) that I am not empowered by law to refund such taxes that have been
lawfully paid and the decision not to refund such taxes has been made bona
fide in compliance with legal provisions ; and

(5) that action will be taken to recover Turnover Taxes that are payable on
local sales of rubber for the period prior to the publication of P1 from every
person in default of such taxes."

_

Section 2_ of the Turnover Tax Act provides that-

" subject to the other provisions of this Act there shall be charged for the
period November 13, 1981 to December 31, 1981 and for every quarter commencing
on or after January 1, 1982 from every person who-

( _a_ )  carries on any business in Sri Lanka ; a tax (hereinafter referred to
as the "turnover tax") in respect of the turnover made by that person from
that business ........... computed at such rate as the Minister may fix by
order published in the Gazette."

_

Section 4(1)_ provides "the Minister may, if he is of opinion that it is
essential for the economic progress of Sri Lanka, exempt by Order published in
the Gazette, any business or such business, as may be person, from the
turnover tax,"

_

Section 10_ provides "the turnover __ tax in respect of any quarter shall be
paid not later than the fifteenth day of the month following the end of that
quarter. Any tax not so paid shall be deemed to be in default and the person
by whom such tax is payable ......... shall be deemed to __ be a defaulter for
the purposes of this Act."

_

Section 31_ states that any turnover tax shall he a first charge on the assets
of the defaulter.

_

Section 33(2)_ "where any turnover tax is in default, the Commissioner-General
may issue a certificate to the G.A., A.G.A., **** Fiscal, Dr. Fiscal or tax
collector containing particulars of such tax and the name of the defaulter and
the officer to whom such certificate is issued shall be empowered to cause
.... the tax to be recovered from the defaulter named in the certificate by
seizure and sale of his movable property".

**307**

_

Section 33(4)_ "where any turnover tax is in default and the Commissioner-
General is of opinion that recovery by means provided in subsection 2 is
impracticable or inexpedient, he may issue a certificate to a District Court
.... containing the particulars of such tax and the name of the person by whom
the tax is payable and the court shall thereupon direct a writ of execution to
issue to the fiscal authorising and requiring him to seize and sell any
property movable or immovable of the defaulter."

_

Section 34_ provides for "proceedings for recovery of turnover tax in default
before a Magistrate where the Commissioner-General is of the opinion that the
recovery by seizure and sale is impracticable or inexpedient."

_

Section 49_ provides that "if it is proved **** to the satisfaction of the
Commissioner-General by claim duly made in writing within three years after
the end of a quarter that any person has paid turnover tax in excess of the
amount with which he was properly chargeable for that quarter, such person
shall be entitled to have refunded the amount so paid in excess."

_

Section 56_ provides that "the Commissioner-General, Inland Revenue, shall be
in charge of the Administration of this Act,"

It is to be borne in mind that the only instance in which provision is made by
the __ Act for a refund of any turnover tax had been paid is when any person
had paid turnover tax in excess of the amount with which he is properly
chargeable (vide section 49). There is no provision for refund of turnover tax
under any other circumstances. Counsel for the petitioner was unable to point
to any provision of the Art which enables the Commissioner-General to make the
refund of the sum of Rs. 2,109,001.43 which the petitioner had duly paid in
discharge of its statutory liability under the Act.

But Counsel states that the petitioner is not claiming under the Act. The
powers of a public official like the Commissioner-General of Inland Revenue
are not unlimited. There are legal limits to his powers; his powers are Spelt
and defined by the Act, and he cannot act outside or in excess of the powers
vested in him by the Act, he cannot excercise those powers for extraneous
purposes. When any question of refund of the turnover tax paid under the Act
arises his power to make such

**308**

refund has to be looked for within the framework of the Act. As pointed out
earlier, the only instance of refund provided for by the Act is that referred
to in section 49 of the Act, viz. turnover tax paid in excess.

It is not disputed that the sum of Rs.2,109,001.43 claimed by the petitioner
does not represent any turnover tax paid in excess of the amount with which he
was properly chargeable. The said sum was what was lawfully due from it as
turnover tax for the period in question and was lawfully paid by the
petitioner in the discharge of its legal liability. If the petitioner's prayer
is that the Commissioner-General of Inland Revenue should be directed by this
court to make a refund of this Rs 2,109,001 .43 paid by the petitioner as
turnover tax on rubber up to 31.12.1982, we have to look for justification
outside the Act to make the refund. Counsel for petitioner invoked the
jurisdiction of this court under Article 126 (4) of the Constitution to make
such directions as it may deem just and equitable in respect of the petition
preferred under Article 126 (2) to warrant the refund set off against future
taxes.

The power of this court to issue such directions stems from proof of the
infringement of a fundamental right. it is only on such an infringement that
this court will **** have the power to grant such relief or make such
directions as it may deem just and equitable in the circumstances. This
preliminary fact has to be established by the petitioner to warrant the
invocation of this equitable jurisdiction. In the instant case, the petitioner
pleads breach of its right to equality as the basis of its application.
Article 12 (1) of the Constitution provides "all persons are equal before the
law and are entitled to the equal protection of the law." The essence of the
right of equality guaranteed by Article 12(1) and the evil which the article
seeks to guard against is the avoidance of designed and intentional hostile
treatment or discrimination on the part **** of those entrusted with
administering the law. In order to sustain the plea of discrimination based
upon Article 12(1) a party will have to satisfy the court about two things,
namely (1) that he has been treated differently from others, and (2) that he
has been differently treated from persons similarly circumstanced without any
reasonable basis.

**309**

But the equal treatment guaranteed by Article 12 is equal treatment in the
performance of a lawful act. Via Article 12, one cannot seek the execution of
any illegal or invalid act. Fundamental to this postulate of equal treatment
is that it should be referable to the exercise of a valid right, founded in
law in contradistinction to an illegal right which is invalid in law. I
respectfully agree with what the court said in _Venkata Subbiah Setty v.
Bangalore Municipality_ (1) .

"Article 14 (corresponding to our Article 12) cannot be understood as
requiring the authorities to act illegally in one case, because they have
acted illegally in other cases."

In _Ram Prasad v. Union of India_ (2) __ the latter court quoted with approval
the above statement of the law in _Venkata Subbiah Setty v. Bangalore
Municipality (supra)_ and added-

"that the guarantee under Article 14 cannot be understood as requiring the
authorities to act illegally in one case because they have acted illegally in
other cases. No one can contend that a wrong must be extended to him as well
in order to satisfy the provisions of Article 14."

In _Chief Commissioner v. Kitty Puri_ (3), the court observed:

"But the respondent No. 1 cannot contend that because the society and the
government have illegally shown favour to some person, then this court must
compel them to commit another illegality to show favour to respondent No. 1 in
the same way. This is not the meaning of equality guaranteed by Article 14 of
the Constitution."

The inequality complained of by this petitioner in this case is only an
inequality in the matter of illegal treatment. The Constitution only
guarantees equal protection of the law and not equal violation of law. One
illegality does not justify another illegality.

In the exercise of its powers under Article 126(4) of the Constitution this
court can issue a direction to a public authority or official commanding him
to do his duty in accordance with the law. It cannot issue a direction to act
contrary to the provisions of the law or to do something which in law, would
be in excess of his powers.

**310**

In _Narain Dass v. Improvement Trust_ (4) _,_ it was stated that while,
administering section 56 of the Punjab Town Improvements Act, there had been
hostile discrimination against the appellant, because lands under orchards
belonging to persons similarly placed had been exempted whereas the appellants
had been refused exemption. Rejecting the complaint of unequal treatment, the
Supreme Court of India, said that-

"If the appellants had failed to bring their case within section 56 of the
Act, then merely because some other party had erroneously succeeded in getting
his lands exempted ostensibly under that section that by itself would not
clothe the appellant with a right to secure exemption for their lands. The
rule of equality before the law or of the equal protection of the laws under
Article 14 could not be invoked in such a case."

Counsel for the petitioner submitted that this court is vested with power
under Article 126(4) to grant such relief of making such directions as it may
deem just and equitable in the circumstances and that if the circumstances
disclosed by the petition exhibit inequality of treatment this court can grant
relief even at the cost of breach of the law. I do not agree with this
contention. Before we come to the grant of relief under Article 126(4) the
infringement of fundamental right should be first established. In this ** _**_
case the petitioner pleads infringement of the fundamental right to equality.
To succeed in the plea the petitioner has to establish discrimination in the
performance of a lawful act. The doctrine of equality is intended to advance
justice according to law, __ by avoiding hostile discrimination. Justice is
not advanced if breach of the law is to be countenanced in the process. As
stated earlier Article 12 does not guarantee equal violation of the law. The
petitioner's argument involves the Commissioner-General transgressing the law,
doing something in excess of his powers. The making of the refund of Rs.
2,109,001.43 duly paid by the petitioner **** as turnover tax or setting off
this amount against petitioner's future tax liability is not warranted by the
provisions of the Act. The Commissioner-General does not have the legal power
to do either. Even though the Commission-General had unlawfully refrained from
recovering any turnover tax from other rubber dealers, the petitioner's
contention involves calling upon the Commissioner-General to commit another
illegality in line with the other illegality. The rule of equality before the
law or equal protection of the law under Article 12(1)

**311**

cannot be invoked in such circumstances. In the exercise of its jurisdiction
to grant relief or give such directions as this court may deem just and
equitable, this court cannot lend its sanction or authority to any illegal
act. Illegality and equity are not on speaking terms.

Counsel relied heavily on the American case of _Sioux City Bridge Company v.
Dakota County, Nebraska_ (5) __ in support of his submission that the court
can depart from the requirement of the statute to ensure equality of
treatment. It was held in that case that intentional and arbitrary assessment
of the property of one owner for taxation at its true value, in accordance
with the State Constitution and laws, while all other like property is
systematically assessed much lower was a violation of the equal protection of
the laws and that the owner aggrieved by the discrimination was entitled to
have his assessment reduced to the common level, since "by no judicial
proceeding can we compel reassessment for the great mass of such property at
its true value as the law requires." The court in that case, held that the
right of the tax-payer whose property alone is taxed at 100% of its true value
is __ to have his assessment reduced to the percentage or that value for which
others are taxed, namely 55%, __ even though this was a departure from the
requirement of the statute. The conclusion was based on the principle that
where it is impossible to secure both the standard **** of **** the true
value, and the uniformity equality required by law, the latter requirement is
to be preferred as the just and ultimate purpose of the law. That case is
distinguishable from the petitioner's case. Whilst the petitioner in this case
is asking for a refund of the tax which he has paid in terms of the law, in
the _Sioux's_ _case (supra)_ the prayer was not for such a refund of tax
already lawfully paid on the basis of full value, as required by the State
Law, but to have the assessment reduced to the same proportion of its full
value that other similar properties were assessed. The Supreme Court in that
case determined the future liability of the appellant in keeping with the
requirement of uniformity. The court stressed that it sanctioned the departure
from the requirements of statute only because it was impossible to secure both
the standard of the true value and the uniformity and equality required by
law. The relevant statute law in that case required that there should be
uniformity in the basis of assessment. It was regarded as manifestly unjust
that the appellant's property should be assessed at its true value while other
property in the district was assessed at 55% of its true value. I do not
however

**312**

agree with the proposition of law accepted in that case that statute law can
be disregarded or departed from, in order to satisfy the requirement of
equality. The ratio decidendi of that case should be confined to the special
facts of that case. The jurisdiction to grant such relief or make such
directions "as it may deem just and equitable in the Circumstances" calls for
the exercise of discretion judicially. It will not be a proper exercise of
judicial discretion-and a court of law will not lend its authority to such
exercise-if it will conduce to carrying into effect that which is prohibited
by law. The first duty of a court is to administer justice according to law,
the law enacted by Parliament.

The Commissioner-General's powers and duties in relation to B.T.T. are defined
by the Act. The Act is exhaustive of his powers and duties in relation to
B.T.T. His statutory duty requires him to recover every rupee which might be
lawfully eligible from each individual taxpayer as B.T.T. The Commissioner-
General being a statutory body exercising statutory powers under statutory
restrictions and conditions cannot arrogate to himself a power which the law
has not endowed him with. He cannot exercise a dispensing power which the Act
has not invested him with. Section 56 of the Act places the Commissioner-
General in charge of the administration of the Act. Sections 31-39 of the Act
provides the machinery for the recovery of such tax in default. A statutory
duty is cast on the Commissioner-General of putting the machinery in motion
whenever such tax is in default and it is not for him to waive recovery of the
tax in circumstances not permitted by the Act. It would, therefore, appear
that when the former Commissioner-General by his letter dated 24th January
1983 (P10(B)) gave an undertaking to the Sri Lanka (All Ceylon) Rubber Dealers
Association that-

"Administrative arrangements will be made _not to recover_ turnover tax from
rubber dealers up to December 31, 1982".

He was usurping a power which he did not in law possess. The Act confers power
on the Commissioner-General to recover default tax. The nature of the power is
such that it is coupled with a duty. A mandatory duty is cast on him to
exercise that power for the benefit of the State, whenever the circumstances
warrant such exercise. It is ultra vires for him to agree to renounce that
power in circumstances not warranted by the Act. No judicial countenance can
be given to the assumption of the Commissioner-General that it is a matter
resting on his discretion whether the B.T.T. should be recovered or not. The

**313**

claim strikes at the fundamental relationship that exists between the
legislature and the executive. Charged as he was with the administration of
the Turnover Tax Act, it was his bounden duty **** to recover all B.T.T. in
default. He could not fetter his future executive action by any agreement with
a defaulting tax-payer and bind himself not to recover tax in default. He
could not refuse to recover such tax. It was as far back as 1688 that in
England the Bill of Rights provided -

(1) That the pretended power of suspending of __ laws or the execution of
laws, by legal authority without consent of __ parliament is illegal.

(2) That the pretended power of dispensing with laws, or the execution of
laws, by regal authority  ........... is illegal.

When Parliament imposes B.T.T. it is the duty of the Commissioner-General to
assess and levy it upon and from those who are liable in law.

This court, acting on constitutional principles cannot give legal recognition
to the unconstitutional action of the Commissioner-General in agreeing not to
recover B.T.T. which the law mandated him to recover. The petitioner's
contention involves this court lending its sanction to the illegal action of
the Commissioner-General. Taxes are imposed by Parliament and if a subject
falls to be to such taxes, whether he should in fact __ be taxed or not is not
a matter left to the discretion of the Executive. The courts cannot condone
any attempt at frustration of the law by the executive. It is basic to the
Constitution that the Executive should carry out the mandate of the
Legislature.

The 1st respondent, the present Commissioner-General has, in his affidavit,
stated that the letter P 10 (B), is not an exemption or waiver of such taxes
and that the Commissioner-General of Inland Revenue is not empowered under the
Act to grant any such exemption or waiver of taxes that are legally due, and
has assured that action will be taken to recover Turnover Taxes that are
payable on local sales of rubber for the period prior to the publication of P1
from every person in default of such taxes.

The petitioner's application fails and is dismissed with costs.

**

ATUKORALE, J. -** I **** agree.

**

THAMBIAH, J. - **I **** agree. _  
  
Application dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1985/7.html_  

