##  Peter Singho v. Wydaman - SLR - 238, Vol 2 of 1983 [1983] LKSC 7; (1983) 2
Sri LR 238 (19 October 1983)

# 238

  **PETER SINGHO**

**v.**

**WYDAMAN**

SUPREME COURT

SHARVANANDA, J. ABDUL CADER, J. & RODRIGO, J.

S. C. NO. 17/83; S. C. NO. 72/82 C.A. APPLICATION NO. 568/82

D. C. MT. LAVINIA NO. 1105/RE

19 OCTOBER 1983.



    Civil Procedure Code, Section 86(2) ‑ Decree entered ex parte ‑ Application to vacate it on ground of non‑service of summons.



# Held -



When a defendant complains that summons had not been served on him and
nevertheless a decree had been entered against him, he challenges the
foundation of the default decree. When a defendant attempts to satisfy Court
that the decree against him for "default" is not based on valid evidence for
the finding that summons was served on him, he falls within the ambit of
section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code.



**APPEAL** to the Supreme Court from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_Nimal Senanayake_ with _Miss S. M. Senaratne_ and _Miss H. D. Telespha_ for
plaintiff ‑respondent‑appellant.

_  _

_M. A. Q, M. Ghazzali_ with _D. S. Rupasinghe_ for the defendant‑petitioner
‑respondent.

_ _

## Cur. adv. vult



8 November, 1983

  
ABDUL CADER, J.

_  _

_  _At the conclusion of the argument on 19.10.83, we dismissed the appeal
with costs and indicated that we will give our reasons for the dismissal
later. We now set out below the reasons.



The appellant before us was the plaintiff in an action against the
defendant‑respondent to eject him. Summons was not served on the respondent
personally, but was reported to have been served by way of substituted
service. The defendant failed to appear on the date of hearing and judgment
was entered in



#  239

**  **

favour of the plaintiff ex‑parte. The respondent moved to have the judgment
set aside as no summons was served on him either personally or by way of
substituted service. The learned District Judge made order refusing to vacate
the judgment. The petitioner filed notice of appeal against the order and
tendered the Petition of Appeal also within time.



Meanwhile the plaintiff‑appellant filed application for execution of decree
which was allowed by the Judge on the basis that the tenant had failed to
obtain Leave to Appeal against his order which, according to the District
Judge, was the proper procedure to be followed.



On petition for revision being filed by the defendant-­respondent, the Court
of Appeal took the view that Section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code, on
which the defendant‑respondent relied, presupposes that summons has been
served on the defendant who is in "default". But since the respondent had
taken up the position that no summons has been served on him, this Section has
no application.



The Court, however, went on to discuss the question whether the order made by
the District Judge was a final order and, after quoting very relevant
authorities, came to the conclusion that the order made by the District Judge
was a final order from which the petitioner had rightly preferred an appeal to
that Court.



Before us, Mr. Senanayake conceded that if Section 86(2) had application the
defendant had a right to appeal direct in view of Section 88 (2) of the Civil
Procedure Code, but he contended that since Section 86(2) had no application
even as the Court of Appeal had held, the defendant could not avail himself of
Section 88(2). He did not deny that the District Court had a right to
entertain an application, by the defendant to set aside the order made ex
parte, but he said that that would be under the inherent jurisdiction of the
District Court and not under any particular section in the Code, and submitted
that the order made by the learned District Judge was an "order" in terms of
Section 754 (2) and, therefore, an appeal could be preferred only with the
leave of the Court of Appeal.



#  240



This contention is thoroughly artificial for the reason that if an appeal lies
when the defendant agrees that summons has been served on him and he was in
default under Section 86(2), there is all the more reason why a direct appeal
should be permitted when the defendant denies service of summons on him.



To give the word "default" the restricted meaning contended for would be to
place the defendant who had received summons and kept away from Court at an
advantage over a defendant who had not received summons altogether.



It may be noted that Section 88(2) has no reference expressly to Section
86(2).



Counsel relied strongly on the word "default" in Section 86(2) and submitted
that this section would apply only to a defendant who had failed to appear in
court after summons had been served on him. The scheme of this Chapter does
not support Counsel's contention. The word "default" is used in a technical
sense, both in Section 86(2) and 88(2), and not in the meaning of common
usage. Section 84 reads as follows:



"If the defendant fails to file his, answer on or before the day fixed for the
filing of the answer, or on or before the day fixed for the subsequent filing
of the answer or having filed his answer, if he falls to appear on the day
fixed for the hearing of the action, and if the court is satisfied that the
defendant has been duly served with summons, or has received due notice of the
day fixed for the subsequent filing of the answer, or of the day fixed for the
hearing of the action, as the case may be, and if, on the occasion of such
default of the defendant, the plaintiff appears, then the court shall proceed
to hear the case ex parte forthwith or on such other day as the court may
fix."



When a defendant complains that summons had not been served on him and
nevertheless a decree had been entered against him, he challenges the
foundation of the default decree. He moves the court to reverse its finding
that he was in default; to hold with him that summons was not served on him.
It is to be noted that he



**  241**

**  **

makes application after "service of the decree against him for default". The
corresponding word in the Code of Indian Civil Procedure is "non‑appearance"
(09.R.7) which is the sense in which the word "default" has been used in our
Code.



I am of the view that when a defendant attempts to satisfy Court that the
decree entered against him for "default" is not based on valid evidence for
that finding that summons was served on him, he falls within the ambit of
Section 86(2). I have, therefore, come to the conclusion that Section 86(2)
would apply. I do not agree with the view of the Court of Appeal that Section
86(2) is confined to cases where the defendant is in default after summons
have been admittedly served on him.



Under these circumstances, it is not necessary to go into the question whether
the order made by the District Judge was an "order" or a "judgment" in terms
of Section 754. However, the Court of Appeal has given valid reasons for its
finding that the order made in this case is a final order which entitles the
defendant to lodge an appeal without leave of the Court of Appeal.



The appeal is dismissed with costs.



**ABDUL CADER, J.** ‑ I agree.



**RODRIGO, J.** ‑ I agree.



### Appeal dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/7.html_  

