##  Bandaranaike v. De Alwis and Others - SLR - 617, Vol 2 of 1982 [1982] LKSC
7; (1982) 2 Sri LR 617 (20 September 1982)

#  617

**  BANDARANAIKE**

**v.**

**DE ALWIS AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT

SAMARAKOON, C.J., WIMALARATNE, J., AND COLIN‑THOME, J.

S. C. 1/82

SEPTEMBER 1, 1982.



    Charge of personal misconduct of Judge ‑ State seeking to intervene ‑ Interests of justice ‑ Third party seeking to be added ‑ No charge against him ‑ Constitution, Article 134(3) ‑ Court's power to hear necessary party.



The petitioner alleged that the Special Presidential Commission had issued a
Notice under Section 16 of the Special Presidential Commission Law informing



#  618



A.H.M. Fowzie that he was a person whose conduct should be the subject of
inquiry and requiring him to file a statement if he challenged the allegations
in the evidence led at the inquiry.



The petitioner further alleged that while Fowzie continued to be subject to
the jurisdiction of the Commission of which the 1st respondent was a member he
knowingly engaged in financial transactions with Fowzie and thereby was guilty
of misconduct and corruption and compromised his position and not qualified to
act as a Member of the Special Presidential Commission.



The Attorney General in the interests of justice and Fowzie because
insinuations had been made against him sought to intervene under Article 134
of the Constitution.



**Held ‑**



1) That the allegations involved the personal conduct of the 1st respondent in
his private dealings in which the State was in no way involved and therefore
it was not necessary to hear the Attorney‑General.



2) That conduct of the 1st respondent in entering into a common legal
transaction when he was a member of the Commission which had assumed
jurisdiction over Fowzie was the question and not the conduct or corruption of
Fowzie.



**Cases referred to:**



(1) _The United India Fire and General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Weinman (1958) 59
NLR 495._



(2) _The Chartered Bank v. De Silva (1964) 67 NLR 135._



**APPLICATION** to intervene in writ proceedings.



_G.F. Sethukavaler, S.A.,_ with _Lakshman de Alwis_ instructed by _Mrs. P.K.
Nanayakkara_ for applicant.



_K.M.M.B. Kulatunge,_ acting S.G. with _Suri Ratnapala, S.C._ instructed by
_T.G. Gooneratne,_ State Attorney for Attorney‑General.



_P. Navaratnarajah, Q.C._ , with _Dr. M.L.S. Jayasekera, Kanag ‑Iswaran_ and
_K. Sivananthan_ instructed by _Messrs Srinivasan, Amaratunge_ and
_Pararajasingham_ for 1st respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._



September 20, 1982



**SAMARAKOON, C.J.**



The petitioner has made an application for Writs of Quo Warranto and
Prohibition in terms of the proviso to Article 140 of the, Constitution of the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read with Section 18A of the
Special Presidential Commission (Special Provisions) Act No. 4 of 1978 seeking
an order that 1st respondent



**  619**



has become "unable to act, and is disentitled to hold office of and to
function as a Member of the Special Presidential Commission of Inquiry" and
for a further order restraining and preventing him from continuing to exercise
or to function in the said office. The petitioner alleges that the Special
Presidential Commission ‑acting under the provisions of Section 16 of the
Special Presidential Commission of Inquiry Law No. 7 of 1978. had issued a
notice on A.H.M. Fowzie informing him that he was a person whose conduct
should be the subject of inquiry and requiring him to file a statement if he
challenged any allegations contained in the evidence led at the preliminary
inquiry. The petitioner further alleges that while the said Fowzie continued
to be subject to the notice and thereby subject to the jurisdiction of the
Commission the 1st respondent knowingly engaged in financial dealings with the
said Fowzie. The dealings comprise a land transaction, the details of which
are not relevant for this application. By so doing, the petitioner states, the
1st respondent has ‑



"(a) committed an act of grave misconduct,  


(b) vitiated his integrity, and thereby shown himself to be corrupt, and
guilty of corruption, and thereby,  


(c) compromised his position as a Judge of the Court of Appeal, by his
misbehaviour, and  


(d) become 'unable to act' as a Member of the Special Presidential Commission
of Inquiry, under section 3(1) of the said Law No. 7 of 1978."



Two applications have now been filed seeking permission to intervene in these
proceedings. One is by the State Attorney who, seems to have been alerted by
copies of notices and documents served on the Attorney‑General from time to
time. The State Attorney moves that the Attorney‑General be granted a hearing
because "it appears from the material filed so far that it would be in the
interests of justice that the Attorney‑General appears on behalf of the State
at the hearing of the above application." An unusual kind of application. He
is not seeking to be added as a party for the reason that the interests of the
State would be adversely affected by any order that will be finally made. It
is simply on the basis that the interests of justice would be served if the
Attorney‑General is heard on behalf of the State. The gravamen of the
allegations involves the personal conduct of the 1st respondent in his private
dealings in which the State is in no way involved. If in the course of the
proceedings this Court considers it necessary to hear the Attorney‑General he
will certainly be noticed as amicus curiae. Such a stage has not been reached.
I therefore refuse the application of the State Attorney.  


#  620



The other application is one made by the said A.H.M. Fowzie. He has filed an
affidavit and moves that he be allowed to take part in these proceedings and
be heard. He states that the "imputations and insinuations of impropriety and
suspicion relating to the conduct and dealings between the 1st respondent" and
himself and allegations of corruption, misconduct and scandal touch on him
also. He further states that an adverse finding against the 1st respondent
would have serious consequences on his integrity and expose him to the
jeopardy of the law's processes. He pleads that he is a businessman, a social
worker, a politician and that. he once held office as Mayor of Colombo.
Counsel appearing for him sought to justify this application under the
provisions of Article 134(3) of the Constitution of 1978 which reads as
follows:‑



"134(3) The Supreme Court may in its discretion grant to any other person or
his legal representative such hearing as may appear to the Court to be
necessary in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this Chapter."



The Attorney‑General has of right to be heard in the seven instances set out
in Article 134(1). A party to a proceeding has a similar right of being heard
in person or by representative in such proceedings [Article 134 (2)]. Any
other person will be heard if the Supreme Court thinks that such person should
be heard. The provisions of Article 134(3) give the Court an unlimited
discretion. The petitioner cited two decisions of the Supreme Court. The first
is the case of _The United India Fire and General Insurance Co. Ltd. vs.
Weinman_ (1). That was a case arising from a motor collision resulting in
injuries to the plaintiff. The plaintiff claimed damages against the owner of
the motor vehicle and his driver. The Insurance Company sought to be added
stating that it was a necessary party because, as the in surer of the motor
vehicle, the Company would eventually be liable to honour any decree entered
against the owner of the, motor vehicle. The Supreme Court rejected this
argument on the ground that any order against the owner would not affect the
Company's legal rights and in any event no liability would  arise until and
unless a decree Js entered against the insured as provided in Section 105(1)
of the Motor Traffic Act.



The next case cited by the petitioner is the case of _The Chartered Bank vs.
De Silva_ (2). This was a case in which the Bank sought to be added as a party
under the provisions of Section 18 of the Civil Procedure Code. It was held
that the Bank was only a material



**  621**



witness and its presence was therefore not necessary in order to completely
and effectually decide the questions involved in the action.



The words of Article 134(3) are of wider import than Section 18 of the Civil
Procedure Code. The word necessary in this Article is not restricted to a
hearing for the purpose of exercising the jurisdiction conferred by Chapter
XVI of the Constitution. It goes way beyond such limits. It gives the Court
the discretion to hear any person if it considers that the interests of
justice require that he be heard.



In that view of the provisions of Article 134(3) the question I ask myself is
whether it is necessary to hear the said Fowzie to decide the allegations
against the 1st respondent. The transaction of sale and purchase is a common
legal transaction. It is not the transaction that is impugned. It is the
conduct of the 1st respondent in entering into such transaction at a time when
he was a Member of the Commission which had assumed jurisdiction over the said
Fowzie in terms of section 16 of the Law No. 7 of 1978; that is now in
question. This court need not, and indeed is not called on to decide any
allegations of misconduct or corruption against Fowzie. Though no doubt, if
such a development takes place in the course of the hearing this Court might
then consider the necessity of hearing Fowzie. I therefore refuse this
application too. I Make no order for payment of costs against either the
Attorney‑General or Fowzie.



**WIMALARATNE, J.** ‑ I agree.



**COLIN ‑THOME, J.** ‑ I agree.



Application refused.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/7.html_  

