##  Wijesiri v. Siriwardene - SLR - 171, Vol 1 of 1982 [1980] LKSC 7; (1982) 1
Sri LR 171 (27 August 1980)

# 171



**SUPREME COURT  
** **  
Wijesiri**

**v.**

#### Siriwardene



##### S.C. 81/81 ‑ C.A. Application No. 2329/80



Writ of Mandamus ‑ locus standi ‑ Minister's discretionary power articles 55
and 59 of the Constitution



P is a Member of Parliament. He look up the cause of 53 candidates who were
selected for appointment to Grade II Class II of the Sri Lanka Administrative
Service on the results of an Open Competitive Examination but whose letters of
appointment were not issued by the Respondent.



R who was Sec. Ministry of Public Administration contended that the letters
were not issued because the Cabinet decided to withhold them consequent to a
number of complaints that there were certain irregularities in the conduct of
the examination.



P contended that the letters were not issued because a powerful Trade Union
objected that the selectees were not members of their Trade Union.



**Held** _:_    _Per Wimalaratna and Ratwatte J_ ‑ To apply for a Writ of
Mandamus it is not necessary to have a personal interest but it is sufficient
if the applicant can show a genuine interest in the matter complained of and
that he comes before Court as a Public spirited person, concerned to see that
the law is obeyed in the interest of all.



                 2.   That since the notice calling for applications from candidates contains a clause reserving to the Minister the right to postpone or cancel examinations or to refrain from filling any of the vacancies it would be difficult to impose on him a duty either to fill the vacancies or to make appointments of persons selected.



Mandamus will not issue if it will be futile.



Per _Wanasundara J._ Article 55 of the Constitution precludes the Court from
granting relief in the matter.



#  172



A **PPEAL** from judgment of the

Court of Appeal



Before: **          **Wanasundera J., Wimalaratne J., and Ratwatte J.



Counsel: **        ** _H. L. de Silva, S/A,_ with _E. D. Wickramanayake_ and

> > _Gomin Dayasiri_ for Petitioner‑Appellant.
>>

>> _K. M. M. B. Kulatunga_ , Addl: S. G with

>>

>> _Suri Ratnapala, S.C.,_

>>

>> for the Respondent ‑ Respondent.

Argued and Decided on: **            **21st & 22nd January, 1982.

Reasons Delivered on: **              **4th March, 1982.



_Cur. adv. vult._



**WIMALARATNE   J.**

_  _

We heard Counsel and gave our decision on 22.1.82 dismissing this Appeal. We
now state our reasons.



The Petitioner‑Appellant is a Member of Parliament sitting in the Opposition
Benches. He has taken up the cause of 53 candidates who were selected for
appointment to class II grade II of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service on
the results of an open competitive examination held in 1979 to fill 30 per
cent of the vacancies, but who were not issued with letters of appointment by
the Respondent, who is the Secretary to the Ministry of Public Administration.
The Petitioner invoked the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal and asked for a
Writ of Mandamus to compel the Respondent to perform what he calls the public
duty of appointing these successful candidates. The Respondent answered that
in view of certain allegations made in respect of the holding of the
Intelligence Test paper at the Nalanda College Centre where 162 candidates
sat, the Cabinet of Ministers decided that that paper be cancelled, and that
all the candidates be required to sit that paper once again. In conformity
with that decision he took steps in November 1980, after informing all the
candidates, to hold a fresh Intelligence test paper and selected 248 to face a
viva voce test, but before a fresh selection could be made the Petitioner
filed the present application, and the vacancies have so far not been filled.



#  173



The Court of Appeal dismissed the application with costs, but granted the
Petitioner leave to appeal to this Court on the following questions:‑



1. Whether Petitioner has locus standi to make this application.



2. Whether Article 55 (5) is a complete and total bar precluding this Court from inquiring into or in any manner calling into question, the orders and decisions of the Cabinet of Ministers and the Respondent pertaining to appointment of public officers to the Public Service ?



3. Whether the duty that the Petitioner is seeking to compel is of a public nature and not merely of a private character?



4. that the Respondent owes a duty to the State in making appointments and not to the 53 persons.



5. Whether the Court will not grant the Mandamus because it is futile?



6. that the Court will not issue a Mandamus if the application is not bona‑fide made but made with the indirect motive of assisting the 53 persons.



The facts as are necessary for a determination of these issues are briefly
these: Altogether 2997 candidates sat the written examination held on 26.5.79
and comprising papers in general intelligence, comprehension and case study,
carrying 200. 100 and 100 marks respectively. At the Nalanda College Centre
some of the candidates had lodged a complaint that the packet containing the
general intelligence paper had been opened 25 minutes before and not 10
minutes before the commencement, and that two candidates who were accommodated
near the table where the papers were opened may have had an unfair advantage;
and some of the candidates refused to sit the paper at that centre. However,
248 candidates who had obtained the required marks in the three written papers
were called for a viva voce test, and from them 53 were selected, and their
names were published on the notice board of the Ministry of Public
Administration on 24.12.79. Letters of appointment were in fact prepared to be
dispatched to them, but before they were posted they were intercepted by a
Ministry Official and the 53 who were so near found themselves yet so far, as
they never received their letters of appointment.



# 174



The Petitioner alleges that a trade union, namely the Jathika Sevaka Sangamaya
(J. S. S.) affiliated to the government in power was responsible for the
interception of the letters for the reason that the majority of the 53
selected were not members of that trade union. The respondent however averred
that the appointments were not made because of allegations and counter
allegations about the conduct of the examination and not for the reason
alleged by the petitioner. Subsequently, the Cabinet of Ministers by a
decision dated 27.8.80 directed that all candidates be called upon to sit a
fresh paper in general intelligence, and he took steps accordingly.



The Court of Appeal has found as a fact that the 53 candidates were not
appointed because of suspicion of irregularities in the conduct of the written
paper in general intelligence, and not as a result of pressure from the J.S.S.
and that apart from inviting the Court to draw inferences of bad faith, no
reliable material had been placed to establish that either the respondent or
the Cabinet of Ministers had acted unlawfully. There is no application to this
Court for leave to appeal on this finding of fact, but in spite of the
Additional S.G.'s preliminary objection to the petitioner canvassing the
findings of fact, we permitted learned counsel for the petitioner to refer to
such facts as may be necessary for a determination of the six questions
formulated above.



Much of the arguments before us related to the first question, that is whether
the petitioner has the locus standi. The Court of Appeal has considered with a
great degree of thoroughness the evolution in English Law, of the requirement
of locus standi in applications for Mandamus ‑ from the earliest decision in
the _Queen Vs. Guardians of the Lewisham Union_ (1897) 1QB 498, (where the
requirement was the existence in the petitioner of a legal right to the
performance of a public duty) up to the most recent decision in _Inland
Revenue Commissioners Vs. National Federation of Self Employed and Small
Business Ltd.,_ (1981) 2 WLR 722 (where the requirement now is that the
applicant should have sufficient interest in the matter to which the
application relates). Tambiah J. has discerned from a study, of the decided
cases that two requirements must be satisfied. They are (i) that an applicant
for Mandamus must show some interest over and above the interests of the
community as a whole or the class of the community to which he belongs; and
(ii) that even where he comes forward in the public interest he must be able
to show



**  175**



some personal interest in the matter complained of. In his view the present
Petitioner does not satisfy either of these tests. L. H. de Alwis J. has not
come to a finding as to whether the petitioner has satisfied the requirement
of a sufficient interest in the performance of a public duty because in his
view the respondent's duty to appoint these 53 selectees is not a public duty.
There is therefore no decision by the Court of Appeal on the question as to
whether Mr. R. P. Wijesiri M.P. has a sufficient standing to institute these
proceedings.



In this connection it would be relevant to refer to the views of an eminent
jurist on the question of locus standi. Soon after the decision of the Privy
Council in _Durayappah Vs. Fernando_ (1967) 3 WLR 289, in an Article entitled
_Unlawful Administrative Action_ in (1967) 83 L.O.R. 499, _H. W. R. Wade_
expressed the view that one of the merits of Certiorari is that it is not
subject to narrow rules about Locus standi, but is available even to
strangers, as the Courts have often held, because of the element of public
interest. In other words it is a genuine remedy of public law, and all the
more valuable for that reason (at p. 504). As regards the applications for
_Mandamus_ they should, in his view, in principle be no more exacting than it
is in the case of the other prerogative remedies, because public authorities
should be compellable to perform their duties, as a matter of public interest
at the instance of any person genuinely concerned; and in suitable case,
subject always to discretion, the Court should be able to award the remedy on
the application of a public spirited citizen who has no other interest than a
due regard for the observance of the law‑ _Wade_ ‑ _Administrative Law_ (4th
Ed) 608. The result of a restrictive doctrine of standing, therefore, would be
to encourage the government to break the law; yet this is exactly what the
prerogative writs should be able to prevent (p. 609). To restrict Mandamus to
cases of personal legal right would in effect make it a private law remedy (p
610). These observations, with which I am in respectful agreement, appear to
make the second requirement , insisted upon by Tambiah J. i.e.: some personal
interest in the matter complained of, unnecessary. But the first requirement
ought, in my view, to be satisfied and it is satisfied if the applicant can
show a genuine interest in the matter complained of, and that he comes before
Court as a public spirited citizen concerned to see that the law is obeyed in
the interest of all, and not merely as a busy body perhaps with a view to gain
cheap publicity. As to whether an applicant satisfies this second requirement
will depend on the facts



#  176



of each case. There will always be categories of persons whose interest in
seeing that justice is done by public authorities is more than that of the
average citizen. A Member of Parliament may under certain circumstances fall
into that category because" Members Parliament represent the whole community,
responsible in the last resort, as Burke pointed out, to their own conscience.
They are not mere delegates of their constituents" _Wade & Phillips ‑
Constitutional Law _(7th Ed) p. 124.



In applying the principles we gather from decisions of the English Courts on
the question of locus standi we have to bear in mind that after the adoption
of a Republican Constitution our members Parliament have a character different
to M.P.'s of the pre Republican era. According to the preamble to our present
Constitution they the freely elected representatives of the people of Sri
Lanka, who have mandate from, and an obligation to the people to see that
just, social, economic and cultural order may be attained.



As stated earlier, the written test was held on 26.5.78. The matter of the
irregularity in the holding of the intelligence test paper at one of the
centres was raised in Parliament on 9.11.79 by another opposition M.P. who
demanded that the whole examination cancelled. In reply to a question raised
by the same M.P. on 1.12.79 the Minister of Public Administration assured the
House and the country that there were no serious irregularities. On 22.12.79
Excellency the President, in reply to a letter addressed to him another
Opposition M.P., replied that investigations conducted the Minister of
Education and the Commissioner of Examination had revealed that the physical
circumstances of supervision had necessitated the opening of the packet 25
minutes before instead 10 minutes before the commencement of the paper and
that irregularities whatsoever had been committed. It is only thereafter that
the names of the successful candidates were published on the notice board of
the Ministry on 24.12.79. Then again the C.I.D. replied on 31.12.79 to the
Railway Clerical Service Union, which had also made allegations of corruption
that "there was no evidence to accept that any offence had taken place". On
12.2.80 the Nation Clerical Service Union wrote to H. E. the President that it
had confidence in the limited competitive examination and requested that a
fresh examination be held. The letters of appointment were intercepted on
15.5.79. On 9.6.80 the Union received a reply that the U.N.P.



#  177



Working Committee had taken a decision to suspend the appointments to the S.
L. A. S. based on the results of the limited competitive examination. After
the Government had decided to cancel the written paper in general
intelligence, an M.P. speaking on behalf of the Deputy Minister of Public
Administration stated in Parliament that the letters of selection which had
been signed and which had been sent to the tappal section for posting on
15.5.79 were not despatched because on representations made by the Public
Service National Trade Union Federation he had requested the Respondent not to
post the letters to the 53 successful candidates.



On 3.9.80 and again on 25.9.80 the Petitioner spoke in Parliament on behalf of
the 53 candidates and said that it would be a grave injustice to them who had
been waiting for‑one year with great frustration and hoping that the
appointments would be given soon. He requested the government not to commit
excesses against the honest, educated and efficient public servants of this
country and thought the result would be the spread of frustration and disgust
in the whole public service. The petitioner reverted to this matter once again
in Parliament on 4.11.80. and referred to the earlier replies given by the
government that inquiries conducted by the department of examination and even
by the C.I.D. revealed that no irregularities had taken place, and that
therefore the 53 candidates had been discriminated against.



In the light of the sequence of events, the results of the investigation
conducted by the authorities and the genuine interest evinced by the
Petitioner it would not be correct to label him as a mere busy body simply
interfering in things which do not concern him. In instituting these
proceedings he has acted bona fide as he may have thought that he was acting
in the public interest; this was one of the reasons that influenced me to
delete the order for costs made against him by the Court of Appeal.



The second question we are called upon to decide is less troublesome. It
involves a simple application of Article 55(5) of the Constitution. In terms
of paragraph (1) of Article 55 the appointment, transfer, dismissal and
disciplinary control of public officers is vested in the Cabinet of Ministers,
and all public officers hold office at pleasure. Paragraph (3) empowers the
Cabinet to delegate such powers to the Public Service Commission (P.S.C.),
except such powers as have to



#  178



be exercised over Heads of Departments. Article 58(l) empowers the P.S.C. to
delegate its powers of appointments etc. to a public officer. So that the
respondent, who is a public officer, holds only a delegated power, which power
ultimately resides in the Cabinet of Ministers. Now paragraph (5) of Article
55 provides as follows:‑



Subject to the jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court under paragraph (1)
of Article 129 no court or tribunal shall have power or jurisdiction to
inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner call in question, any order or
decision of the Cabinet of Ministers, a Minister, the Public Service
Commission, a Committee of the Public Service Commission, or of a public
officer, in regard to any matter concerning the appointment, transfer,
dismissal or disciplinary control of a public officer.



The present application not being one under Article 126(1) where a public
servant is complaining that any fundamental right of his has been infringed by
executive or administration action, it is the contention of the learned
Additional S.G. that Article 55(5) of the Constitution completely precludes
this Court from questioning in these proceedings the decision either of the
respondent not to send the letters to the successful candidates or the
decision of the Cabinet to cancel the Intelligence test paper.



Mr. H.L. de Silva contends, however, that the present application is not one
seeking to question any decision of a public officer in regard to _an
appointment_. But it seems to us, and there is no doubt, that by this
application the petitioner is seeking to question the decision of the
respondent _" concerning an appointment"_. The modern trend, after the
decision in _Anisminic Ltd. Vs. Foreign Compensation Commission_ (1969) 2 A.C.
147 is not to give effect to such preclusive clauses if the decisions sought
to be quashed are proved to be unlawful; and that notwithstanding the fact
that the preclusive clause is contained in a written constitution rather than
in an ordinary statute it would not afford an answer to unlawful acts of the
executive ‑ _Bindra, Interpretation of Statutes_ (6th Ed) P. 808. But even
assuming his submission to be correct, this will not help the petitioner, in
the absence of proof that the decision is clearly unlawful. The Court of
Appeal has found as a fact that the decision was made not as a result of trade
union pressure but because of allegations and counter allegations regarding
the holding of the examination. I am therefore



#  179



of the view that Article 55(5) precludes us from granting the petitioner any
relief.



In view of his answers to the first and second questions Tambiah J. has not
considered it necessary to deal with the nature of the respondent's duty in
making appointments to the public service. de Alwis J. has taken the view that
the duty, if duty there be to appoint the selectees is a private, and not a
public duty. The notice calling for applications from candidates contains a
clause reserving to the Ministry the right to postpone or cancel the
examination if it considers it necessary to do so. It also reserved the right
to refrain from filling any of the vacancies. It is therefore difficult to
impose on the respondent an obligation in the nature of a public duty either
to fill the vacancies or to make the appointments of the person selected.



On the issue of "futility" the two Judges have disagreed. Tambiah J. has taken
the view that as the respondent himself did not have the power to refuse to
appoint if the Court were to grant a writ of Mandamus, but only an
apprehension that the Cabinet of Ministers would frustrate it, de Alwis J.
says that the Cabinet has the power to rescind any appointment made by the
respondent in obedience to the order of Court. He bases his view on an
application of Article 59(c) of the Constitution which empowers the Cabinet of
Ministers to alter, vary or rescind any appointment made by a public officer
holding delegated powers from the P.S.C. In view of our answers to questions 2
& 3 above it appears unnecessary to embark upon an interpretation of Article
59(c).



It has been said that the petitioner's motive in instituting these proceedings
was to assist these 53 persons rather than to serve the public interest. It is
not improbable that he wished to assist them, but it would be unfair by him to
say that that was the sole motive. The interest taken by him from the time he
knew that the appointments were not going to be made are matters of record. As
I have stated earlier his actions have been bona fide and mainly in the public
interest. But the law is against him. Hence our decision to dismiss this
appeal without costs and also the decision to delete the order for costs made
against him in the Court of Appeal.



**  180**



**WANASUNDERA,   J.**



I agree with the conclusions of Wimalaratne, J., that this appeal should be
dismissed without costs and also to the direction deleting the order for costs
made in the Court of Appeal.



Article 55 precludes us from granting relief in this matter and in these
circumstances I do not wish to make a pronouncement on the question of _locus
standi._



**Ratwatte,   J**. -



I agree with **Wimalaratne. J**..



_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1980/7.html_  

