##  Somawathi De Zoysa Alias Kumarasinghe v. V.Jayasena Fernando - SLR - 10,
Vol 1 of 2005 [2004] LKSC 7; (2005) 1 Sri LR 10 (15 June 2004)

**10**

**SOMAWATHI DE ZOYSA ALIAS KUMARASINGHE  
V.V.  
JAYASENA FERNANDO**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA, C.J.,  
DE SILVA, J.  
AND WEERASOORIYA, J.  
S. C. APPEAL NO. 19/2000  
C. A. 673/1988  
D. C. MT. LAVINIA 650/ZL  
2ND JUNE AND 4TH AUGUST, 2003  
  
_Declaratory Action - Defence of constructive trust - Plaintiff's claims to be
a bona fide purchaser without notice of trust - Burden of proof - Trust
Ordinance, sections 65, 66 and 84 - Lack of evidence of trust - Plaintiff's
right to declaration of title._

**11**

The plaintiff-respondent ("the plaintiff") instituted action against the
defendant appellant ("the defendant") for a declaration of title to a land
consisting of separate portions, namely the northern and the southern
portions. The plaintiff had purchased the northern portion of the land on
01.12.1979 from the former husband of the defendant. The defendant had left
the husband on 23.02.1979.  
  
The defendant claimed that prior to her separation from her husband the
defendant had sold a land for Rs. 5000/- and two days later namely, on
24.10.1978, her former husband had purchased the aforesaid northern portion of
the land for Rs. 5000/- paid by her. Hence the said land which the plaintiff
purchased was held in trust for her (in terms of section 84 of the Trust
Ordinance). Under section 65 (1) of the Ordinance she had a right to follow
the said land into the hands of the plaintiff who had purchased it from the
trustee. She did not file an action for that purpose. However, in terms of
section 66 (1) of the Ordinance, the plaintiff was not liable to suit if he
was a bona-fide purchaser without notice of the trust.  
  
The District Judge held with the defendant and dismissed the plaintiff's
action. On appeal, the Court of Appeal held that the burden of proof under
section 66 (1) as to whether the plaintiff purchased the land bona fide
without notice of the trust was on the beneficiary and not on the transferee
(the plaintiff). Nevertheless the court set aside the judgment of the District
Judge given in favour of the defendant.  
  
**Held:**  
  
(1) The burden of proof under section 66(1) is on the transferee. The  Court
of Appeal erred in holding that the burden was on the beneficiary.  
  
(2) However, the findings of the Court of Appeal that on a consideration of
the entire evidence the conduct of the defendant was not that of a person who
had provided purchase money to her former husband to purchase the Northern
portion of the land in dispute and that the plaintiff had no notice of the
alleged trust at the time of the impugned purchase were correct.  
  
(3) The appeal of the defendant - appellant should be dismissed.  
  
(4) On the question of the burden of proof under section 66(1) of the Trust
Ordinance -

**12**

**Held:  
**  
**_Per_ Weerasuriya, J.  
**  
"The provisions of a statute must be construed with due regard to the object
to be achieved and the mischief to be prevented. Where two views are possible
an interpretation which would advance the remedy and suppress the mischief to
be prevented is to be preferred"  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal  
  
_Rohan Sahabandu_ for defendant-appellant  
  
_Amarasiri Panditharatne_ for plaintiff-respondent

_Cur. adv. vult._

June 15,2004  
  
**WEERASURIYA, J.  
**  
The defendant-respondent-appellant ("the defendant") was granted special leave
to appeal on the matters set out in paragraph 9 (i), (j) and (k) of the
petition. They read as follows :  
  
(9) (i) that the interpretation placed by the Court of Appeal on Sections 65
and 66 of the Trust Ordinance was erroneous in that it required the defendant
to plead and prove the negative.  
  
(9) (j) that the decision of the Court of Appeal to interfere with the
findings of the trial judge was entirely due to the erroneous view taken by
the Court of Appeal on the burden of proof and the Court Appeal made no
reference to Section 98 of the Trust Ordinance.  
  
(9) (k) that the findings on facts by the Court of Appeal cannot be supported
on an examination of the entirety of the evidence.

**Facts in brief**

The plaintiff-appellant-respondent ("the plaintiff") instituted action against
the defendant for a declaration of title to the land described in the schedule
to the plaint which constituted two separate portions of land being the
northern portion and the southern portion, purchased upon two deeds (P2 and
P3) and the ejectment of the defendant. The plaintiff purchased the

**13**

northern portion of the land from the (former) husband of the defendant and
the southern portion from T. Dias. The defendant claimed that before she
separated from her (former) husband she sold a property belonging to her for
Rs. 5000/- and her (former) husband purchased the northern portion of the
land, two days later namely, on 24/10/1978 for Rs. 5000/- with her money. The
defendant therefore pleaded in her answer that her (former) husband held the
subject matter of this action in trust for her and sought a declaration to
that effect.  
  
It was common ground :  
  
(a) that the (former) husband of the defendant purchased the northern portion
of the subject matter of this action in extent 12.5 perches for Rs. 5000/- on
24/10/1978 from T. Dias upon deed No. 9166 (P1).  
  
(b) that the defendant and husband resided on the said land after the purchase
of the same till 23/02/1979.  
  
(c) that the (former) husband of the defendant sold the property to the
plaintiff for a sum of Rs. 5000/- on 01/12/1979 upon deed No.  
9816 (P2).  
  
(d) that the plaintiff purchased an equivalent extent of 12.5 perches of the
same land which formed the southern portion on 20/11/1979 from T. Dias upon
deed No. 9781 (P3).  
  
The learned District Judge upheld the defendant's position and held that the
property was subject to a trust in favour of the defendant and dismissed the
action. The plaintiff thereafter appealed against the judgment of the District
Court, and the Court of Appeal by its judgment dated 26/05/ 1999 allowed the
appeal and entered judgment for the plaintiff as prayed for in the plaint.

**Section 65 and Section 66 of the Trust Ordinance :  
(Paragraph 9(I))**

There is no controversy that the claim of the defendant that the land in
dispute was held by her (former) husband in trust for her was based in

**14**

terms of the provisions of Section 84 of the Trust Ordinance, which lays down
that where property is transferred to one person for a consideration paid or
provided by another one, and it appears that such other person did not intend
to pay or provide such consideration for the benefit of the transferee, the
transferee must hold the property for the benefit of the person paying or
providing such consideration.  
  
It is well accepted that a beneficiary under a trust has a personal remedy
against a trustee for loss caused by a breach of the trust. Section 65 (1) of
the Trust Ordinance provides an additional remedy to a beneficiary to follow
the trust property into the hands of a third party where trust property has
been disposed of by the trustee. This section enacts that where property comes
into the hands of a third party inconsistently with the trust, the beneficiary
may institute a suit for a declaration that the property is comprised in the
trust. Though the remedy available to the beneficiary is merely a declaration,
this would effectively prevent the third party (transferee) from exercising
his proprietary rights in respect of the property.  
  
It is significant that Section 66 (1) makes provisions for a third party to
obtain the property free of the trust on proof of certain circumstances. This
section lays down that nothing in Section 65 (1) entitles the beneficiary to
any right in respect of the property in the hands of a transferee who in good
faith for consideration purchases the property without notice of the trust
either when the purchase money was paid or when the conveyance was executed.  
  
Having regard to the provisions of Section 65 (1), there is no dispute that
the burden of establishing a constructive trust in terms of Section 84 of the
Trust Ordinance lies with the defendant. The crucial question in this appeal
is on whom does the burden of proof lie in terms of Section 66 (1) of the
Trust Ordinance.  
  
The provisions of a statute must be construed with reference to their context
and with due regard to the object to be achieved and the mischief to be
prevented. Where two views are possible an interpretation which would advance
the remedy and suppress the mischief it contemplates is to be preferred.  
  
Section 65 (1) of the Trust Ordinance seeks to protect a beneficiary from a
breach of the trust, by alienation of the property by making provisions

**15**

for a beneficiary to follow the property into the hands of a third party. The
provisions of Section 66 (1) of the Trust Ordinance seek to protect a bona
fide purchaser for value who had no notice of the trust. In the light of the
provisions of Section 66 (1), to take the property free of any trust there
must be proof that the transferee was a bona fide purchaser for consideration
and that he had no notice of the trust. To place the burden of proof to come
within these provisions on the beneficiary, would be to frustrate the object
of obtaining a declaration that the property is comprised in the trust in
terms of Section 65(1) of the Trust Ordinance. Therefore to advance the remedy
provided by Section 65 (1) to a beneficiary and to suppress the mischief which
is sought to be avoided by breach of the trust, the burden of proof should be
placed on the transferee. For the above reasons I hold that the burden of
proof in terms of Section 66(1) of the Trust Ordinance to prove the existence
of circumstances bringing the case within its provisions lies on the
transferee. The Court of Appeal has taken the mistaken view that the burden
lies with beneficiary (defendant).

> **The alleged erroneous finding by the Court of Appeal**

**Paragraph 9 (j) & (k).  
**  
These related to two fundamental issues, namely:  
  
(1) Whether the defendant's (former) husband held the property in trust for
the defendant; and  
  
(2) Whether the plaintiff was a bona fide purchaser for consideration without
notice of the trust.  
  
Learned District Judge held that the defendant's (former) husband purchased
the northern portion of the subject matter upon deed No. 9166 on 24/10/1978
(P1), with the money advanced by the defendant. This conclusion rested on the
testimony of the defendant and from the inference drawn from the following
circumstances.  
  
(1) that the defendant sold a property belonging to her on 22/10/1978 for Rs.
5000/- and

**16**

(2) that the defendant's (former) husband purchased the northern portion of
the subject matter just two days later namely, on 24/10/ 1978 for Rs. 5000/-.  
  
Learned District Judge accepted the testimony of the defendant and rejected
the version of the husband that he purchased the land using his money and the
money given to him by his father and members of his family.  
  
The Court of Appeal whilst conceding that at first glance it would appear that
the defendant provided the money, considered the following material as well in
respect of the conduct of the defendant vis-a-vis the property, which had been
overlooked by the learned District Judge.  
  
(a) that the defendant left her husband on 23/02/1979.  
  
(b) that the defendant's (former) husband sold the property in dispute to the
plaintiff on 01/12/1979 namely, nine months after their separation.  
  
(c) that during this period the defendant had not called upon her (former)
husband to reconvey the property.  
  
(d) that the defendant failed to protect her rights in terms of the
Registration of Documents Ordinance by entering a caveat.  
  
(e) that the defendant did not file action against her (former) husband for a
declaration that the property is subject to a trust in her favour.  
  
(f) that the defendant in her answer filed in the divorce action filed by her
(former) husband did not aver that this property was subject to a trust in her
favour.  
  
The Court of Appeal held having considered all the circumstances that the
conduct of the defendant was not the conduct of a person who had provided the
consideration for the purchase of the property.  
  
Upon a close examination of all the circumstances I hold that the Court of
Appeal was justified in arriving at the above finding.

**17**

Learned District Judge had held that the plaintiff was not a bona fide
purchaser for value and had notice of the trust mainly due to two reasons.  
  
(1) that the plaintiff having made aware of the dissension between the
defendant and her husband took advantage of it and purchased  
the property for a low price.  
  
(2) that when the plaintiff informed the defendant's former husband that the
defendant had got into possession of the property, he merely told him to file
action.  
  
The Court of Appeal had considered the following material on this issue.  
  
(1) that the plaintiff had purchased the southern portion of this land similar
in extent on 20/11 /1979 for Rs. 5000/-.  
  
(2) that the defendant's (former) husband purchased the northern portion of
the land nearly one year earlier for Rs. 5000/- and sold  
it to the plaintiff for the same amount.  
  
(3) that there was no material to establish that the plaintiff was aware of a
trust in favour of the defendant since the property was  
purchased by the plaintiff nine months after their separation.  
  
(4) that the alleged possession of the defendant of the land in dispute at the
time of purchase by the plaintiff would have alerted him to the risk of
entering into litigation and consequently there was no need for him to
complain to the defendant's (former) husband of  
the alleged possession by the defendant.  
  
(5) that there was no need for the plaintiff to complain to the defendant's
(former) husband, in view of her assertion that she was in possession at the
time of the purchase of the property.  
  
(6) that the admission by the defendant (page 283 of the brief) that she left
her (former) husband on 23/02/1978 corroborated the testimony of her husband
that she left him on 23/02/1978 and established the position of the plaintiff
that there was no one in possession of this land at the time of his purchase.

**18**

It is not possible to come to the conclusion that the defendant had left the
land on 23/02/1978 by solely relying on the answer appearing at page 283 of
the brief, in view of the contrary position of the defendant both in her
examination in chief and in re-examination.  
  
Section 3 (j) of the Trust Ordinance has to be considered on the question of
notice of the trust by the plaintiff.  
  
"3 (j) a person is said to have notice of a fact either (i) when he actually
knows that fact, (ii) or when, but for willful abstention from inquiring or
gross negligence, he would have known it, (iii) or when information of the
fact is given to or obtained by any person whom the Court may determine of
having been his agent for the purpose of receiving or obtaining such
information".  
  
On the available material it is not possible to hold that the plaintiff had
notice of the trust by applying the criteria spelt out in Section 3 (j).  
  
The Court of Appeal had proceeded to evaluate the evidence led at the trial
and had drawn certain inferences from the conduct of the defendant vis-a vis
the trust property and held that the purchaser had no notice of any interest
of the defendant in respect of the property. In the light of the above
material the contention of the defendant that the Court of Appeal had failed
to consider Section 98 of the Trust Ordinance has no merit. For the above
reasons I hold that the Court of Appeal had correctly held that the plaintiff
had no notice of the trust at the time of his purchase of the property.  
  
For the foregoing reasons, I dismiss this appeal. However, I make no order as
to costs.  
  
**S. N. SILVA, C. J.** \- I agree.  
  
**J. A. N. DE SILVA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_**Appeal dismissed**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/7.html_  

