##  A.M.E. Fernando v. The Attorney General - SLR - 52, Vol 2 of 2003 [2003]
LKSC 7; (2003) 2 Sri LR 52 (6 February 2003)

**52**

**A.M.E FERNANDO  
v.  
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL**

SUPREME COURT  
S.N.SILVA, CJ.  
EDUSSURIYA, J. AND  
YAPA, J.  
SC (FR) 55/2003 2ND  
JUNE, 2003

_Fundamental Rights - Ex facie curiae - Contempt of court_ \- _Power of_
_Supreme Court - Constitution, Article 105(3) - Grossly irregular behaviour
against authority of court - Disturbing proceedings of court_ \- _Summary
pun­ishment without trial - Motion for review of punishment.  
 _

The petitioner an employee of the Y.M.C.A. had a fall and suffered injuries
dur­ing employment. He sought compensation. The Deputy Commissioner of
Workmen's Compensation held an inquiry in the course of which the dispute was
settled for the payment of Rs.4947/- to the petitioner by the Y.M.C.A.
However, the petitioner refused to accept that sum which had been deposited
with the Commissioner. The petitioner walked out threatening to file a
funda­mental rights case. He then complained to the Human Rights Commission
(the HRC). After obtaining the observations of the Commissioner the HRC
declined to proceed with the application.  


Thereafter, the petitioner complained to the Ombudsman who consulted the
Judicial Service Commission ("the JSC). The JSC informed that it had no power
to grant relief as it was a judicial order in respect of which relief should
be sought before a higher court.

Next, the petitioner filed four fundamental rights cases.

(1)           Against the Attorney-General and the Deputy Commissioner of
Workmen's Compensation for failure to vacate the settlement by the Deputy
Commissioner.

(2)           Against the Attorney-General and the Ombudsman with the same
mate­rial but without specifying the right which was infringed.

(3)           Against the Attorney-General, the JSC, the Registrar of the
Supreme Court ("the RSC") for alleged failure to list certain motions but
without setting out the fundamental right which was infringed.

  
**53**

(4) SC(FR) 55/2003 against the Attorney-General, the JSC and its Chairman, the
RSC and two of the Judges of the Supreme Court who had dismissed the 1st and
2nd petitions above named on the ground that the court had no jurisdiction
regarding the impugned order as it was a judicial order.

The 3rd application had been dismissed for want of compliance with the Rules
of the Court and for want of material to substantiate the petitioner's
complaint.

The Y.M.C.A. had not been made a party to these applications.

In SC (FR) 55/2003 the petitioner appeared in person. When the court explained
to him the reasons for his failure in the earlier cases and that he was acting
in abuse of the process of court in persisting in filing more applications,
the petitioner raised his voice and said in loud language that he should be
allowed to proceed with the case. He persisted in disturbing the proceedings
of court from the bar table, in spite of a warning that he may be dealt with
for contempt; whereupon, the court made order dated 6.2.2003 finding him
guilty of contempt and sentenced him to 1 year Rl.

**Held :**

1.                          Where a person is guilty of gross misbehavior in court and disturbs the proceedings it constitutes _" ex facie curiae" _(contempt in the face of court) for which he is liable to be summarily judged and punished, with­ out a formal charge.

2.                          There is an absence of expression of regret with an undertaking that the petitioner would not repeat such conduct even though the petitioner's counsel was himself informed of such requirements, to consider mitiga­tion. As such there are no grounds for mitigating the impugned order or the punishment.

3.            The motion for review of the impugned order should be refused.  
_  
Per_ S.N. Silva, CJ

"I would cite the words of Lord Denning referred to above "to maintain law and
order the judges have and must have the power _at once_ to deal with those who
offend against it. It is a great power - a power _instantly_ to imprison a
person without trial \- but it is a necessary power."

**Cases referred to :**

_1.                      __A. G. v Times Newspaper Ltd (HL)(1974) AC 273, 302_

_2.                      __Morris v Crown Office (1970) 1 AER 1079_

54 ** _ _**

**APPEAL** from the Order of the Supreme Court dated 6.2.2003.

_Elmore Perera_ with _Buddhika Kurukularatne _and _D. Senaratne_ for
petitioner.

_Cur. adv. vult_

July 17,2003

**SARATH N SILVA, C.J.**

A petition has been presented seeking a review of the judgment dated 6.2.2003.
We heard submissions of counsel on 2.6.2003 and reserved the order in respect
of the petition.  
  
It is necessary at this stage to set down the facts relevant to the matter in
brief. The petitioner was an employee of the Young Mens' Christian Association
(Y.M.C.A.) as its Secretary attached to the Dehiwala Branch and later the
Colombo Central Branch. Whilst engaged in that employment he had a fall and
suffered certain injuries. He filed an application in terms of Workmens'
Compensation Act for redress in respect of the injuries that were 10 suffered
by him. The Deputy Commissioner, Workmens' Compensation held an inquiry into
the petition. The petitioner and the Y.M.C.A. were represented by attorneys-
at-law. On 22.10.1997, a settlement was entered into between the parties
before the Deputy Commissioner of Workmens' Compensation, in terms of which
the petitioner was to be paid a sum of Rs.4947/- in lieu of his claim, by the
Y.M.C.A. When the matter was called before the Deputy Commissioner on
9.1.1998, the petitioner refused to accept the money which was deposited with
the Commissioner. The Deputy Commissioner has in letter dated 27.5.1998, filed
by the 20 petitioner stated that the petitioner refused to accept the money
and walked out stating that he would file a "fundamental rights case" against
the Deputy Commissioner of Workmen's Compensation.



Thereafter the petitioner made a complaint to the Human Rights Commission of
Sri Lanka, in respect of the proceedings before the Deputy Commissioner of
Workmens' Compensation. The Commission called for the observations of the
Deputy Commissioner of Workmens' Compensation and after considering the
available material by letter dated 31.1.2001 informed the

55



petitioner that the Commission "is unable to proceed with the complaint in
terms of the powers vested in it by the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka
Act, No.21 of 1996".



It is to be noted that in this complaint the petitioner makes no reference to
the Y.M.C.A. being the organization in respect of which he originally sought
relief from the Commissioner of Workmens' Compensation.



Thereafter the petitioner made a complaint to the Ombudsman stating _inter
alia_ that there should be a public apolo­gy given to the petitioner by the
Deputy Commissioner of  Workmens' Compensation and the Human Rights Commission
of Sri Lanka. The Ombudsman having sought the views of the Judicial Service
Commission informed the petitioner that no relief can be granted in the
matter.



The Judicial Service Commission informed the Ombudsman that it has no power to
grant relief by way of an appeal, revision, review or otherwise with regard to
a matter pending before a court or a tribunal or to be decided before a court
or tribunal and that any such relief can only be obtained upon an appropriate
appeal to the High Court according to law.



Thereafter the petitioner commenced the process of filing applications in this
court. He filed four applications in all. They are S.C.(FR) 644/02, S.C(FR)
645/02 and S.C.(FR) 721/02 and S.C.(FR) 55/03.



1\. S.C.(FR) 644/2002 is against the Hon. Attorney-General and the Deputy
Commissioner of Workmens' Compensation. It is a complaint that the settlement
entered into before the Deputy Commissioner should have been vacated and that
by the failure to vacate the settlement the Deputy Commissioner has infringed
the petitioner's fundamental rights guaranteed 60 by the Constitution. The
papers filed by the petitioner are not in order and do not specify even the
fundamental right that is alleged to have been infringed by the Deputy
Commissioner of Workmens' Compensation. It is seen that the petitioner has
filed an affidavit and a series of documents with regard to the entire matter.

  
**56**

2           S.C.(FR) 645/2002 is filed against the Hon. Attorney-General and
the Ombudsman which contains a photocopy of the same affidavit and another
series of documents without any reference to the petitioner's fundamental
right which has been infringed by the Ombudsman.



3.              S.C.(FR) 721/2002 has been filed by the petitioner against the Hon. Attorney-General, the Registrar of this court and the Chairman, Judicial Service Commission. There is no petition in this case and no mention is made of the specific funda­mental right that these respondents are alleged to have infringed. It is stated in the affidavit that the petitioner com­plained to the Judicial Service Commission to direct the Registrar, Supreme Court to list certain motions before the court and he has failed to do so.



It is to be noted that the petitioner has not made any refer­ence to any
grievance that he has with the Y.M.C.A. in any of the above applications. The
Y.M.C.A. is not made a respondent in these applications and the petitioner's
complaints are only in respect of the officials who have dealt with his
complaint against the Y.M.C.A. The petitioner is therefore not prosecuting the
relief he originally sought from Commissioner of Workmens' Compensation. His
grievance is now turned against the officials, who merely stat­ed that they
cannot intervene in the settlement that he entered into with the Y.M.C.A.



S.C.(FR) 644 & 645/2002, came for support before the Chief Justice, Justice
J.A.N. de Silva and Justice T.B. Weerasuriya, on 27.11.2002, and the
petitioner appeared in person. The court entered the following judgment after
hearing the petitioner. Since the petitioner's subsequent complaint stems from
this judgment I would reproduce here the entirety of what has been recorded
and signed by the judges.



"In both matters the complaint is substantially in respect of an order made by
the Deputy Commissioner of Workmen's Compensation. This is a judicial order
which does not attract 100 the provisions of Articles 17 and 126 of the
Constitution. The complainant has a right of appeal to the High Court. The
complainant admits that he did not appeal from the impugned order.

In the circumstances the complaint is rejected."

**57**  

S.C.(FR) 721/2002 came up for hearing on 14.1.2003 before 01 Justice Shirani
A. Bandaranayake, Justice P. Edussuriya and Justice J.A.N. de Silva. The
petitioner appeared in person and the Court noted for reasons stated that
there is no material before the Court to substantiate any of the submissions
made by the petitioner that, there has been no compliance with the Supreme
Court Rules in presenting the application and the application was accordingly
dismissed.



Thereafter the petitioner filed S.C.(FR) Application No. 55/2003, the 4th
application, being the present case. This was filed 10 on 30.1.2003, naming
the Hon. Attorney-General, Secretary, Judicial Service Commission, Chairman,
Judicial Service Commission, the Registrar of this Court, the Chief Justice
and the other two Judges who decided in S.C. (FR) 644/02 and 645/02 as
respondents.



The petitioner alleges that the respondents have infringed his fundamental
rights guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the Constitution by not permitting
him to support S.C.(FR) 644/02 and S.C.(FR) 645/02 separately. It appears that
the complaint of the petitioner is that these two applications were considered
together 20 and one judgment was given encompassing both cases. This
appli­cation came up before the present Bench on 6.2.2003. The peti­tioner was
informed that he cannot persist in filing applications of this nature without
any basis and abusing the process of this Court. At that stage the petitioner
raised his voice and insisted on his right to pursue the application. He was
then warned that he would be dealt with for contempt of Court if he persists
in disturbing the pro­ceedings of Court. Inspite of the warning the petitioner
persisted in disturbing the proceedings of the Court from the bar table of the
Court. At this stage for the reasons recorded in the judgment dated 30
6.2.2003, the petitioner was sentenced to 1 year R.I for the offence of
committing contempt of Court.



Learned Counsel for the petitioner supported this application for review on 2
grounds-

i. that no charge was read to the petitioner before he was con­victed for
contempt of Court and sentenced in the manner stat­ed above;

**58**

ii. that in any event the sentence is excessive;



Learned Counsel also submitted that the matter should not be heard by the same
Judges since they are biased.



It is clear that the submissions have been made on a mis­conception of the law
relating to contempt of Court and the proce­dure applicable in respect of
different categories of contempt. Article 105(3) of the Constitution vests the
Supreme Court, which is a superior court of record, in addition to the powers
of such Court the power to punish for contempt of itself whether committed in
the court itself or elsewhere, with imprisonment or fine or both, as the Court
may deem fit".  


This provision of the Constitution is based on the common law, which draws a
distinction in what is described as criminal con- so tempt between, those
committed in the face of the Court _" In facie curiae" _and, those committed
outside court "ex _facie curiae " _The inherent jurisdiction of the Superior
Courts of England to impose punishment summarily in respect of contempt in
_facie curiae_ is set out in "Oswald's _Contempt of Court'_ 3rd Ed. Page 8, as
follows;  


"It is now the undoubted right of a Superior Court to commit for contempt. The
usual criminal process to punish con­ tempts was found to be cumbrous and
slow, and therefore the Courts at an uncertain date assumed jurisdiction them­
selves to punish the offence summarily, _brevi manu,_ so that socases might be
fairly heard, and the administration of justice not interfered with. A Court
of Justice without power to vindi­cate its own dignity, to enforce obedience
to its mandates, to protect its officers, or to shield those who are entrusted
to its care, would be an anomaly which could not be permitted to exist in any
civilized community. Without such protection Courts of Justice would soon lose
their hold upon the public respect, and the maintenance of law and order would
be ren­dered impossible. Hence it is that the summary power of punishing for
contempt has been given to the Courts."



The authority cited in Oswald is the case of _R_ v _Almon_ decid­ed in the
year 1765.

**59**

The basis of exercising jurisdiction in respect of contempt of court, in
general has been clearly stated in the judgment of Lord Morris of the House of
Lords in the case of _A.G._ v _Times_ _Newspaper Ltd.(1)_ as follows:



"...the phrase contempt of court is one which is compen­dious to include not
only disobedience to orders of a court but also certain types of behaviour or
varieties of publications in reference to proceedings before courts of law
which overstep so the bounds which liberty permits. In an ordered community
courts are established for the pacific settlement of disputes and for the
maintenance of law and order. In the general interests of the community it is
imperative that the authority of the courts should not be imperiled and that
recourse to them should not be subject to unjustifiable interference. When
such unjustifiable interference is suppressed it is not because those charged
with the responsibilities of adminis­tering justice are concerned for their
own dignity: it is because the very structure of ordered life is at risk if
the recognized courts of the land are so flouted that their authority wanes
and is supplanted Grossly irregular behaviour in court could never be
tolerated."

_ _

_Morris_ v _Crown Office_ is a specific case of contempt _in_ _facie curiae_
involving an instance of disturbance of Court proceed­ings where the persons
responsible for causing the disturbance being eleven students were summarily
dealt with and imposed terms of imprisonment. Lord Denning MR, dealing with
the sum­mary imposition of terms of imprisonment stated as follows \- at page
1081-

'In sentencing them in this way the judge was exercising a jurisdiction which
goes back for centuries. It was well described over 200 years ago by Wilmot,
CJ in an' opinion which he prepared but never delivered. He said :



'...It is necessary incident to every Court of justice to fine and imprison
for a contempt to the Court, acted in the face of it...'



That is R v Almon. The phrase 'contempt in the face of the court' has a quaint
old-fashioned ring about it; but the importance of it is this; of all the
places where law and order must

**60**



be maintained, it is here in these courts. The course of jus- notice must not
be deflected or interfered with. Those who strike at it strike at the very
foundations of our society. To maintain law and order, the judges have, and
must have, power at once to deal with those who offend against it. It is a
great power - a power instantly to imprison a person without trial -but it is
a necessary power."



It is thus seen that the power of a superior Court to deal with summarily
instances of contempt's committed _in facie curiae_ is firmly entrenched in
the common law of England with judicial dicta of the highest authority that
date back over 200 years. In Sri Lanka 120 this power is given firm
recognition in being written into the Constitution, the Supreme Law of the
land. When the Court exer­cises jurisdiction summarily, the formalities that
attend the exercise of jurisdiction in a normal criminal matter, such as the
framing of a charge, the recording of a plea and the conduct of a trial or
inquiry are dispensed with. Learned Counsel made his submission regard­ing the
need to frame a charge ignoring this basic characteristic of exercising
jurisdiction summarily in respect of contempt committed in the face of the
Court. It would indeed make a mockery of judicial proceedings if a person who
continues to disturb the proceedings 130 in Court after being warned that he
would be dealt with, is to have a charge read against him and questioned
whether he pleads guilty or not guilty. It is for this reason that
jurisdiction is exercised sum­marily. I would cite the words of Lord Denning
referred to above, "to maintain law and order the Judges have and must have,
power at _once_ to deal with those who offend against it. It is a great power
-a power _instantly_ to imprison a person without trial - but it is a
nec­essary power."



The petitioner appeared in person and is entitled to a degree of latitude by
the Court. The warning given that he would be dealt 140 with if he persists in
continuing to disturb the proceedings of Court is a measure of the latitude
that was shown. In fact he continued to disturb the proceedings of Court even
after the sentence was imposed. He finally stopped the continued unruly
behaviour only when he was firmly informed that any further disturbance of the
Courts proceedings would be dealt with as another offence of con­tempt of
court.

**61**

The course of action taken by this Court in dealing with the petitioner who
appeared in person is entirely in accord with the fol­lowing passage in
"Oswald on Contempt of Court" 3rd Edition at page 54-



"Although considerable latitude has been allowed, especially in more recent
times, to parties conducting their causes in person, in consequence of their
ignorance of the forms of procedure, this indulgence should not be extended to
permit them to continue an improper course of conduct after warn­ing from the
Judge, nor to use unbecoming or abusive lan­guage."



Therefore we see no merit whatsoever in the first ground urged by Counsel that
a charge should have been read to the petitioner before he was punished for
committing contempt in the face of the Court.



The second ground relates to the sentence that has been imposed. In this
regard I would begin by citing the words of Lord Morris referred to above. "In
an ordered community courts are established for the pacific settlement of
disputes and the maintenance of law and order." The proceedings in our Courts
come well within this description. The proceedings of our Superior Courts are
conducted without the presence of any police or security personnel, armed or
otherwise. The only official being a 170 stenographer who represents the
Registrar. Hundreds of litigants and members of the public come daily to our
Courts and conduct themselves with admirable decorum. Counsel conduct
themselves generally with dignity that befits their office except in the case
of an individual who may be considered an anachronism. It is clear from the
preceding narrative of the facts that the petitioner did not come to this
Court for a "pacific settlement" of any dispute. His dispute is with the
Y.M.C.A. which is not even cited as a party to any of the four applications
the petitioner filed in this Court. He filed these applications only to imp
lead the judicial officer so and the Ombudsman who merely stated the obvious
that they cannot intervene to set aside a settlement he had entered into with
the Y.M.C.A. To cap it all, he filed the last case against the Judges of this
Court who merely stated the obvious, that jurisdiction cannot be exercised in
terms of Articles 17 and 126 of the

62



Constitution (fundamental rights jurisdiction) in respect of judicial action.

It was pointed out to counsel that in every case a judge has to decide a
matter in favour of one party and against the other. And, if a party against
whom a decision is given is to implead the judge 190 in respect of such
decision, every judge would have as many cases against him as the number
decided by him. This depicts the pre­posterous nature of the application filed
by the petitioner which by itself is in contempt of the authority of this
Court.

Counsel at one stage contended that S.C (FR) 55/03 filed by the petitioner
against the Registrar, the Chief Justice and the other Judges does not
disclose any infringement of a fundamental right and should have been rejected
in chambers by the judges. At a later stage he contended that the Chief
Justice should not have sat on the bench, since he is named as a respondent in
the papers that should have been rejected in chambers. These submissions are a
conundrum of absurdity which do not require any further consider­ation by this
Court.  
  
As noted above, the very act of the petitioner in filing this application
against the Registrar and the Judges who heard his previous cases is in
contempt of the authority of this Court. When the case was called the
petitioner walked upto the bar table, placed his files on the lectern provided
for counsel and continued to address Court in a loud voice not heeding the
warning that was given. He thus came determined to defy the authority of the
Court 210 and to cause the maximum possible disturbance in the process and
certainly not to seek a pacific settlement of the dispute he had with the
Y.M.C.A which was not even named as a party respondents to the application. We
are therefore of the view that the sentence of 1 year was warranted in the
circumstances of this case. We have been inclined at every stage to mitigate
this sentence if the petitioner expressed regret and gave a firm undertaking
that he would not disturb the proceedings of Court at any stage in the future.
The petitioner has very clearly refrained from expressing any regret even in
the papers filed seeking review. Counsel was informed by Court that the
hearing could be adjourned to enable him to obtain instructions from the
petitioner on the matter of expressing regret and seeking a mitigation of the
sentence on that basis. Counsel specifically declined to take an adjournment
for this purpose and concluded his submissions. In these circumstances we see
no basis to consider a mitigation of the sentence that has been imposed. The
motion for review is accordingly refused.

**EDUSSURIYA, J.** \- I agree.

**YAPA, J.** \- I agree.

Motion for review refused.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/7.html_  

