##  Cassim v. Weerawardene, Commissioner For National Housing and Another -
SLR - 316, Vol 1 of 2002 [2002] LKSC 7; (2002) 1 Sri LR 316 (14 May 2002)

**316**

**CASSIM  
v.  
WEERAWARDENE, COMMISSIONER FOR  
NATIONAL HOUSING AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 72/2002  
CA APPLICATION NO. 897/2000  
FEBRUARY 25, 2002  
  
_Ceiling on Housing Property - Application for purchase of house - Section 13
of Law, No. 1 of 1973 - Death of applicant tenant after the vesting order for
the sale of the house is Gazetted - The right of the tenant's widow to
purchase the house - Vested right.  
_  
The late Shah Mihilar was the tenant of the premises in suit since 1954 and
occupied it from that year with his wife the 2nd respondent. On 21. 06. 1968
Mohideen Cassim purchased the premises with Mihilar in occupation who
continued as the tenant of Mohideen Cassim. Appellant, the widow of Mohideen
Cassim is the present owner in terms of the Last Will of said Mohideen.  
  
On 20. 10. 1971 Mihilar applied to the Commissioner for National Housing to
purchase the house in terms of section 13 of the Ceiling on Housing Property
Law, No. 01 of 1973. On 09. 04. 1996 the Commissioner recommended to the
Minister that the house be vested in him for the purpose of sale to the
tenant. The decision was affirmed by the Board of Review in appeal by an order
dated 22. 08\. 1997. Thereafter, acting under section 17 (1) of the Law by a
Gazette notice the house was vested with effect from 22. 04. 1988 in the
Commissioner. Mihilar the tenant died on 27. 04. 2000 leaving his wife the 2nd
respondent as the tenant in occupation of the house. In the meantime the
Valuation Board under the law had determined the value of the premises as Rs.
76,728 and notified the parties by letter dated 08. 05. 2000. The 2nd
respondent having received the said notification informed the Commissioner
that as her husband had died she was willing as the lawful heir bf her
deceased husband to make payment and purchase the house.

**317**

The Commissioner informed the 2nd respondent that in view of the Supreme Court
decision in Leelawathie v. Ratnayake she was not entitled to purchase the
house and that steps will be taken to divest the house.  
  
**Held :  
**  
In the circumstances of this case, in which the Minister had at the time of
the applicant-tenant's death made a vesting order in terms of the law, the
right to purchase the house was a proprietary right which on the death of the
applicant devolved on his widow. It was a vested right which devolved on the
applicant's heirs.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. _Leelawathie v. Ratnayake -_ (1998) 3 Sri LR 349 (distinguished).  
  
2\. _Atapattu v. People's Bank -_ (1997) 1 Sri LR 208 at 218-219.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_A. A. M. Marleen, PC_ with _Miss R. Jayatilleke_ for appellant.  
  
_Anil Gooneratne, Deputy Solicitor-General_ with _Ms. Shaheeda Barrie, State
Counsel_ for 1st respondent.  
  
_Ms. Priyanthi Gunaratne_ for 2nd respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 14, 2002  
  
**ISMAIL, J.  
**  
The 2nd respondent is the widow of Shah Mihilar who was the tenant, until his
death on 27th April, 2000, of the residential premises bearing assessment No.
14, 9th Lane, Kollupitiya. The premises, as depicted in plan No. 731 dated 07.
07\. 1965 made by A. F. Sameer, Licensed Surveyor, is in extent 9.4 perches.  
  
The appellant, the present owner of the premises in terms of the Last Will, is
the widow of Mohamed Mohideen Cassim, who purchased the same by deed No. 812
dated 21. 06. 1968 attested by Felix J. P. Perera, Notary Public. The deceased
husband of the 2nd respondent

**318**

who was then in occupation of the premises continued as the tenant of the
purchaser. The 2nd respondent and her deceased husband have occupied the
premises since their marriage in 1954.  
  
The 2nd respondent's husband made an application as the tenant on 20. 10. 1975
to the Commissioner for National Housing for the purchase of the said premises
in terms of section 13 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law, No. 1 of 1973.
The Commissioner on being satisfied after an inquiry of the conditions
enumerated in section 17 (1) (a) (6) (c) of the said Law recommended to the
Minister on 09. 04. 1996 that the house be vested in him for the purpose of
sale to the tenant.  
  
The appellant appealed against the said decision of the Commis­sioner to the
Board of Review, which by its order dated 22. 08. 1997, affirmed the decision
of the Commissioner and dismissed the appeal after consideration without
costs. The appellant did not seek to have this decision varied in any
appropriate proceedings.  
  
Thereafter, the Minister of Housing and Urban Development by virtue of the
powers vested in him by section 17  (1) of the Ceiling on Housing Property
Law, as amended, vested the house No. 14, 19th Lane, Kollupitiya, with effect
from 22. 04. 1998 in the Commis­sioner for National Housing by publication in
the Gazette.  
  
The Valuation Board constituted under the Ceiling on Housing Property Law
determined the value of the said premises as being Rs. 76,728.00 and notified
the parties by letter dated 08. 05. 2000. The 2nd respondent who received the
letter addressed to her husband informed the Commissioner of the death of her
husband and indicated her willingness as the lawful heir of her deceased
husband to make the payment and purchase the house.  
  
The Commissioner informed the 2nd respondent by his letter dated 24. 07. 2000
that in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Leelawathie v. Ratnayake
(1) that she was not entitled to a transfer 40 of the premises in her favour
and that steps would be taken by him to divest the premises.

**319**

The 2nd respondent then moved the Court of Appeal by way of a Writ of
Certiorari to quash the aforesaid decision and to restrain or prohibit the
Commissioner from divesting himself of the ownership of the house. The Court
of Appeal by its judgment delivered on 29. 06. 2001 allowed the application
and directed the Commissioner to accept the money and to transfer the house to
the 2nd respondent. The present appeal is against the judgment of the Court of
Appeal.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the appellant relying on the judgment in
Leelawathie v. Ratnayake submitted that the right of a tenant to make an
application for the purchase of a house let to him under section 13 of the
Ceiling on Housing Property Law was personal to him and that it ceased upon
his death. He pointed out that the Commissioner had not entered into an
agreement with the tenant for the sale of the house to him after the vesting
as required by section 17 (2) of the Law and that the tenant had not paid the
purchase price before his death.  
  
The facts in Leelawathie v. Ratnayake were that pursuant to the application of
the tenant under section 13 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law to purchase
the house let to her, the Commissioner decided to recommend to the Minister
the vesting of the house in him for the purpose of sale to her. On an appeal
by the owner of the house under section 39 of the Law, the Board of Review set
aside the decision of the Commissioner. The tenant then moved the Court of
Appeal by way of a Writ of Certiorari to quash the order of the Board of
Review. The tenant died pending the hearing of the appli­cation and her
daughter was substituted after which the Court of Appeal restored the order of
the Board of Review. On appeal to the Supreme Court it was held that the right
conferred by section 13 is personal to the tenant making the application and
that as her right ceased upon her death, the daughter was not entitled to
proceed with the application made by her mother. It was noted that the tenant
who made the application died before an order was made vesting the house in
the Commissioner and that there was not even a notification by the Minister
under section 17 (1) of the Law. It was held that in the

**320**

circumstances the deceased tenant had no proprietary rights in respect of the
house which could pass to the heirs on her death.  
  
The facts of the present case are not similar and the judgment in Leelawathie
v. Ratnayake would, therefore, not be applicable. The  house was vested in the
Commissioner for the purpose of sale to the tenant before his death. The order
of vesting was made by the Minister by a publication in the Gazette dated 15.
05\. 1998 in terms of section 17 (1) of the Law and the only outstanding step
required of him to effect a formal transfer of the premises was the payment of
the purchase price. The tenant died on 27. 04\. 2000 less than two weeks
before the valuation of the house was communicated to the parties. Upon
receipt of the said letter dated 08. 05. 2000, the 2nd respondent wife as the
lawful heir indicated- her willingness to pay the purchase price of Rs. 76,728
for the formal transfer of the so house to her.  
  
Even though the right of the tenant to make an application to purchase the
house was a personal right, once the right was exercised and a vesting order
made, the character of that right changed. It was a vested right which on the
death of the applicant devolved on his heirs. See the cases cited in Atapattu
v. People's Bank.(2)  
  
The Court of Appeal has correctly held that in the circumstances of this case
that the tenant had acquired a proprietary right in respect of the house which
could be passed upon his death to his widow, the 2nd respondent.  
  
Accordingly, the judgment of the Court of Appeal is affirmed and the appeal is
dismissed without costs.  
  
**FERNANDO, J. -** I agree.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/7.html_  

