##  Haji Omar v. Wickremasinghe and Other - SLR - 61, Vol 3 of 2001 [2001]
LKSC 7; (2001) 3 Sri LR 61 (26 January 2001)

**61**

**HAJI OMAR  
v.  
WICKREMASINGHE AND OTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
SC(HC)LA 32/2000  
HC CIVIL 36/98/1  
D.C. COLOMBO CASE NO. 5033/SPL  
JANUARY 26, 2001  
  
_High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 10 of 1996 - S.5(2),
S.6 - Leave to Appeal from an order - Civil Procedure Code Amendment 38 of
1998 \- S.757(2) Cap. 58 - should the Registrar send out the Notice of
Application for leave to appeal to the Respondents.  
  
_**Held :  
**  
(i) In an application for leave to appeal under S.5(2), S.6 of Act 10 of 1996,
it is the Registrar who should send the Notice of application for leave to
appeal to the Respondents; an order from Court is unnecessary.  
  
**APPLICATION** for Leave to Appeal to the Supreme Court from the Commercial
High Court.  
  
_Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ for Petitioner.

_Cur. adv. vult._

January 26, 2001.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
  
**This is an application for leave to appeal under section 5(2) and 6 of the
High Court of the Provincs (Special provision) Act No. 10 of 1996. The
petitioner moves for notice on the respondents. Mr. Jayawardena draws our
attention to section 757(2) of the Civil Procedure Code, as amended by Act.
No. 38 of 1998; That section make provision for application for leave

**62**

to appeal to the Court of Appeal. Section 6 of Act No. 10 of 1996 provided
that application for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court shall be made as
nearly as practicable in the manner provided by chapter 58 of the Civil
Procedure Code. According to procedure set out in section 757(2) as applicable
to this application. It is the Registrar who should send notice of
applications for leave to appeal to the respondents and an order from this
Court to that effect is unnecessary. The Registrar is directed to take steps
in terms of section 757(2) of the Civil Procedure Code in applications of this
nature.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**GUNASEKARA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Registrar directed to take steps under S. 757(2) C. P. C.,_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/7.html_  

