##  Wedamulla v. Abeysinghe - SLR - 26, Vol 3 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 7; (1999) 3
Sri LR 26 (20 May 1999)

**26**

**WEDAMULLA  
v.  
ABEYSINGHE**

SUPREME COURT.  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
GUNAWARDANA, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C. No. 48/98.  
S.C. SPL LA No. 478/97.  
C.A. (REV) No. 547/97.  
M.C. GANGODAWILA No. 1957.  
MAY 07, 12, 1999.

_State Lands Recovery of Possession Act, No. 7 of 1979 - Amendment No. 29 of
1983 - Quit Notice - SS. 3, 4, 5, 5 (2) (a) Amendment No. 58 of 1981 s. 5 (4)
- Urban Development Authority \- Competent Authority - Right or status to file
proceedings - Approval of Minister condition precedent - Omnia preasumuntur
rite et solemniter esse acta._

**Held:**

1\. Competent Authority includes an officer generally or specially authorised
by a Corporate body.

2\. The appellant was by name and designation appointed the 'Competent
Authority" by the Board of the UDA in whom the land was vested.

3\. He had every right to make an application for the possession of the land
and for ejectment of the respondent. The proceedings under the State Lands
(Recovery of Possession) Act are required to be initiated by a Competent
Authority.

4\. It must be assumed that the necessary steps were taken including the
obtaining of the Minister's approval - in fact, it had been obtained prior to
proceedings for ejectment.

_K. C. Kamalasabeysan, PC, SG with U. Egalahewa, SC for respondent-appellant._

_S. Mahenthiran for defendant-petitioner-respondent._

Appeal from the Judgment of the Court of Appeal.*

_Cur. adv. vult._

*1997 3 SLR 417.

27

May 20, 1999.  
**AMERASINGHE, J.**

The respondent was in occupation of a land that had been acquired by the State
and vested in the Urban Development Authority.

The appellant filed an application in the Magistrate's Court of Gangodawila in
the prescribed form set out in the schedule to the State Lands (Recovery of
Possession) Act, No. 7 of 1979, for the recovery of the possession and
occupation of the land and for the ejectment of the respondent. The
application was supported by an affidavit in the prescribed form. The learned
Magistrate on 7th May, 1979, made order in favour of the appellant and the
respondent was thereafter evicted from the land upon the issue of a writ.

The respondent filed a revision application in the Court of Appeal against the
order of the learned Magistrate on the basis that the land was not a State
land and that he had had undisturbed and uninterrupted possession of the land
in question. When the matter came up for hearing the learned Judge of the
Court of Appeal reversed the order of the Magistrate on 2 counts, namely, (1)
that the Addl. Director- General of the Urban Development Authority had "no
status or right to file proceedings on behalf of the Urban Development
Authority;" and (2) That the approval of the Minister of Housing was "a
condition precedent for the institution of proceedings in Court directed at
evicting or ejecting any person in'' possession of property vested in the
Urban Development Authority".

The appellant obtained leave of the Supreme Court to appeal against the order
of the Court of Appeal. When the matter came up for hearing on the 2nd of
February, 1999, learned counsel requested the Court to decide the appeal on
the basis of written submissions. Written submissions were filed on 7th May,
1999 and on 12th May, 1999.

The State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act provides that where a quit notice
has been issued to a person in unauthorised possession or occupation of any
State land and such person fails to comply with

**28**

such notice, any "competent authority" may make an application in writing in
the prescribed form to the Magistrate's Court having jurisdiction setting
forth the matters referred to in section 5 (1) (a) and praying for the
recovery of such land and for an order of ejectment of the person in
possession or occupation. (see sections 3, 4 and 5 of the State Lands
(Recovery of Possession) Act, No. 7 of 1979 as amended by Act No. 29 of 1983).
"Competent Authority includes "an officer generally or specially authorized by
a corporate body, where such land is vested in or owned by or under the
control of, such corporate body". (Section 18 State Lands (Recovery of
Possession) Act as amended by section 5 (h) of Act No. 58 of 1981).

In the matter before me, the appellant was by name and designation appointed
the "competent authority" by the Board of the Urban Development Authority in
whom the land in question was vested. He had every right, therefore, to make
an application for the possession of the land and for ejectment of the
respondent. Admittedly, as the learned Judge of the Court of Appeal observes,
a corporate body has then the right to sue and be sued. However, he overlooked
the fact that proceedings under the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act
are required to be initiated by a "competent authority".

With regard to the second ground, it might be assumed that the necessary steps
were taken, including the obtaining of the Minister's approval. Ominia
praesumuntur rite et solemniter esse acta. In fact, the Minister's approval
under section 14 (2) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act had been
obtained prior to proceedings for ejectment being taken. The Minister's order
is dated the 17th of June, 1996.

For the reasons set out in my judgment, I set aside the judgment of the Court
of Appeal and affirm the order of the Magistrate.

**GUNAWARDANA, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/7.html_  

