##  Victor Ivon v. Sarath, N., Silva, Attorney General and Anothers - SLR -
340, Vol 1 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 7; (1998) 1 Sri LR 340 (3 April 1998)

**340**

**VICTOR IVON  
v.  
SARATH N. SILVA, ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 89/98  
MARCH 11TH AND 19TH 1998.  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Prosecution of persons for defamation - Penal Code
Sections 479 and 480 - Code of Criminal Procedure Act - Sections 135 (1) (f)
135 (6) and 393 (7) - Indictment in the High Court - Attorney-General's
discretion - Articles 12 (1) and 14 (1) (g) of the Constitution.  
_  
The petitioner complained that the Attorney-General and/or his officers had
indiscriminately, arbitrarily and for collateral purposes without proper
assessment of the facts indicted the petitioner in High Courts with several
offences of criminal defamation in breach of the petitioner's rights
guaranteed by Article 12 (1) and 14 (1) (g) of the Constitution.  
  
Per Fernando, J.  
  
'It is clear that the Attorney-General has a statutory discretion, which
involves several aspects. He has to decide whether to give or refuse sanction;
and whether to exclude a summary trial, and in that event, whether to order
non-summary proceedings or to file an indictment. The exercise of that
discretion is neither legislative nor judicial action but constitutes
"executive or administrative action".  
  
**Held:  
**  
1\. The Attorney-General's power to file (or not file) an indictment for
criminal defamation is a discretionary power, which is neither absolute nor
unfet足tered. Where such a power or discretion is exercised in violation of a
fundamental right, it can be reviewed in proceedings under Article 126.  
  
2\. The pendency of proceedings in another court will not bar the exercise of
the constitutional jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. However, that would be a
circumstance which would make the court act with greater caution and
circumspection.  
  
3\. The petitioner had failed to establish a prima facie case for review.

**341**

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_R. K. W. Goonasekera with Suranjith Hewamanne, J. C. Weliamuna, P. K. T.
Perera and Ms Kishali Pinto Jayawardena_ for the petitioner.  
  
_K. C. Kamalasabayson, P.C, A.S.G with U. Egalahewa, S.C and Harsha Fernando_
, SC for the respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

April 3, 1998.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
We have to consider whether to grant leave to proceed with this application,
which alleges infringements by the Attorney-General of Articles 12 (1), 14 (1)
(a) and 14 (1) (g) of the Constitution, giving rise to questions which are as
complex as they are important.  
  
The petitioner is the Editor of the "Ravaya", a Sinhala weekly newspaper which
enjoys a substantial circulation as well as a reputation for exposing
misconduct and corruption. He complains about two indictments, served on him
in January, 1998, for criminal defamation of a former Minister of Fisheries
(in the "Ravaya" of 13.2.94), and of the present Inspector-General of Police
(in the 'Ravaya" of 19.1.97). His petition refers to four previous
indictments. One was in 1993: there, after an appeal to this Court, the
proceedings came to an abrupt end in 1996 on account of a defect in the
proceedings, which was not attributable to the prosecution. The second was in
1994: initially proceedings had been instituted in the Magistrate's court; an
objection was taken that sanction had not been given; he was discharged, but
thereafter an indictment was filed in the High Court; and that was later
withdrawn. (In the meantime, the victim had filed three civil cases which were
dismissed for default of appearance.) Another was filed in 1996, and that too
was withdrawn in 1997. The fourth was filed in 1997, and the proceedings in
the High Court are still pending.  
  
As there was some uncertainty as to the factual averments, and as the issues
were more than ordinarily difficult, on 11.3.98 we asked Mr. Kamalasabayson to
file a statement clarifying the position as to all six indictments. That was
done. Among the matters disclosed was that the Attorney-General had declined
to institute or sanction

**342**

proceedings for criminal defamation against the petitioner, upon complaints by
nine other persons.  
  
The petition also referred to several other incidents as well as "Ravaya"
articles critical of the Attorney-General and officers of his Department from
which the inference of bias was sought to be drawn.  
  
The petitioner stated his grievance in this way:  
  
". . . the Hon. Attorney-General and/or his officers have indis足criminately,
arbitrarily and for collateral purposes without proper assessment of the facts
as required in law for criminal defamation prosecution and without regard to
the constitutional guarantees given to journalists have indicted the
petitioner in High Courts as aforesaid and therefore the petitioner's
fundamental rights guaran足teed to him under Article 12 (1) have been violated
. . . [D]ue to the aforesaid actions . . . the petitioner's right to freedom
of speech and expression including publication has been violated contrary to
Article 14 (1) (a) ... and ... his right to freedom to engage in his lawful
profession has been effectively violated contrary to Article 14 (1) (g) of the
Constitution."  
  
I must add that the indictments, incidents and articles referred to by the
petitioner go back to 1992, and thus cover the periods of office of the
present Attorney-General as well as his two immediate predecessors in office.  
  
Criminal defamation is defined in section 479 of the Penal Code, and is
punishable under section 480. It is an offence triable summarily by the
Magistrate's Court, and by the High Court as well. By virtue of section 135
(1) (f) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, no prosecution for criminal
defamation can be instituted either by the victim or by any other person
(including a "peace officer") except with the sanction of the Attorney-
General. However section 393 (7) permits the Attorney-General directly to file
an indictment in the High Court, and to direct that non-summary proceedings be
held "having regard to the nature of the offence or any other circumstances'",
in which event section 135 (1) (f) will cease to apply (section 135 (6)).  
  
It is clear that the Attorney-General has a statutory discretion, which
involves several aspects. He has to decide whether to give or refuse

**343**

sanction; and whether to exclude a summary trial, and, in that event, whether
to order non-summary proceedings or to file an indictment. The exercise of
that discretion is neither legislative nor judicial action, but constitutes
"executive or administrative action".  
  
The important question in this case is whether the Attorney-General's
discretion in regard to the institution of criminal proceedings is absolute,
unfettered and unreviewable, in which event leave to proceed must be refused
without further ado.  
  
The question is not simply whether a decision to file an indictment can be
reviewed; it is a larger question, whether a decision to grant sanction to
prosecute, or to file an indictment, or the refusal to do so, can be reviewed.
Whichever way that question is answered, it may have implications in regard to
decisions by public officers to institute (or refrain from instituting),
criminal proceedings.  
  
Mr. Kamalasabayson, P.C, submitted that whether or not the Attorney-General's
discretion can be reviewed, it was properly exercised in relation to the two
impugned indictments served in January, 1998, and that leave to proceed should
be refused on that ground. Mr. Goonesekera contended that even if, in general,
that discretion might not be reviewable, it was reviewable in regard to
indictments for criminal defamation, issued in violation of the fundamental
right to freedom of speech.  
  
I do not think it is possible to look at the two indictments, on the basis of
either of the above submissions, without first considering the nature, scope
and purpose of that discretion. It is only then that we can determine whether
that discretion was properly exercised, as Mr. Kamalasabayson says it was, or
whether, as Mr. Goonesekera contends, prima facie, it infringed the
petitioner's rights.  
  
A primary consideration is that the constitutional jurisdiction of this Court
to grant relief for infringements of fundamental rights by executive or
administrative action must necessarily apply to the exercise of any power or
discretion conferred on a public officer by an Act of Parliament, in the
absence of a constitutionally valid derogation from that jurisdiction.

**344**

In order to determine the nature of the discretion to file an indict足ment, and
whether it is reviewable, and if so, in what circumstances and to what extent,
it is useful first to examine the discretion to grant sanction: because it is
difficult to see on what principle the Attorney-General could conclude that a
prosecution was not warranted and therefore refuse to grant sanction, but
nevertheless file an indictment. Let me begin with an extreme hypothetical
case. If a person complains that he was criminally defamed at a public
meeting, at which he was not present, and the only witness he has, as to the
actual words spoken, is a person who is quite hard of hearing, could sanction
be granted, without any further investigation, and without the statement of
the accused having been recorded? A decision to prosecute in such
circumstances would be, prima facie, arbitrary and capricious, and so would
the grant of sanction. If the accused were to seek judicial review, relying on
Article 12 (1), and submitted a certified copy of Court proceedings
conclusively establishing that at the time of the alleged defamation he was
giving evidence in a Court one hundred miles away, should this Court say that
his only remedy was to place that evidence before the Magistrate's Court;
obtain an aquittal; and then recover damages for malicious prosecution? That
would be to condone the use of the executive power of the State to pervert the
criminal justice system into an instrument of harassment, instead of a shield
for the protection of the citizen.  
  
Let me turn to another extreme example, where there is sufficient evidence of
guilt. Suppose that during an election campaign rival politicians were
persistently defaming each other, and that the Attorney-General consistently
refused sanction despite adequate evidence of guilt - referring all the
complainants to their remedies under the civil law and the election laws. I
think that would be proper. Suppose, however, that he made exceptions in
regard to all cases in which the alleged wrongdoer belonged to one particular
political party. Could it be said that the accused in those cases cannot
complain that the grant of sanction infringed Article 12 (2), simply because
there was sufficient evidence against them to justify a prosecution? In other
words, where a decision has to be taken whether or not to grant sanction to
prosecute the members of one class of alleged offenders, similarly
circumstanced in every respect, save political affiliation, could that
decision turn solely on their political persuasion? It might conceivably be
argued that alleged offenders against whom there is evidence can hardly be
heard to complain that other offenders

**345**

are not being prosecuted. But let me look at the problem from the point of
view of those defamed. Could it possibly be said that complainants who
belonged to that political party were not entitled to complain that the
refusal of sanction to them was in violation of Article 12 (2), in a situation
in which complainants from rival political parties were granted sanction? Such
examples can be multiplied. If all persons complaining of criminal defamation
by articles published in a rival newspaper were denied sanction despite ample
evidence, but sanction was regularly granted for prosecutions against the
"Ravaya" even on tenuous evidence, would there not be an infringement of
Article 12 (1)?  
  
It seems to me that the undoubted discretion regarding sanction is subject to
obvious limits: where the evidence was plainly insufficient, where there was
no investigation, where the decision was based on constitutionally
impermissible factors, and so on.  
  
Let me now turn to the discretion to file an indictment. Section 393 (7) does
not contemplate that in every case where sanction is granted, an indictment
should be filed. There must be something more in "the nature of the offence or
any other circumstances of the case", and that becomes clear when one compares
the different consequences which result from an indictment. Where sanction is
granted to the victim to prosecute, it is he who must meet the expenses of the
case - retaining lawyers, making investigations, finding witnesses and
ensuring their attendance. And if his prosecution is unsuccessful, it is he
who runs the risk of an action for damages for malicious prosecution. Where a
peace officer institutes proceedings in the Magistrate's Court, or the
Attorney-General files an indictment, the victim of the alleged defamation is
relieved of all those burdens, expenses and risks.  
  
The victim of defamation may completely clear his name by means of a civil
action for damages, which has the advantage of a lower burden Of proof. But
the criminal law allows him a penal remedy, if he gets sanction; and that may
perhaps be more satisfying to him than monetary compensation for the wrong
done to him. But why should the State undertake the burdens, the expenses, and
the risks, of vindicating his reputation? Is the power to do that - whether by
means of a prosecution by a peace officer or by indictment \- intended to be
used purely to confer a benefit on the victim, or only where

**346**

it would serve the public interest? It seems to me that, in order to justify
that burden being shifted to the State, there must be some distinct public
interest and benefit, as, for instance, where the alleged defamatory statement
is likely to disrupt racial or religious harmony, or to prejudice Sri Lanka's
international relations, or to erode public confidence in the maintenance of
law and order or in the administration of justice.  
  
It is enough, for the purposes of this case, to say that the Attorney-
General's power to file (or not to file) an indictment for criminal defamation
is a discretionary power, which is neither absolute nor unfettered. It is
similar to other powers vested by law in public functionaries. They are held
in trust for the public, to be exercised for the purposes for which they have
been conferred, and not otherwise. Where such a power or discretion is
exercised in violation of a fundamental right, it can be reviewed in
proceedings under Article 126.  
  
Does the fact that the High Court has jurisdiction in respect of the
indictments filed affect the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 126?
Upon the filing of an indictment it is the High Court alone which has the
jurisdiction to try the accused on that indictment; it has also the power to
consider whether that indictment complies with legal requirements, as to form,
etc., but it has no authority whatever to review the antecedent process
leading up to the executive act of issuing the indictment, and particularly
whether it was issued in violation of the fundamental rights of the accused.
That is a distinct jurisdiction, solely and exclusively vested in this Court
under Article 126. The exercise of that jurisdiction will not adversely affect
the jurisdiction of the High Court. Thus, in analogous situations, this Court
can property determine whether the arrest and detention of a person was
contrary to Article 13, although a trial is pending in the High Court: a
finding by this Court that the arrest was lawful (or unlawful) in no way
inhibits a subsequent verdict by the High Court that the accused was not
guilty (or guilty), because the issues relating to the constitutionality of an
arrest are different to those relating to guilt. And, conversely, a verdict by
the High Court that the accused is guilty (or not guilty) will not be
inconsistent with a subsequent decision by this Court that his arrest was
nevertheless unlawful (or lawful). Likewise a finding by this Court that the
decision to file an indictment for criminal defamation was in violation of,
say, Article 12 (2) or Article 14 (1) (a), does not preclude the High Court
from reaching a verdict of

**347**

guilty - unless this Court finds that the violation was so serious as to
require the quashing of the indictment. That, however, is both proper and
inevitable: this Court is superior to the High Court, and what is more its
constitutional jurisdiction under Article 126 takes precedence over the
statutory jurisdiction of the High Court.  
  
While the pendency of proceedings in another Court do not bar the exercise of
the constitutional jurisdiction of this Court, that would be a circumstance
which would make this Court act with greater caution and circumspection.  
  
The next question is whether the petitioner has established a prima facie case
for review.  
  
Mr. Goonesekera made a submission which suggests that a journalist or a
newspaper should be considered differently to other people. He submitted that
in exposing misconduct and corruption through the "Ravaya" the petitioner was
performing a service to the public. Mr. Kamalasabayson did not question that.
But Mr. Goonesekera went further. He claimed that it was not always possible
for a newspaper, under the pressure of deadlines, to ensure accuracy; that
mistakes were sometimes made; but if mistakes did occur, the policy of the
"Ravaya" was to publish corrections and in support he referred to a notice
published in the "Ravaya" inviting corrections and responses. Laudable though
that policy is, I do not think that a newspaper enjoys any greater privilege
of speech, expression and publication, or immunity from prosecution, than the
ordinary citizen. The freedom of the press is not a distinct fundamental
right, but is part of the freedom of speech and expression, including
publication, which Article 14 (1) (a) has entrenched for everyone alike. It
surely does allow the pen of the journalist to be used as a mighty sword to
rip open the facades which hide misconduct and corruption, but it is a two-
edged weapon which he must wield with care not to wound the innocent while
exposing the guilty. As Shakespeare put it:  
  
"O! it is excellent  
To have a giant's strength,  
But it is tyrannous.  
To use it like a giant."  
(Measure for Measure, II, ii, 107)

**348**

I cannot accept the submission that the Attorney-General's decision to indict
a newspaper editor must be scrutinized with any greater strictness than a
similar decision to indict any other citizen.  
  
Mr. Kamalasabayson handed to us on a confidential basis, for perusal only by
us \- without objection from Mr. Goonesekera - the reports submitted to the
Attorney-General by the two State Counsel who dealt with the two files.  
  
In regard to the indictment alleging defamation of the Inspector-General of
Police, the petitioner claimed that it had been filed even though the
Inspector-General of Police himself had made no complaint. Mr. Kamalasabayson
produced the complaint made on 20.1.97 by the Inspector-General of Police -
the day after the offending publication - denying the truth of the allegations
against him. The petitioner says that he was not aware that such a complaint
had been made, and that it was not listed in the indictment. However, the
undisputed fact is that such a complaint had been made.  
  
The impugned article alleged that the Inspector-General of Police had abused
his authority by interfering with the investigations into a case of sexual
abuse of children. State counsel recommended an indictment because the
Inspector-General of Police, the suspects, and the investigating officer made
statements denying such interference, while the petitioner had not provided
any material to substantiate his allegations. It is undoubtedly in the public
interest to ensure that in all respects the conduct of the Inspector-General
of Police is at all times above suspicion. State counsel observed that the
article affects public confidence in the law enforcement process. I hold that
the Attorney-General could properly have taken the view that this was more
than a matter of vindicating the reputation of an individual, and warranted an
indictment.  
  
The petitioner's other complaint is that the Attorney-General decided to
indict him in 1996 (in respect of the "Ravaya" article of 13.2.94 about the
former Minister of Fisheries) despite two reports, dated 30.9.94 and 27.1.95,
which, he says, establishes the truth of the article. Mr. Kamalasabayson
submitted that those reports had not been sent to the Attorney-General, and
that the petitioner himself made no reference to them either in the statement
he made on 24.2.95 or later. (He also said that he has now called for them,
and that they

**349**

will be given due consideration.) However, although a perusal of that
statement shows that the petitioner did say that official inquiries were then
proceeding in respect of corruption and irregularities in that Ministry, the
report made by State counsel does not indicate that any investigations had
been made about those inquiries.  
  
A citizen is entitled to a proper investigation - one which is fair,
competent, timely and appropriate - of a criminal complaint, whether it be by
him or against him. The criminal law exists for the protection of his rights -
of person, property and reputation \- and lack of a due investigation will
deprive him of the protection of the law. But the alleged lack of a proper
investigation, which resulted in those reports not being available to the
Attorney-General was a lapse on the part of those whose duty it was to
investigate, and not on the part of the Attorney-General. Those responsible
for the investigation have not been made parties, and the petitioner's case
has not been presented on the basis of a defective investigation.  
  
The impugned article contained a general allegation that the Ministry had
become the personal business of the Minister. It went on to make three
specific allegations: that a dredger worth millions had been sold for Rs.
400,000 to a company owned by the Minister's son, that a circuit bungalow had
been sold to the son, and that a Ministry vehicle had also been given to him.
The Minister and his son had denied all these. State counsel ought to have
asked for clarification whether official inquiries were in fact pending about
those matters - particularly, because two years had elapsed between the
publication and the indictment. If there had been such inquiries, they might
have revealed evidence which had a bearing on the truth of the allegations.
But despite that lapse all that we have now are the two reports relevant to
the first allegation. Even if I were to assume in the petitioner's favour that
the first allegation is true, yet we do not have any material at all
suggesting that the other two are also true. At least in regard to those two
allegations, it cannot be said that prosecution was unjustified. State counsel
expressed the view that the allegations affected not only the individual but
the Ministry and the conduct of its affairs: there was thus an element of
public interest.  
  
The net result is that the defects in the investigation have not been duly
challenged. It does not appear, prima facie, that the lapse on the part of
State counsel in not calling for further material has caused any prejudice
whatsoever in regard to two of the three allegations.

**350**

Errors and omissions do occur, and by themselves are not proof that the
impugned decision was arbitrary, capricious, perverse or unreasonable, or
intended to interfere with the petitioner's freedom of speech.  
  
I do not regard the fact that four previous indictments had been filed against
the petitioner as continuous harassment, particularly because three of the
four were withdrawn, or not proceeded with, and of these, two withdrawals were
in circumstances which do not suggest any impropriety on the part of the
prosecution; and, moreover, during the same period the Attorney-General
declined to take action on nine other complaints.  
  
For the above reasons, leave to proceed is refused. We are indebted to Counsel
for their assistance in this matter.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. - I agree.  
  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. - I agree.  
  
_Leave to proceed refused._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/7.html_  

