##  Vasudeva Nanayakkara v. Choksy And Others (John Keells Case) - SLR - 134,
Vol 1 of 2008 [2008] LKSC 7; (2008) 1 Sri LR 134 (21 July 2008)

**134**

**VASUDEVA NANAYAKKARA  
v  
CHOKSY AND OTHERS  
(JOHN KEELLS CASE)**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SilVA, CJ.  
AMERATUNGA, J.  
BALAPATABENDI,J.  
SC FR 209/2007  
MARCH 14,27,2008  
MAY 12, 26, 2008.  
  
_Constitution Article 3, 4 - Article 12 (1), 126 - 13th Amendment - Sale of
shares of Lanka Marine Services Ltd - Acting without lawful authority - Public
Enterprise Reform Commission Act, NO.1 of 1996 - Ostensible authority - Right
to equality - Privatization - Bias - Rule of law - Locus Standi - Defence of
time bar - Severability of executive action - Just and equitable relief under
Article 126 - Provincial land list - Advice of Provincial Council necessary?
Petroleum Products (sp. provisions) Act 63 of 2002.  
_  
The petitioner filed application in the public interest in terms of Article
126 alleging an infringement of the fundamental right to the equal protection
of the law. The impugned executive action is the action primarily of the 8th
respondent \- P. B. Jayasundara (PBJ) who functioned as Chairman of the Public
Enterprise Reform Commission (PERC) and of the Cabinet of Ministers including
the Prime Minister - 3rd respondent. It is alleged that PBJ caused the sale of
shares of Lanka Marine Services Ltd (lMSl) a wholly owned

**135**

company of the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (CPG) which was a profit making
debt free tax paying company to John Keells Holdings (JKL) 18th respondent
without prior approval of the Cabinet of Ministers in a process which is not
transparent and was biased in favour of JKL. It was also alleged that he did
not obtain a valuation of LMSL from the Government Valuer and relied only on a
valuation secured at the discretion of a private Bank. It was further alleged
that, there was an illegal state grant given to LMSL by the then President
within the Port of Colombo 2 years after the sale of shares stating that it
was made upon the payment of approximately Rs. 1.2 Billion by LMSL to the
Government whereas no such money was paid. It was further alleged that in a
collateral proceeding JKH obtained tax free status for its investment in LMSL
from the Board of Investments (BOI) and that since the applicable regulation
did not cover the agreement entered into, JKH got the regulation amended and a
fresh agreement entered into by the BOL It was alleged that the impugned
privatization was lopsided and moved in the reverse direction of Public
Enterprise Reform by converting a tax paying Public Enterprise to a tax free
private enterprise which claimed a monopoly in the relevant business.  
  
It was further alleged that after the bid of JKH was accepted the specimen of
the Common User Facility (CUF) agreement was also amended by PBJ at the detest
of JKH and a new clause included which provided that the Government of Sri
Lanka Ports Authority (SLPA) and CPC would ensure that all bunkers would be
supplied using the CUF. It was further alleged that the new clause effectively
prevented an alternative supply of bunkers and created a monopoly in LMSL now
owned by JKH.  
  
**Held  
  
**(1) The process of divestiture of state ownership which was initially done
on an ad hoc basis in respect of enterprises that were incurring losses was
formalized on 01.03.1995 and described as the Public Enterprise Reform
Programme with the establishment of a Special Task Force appointed by the
President. The Reform Programme was further enhanced and given legal dimension
by Act NO.1 of 1996 established by the PERC. Thus Public Enterprises Reform
which lay in the area of Executive discretion came strictly to the legal
domain as being public process regulated by law. The functions and the objects
of PERC are set out in section 4 of the Act.  
  
Since the role of advising and assisting is vouched by section 4 in mandatory
terms, it necessarily follows that the Government cannot carry out public
enterprise reform including divestiture without receiving advice and
assistance from PERC. Furthermore all the objects of PERC are intended
primarily to benefit the people - section 5(1).  
  
(2) The committee of officials reconciled a cautious approach of preserving
the monopoly of LMSL within the Port and liberalization the sector by the
grant of 3 licences for the supply of bunkers outside the Port of Colombo. The
Committee which included a Director of PERC did not recommend the sale of
shares of LMSL.

**136**

The steps taken by PBJ and the PERC towards affecting a sale of shares of LMSL
is not in any way mandated by the decision of the Cabinet of Ministers and is
manifestly contrary to the process that had been authorized. The procedure
adopted is also contrary to the Public Finance Circular.  
  
(3) The Cabinet had not even authorized the PERC to make reconsideration as to
the sale of LMSL shares. The only matter on which the Cabinet had authorized
action was the liberalization of the bunkering service in the area outside the
Colombo Port, which had been effectually put into cold storage by PERC. This
action is not based on a lawful exercise of Executive power in terms of the
PERC Act and was contrary to the decision of the Cabinet of Ministers.  
  
(4) All ostensible authority involves a representation by the principal as to
the extent of that agents authority. No representation by the agent as to the
extent of his authority can amount to a "holding out" of the principal. No
public officer unless he possess some special power, can hold not on behalf
the state that he or some other public officer has the right to enter into a
contract in respect of the property of the state when in fact no such right
exists.  
  
(5) The 13th Amendment provided for the exercise of legislative and executive
power within a province in respect of matters in the provincial land list on a
system akin to the Westminster model of government. The power reposed in the
President in terms of Article 33 (d) read with section 2 of the State Lands
Ordinance is circumscribed by the provisions of "Appendix II" in item 18.  
  
"Appendix 11" established an interactive legal regime in respect of state land
within a Province. Whilst the ultimate power of alienation and of making a
disposition remains with the President the exercise of the power would be
subject to conditions in Appendix 11 being satisfied. A pre condition is that
an alienation or disposition of state land within a province shall be done in
terms of the applicable law only on the advice of the Provincial Council.  
  
(6) The rule of law postulates the absolute supremacy or predominance of
regular law as opposed to the influence of arbitrary power. It excludes the
existence of arbitrariness of prerogative or wide discretionary authority on
the part of the government.  
  
(7) The principle enunciated in Articles 3 and 4 of the Constitution is that
the respective organs of government, the legislature, the executive and the
judiciary are reposed power as custodians for the time being to be exercised
for the people. The resources of the state are the resources of the people and
the organs of state are guardians to whom the people have committed the care
and preservation of these resources.

**137**

There is a positive component in the right to equality guaranteed under
Article 12 (1) and where the executive being the custodian of the people's
power all _ultra vires_ and in derogation of the law and procedures that are
intended to safeguard the resources of the state, it is in the public interest
to implead such action.  
  
(8) The defence of time bar must necessarily fail since the impugned transfer
was not conducted according to law in a fair and transparent process.  
  
**Held further  
  
**(9) **** The petitioner has a sufficient locus _standi_ to institute these
proceedings in the public interest and has established an infringement bf the
fundamental right guaranteed by Article 12 (1) in respect of 90% of the shares
of LML.  
  
_Per_ Sarath N. Silva C.J.

"From the perspective of JKH I hold that the company has secured advantages
and benefits through the illegal process and in specific instances by
misrepresentation that have been made.

_Per_ Sarath N. Silva C.J.

    "The findings in the judgment demonstrate that the action of PBJ has not only been arbitrary and ultra vires but also biased in favour of JKH.   
  
_Per_ Sarath N. Silva C.J.

"Ordinarily, the grant of a declaration that executive or administrative
action is an infringement of the fundamental right guaranteed by Article 12
(1) would result in a restoration of the status quo ante. However since the
jurisdiction vested in this court in terms of Article 126 (g) is to grant
relief or to make directions as it may seem just and equitable, it is open to
the court to ascertain whether the implications of the impugned executive
action is severable.

**An APPLICATION** under Article 126 of the Constitution.  
  
**Cases referred to:-  
  
**1. _Attorney-General v A. D. de Silva -_ 34 NLR 529 (PC) _  
  
_2 _. Rawlands v A. G. -_ 72 NLR 385 _  
  
_3 _. Visvalingam v Liyanage - 1983 -_ 1 Sri LR 236  
  
4 _. Premachandra v Jayasundara -_ 1994 - 2 Sri LR 9 _  
  
_5 _. Bulankulama and others v Secretary Ministry of Industrial Development -_
2000 - 3 SLR 243 _  
  
6\. Senaratne v Chandrika Kumarasinghe - 2007_ \- 1 Sri LR 59.

**138**

_M. A. Sumanthiran with Viran Corea for petitioner  
_  
_Nihal Fernando PC with Ronald Perera and V. K. Choksy for 1st respondent  
  
L. C,. Seneviratne PC with A. P. Niles for 3rd respondent  
  
Viraj Premasinghe for 10th respondent  
  
Romesh de Silva PC with Harsha Amarasekera for 18th - 21 st respondents  
  
Y. J. W, Wijayatilleke PC ASG with Viraj Dayaratne SSC for 8th, 15th - 19th,
26th and 31st respondents  
_  
22nd respondent - Nihal Sri Amarasekera in person.  
  
_Shibly Azeez PC for 32nd - 34th added respondents.  
  
_  

July 21, 2008

**SARATH N. SILVA P.C., C.J.  
  
    **The petitioner, Vasudeva Nanayakkara, in the capacity of a national politician and a social worker has filed this application in the public interest in terms of Article 126 of the Constitution, alleging an infringement of the fundamental right to the equal protection of the law guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution. The impugned executive action as alleged by the petitioner is the action, primarily of P. B. Jayasundera, the 8th respondent who functioned at the material time as Chairman of the Public Enterprise Reform Commission (previously and presently Secretary to the Treasury) and of the then Cabinet of Ministers, including the 3rd respondent, Ranil Wickremasinghe, who was the Prime Minister. The then President is cited as the 4th respondent. It is alleged that Jayasundera caused the sale of shares of Lanka Marine Services Ltd., (LMSL) a wholly owned company of the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (CPC), which was a profit making, debt free, tax paying company to John Keells Holdings Ltd (JKH - 18th respondent), without prior approval of the Cabinet of Ministers, in a process which was not transparent and was biased in favour of J.K.H. It is also alleged that he did not obtain a valuation of LMSL from the Government Valuer and relied only on a valuation secured at his discretion from a private bank. That, the sale price of approximately Rs. 1.2 billion pales into insignificance considering that profits of LMSL for the 4 years including the year of sale was Rs.2.45 billion. In addition an illegal State Grant was given to LMSL by the then President of an extent of 8 Acres 2 Roods, 21.44 perches within the Port of Colombo in January 2005, nearly 21/2 

**139**

years after the sale of shares stating that it was made upon the payment of
approximately Rs.1.2 billion by LMSL to the Government, whereas no such money
was paid. It is further alleged that in a collateral proceeding JKH obtained
tax free status for its investment in LMSL from the Board of Investment (BOI).
That, since the applicable Regulation did not cover the Agreement entered
into, JKH got the Regulation amended and a fresh Agreement entered into by the
BOI. Thus it was alleged that the impugned privatization was lopsided and
moved in the reverse direction of public enterprise reform by converting a tax
paying Public Enterprise to a tax free private enterprise which claimed a
monopoly in the relevant business.  
  
    The petitioner also relies on the Central Bank Annual Report of 2004 (P24) which states that the privatization of LMSL has not yielded the expected low prices and competition, requiring further reforms in the sector. The same view is expressed by the notice published on May 2005 (P2), by "Feeder Operators" complaining of high "Bunker Prices" in Colombo.   
  
    The petitioner was actively supported by Nihal Amarasekera, the 22nd respondent who succeeded Jayasundera as Chairman, PERC, at a later point of time. It is clear that the bundles of documents produced in the case would not have surfaced if not for the probing scrutiny by Amarasekera. I would not cite the scathing remarks made by him of the impugned transaction since this court would be guided only by the sequence of events, relevant documents and the reasonable inferences that could be drawn from them.   
  
    The petitioner is also supported by 3 intervenient petitioners later added as 32nd, 33rd and 34th respondents. The 32nd respondent, Sri Lanka Shipping Co. Ltd., (SLSCC) bid for the shares of LMSL in collaboration with Chemoil Corporation, USA. They allege that the initial bid of JKH was made in collaboration with Fuel and Marine Marketing (FAMM) owned by the Chevron Corporation of USA. That, JKH could have got above the threshold of 70 marks to be short listed, only on the credentials of FAMM, being a market leader in Bunkering. After clearing the initial threshold, the Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) was notified that FAMM was not pursuing the bid in collaboration with JKH and it is alleged that the 

**140**

TEC erred in continuing to evaluate the bid on financial capability and
business strategy as an individual bid of JKH. It was submitted that with the
withdrawal of FAMM, the Committee should have struck off the marks attributed
on the credentials of FAMM and removed JKH from the shortlist.  
  
    It is further alleged by the petitioner and the 22nd, 32nd, 33rd and 34th respondents that after the bid of JKH was accepted the specimen of the Common User Facility (CUF) Agreement was amended by Jayasundera at the behest of JKH and a new clause 8.2 was included which provided that the Government, Sri Lanka Ports Authority (SLPA) and CPC would ensure that all bunkers would be supplied using the CUF. The catch in this clause is that the CUF is connected to the Storage Tanks located within the property granted to the privatized LMSL and the added clause effectively prevented an alternative supply of bunkers and created a monopoly in LMSL now owned by JKH. After their bid for the purchase of LMSL shares was rejected, the 32nd respondent obtained a licence in terms of section 5 of the Petroleum Products (Special Provisions) Act, NO.33 of 2002 to distribute petroleum which included the supply of bunkers. On that license these respondents commenced an off-shore operation of supplying bunkers using ships and a main tanker. LMSL owned by JKH caused SLPA to prevent this operation in terms of the said clause 8.2. There were many rounds of litigation and finally the Court of Appeal struck down the said clause 8.2 as being inconsistent with the provisions of Act, NO.33 of 2002.  
  
    It is thus seen that the petitioner and the respondents referred above challenge every step of the privatization of LMSL including steps taken after the acceptance of the bid to consolidate the gains of JKH. The gravamen of the allegation is that P. B. Jayasundera, Chairman of PERC and S. Ratnayake, Director, JKH (20th respondent) worked hand in glove to clinch the wrongful benefits to JKH. In sum, the petitioner and 22nd, 32nd, 33rd and 34th respondents adopt the conclusion of the Committee On Public Enterprises (COPE) of Parliament which inquired into the same matter and reported to Parliament as follows:  
  
_     "This transaction had been executed blatantly without Cabinet approval,
with several flaws causing loss and_

**141**

    _detriment to the Government, and demonstrating it to be a questionable "fix", and is therefore ab-initio bad in law, null and voild."(Vide: Hansard of 12.01.2007-P35)  
  
    _Although I cited the conclusion of the Committee as reported to Parliament, I have to state straightaway that the perspective of the inquiry before this court is different. We have to focus on the applicable law and ascertain whether the impugned executive action was an arbitrary exercise of power, serving a collateral purpose and defeating the object of the law, denying thereby to the petitioner and the People the equal protection of the law under Article 12 of the Constitution. From that perspective the initial focus would be on the Public Enterprises Reform Commission of Sri Lanka Act, NO.1 of 1996, purportedly in terms of which Jayasundera as the then chairman of the Commission took the impugned executive action.   
  
A. PUBLIC ENTERPRISES REFORM COMMISSION OF SRI LANKA ACT, NO.1 OF 1996  
  
    The Act which sets up the Commission better known by the acronym PERC marks a watershed in the progression of governmental economic policy, from a State owned and controlled, centrally driven economy to a privately owned market driven economy. This process has been characterized at one end of the spectrum, in the extensive nationalization programme especially in the post 1956 era and the establishment of large scale State commercial enterprises to, the divestiture of State ownership and/or control. At one end the process envisaged economic stability and fixed prices and at the other, market buoyancy and competition resulting in the best product reaching the people at the lowest price. At both ends the process has been intended to benefit the People. Hence I would reject the objection raised by the contesting respondents which denies a public interest in the due execution of this Law and also denies a locus standi to the petitioner to vindicate such public interest by invoking the jurisdiction of this court in terms of Article 126(1) of the Constitution, as being misconceived and myopic.  
  
    The process of divestiture of State ownership which was initially done on an ad hoc basis in respect of Enterprises that were 

**142**

incurring losses was formalized on 01.03.1995 and appropriately described as
the Public Enterprise Reform Programme with the establishment of a Special
Task Force by the President. The Reform Programme was further enhanced and
given the much needed legal dimension when Parliament enacted Act, No.1 of
1996 cited above establishing the Commission 'PERC'. Thus Public Enterprise
Reform which lay in the area of Executive discretion came strictly to the
legal domain as being a public process regulated by law. The functions and
objects of the PERC are set out fairly and squarely in section 4 of the Act,
as follows:-  
  
    _'The function of the Commission shall be to advise and assist the Government on the reform of public enterprises with the following objects in view:-  
_  
    _(a) fostering and accelerating the economic development of the country;  
  
    (b) improving the efficiency and competitiveness of the economy;  
  
    (c) upgrading production and services with access to international markets on a competitive basis, by the acquisition of new technology and expertise;  
  
    (d) developing and broadbasing the capital market and mobilizing long term private savings;  
  
    (e) motivating the private sector;  
  
    (f) augmenting the revenues of the Government, so as to enable it to better address the social agenda; (emphasis added)  
_  
    It is manifest from this provision that the role of the PERC is limited and circumscribed by law to one of advising and assisting the Government in any envisaged reform of a public enterprise including divestiture of State ownership. Since the role of advising and assisting is couched by section 4 in mandatory terms, it necessarily follows that the Government cannot carry out public enterprise reform including divestiture without first receiving the advice and assistance of the PERC.

**143**

    A further aspect to be noted in the section is that all the objects of the PERC are intended primarily to benefit the People, The public element of the process is further enhanced by the specific duty cast on the PERC by section 5 (1) which reads as follows:   
  
_" to assist the Government to create public awareness of Government policies
and programmes on the reform of public enterprises with a view to developing a
commitment by the public, to such policies and programmes." _

    Thus public enterprise reform including divestiture could never descend to be a shadowy, slithering process. The Law mandates that it should be a transparent process circumscribed by an abiding public interest in ensuring its legality and propriety. It is on this basis that I reject the objection to a suit in the public interest and the denial of a _locus standi_ to the petitioner as being misconceived and myopic. The objection not only ignores the significance of the impugned transaction in the broad canvas of an economic paradigm shift but also ignores the salient aspects of the Law cited above.  
  
    I would now move to examine the process of reform relevant to the impugned transaction being the sector commonly referred to as, bunkering.   
  
B. LIBERALIZATION OF BUNKERING  
  
    The service of providing marine petroleum fuels to ships that lay in port, in anchorage or off-shore is a shipping related operation generally described as bunkering. Hub ports like Singapore enhanced their capacity to supply bunkers and were generating foreign exchange revenue of phenomenal proportions. It is accepted that the Port of Colombo with its unique and advantageous geographic location close to major West-East Shipping lanes failed to harness the huge potential in this sector. The principal inhibiting factor was cited as the monopoly vested in the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (CPC) by Act, NO.28 of 1961 in the entire sector of the petroleum trade and industry including bunkering. This was one item of the process of nationalization in the post 1956 era, referred to above. Bunkers were supplied by the CPC through its wholly owned subsidiary LMSL using a storage facility of 12 tanks and a network of interconnecting pipelines linked 

**144**

to the Dolphin Berth and the South Jetty. This network is later described as
the Common User Facility (CUF) and is located within the Port of Colombo.  
  
    The initial proposal for the liberalization of bunkering is contained in the Cabinet Memorandum of 24.05.2000 presented by the Minister of Shipping. It cites the high prices of bunkers supplied in Colombo and of limited supplies and recommends that the private sector be encouraged to invest and operate bunkering services. The memorandum makes no reference to a sale of shares of LMSL.  
  
    The Cabinet considered the memorandum on 22.06.2000 together with observation made by several Ministers and decided to refer the matter to a Committee of Officials for a report thereon. The officials to consist of Secretaries to Ministries of Finance, Shipping, Irrigation and Power and of PERC. The Committee Report dated 01.08.2000 was submitted to the Cabinet with a memorandum of the Minister of Shipping bearing the same date.   
  
    The recommendations of the Committee of Officials were as follows:-

_" (a) To liberalize the bunkering sector and to permit a limited number of
parties to operate bunker services within the territorial waters of Sri Lanka
and the Ports of Sri Lanka other than the Port of Colombo;  
  
(b) For PERC to seek offers through an open tender process for the importation
and marketing of marine fuel as given in section 3 above, from investors with
local equity participation and the necessary technical and financial ability
and experience in Bunkering;  
  
(c) The GOSL to charge a licence fee from the selected operators for the use
of Sri Lankan territorial waters to carry out their business;  
  
(d) To authorize the Merchant Shipping Division of the Ministry of Shipping
and Shipping Development in terms of the Merchant Shipping Act, No.52 of 1971
to regulate and monitor the activities of bunker operators within Sri Lanka's
territorial waters; "  
  
(e) For PERC to initiate action accordingly and to make further recommendation
to the Cabinet regarding the process to be followed. "  
 _

**145**

    It is to be noted that the Committee recommended a cautious approach of preserving the monopoly of LMSL within the Port and liberalizing the sector by the grant of 3 licences for the supply of "bunkers outside the Port of Colombo. The PERC had" to make recommendations regarding this process. It is significant that the Committee which included a Director of PERC did not recommend the sale of shares of LMSL.  
  
    The Minister of Shipping in his Memorandum dated 01.08.2000 agreed with the recommendations of the Committee of Officials subject to two observations viz:-  
  
_     "In the light of this background I will make the following observations
on the committee report for consideration of the Cabinet.  
  
    (a) Monopoly given to Lanka Marine Services Ltd., (LMSL) should be restricted to one year within which period privatization of LMSL should be completed._

_     (b) New entrants to the bunkering sector in Sri Lanka should be allowed
to sell bunkers within the territorial waters of Sri Lanka which should
include the immediate  
     vicinity of the Port of Colombo.  
_  
_     I seek the approval of the Cabinet of Ministers for the recommendation
of the Committee of Officials, subject to the observations I have made."  
  
    _The Cabinet considered the matter on 17.08.2000 and granted approval to the proposals in the memorandum and directed that action be taken by the Minister of Shipping and Shipping Development.   
  
    Thus the process of reform in the bunkering sector authorized by the Cabinet was a phased out arrangement. Initially for the PERC to invite offers for supply of bunkers outside the Port of Colombo and licenses being granted to 3 suppliers. To continue with the monopoly of LMSL to supply bunkers within the Port of Colombo for 1 year within which period the privatization of LMSL to be completed. It was envisaged that the competitive process will bring in the necessary expertise to the sector with the service being operated with due compliance with international safety and environmental standards and finally with the completion of the privatization of LMSL the entire sector being liberalized. The 

**145**

benefits for the Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) are set out in paragraph 3(d)
of the recommendations of the Committee Officials which reads as follows:-

_'The benefits to GOSL are expected from the increase in tax revenue through
higher income tax from the local companies as well as opportunities for
employment generation. In addition, GOSL would charge a license fee, for the
use of Sri Lanka's territorial waters. " _

C. ACTION TAKEN BY THE PERC CHAIRED BY JAYASUNDERA PURPORTEDLY ON THE BASIS OF
THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE OFFICIALS AND THE OBSERVATION OF THE
MINISTER AS APPROVED BY THE CABINET OF MINISTERS

    The petitioner has put in the forefront of his case that any action by the PERC could only have been within the conspectus of the recommendations of the Committee and the observations of the Minister as approved by Cabinet, as set out above. Jayasundera has in paragraph 8 of the affidavit admitted the content of these  
documents and of the decision of the Cabinet. Hence we have to assume that he
knew fully well that the task of PERC was to make a recommendation to the
Cabinet on the 3 processes that were envisaged in the following order:-

(i) the process of calling for tenders through an open tender to issue
initially 3 licenses for the supply of bunkers within the territorial waters
and Ports other than Colombo;  
  
(ii) the process of privatization and the removal of the monopoly given to
LMSL within a period of 1 year of the operation of this partly liberalized
regime as envisaged in (i) above;  
  
(iii) the operation of the fully liberalized regime of bunkering services
after the privatization of LMSL as envisaged in (ii) above;

    Admittedly, PERC did not make any recommendation to the Cabinet on any of the matters envisaged above which would have brought about an improved regime of bunkering facilities to service a growth in the shipping sector; higher foreign exchange earnings 

**147**

and a higher yield of tax revenue. Nor was there any change in the Cabinet
decision stated above. Instead, whilst purporting to act under the said
Cabinet decision PERC embarked on a course of action devised by itself of
which I would now examine.  
  
    On 28.10.2001, PERC published a notification inviting proposals from private sector operators to participate in the marine fuel market in Sri Lanka within the territorial waters including the Ports. The notice also stated that there will be no limit in the number of licenses to be issued. I have to make a brief note here that this notification is contrary to the Cabinet decision. The Committee of Officials had recommended that only three licenses should be issued initially and in any event in the first year, services could be provided only outside the Port of Colombo.   
  
    More significantly the issue of licenses required a new legal regime which as pleaded in paragraph 6 of the petition by the petitioners is contained in the Petroleum Products (Special Provisions) Act, NO.33 of 2002. This averment is admitted by Jayasundera in paragraph 5 of his affidavit. The Act, NO.33 of 2002 was passed by Parliament and certified by the Speaker only on 17.12.2002. Hence the notice calling for proposals more than 1 year before the law as enacted was an exercise in futility. It appears that PERC took no action on the proposals received pursuant to the notification referred to above except to forward them to the Ministry of Power and Energy. No recommendation was made by Jayasundera as required in the Cabinet decision as to the process of granting three licences initially to operate bunkering service outside the Port of Colombo.   
  
    PERC published another notice on 08.02.2002 inviting Expression of Interests (EOI's) for the purchase of 90% shares in LMSL. EOI's were to be submitted on or before 21.02.2002. The notice stated that it is being published on behalf of the Government of Sri Lanka. It has to be noted that the Cabinet of Ministers did not in the decision referred to above authorize PERC to call for such EOI's. The proposal of the Committee of Officials (including a Director of PERC) was that PERC should make recommendations as to the grant of licenses for providing bunkering service. The observation of the Minister was that the privatization of LMSL.

**148**

should be completed within 1 year of operation the partly liberalized
bunkering services in terms of the licenses that will be issued. It is
significant that the Minister's observation quoted by me verbatim in the
preceding section does not even. refer to any action on the part of the PERC
in this regard. The omission is for good reason since the process of
privatization of LMSL was to follow the successful implementation of the
licensing scheme with private operators supplying bunkers outside the Port of
Colombo. Neither the Committee of Officials nor the Minister ever envisaged a
situation where LMSL which admittedly had a monopoly is privatized without
successfully operational licensing scheme which was essential to pave the way
for competition, lowering of price and improved services, being the objective
approved by the Cabinet of Ministers. From this perspective the course of
action adopted by the PERC of dampening the liberalization process and
publishing a notification with an obvious overbreadth, shorn of the necessary
legal machinery, which could not have been implemented at the stage and by
accelerating the privatization process of LMSL, has to be viewed in a dim
light. The action which was contrary to the Cabinet decision had the effect of
favouring the would be purchaser of LMSL shares who will continue in effect to
have a monopoly of providing bunkering services. The inference is further
supported by an amendment to the draft CUF Agreement, agreed to be Jayasundera
at the behest of JKH, after the offer of JKH for purchase of LMSL shares was
accepted (which would be dealt with at a later stage under the head of
"Deviations which was availed of by LMSL then under the control of JKH to
stave off competition in the supply of bunkers.  
  
    The petitioner and Amarasekera have made several submissions that Jayasundera has acted contrary to the Public Finance Circular No. FIN 358 (4) dated 29.11.199.. which Jayasundera himself had issued for "Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Procurement Procedure..." by the failure to constitute a Cabinet Approved Tender Board (CATB) for the purpose of making recommendations the Cabinet on the sale of LMSL shares. It was submitted that the Tender Documents viz: the EOI and Request for Proposal (RFP) should have been approved by a CAT and the 

**149**

TEC. In this instance only a TEC had been appointed and on the sequence of
dates it was established that the EOI and RFP had been issued prior to even
the appointment of the TEC.  
  
    The requirements to appoint a CATS and a TEC a intended to ensure transparency, fairness and honesty the procurement process. Purchase and sale are two aspect of a contractual process which those volumes of guideline and circulars are intended to safeguard. Jayasundera has conveniently sought to explain the failure to appoint a CATS on the basis that it is not a practice to appoint such a Soard in respect of the sale of Government shares. If it is so, his practice is contrary to his own  
circular. Se that as it may, the appointment of CATS would have afforded a
mechanism to redress the bitter grievances such as those voiced by the 32nd
respondent, as to a lack of transparency and of unfavourable treatment.
Furthermore, it would have ensured that the Cabinet was apprised of the
process of evaluation of bids and a decision being made by the Cabinet as to
the manner in which the sale should be effected, without Jayasundera on his
own accord purporting to "clinch the deal" with JKH.  
  
    Furthermore, if the tender documentation was prepared by a TEC and CATS, incorrect statements such as the seriously wrong statement contained in paragraph 4.4.1 of the RFP would have been avoided. In respect of the land in question this paragraph states that CPC presently holds freehold title to this land and has obtained Cabinet approval to transfer the land to LMSL. This statement is incorrect in its entirety. The petitioner has established that the land in question in extent 8 acres 2 roods and 21.4 perches is in fact a part of the Port of Colombo in terms of Order made by the Minister in terms of section 2(3) of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority Act, No.51 of 1979. The aspect of the land will be dealt with morefully at a later stage.   
  
    I conclude on the foregoing reasoning that the steps taken by Jayasundera and PERC towards effecting a sale of shares of LMSL is not in any way mandated by the decision of the Cabinet of Ministers and is manifestly contrary to the process that had been authorized. The procedure adopted is also contrary to the Public Finance Circular issued by Jayasundera himself. 

**150**

    Jayasundera has sought to explain the action taken by him in paragraph 10(d) of his affidavit as follows: 

_" as provided for. in section 5 (t) of the Public Enterprises Reform
Commission Act, NO.1 of 1996, PERC was acting as the agent of the Government
and as such was empowered to follow appropriate procedures in carrying out the
task of liberalizing the bunkering trade;"_  
  
Section 5(t) of the PERC Act relied on by him reads follows:  
_  
"to act as the agent of the Government, in Sri Lanka or abroad, for the
purposes of any matter or transaction, if so authorized"_

(emphasis added)

    He seems to be implying that he took steps for the sale of LMSL without prior authority of the Cabinet "in carrying out the task of liberalizing the bunkering trade". It is correct as noted above that the Cabinet of Ministers decided that PERC should make proposals for liberalizing the bunkering trade by issuing licenses to the private  
sector. Jayasundera as revealed in the preceding analysis in fact put this
process of 'liberalizing' in cold storage and moved at express speed in the
opposite direction of privatizing LMSL with the monopoly intact. In that
respect he has acted contrary to section 5(t) relied on by him by failing to
act in the manner he was authorized to do and by engaging in a process which
was diametrically opposed to the policy as laid down in the Cabinet decision.  
  
D. VALUATION OF LMSL SHARES  
  
    Valuation of LMSL had been done by the Chief Valuer as at 02.07.93. Jayasundera wrote to the Chief Valuer on 06.02.2002 requesting an updated version of the valuation. The Chief Valuer replied him by letter dated 07.05.2002 stating that the valuation of assets is almost complete and can be finalised within a week and that the business valuation was not started since his officers are entitled to an incentive payment as approved by the Cabinet. He requested Jayasundera to confirm the payment as approved by the Cabinet. Significantly, Jayasundera did not reply this letter. Instead, by letter dated 15.05.2002 a business valuation of LMSL was requested from the DFCC Bank to be given before 28.05.2002. A

**151**

sum of Rs. 750,000/- plus GST and NSL were paid by Jayasundera to DFCC Bank
without demur. A question immediately arises as to how a public officer who
was reluctant to pay an incentive allowance to another public officer could be
so generous to a private bank. The only reason given by Jayasundera for not
pursing the matter with the Chief Valuer is that "it would not have been
feasible to have expected a business valuation to be done by the Chief Valuer
within a short period of time" (paragraph 12k of his affidavit). Even the DFCC
bank appears to have been rushed through by PERC to furnish the valuation.
Question looms large as to whose deadline Jayasundera was trying to keep. The
Cabinet had not even authorized PERC to make a recommendation as to the sale
of LMSL shares. The only matter on which the Cabinet had authorized action was
the liberalization of the bunkering service in the area outside the Colombo
Port, which had been effectively put into cold storage by PERC as demonstrated
above. Hence his hasty action was certainly not based on a lawful exercise of
executive power in terms of the PERC Act and was contrary to the decision of
the Cabinet of Ministers.  
  
    Even assuming that Jayasundera wanted to make an unsolicited recommendation to the Cabinet as regards the sale of LMSL shares, the proper course would have been to secure a valuation from the Chief Valuer which had been previously requested and would have been ready within a week in regard to the assets of LMSL. He avoided getting this valuation by refraining from making a commitment to pay the Chief Valuer the incentive allowance which the latter was entitled to in terms of Cabinet decision. Having successfully stalled that process, he selected a private bank on his own and paid the full fee that was sought. This is completely contrary to the basic tenets of public sector procurement. The business valuation he sought was conceived by him alone. Based on the business value given by the DFCC, Jayasundera fixed floor price for bids of 90% of LMSL shares at Rs 1.2 Million. The severe criticism of the valuation and the floor price fixed is based on the financial performance of LMSL within 4 years of the privatization. According to the Annual Report profits of LMSL for the year 2005/2006 (figures being as follows: 

**152**

    2002/2003 -     508,735,000  
  
    2003/2004 -     267,802,000  
  
    2004/2005 -     575,035,000  
  
    2005/2006 -  1,106,992,000  
  
                      2,458,564,00)

    Thus, it is pointed out by the petitioner and Amarasekera that within 4 years more than double the amount that had been spent on the purchase of shares was recovered by way of profits from the business of LMSL. That alone gives credence to the criticism of petitioner and of Amarasekera that the basis of valuation and the process of sale was seriously flawed.   
  
    The method used by DFCC was the discount of future cash flow projected to a period of 15 years. Amarasekera in his submissions demonstrated that this is an erroneous basis of valuation considering the nature of the business activity, especially if the high component of real estate (more than 8 Acres of land in the Port of Colombo) is to be taken into account. Real estate could never be valued in the manner it was sought to be done. The valuation of real estate could have come from the assets value done by the Chief Valuer which Jayasundera carefully avoided obtaining. The aspect of significance is that LMSL would continue to enjoy a monopoly in the bunkering sector due to the delay in the process of liberalization which has been dealt with exhaustively in the preceding section of the judgment. Jayasundera in fact paved the way for the continuation of the monopoly by adding clause 8.2 to the CUF Agreement after the offer of JKH was accepted.   
  
    The petitioner in paragraph 22 of the petition quoted paragraph 12 of the Report of the Committee on Public Enterprises (COPE) which highlights both matters referred above. The said paragraph 12 quoted in the petition is as follows: 

_ "Consequently, being confronted with the above monopoly clause, DFCC Bank
reneged on their "business valuation" of LMSL of Rs. 1,200,000,000/- and
confirmed in writing that on the basis of a "monopoly" their "business
valuation" is Rs.2,400,000,000/-, confirming that had they been required to
give _

**153**

_a "net assets valuation" they would have engaged the services of a
professional real estate valuer for the land 8A. 2R. 21,44P'''_

_     _The representative of the DFCC who filed an affidavit in Court has
refrained from giving any specific answer to the averment in paragraph 22 of
the petition. In the circumstances it is unnecessary to consider the written
submissions tendered on behalf of the DFCC seeking to justify the valuation.
Jayasundera's conduct in the matter of obtaining the valuation is basically
not authorized by the cabinet, is characterized by inexplicable haste;
erratic; apparently designed to suit his own objectives; contrary to all
accepted procedures and furthest removed from a lawful exercise of power under
the PERC Act of tendering well considered advice and a recommendation to the
Cabinet.  
  
E. EVALUATION BY THE TEC AND THE SHORTLISTING OF BIDDERS  
  
    A 'TEC' was appointed by C. Ratwatte, the then Secretary to the Treasury entirely on the recommendation of Jayasundera. A characteristic feature of the entire process is that Ratwatte has approved and signed every paper that had been put to him by Jayasundera, promptly and without any question being raised.   
  
    The TEC met on 8th and 27th March 2002 to review the 17 EOl's submitted. A two tiered marking scheme was adopted. 60 marks being attributed to financial capability on the basis of net assets of the bidders and 40 marks were attributed to experience in bunkering and other credentials in that sector. Bidders receiving over 70 marks were short listed to submit proposals.  
  
    JKH submitted the EOI in collaboration with Fuel and Maritime Marketing (FAMM) owned by the Chevron Corporation of the USA. The 32nd Added respondent being a party that was rejected submitted a bid in collaboration with the Chevron Corporation of the USA. Both EOls were short listed - together with 4 others. The case of the 32nd Added respondent is that JKH would have received the full 60 marks for financial capability but since JKH did not have experience in the bunkering sector, it could not have cleared the threshold of 70 marks if not for the collaboration of FAMM which was undoubtedly a market leader in the sector. The 

**154**

TEC met on 06.06.2002 to review the proposals of the six short listed bidders.
On that day it is recorded by the TEC that FAMM would not bid for the shares
along with JKH but may enter into a technical consultancy agreement. The
submission is that at that stage JKH should have been removed from the
shortlist since it would have necessarily fallen below the threshold of 70
marks. The 32nd Added respondent alleges discriminatory treatment since the
TEC continued to evaluate the bid of JKH as an individual bid whereas its bid
was rejected on the basis that the collaborator Chemoil Corporation sought a
monopoly for 8 years, since a monopoly was not possible within the terms that
were offered. Submission of the 32nd Added respondent is borne out by the
summary of the EOI's being Annex 1 to the TEC Report. The EOI of JKH is
summarized with FAMM as the lead collaborator. Item 10 reads as follows:  
  
Name:                                FAMM/John Keells Holdings Ltd.,  
  
Submission of Information:   Form    A        -        Yes  
                                         Form    B        -        Yes  
  
Principal business activity:   Marketing of fuel oil & marine lubricants  
  
Access to refinery:                 Yes  
  
Tanker company:                   Yes  
  
Location of bunkering operations: Americas, Europe, UAE, Asia, incl.
Singapore, Thailand.  
  
    According to the mark sheet annexed FAMM/JKH combination got the maximum marks of 100 on the formidable credentials of FAMM in the bunkering sector highlighted in the evaluation cited above. Admittedly JKH on its own could not have laid claim to any of those credentials.  
  
    The criticism of the petitioner and Amarasekera as to the failure of Jayasundera to get a CATS appointed gathers strength, since there was no other body other than Jayasundera himself to check on the work of the TEC. The following passage of the Report of the TEC show that it has been guided entirely by Jayasundera:

**155**

_" The TEG met on 6th June 2002, to review the proposals received in terms of
the RFP by the due date of 28 May 2002, to shortlist the parties who would be
allowed to place financial bids on the Golombo Stock Exchange." _

    The entirety of the envisaged process of shortlisted parties being allowed to place financial bids on the Colombo Stock Exchange was obviously devised and followed by Jayasundera on his own as the later events reveal, since the matter of sale of shares had not even been placed before the Cabinet as at that stage and there was admittedly no CATB.   
  
    The criticism of the 32nd Added respondent that JKH only made use of the credentials of FAMM to clear the initial threshold and that collaboration with FAMM, was never genuinely intended gains strength from a document that emerges from an entirely different quarter. The petitioner has at a later stage in the case obtained documents marked P36 and P37 from the BOI as to an application for investment relief submitted by Ratnayake on behalf of JKH. On 20.03.2002 being 7 days before the meeting of the TEC referred to above in which the EOI's were reviewed, Ratnayake submitted an application in terms of section 17 of the BOI Law for tax relief in respect of a "new investment'. In column 1(a) of the application form as to "Particulars of Collaborators" only the name of John Keells Holdings and the address at 130 Glennie Street, Colombo 2 is specified. Significantly, there is no reference to any other collaborator or to any foreign investment. More, significantly the particulars of the proposed investment carries all the details of LMSL without the name. The address of the place where the investment is going to be made is given as 69 Walls Lane, Colombo 15, which is the address of LMSL. The extent of the land required for the investment is given as 8 Acres 2 Roods 21.4 Perches being precisely the extent of the land within the Port of Colombo which features so significantly in the case. 12 Tanks, 40 years old being the facilities used by LMSL are also included. The application made by Ratnayake on behalf of JKH is premised on a suppression of the truth, in that it is nowhere stated that what was intended is an acquisition of the business of LMSL. It is falsely made out to be a new investment to qualify for investment relief. The omission to refer to the collaboration of FAMM, which was most significant from 

**156**

the perspective of the BOI, clearly establishes the allegation of the 32nd
Added respondent that the inclusion of FAMM in the EOI submitted at the same
time was only a passing show to get past the threshold of 70 marks.  
  
    Another aspect to be considered is the basis on which Ratnayake of JKH was so confident that its EOI containing the misrepresentation of collaboration with FAMM, would clear all the hurdles and be able to "clinch the deal" including the land of 8 Acres, before the EOI was even shortlisted. Was it optimistic guesswork? Or, as alleged by the petitioner and Amarasekera, the entire deal was arranged between Jayasundera and Ratnayake? The subsequent events will shed light as to which alternative is more probable.  
  
    To continue the narrative of events with regard to the BOI application. By letter dated 11.07.2002 the BOI notified JKH that the application for investment relief has been approved and that there will be no income tax for a period of 3 years. Thereafter income tax would be 10% for the 4th and 5th year and 15% thereafter. The irony of the process as pointed out by Amarasekera is that LMSL owned by the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation was a tax paying enterprise. In the year 2000/2001 it made a profit of Rs. 318 Million and paid Rs. 163 Million as income tax. The criticism of Amarasekera that a profit making tax paying public enterprise became a tax free private enterprise as a result of the impugned exercise is well established. Whereas the object of the process of liberalization according to the Cabinet Memorandum which approved was to increase the volume of bunkering and thereby and increase the revenue yield to the State.   
  
    **The date of the 801 letter granting tax exemption being 11.07.2002 may have some significance since on the very next day - 12.07.2002, Jayasundera rushed a letter to Ratnayake that the JKH bid was accepted and that "it is proposed to conclude the transaction". Ratnayake replied on the same day 12.07.2002 stating that they are willing to conclude the transaction. There is indeed, amazing speed, in concluding a transaction as to the sale of a public asset which also included 8 Acres of land in the Port of Colombo. Allthis was done when the proposed process of sale had not been even considered**

**157**

**by the Cabinet. The Cabinet considered the process, a month later on
14.08.2002.  
**  
    To conclude the narrative of events as regards the BOI approval, although approval was granted by letter dated 11.07.2002, it would not have in effect given tax relief to JKH since only a new investment as opposed to an acquisition of an existing business would qualify for such relief. The applicable Regulation was thereafter amended by Gazette bearing No. 1256/22 dated 01.10.2002 to include an investment formed by an acquisition of assets of an existing enterprise. The amendment is "tailor made" to fit the acquisition of assets of LMSL by JKH. Which inference is fully supported by the prompt letter dated 04.10.2002 sent by Ratnayake to BOI requesting an amendment of the Agreement that had already been entered into on the basis of the amendment to the Regulation. All the amendments to the Agreement suggested by Ratnayake were incorporated by BOI ensuring the tax relief referred to above for the investment. This process to say the least makes a mockery of the Rule of Law and the equal protection of the law. If the law can be bent and amended to suit an individual purpose and to confer a benefit to any party that was not due under the existing law, the hallowed principle of equality before the law, will be denuded of its essential and abiding meaning.   
  
    I have to now revert to the events leading to the acceptance of the bid and consideration of the deviations that favour JKH as alleged by the petitioner and Ratnayake.  
  
F. EVENTS LEADING TO THE ACCEPTANCE OF THE BID AND THE ALLEGED DEVIATIONS THAT
FAVOUR JKH  
  
    A Pre Bid Conference was convened by Jayasundera on 30.04.2002 and held at the PERC office. Representatives of the CPC, SLPA, Colombo Stock Exchange and of parties who submitted EOI's were present. It is clear that the meeting was convened well before the report of the TEC was completed. The TEC Report is undated but it refers to a meeting on 06.06.2002. It appears that without finalizing the report and signing it, the parties who were shortlisted were notified that they could submit proposals on the basis of the RFP furnished by PERC. The absence of any guidelines laid down by the Cabinet and of a CATB appears to have 

**158**

enabled Jayasundera to devise a procedure of his choice being a course of
action far removed from the power vested in the PERC under the law referred to
above being to advise and assist the Government. Be that as it may when
parties come for the Pre Bid Conference no one knew of the basis on which the
EOI's were evaluated for thee plain reason that there was no Report of TEC as
at that date.  
  
    The minutes of the conference have been recorded and circulated amongst all parties present. Whatever be the regularity of the procedure adopted, what was notified to the parties have a degree of sanctity and parties would necessarily have been guided by it in making their proposals. Three matters arise for consideration in view of the specific allegations that have been made of subsequent deviations that favour JKH. These matters are as follows:  
  
DEVIATION (i)  
  
    Paragraph 1 of the minutes specifically states that LMSL will not have a monopoly on the import and sale of bunkers subsequent to the sale of LMSL shares. Paragraph 1.5 states that the present CPA Act provides for the Minister to authorize the import and sale of bunkers;  
  
    Thus the clear message given to the bidders is that after the sale the monopoly will be dismantled with licenses being granted to others.  
  
    I have demonstrated above that the Cabinet had directed the reverse of the process, being a partial dismantling of the monopoly and a sale of LMSL shares within 1 year thereof.  
  
    Further, it is clear from the sequence of events set out above under the head of "Liberalization of Bunkering" that the PERC headed by Jayasundera did not take steps towards liberalization as required by the Cabinet and on the contrary the process was effectively put in cold storage. Hence Jayasundera who knew fully well that PERC had not taken steps to even recommend a liberalized regime to the Cabinet and at the least for sometime to come there would be no competition in the sector, failed to apprise the bidders of the true picture and conveyed an incorrect 

**159**

impression. Whereas, if in effect the monopoly was going to continue for a
limited period of time the bidders may have had a basis to enhance their bids.
Hence Jayasundera's action was adverse to the interests of the State in
securing a better price. He failed to take into account the specific decision
of the Cabinet that the monopoly would at the least would continue to the Port
of Colombo for one year.  
  
    The more serious allegation against Jayasundera on that account is that after the JKH bid was accepted he agreed to a suggestion of Ratnayake made in letter dated 31.07.2002 that provision be included in the draft CUF Agreement which had been issued with the RFP, that all bunkers handled and transported within the Port of Colombo will have use the Common User Facility (CUF). Accordingly the CUF was amended including as clause 8.2, the assurance sought by Ratnayake as an undertaking of the Government and SLPA. The layout of the Pipeline Network shows that the Bunkering Jetty (South Jetty) and the Dolphin Berth are linked to the tanks used by LMSL. Hence the requirement in clause 8.2 would necessarily result in any party supplying bunkers in the Port of Colombo having to use of tanks of LMSL. There is merit in the submission of the Added 32nd respondent that since different grades of fuel are used in supplying bunkers the other competitors would thereby be necessarily precluded from supplying bunkers in the Port of Colombo. LMSL under the management of JKH got the SLPA to enforce clause 8.2 against the Added 32nd respondent when the latter on the basis of a license granted in terms of the Petroleum Products (Special Provisions) Act No. 63 of 2002 began an off-shore operation to supply bunkers. LMSL sought injunctive relief from Court to restrain this operation and followed up by filing a writ application in the Court of Appeal. Finally, the Court of Appeal held that the said clause 8.2 was invalid as being inconsistent with Act No. 53 of 2002. President's Counsel for the 18 to 21 respondents (LMSL/JKH and Directors) submitted that nothing flows from the inclusion of 8.2 and that there was no monopoly after the privatization in view of the judgments of the respective courts. I find it difficult to agree with the submission. What is drawn in issue in this case is the executive action of including clause 8.2. The fact that judicial action set right the wrongful executive action cannot be availed of by the party who secured the wrongful executive action 

**160**

in its favour and went to the extent of enforcing the wrongful executive
action in Court.  
  
    At the pre bid meeting Jayasundera clearly indicated that there would be no monopoly and that other licenses would be issued. He acted contrary to the proclaimed position in two ways. Firstly he refrained from acting on the specific decision of the Cabinet made on the recommendation of the Committee of Officials including a Director of PERC, that PERC should make recommendations as to the issuance of licenses to liberalize the bunkering trade. Thereby he brought about a situation of a defacto monopoly by dampening the competitive regime which the Cabinet envisaged. Secondly, he readily and without any consultation agreed to the inclusion of clause 8.2 in the CUF departing from the draft previously issued, being a provision obviously intended to install a monopoly. Jayasundera's function under the PERC Law cited above was only to advise and assist the Government and not to commit the Government to an undertaking which is completely contrary to the previous decision of the Cabinet.   
  
    Jayasundera has in paragraph 18 (d) of his affidavit admitted the subsequent inclusion clause 8.2 and seeks to justify his action on the basis that it was done.   
  
_     "in order to maintain a level playing field among all bunker operators.
"  
  
    _I have to observe in respect of this quaint defence that his perception of a "level playing field" appears to be one with a single player. He indirectly assured to the continuance of the monopoly, being a course completely contrary to the position set up in the forefront of the Pre Bid Conference.   
  
    As regards the role of JKH in respect of the admitted 'Deviation' by including clause 8.2, the overall submission of President's Counsel is that its action was entirely bona fide and the award was made since it was the only bidder who furnished the undertaking to pay 10% of the bid price. That, it is not the burden of JKH as the buyer to satisfy itself whether Jayasundera was duly empowered or authorized to enter into the impugned transaction and / or to make Deviations in the manner he has done. The gravamen of the submission is that the transaction is a sale and JKH made a

**161**

request for the inclusion of clause 8.2 in furtherance of its commercial
interests and Jayasundera who had ostensible authority agreed to it and that
the transaction cannot be impleaded on this account. Counsel thereby supports
the plea of bona fides with the legality of the executive action in issue.  
  
    The argument seems to be that when there is a yielding hand there is nothing illegal to take something more. I possibly cannot accept either of the propositions of Counsel.  
  
    JKH knew fully well that this was not a mere sale, but a sale of shares owned by a Public Corporation in an extremely lucrative venture. That, transparency and action being taken according to law should necessarily underpin the validity of the transaction. The declared basis at the Pre Bid Conference attended by Ratnayake representing JKH was that there will be no monopoly after the sale and that other suppliers of bunkers would be issued licenses. This premise would necessarily have inhibited bidders from quoting a higher price. In any event the object of the Cabinet was not to secure a higher price by preserving the monopoly. It was, as noted above is to enhance competition, to lower bunker prices, improve facilities and thereby increase the revenue yield to the State. Having come in on this openly declared premise, no sooner the bid was accepted by Jayasundera, Ratnayake moved quickly to get the former committed to an inclusion of clause 8.2. The obvious purpose of getting clause 8.2 included was to drive away competitors as manifested by the subsequent conduct of JKH of procuring the SLPA to take action against the 32nd respondent and thereafter by directly instituting legal proceedings against the latter. Hence I cannot agree with the submission of bona fides.   
  
    The next aspect to be considered is the authority of Jayasundera to make the Deviation in question. Although the issue is dealt with here, the reasoning would apply in respect of all aspects of the impugned transaction.   
  
    The question whether a public officer can act in excess of his statutory authority and enter into any agreement or arrangement and whether such agreement or arrangement would be binding on the State on a plea based on the ostensible authority of the public officer has been fully considered and settled more than half a 

**162**

century ago. It appears that with the passage of time the basic proposition of
law in this regard has been forgotten. In the case of Attorney - General v A.
D. de Silva(1) the Privy Council considered the question whether in a
situation where the Principal Collector of Customs sold certain articles of
the State without any statutory or actual authority, the contract could be
enforced against the State on the the basis that the officer had ostensible
authority. The following dicta of the Privy Council appropriately deal with
the proposition - now advanced by Counsel offf JKH.

_" Next comes the question whether the Principal Collector of Customs had
ostensible authority, such as would bind the Crown, to enter into the contract
sued on. All "ostensible" authority involves a representation by the principal
as to the extent of the agent's authority. No representation by the agent as
to the extent of his authority can amount to a "holding out" by the principal.
No public officer, unless he possesses some special power, can hold out on
behalf of the Crown that he or some other public officer has the right to
enter into a contract in respect of the property of the Crown when in fact no
such right exists. Their Lordships think therefore that nothing done by the
Principal Collector or the Chief Secretary amounted to a holding out by the
Crown that the Principal Collector had the right to enter into a contract to
sell the goods which are the subject matter of this action." (emphasis added)_

    Later in the Judgement (at p. 537) Their Lordship dealt with a situation where a public officer is acting in terms of a statute and observed that the authority would then be "rigidly fixed" by the limits of the statute. That a "representation" by the Public officer would be binding on the State only if there is a specific provision to that effect in the Statute and the reading in, of such a provision by way of interpretation would be an undue extension of a Statute.   
  
    The question of the resultant hardship to a purchaser in a sale, purportedly effected by a public officer has been specifically examined by Their Lordships as follows:

_" It may be said that it causes hardship to a purchaser at a sale under the
Customs Ordinance if the burden of ascertaining whether or not the Principal
Collector has authority to enter into _

**163**

_the sale is placed upon him. This undoubtedly is true. But where as in the
case of the Customs Ordinance the Ordinance does not dispense with that
necessity, to hold otherwise would be to hold that public officers had
dispensing powers because they then could by unauthorized acts nullify or
extend the provisions of the Ordinance. Of the two evils this would be the
greater one. This is illustrated in the case under consideration. The subject
derives benefits, sometimes direct, sometimes indirect, from property vested
in the Crown, and its proper protection is necessary in the interests of the
subject even though it may cause hardship to an individual. " _

The final sentence of the passage is relevant to the examination of the issue
from the perspective of Public Law at a later stage in the judgment.

   The judgment in A. D. de Silva's case was followed by the Supreme Court in
the case of Rowlands v Attorney-GeneraA2). In that case the Court considered
the question whether the principle of ostensible authority could be applied to
enforce a liability against the State on the basis of an assurance given by
the Minister of Finance. The Court held as follows (at page 410.)

_" Now in the field of agency, in so far as it concerns contracts seeking to
impose liability upon the Crown, the common law doctrine that the agent need
have only ostensible authority does not apply, and his authority must be
actual. There is clear authority to this effect in American law but there
would appear to be a dearth of authority in English law. In our law however
there is now clear authority to this effect."_

    The Supreme Court cited the preceding dicta in A. D. de Silva's case as the authority for this proposition.   
  
    The Court also observed that in a contract involving a larger sum of money the authority to bind the State lay in the Cabinet as a whole (p. 405) and not on a single member who acts on his own responsibility. That the Minister should have got approval of the Cabinet or gone "before the House" (Parliament).  
  
    A useful observation has also been made at page 409 as follows:

**164**

_"... It is well recognized that although there are no legal restrictions on
the contents of Government contracts, the Government generally contracts only
on the basis of certain fixed standard terms and conditions.."_

    This is also relevant to the Public Law perspective as evolved in subsequent decisions of this Court referred to later. 

    For the reasons stated above I cannot accept the submission of Counsel for JKH (18th to 20th respondents) based on bona fides. It is clear that these respondents got an advantage over other competitors through the yielding hand of Jayasundera. The ostensible authority of Jayasundera cannot be a shield for these respondents to safeguard what they secured in an illegal, arbitrary and biased exercise of executive power.   
  
DEVIATION (ii)  
  
    The next Deviation alleged is in respect of the land in extent 8Acres 2 Roods 21.44 perches being an area generally referred to as the "Bloemendhal Oil Depot" I have noted above under the head of "Action Taken By PERC" that the statement contained in paragraph 4.4.1 of the RFP that the CPC presently holds freed hold title to the land and has obtained Cabinet approval to transfer it to LMSL, is incorrect. The land in fact comes within the limits of Port of Colombo, as specified in the Order dated 24.03.1986 made by the then Minister of National Security in terms of section 2(3) of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority Act No. 51 of 1979\. The Petitioner has produced the Gazette containing the order marked P33 the contents of which are not disputed.   
  
    If the petitioner could have laid hand on this order, the officials of PERC could with reasonable diligence have done so. All parties submitting proposals were specifically required to carry out their own due diligence without relying on the representations in RFP. Hence JKH cannot rely on the incorrect statement contained in  
paragraph 4.4.1 of the RFP. Be that as it may it is common ground that LMSL
being a Company did not own this property and had no legal claim to it
whatsoever.  
  
    Paragraph 5 of the minutes of Pre-bid Conference reads as follows:

**165**

    _" The time frame for the transfer of assets to LMSL from CPC:   
  
    a. All movables - prior to closing date   
  
   b. Land - within oneyear of the closing date. PERC to revert by 7th May
2002 regarding the terms of the transfer including any payments that would
have to be made by LMS:  
_  
    The petitioner has quoted this section of the minute verbatim in paragraph 25(c) of the petition and Jayasundera had to answer as to what he intended notify the bidders by 07.05.2002 as to the terms of the transfer and the payment to be made. As noted above, by this date the Cabinet has not even been notified of any sale of LMSL shares let alone a transfer of 8 Acres of land within the Port of Colombo. The Cabinet had not authorized Jayasundera of PERC to do anything in this regard. A question looms large as to the basis on which Jayasundera intended to give this vital information regarding the land within 7 days. Jayasundera has stated in paragraph 27(b) and (c) of his affidavit which reads as follows: 

_" (b) The transfer of title of the said land was not to be free of "valuable
consideration" because the value of the said land was taken into account in
arriving at the business valuation of LMSL.  
  
(c) the issue of transferring title of the said land was discussed  at the
Pre-Bid conference since matters such as the manner of transfer, the
instrument to be executed etc., had to be finalized. "_

    In respect of what he has stated in paragraph (b) above it is to be noted that he did not inform the bidders that the value of the land has been taken into account in arriving at the business valuation of LMSL. On the other hand he could not have possibly given this information since the business valuation was requested from the DFCC by him only on 15.05.2002, and the valuation report is dated 10.06.2002, whereas the pre-bid conference was on 30.04.2002.   
  
    In paragraph 71 of his affidavit Ratnayaka has stated that a pre bid clarification letter dated 10.05.2002 was issued to all bidders by PERC in which it was expressly stated that there will be no additional payment to be made with regard to the transfer of the 

**166**

land. He has produced this letter marked Z18. It is significant that although
Ratnayake has stated that all bidders were thus notified, Z18 is addressed
only to him by name. It is not in the format in which the minutes of the Pre
bid Conference were communicated which contained all the names of those who
attended the conference. The letter Z18 is typed on the PERC letter head has
been signed by the Director General. It merely states "... please find
attached additional clarification sought at the Pre-bid Conference." The
attached sheet of paper is not even on a letter head of PERC. It does not
contain any list of names of persons who attended the Conference. The document
which contains only typed script without any writing or even a signature is
titled;  
  
    "Pre Bid Conference further clarification"   
  
    I do not wish to burden this Judgment by reproducing its contents but suffice it to state that it contains important price sensitive information. Significantly paragraph 5 which relates to the land reads as follows:

_" CPC will transfer title of the property at Bloemendhal Road within the
period of one year. There will be no additional payments to be made to CPC in
this regard. CPC will transfer title of the movable assets including the
barges prior to the sale of LMSL."_

    Although the covering letter has been signed by the Director General it is clear that it has been sent on Jayasundera's instructions because he has subsequently acted on this representation that there would be no separate payment for the 8 Acre land within the Port of Colombo. Jayasundera had no mandate whatsoever from the Cabinet or anyone else to make an astounding representation that title to 8 Acres of State land would be transferred without any payment, in such a casual manner, on a sheet of paper that does not bear even a signature. When State land is bequeathed on a Grant or Lease at a nominal price or gratituously, it is described as a "special grant or lease." Section 6(1) of the State Lands Ordinance empowers the President to make such a special grant or lease only for any "charitable, educational, philanthropic, religious or scientific purpose." Even the power reposed in the President would now be subject to the 13th 

**167**

Amendment to the Constitution (referred to later). Thus Jayasundera making
this representation was arrogating to himself a power that even the President
did not have. Even assuming wrongly that the land belonged to the CPC, such
representation should have been made at the Pre-bid Conference which was
attended by the Chief Legal Officer of the CPC. It is clear that Jayasundera
did not seek instructions from the CPC after the Pre Bid Conference on
30.04.2002 and before the date of Z18 being 10.05.2002.  
  
    I have to now revert briefly to certain matters dealt with previously under the heading of "Valuation of LMSL". The Chief Valuer who was requested to do a valuation wrote to Jayasundera on 07.05.2002 stating that the assets valuation was nearly ready and requested confirmation of the incentive payment authorized by the Cabinet for the business valuation. It was noted in the preceding analysis that Jayasundera effectively prevented the Chief Valuer from submitting a valuation by not making a commitment to make the incentive payment. Having thus stalled the Chief Valuer he caused Z18 to be sent to JKH on 10.05.2002 stating that there would be no separate payment for the land. Thereafter, on 15.05.2002 he requested the business valuation from DFCC Bank. Thus it is clear that the business valuation by DFCC Bank is a contrivance adopted by Jayasundera to avoid a separate assets valuation and a business valuation being done by the Chief Valuer.   
  
    I would now deal with the documented sequence of events only from the perspective of the land. After having made a award in favour of JKH in an exchange of letters dated 12.07.2002 between Jayasundera and Ratnayake, well before the matter was even considered by the Cabinet, the PERC set about in getting the relevant agreements ready for signature. The Agreements were executed on 20.08.2002 one day prior to the decision of the Cabinet being confirmed. They are:   
  
    i) CUF Agreement [P19 (a)]  
  
    ii) The Share Sales and Purchase Agreement [P19(c)]  
  
    iii) A notarial Agreement to transfer the Land (P27)

**168**

    Jayasundera and the Director General of PERC have signed as witnesses for all State parties to the Agreements. The Secretary to the Treasury has signed on behalf of the Government of Sri Lanka. The CPC is described as the Vendor and the SLPA is only a party to the CUF Agreement. Jayasundera has admitted that these  
Agreements were prepared by PERC in anticipation of the Cabinet decision. What
is significant from the aspect now being considered is the notarially executed
Agreement to transfer the land. Clearly this kind of Agreement was neither
referred to in the RFP nor at the Pre-bid Conference. It appears to flow from
the exclusive communication to JKH (Z18) referred to earlier. The proposal to
the Cabinet referred to later does not make any reference to the Government
being a party to an Agreement to transfer land.  
  
    Jayasundera in his affidavit (paragraph 27(g) and (k) takes responsibility for this Agreement and adduces four reasons to justify his action. They are 

a) that the "land was to form part of the assets of LMSL";  
b) the value of the land was taken into account in arriving at the business
value of LMSL;  
c) that there was no necessity to obtain specific approval of the Cabinet
since that was "implicit" in the Cabinet Memorandum that was approved;  
d) that Agreement No.538 (P27) was entered into "in order to give effect to
the undertaking to transfer title of the said land"

    An examination of the reasons given by Jayasundera in the context of the documented sequence of events demonstrates that they centre around his own role in this regard. The statement that land "was to form part of the assets" is a nebulous statement. Land is immovable property with clearly defined legal means of acquiring ownership. The question is whether at the material time land was in law an asset of LMSL. Admittedly it was not. It has been a part of the Port of Colombo. The incorrect statement in paragraph 4.4.1 of RFP that CPC holds freehold title to the land and obtained Cabinet approval to transfer the land to LMSL referred to above, was only in the imagination of Jayasundera and the PERC. 

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2008/7.html_  

