##  Jayasinghe v. Kiribindu and Others - SLR - 1, Vol 2 of 1997 [1996] LKSC 8;
(1997) 2 Sri LR 1 (4 April 1996)

1

JAYASINGHE  

**v.  **

**KIRIBINDU AND OTHERS** ****

** **

SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J.,

AMERASINGHE, J,

DHEERARATNE, J,

WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND

WIJETUNGA, J.

S.C. APPEAL 14/95

C.A. 118/87

D.C. KEGALLE 22403/P,

OCTOBER 16, 24 AND NOVEMBER 9, 15, 1995.



Kandyan Law - Diga and Binna marriage - Four essentials of a valid Kandyan
marriage - Continued residence in Mulgedera of Diga married daughter -
Succession - Partition action - Interest rei-publicae ut sit fines litium -
Nemo debet bis vexari pro una et eadem causa \- Res Judicata - Section 9 of
the Kandyan Law Declaration and Amendment Ordinance, No. 39 of 19 - Ordinance,
No. 3 of 1870 Section 39 - Kandyan Marriage and Divorce Act. No. 44 of 1952
Section 28.

_ _

One Ukkuwa had two children: a daughter named Kiribindu and a son named Rana.
Kiribindu married one Piyasena on 27.7.1939. The marria a was registered as a
diga marriage. Snortly before Kiribindu's marriage her brother Rana's wife had
died leaving her husband Rana and their three children Jayasinghe (1st
defendant - appellant) Mathupala (3rd defendant - respondent) and Somawathie
(4th defendant \- respondent). Kiribindu though married in diga did not leave
the mulgedera but stayed on and looked after her brother Rana's three
children. Piyasena died in 1946 but Kiribindu did not re-marry. She continued
to live in the Mulgedera. Her father Ukkuwa died in 1957\. Rana died in 1971
leaving as heirs his three children aforesaid. In an earlier action D.C.
Kegalle L/16312 in respect of another land between Rana and Kiribindu
(reported in 1979 (2) N.L.R. 73) it had been held by the Supreme Court on a
construction of section 9 of the Kandyan Law Declaration and Amendment
Ordinance, No. 39 of 1938 that after dissolution of a marriage of a diga
married woman she can re-acquire her lost right to succeed to her paternal
inheritance by change of her residence to the mulgedera. The decision in
L/16312 was by the District Judge held to be res Judicata in the present
action which Kiribindu filed for partition of six lands on the basis of
inheritance from Ukkuwa. The other questions were whether Kiribindu was in
fact a binna - married daughter or alternatively whether she had regained
rights of succession appropriate to that of a binna - married daughter by
continuously residing in the mulgedera and/or by maintaining a close
connection with it by staying there to look after the children of her brother
Rana.

**2**



**Held:** **(Wadugodapitiya, J. dissenting)**  


(1) Since a diga marriage is one in which the wife is treated as a member of
the husband's family, she would usually leave her parental home and take up
residence with her husband and she then forfeited her rights of inheritance to
her father's properties. Although place of residence is an important indicator
of the character of the marriage, yet severance from her family by joining her
husband's family is the test and not the place of residence. Forfeiture of
rights of succession depends on the fact that a marriage was a diga marriage
and not on whether it was a registered marriage. The registered entry is not
conclusive on the character of the marriage and could be rebutted by evidence
to the contrary.



Remaining in or returning to the mulgedera does not necessarily result in a
retention or re-acquisition of rights. If a diga married woman is remarried in
binna or readmitted into her father's family by a binna settlement clearly
showing that a binna connection was intended, she regains the rights of a
binna married daughter to inherit her intestate father's properties.



Section 9(1) of the Kandyan Law Declaration and Amendment Ordinance, No. 39 of
1938 provides that a binna or diga marriage shall be, and until dissolved
continue to be, for all purposes of the law governing the succession to the
estate of the deceased persons a binna or diga marriage, as the case may be.
The relevant period commences from the time the parties began to treat
themselves as married persons and to live as married persons.



Kiribindu and her husband and her father intended the ma rriage to be in diga
and told the Registrar so at the time of marriage. The certificate of marriage
was in terms of Section 39 of Ordinance, No. 3 of 1870 and section 2 of the
Kandyan Marriage and Divorce Act No. 44 of 1932 the best evidence of the
character of the marriages. The best evidence rule was introduced by section
39 of Ordinance No. 3 of 1870. Section 28 of the Kandyan Marriage and Divorce
Act, No. 44 of 1952 re-enacted the provisions of section 39 of the 1870
Ordinance. The rule has continued to serve the useful purposes for which it
was intended.



A daughter married in diga who resided in the mulgedera to play the role of a
guardian to minor children at the mulgedera does not thereby acquire the
rights of a daughter married in binna.



There was nothing except for the mere fact of residence to suggest that the
daughter Kiribindu was allowed to settle in binna. On the other hand there was
the contemporaneous recording by the Registrar of Marriages of the intention
of the parties that the marriage was a diga marriage despite the fact that it
was known that the residence of the daughter and her husband would be at the
mulged a. The effect of her diga marriage was that she lost her right of
succession to the estate of her father and she had no right, title or interest
in the lands she- seeks to partition.

**3**



The right to contract another marriage after the dissolution of a marriage is
an important right and the character of the second marriage is not determined
by the character of the first marriage. On the death of Piyasena, Kiribindu's
father co have arranged a binna marriage for her but he did not. Nor did he do
anything after Piyasena's death to manifest his intention that a binna
settlement was intended.



The essentials of a legal marriage were:



(1) The parties must have had a connubium.



(2) They must have not been within the prohibited degrees of relationship.



(3) They must have cohabited with the intention of forming a definite
alliance.



It was also requisite:



(4) That the consent of parents and relations should be given; and  
  
(5) In the case of chief of high rank, the consent of the king.  


The absence of approval of parents and relations though ordinarily stated to
be one of the conditions, the question was not free from doubt whether the
absence of such approval would make the marriage null and void.



**Per Amerasinghe, J:**



"Undoubtedly the place of residence is an important indicator of the character
of a marriage. Ordinarily, in the absence of contrary evidence we ought to be
entitled to presume that the common course of usual events consistent with the
ordinary practices of Kandyan Society followed. And so, a woman who after
marriage lived in her mulgedera with her husband may be supposed to have been
settled in binna. On the other hand, it would be expected that a woman married
in diga would have been led away from her parental home. It was a symbolic
manifestation of the departure of the woman to join another family and bear
children who will belong to a different genes.



Such a person would live in her husband's home or upon the property of her new
family. However, if it was agreed that the marriage was a diga marriage, it
would be a diga marriage, irrespective of the fact that the bride took up
residence in her father's house ... The determination of the character is,
perhaps unfortunately, but nevertheless, somewhat more complex than seeking a
response to the simple question: Where did she live?"



**Per Dheeraratne, J:**



An erroneous decision on a pure question of law will operate as res judicata
quoad the subject-matter of the suit in which it is given, and no further.
Unlike a decision on a question of fact or of mixed law and fact, an erroneous
decision on the law does not prevent the Court from deciding the same question
arising between the same parties in a subsequent suit according to law.
Further the

**  4**



subject-matter of the previous action was different from that of the present.
Hence the decision in Rana v. Kiribindu 79 (2) N.L.R. 56 is not res judicata
to bar the present suit.



**Cases referred to:**

_ _

1 _. Ranhotidewayalage Rana v. Ranhotidewayalage Kiribindu_ (1978) 79 (2)
N.L.R. 73, 79.  


2 _. Ukkoo Hamy v. Appu_ (1851) (1843-55) Ramanathan 56.  


3 _. Herathhamy v Podihamy_ (1909) 3 Leader L. R. 58.  


4 _. Herathgedera Malhamy v Belikotoowe Punchyralle_ 14 February 1828: Hayley
Appendix II, p. 48.  


5 _. Herathgedera v. Belikotoowe,_ 14 February 1828, Hayley: Appendix II p.
49.  


6 _. Palleywatte Nandoowa v. Kaluwa Dureya,_ 8 September 1825 Hayley: Appendix
II P. 49.  


7 _. Yattewerragedera Rammela v Kowralle_ 2 August 1822, Hayley: Appendix II
PP. 49, 50, 97.  


8 _. Chelliah v. Kuttapitiya Tea and Rubber Co.,_ (1932) 34 N.L.R. 89, 93.  


9 _. Mampitiya v. Wegodapela_ (1922) 24 N.L.R. 129. 130, 131, 132, 133.  


10 _. James v. Medduma Kumarihamy_ (1957) 58 N.L.R. 560.  


11 _. Menikhamy v. Appuhamy, C.R. Ratnapura_ 12653 S.C. Civ. Min. 10 June
1913: Modder 430, 431, (1913) 5 Bal. N. 38.  


12 _. Kalu v. Howwa Kiri_ (1892) 2 L. R. 54; 1 S.C.R. 140.  


13\. _Punchi Menike v Appuhamy et al_ (1917) 19 N.L.R. 353, 354, 358.  


14\. _Fernando v. Bandi Silva_ (1917) 4 CWR 9, 12.  


15 _. Kuma v Bandu_ (1920) 21 N.L.R. 294\.  


16\. _Podinona v Herat Banda_ (1985) 2 Sri L. R. 237.  


17\. _Dingiri Amma v. Ratnatilaka_ (1961) 64 N.L.R. 163, 166, 167.  


18. _Punchimahatmaya v. Charlis_ (1908) A.C.R. 89.  


19\. _Kotmale v Duraya_ (1907) 3 Bal. 122.  


20 _. Ukku v Kirihonda_ (1902) 6 N.L.R. 104, 106.,  


21 _. Dingirihamy v Mudalihamy et at: D.C. Kurunegala_ 4402 - S.C. Civ. Min.
of 15 October 1912; 16 N.L.R. 61.  


22 _. Dissanayake v. Punchi Menike_ (1953) 55 N.L.R. 198.  


23\. _Tennakoon Mudiyanselage Ukku Amma and Others v. Vidanagamage Beeta Nona_
S.C. Appeal No. 32/94, S.C. Minutes 13  September 1994.  


24 _. Bindi Menika v. Mudianse C.R. Kegalle_ 2394 S.C. Civ. Min. of 22 March
1898. _  
 _

25 _. Dingiri Amma v. Ukku Amma_ (1905) 1 Bal. 193 _.  
 _

26 _. Gonigoda v. Dunuwila_ 9 July 1827: Hayley Appendix II p. 70.  


27 _. Doratiyawe v. Ukku Banda Korale_ (1909) 1 Current L.R. 259.  


28 _. Re Mahara Ratemahatmaya_ (1859) 2 Lorensz 287.  


29 _. Dissanekgedera Sirimal Etena v. Her brother Kooderalle,_ 28 February
1828: Hayley Appendix II p. 42.  


30 _. Wettaewa Bandi Appu and Kirry Menike v. lsmail Naide:_ Hayley: Appendix
II p. 43.  


31 _. Kattikande Menikhamy v. Baala Etana_ 10 November 1826 Hayley: Appendix
II p. 45.

**5**



32 _. Galagamegedera Alenso Naide v. Heykeladeniya Etenec,_ 25 February 1828
Hayley: Appendix II p. 43.  


33 _. Udurawela Polwattegedera Punchyralle v. Do. (VP.) Dukgann_ January 1824;
13 March 1826 Hayley: Appendix II p. 57.  


34 _. Ambaliyadde Case_ , 03 December 1824: Hayley: Appendix 11 pp. 43-44.  


35 _. Boombure Kalu Etena v Punchyhamy;_ 22 November 1823, 01 July 1825:
Hayley: Appendix 11 p. 44.  


36 _. Mahengedera Baale Elena v. Riditotuwegedera Ukkuralle_ , 8 July 1823; 03
May 1825 Hayley: Appendix II pp. 42, 43.  


37 _. Tikiri Kumarihamy v. Loku Menika_ (1857) (1872-76) Ramanathan 106.

_  
_ 38 _. Babanissa v. Kaluhami_ (1909) 12 N.L.R. 103, 105.

_  
_ 39 _. Bandy Ettene v. Bandy Ettene_ (1873) 2 Grenier 115.

_  
_ 40 _. Samerakongedera Punchyralle v. Punchi Menika_ 01 April 1829, Hayley:
Appendix II pp. 44, 45.

_  
_ 41 _. No. 590 Madawelatenne Case_ 03 May 1834: Marshall's Judgments p. 329,
331.

_  
_ 42 _. Batterangedera Horatale v. Her full brother Kalua_ 5 May 1828 Hayley
Appendix 1145 - 46.

_  
_ 43 _. Meera Saibo v Punchirala_ (1910) 13 N.L.R. 176.

_  
_ 44 _. Ram Etana v. Nekappu_ (1911) 14 N.L.R. 289.

_  
_ 45. _Appuhamy v. Kiri Menika_ (1912) 16 N.L.R. 238, 239, 240.

_  
_ 46 _. Ukku v. Pingo_ (1907) 1 Leader 53.



47 _. Tikiri Kumarihami v. Loku Menika and Others_ (1875) (1872-76) Ramanathan
106.

_  
_ 48 _. Siripaly v. Kirihame_ (1917) 4 C.W.R. 157.

_  
_ 49 _. Banda v. Angurala_ (1922) 50 N.L.R. 276, 277, 278 to 280.

_  
_ 50 _. Gunasena and Others v. Ukkumenika and Others_ (1976) ,-3 N.L.R. 529,
531, 534, 535, 536.

_  
_ 51. _Appu Naide v. Heen Menika_ (1948) 51 N.L.R. 63, 64, 65.

_  
_ 52. _Alice Nona v. G. Sugathapala_ (1967) 71 N.L.R. 24.

_  
_ 53. _Yaso Menika v. Biso Menika_ (1963) 67 N.L.R. 71. __

_  
_ 54 _. Sinno v. Appuhamy_ (1913) Bal. N.C. Viol. 1 p. 80. __

_  
_ 55 _. Regina v Opalangu,_ Modder 260 - 261.

_  
_ 56 _. Kin Banda v. Silva_ (1913) 1 Bal. N.C. 83. __

_  
_ 57 _. Dullewe v. Dullewe_ (1913) 1 Bal. N.C. 85.

_  
_ 58 _. Seneviratne v Halangoda_ (1912) 22 N.L.R. 472, 473.

_  
_ 59 _. H. P. James v Medduma Kimarihamy_ (1957) 58 N.L.R. 560.

_  
_ 60 _. Waring Westminster Bank Ltd., v Burton Butler and Others_ (1948) 1 All
ER 257.

_  
_ 61 _. Dingiri Menika v. Punchi Mahatmaya_ (1910) 13 N.L.R. 59.

_  
_ 62 _. Appuhamy v. Punchihamy_ (1914) 17 N.L.R. 271. __

_  
_ 63 _. Morais v. Victoria_ (1968) 73 N.L.R. 409, 413, 417 _._

_  
_ 64 _. Krishnan v. Thurairajah_ (1969) 62 N.L.R. 511.

_  
_ 65 _. Katiritamby v Parupathi Pillai_ (1921) 23 N.L.R. 209.

_  
_ 66 _. Guneratne v. Punchibanda_ (1927) 29 N.L.R. 249.

_  
_ 67 _. K. Subramaniam v Kumaraswamy_ (1955) 57 N.L.R. 130, 131.



68 _. Marassenagedera Kaloomenika v. Udagedera Punchymenika,_ 19th March 1824;
Hayley, Appendix 11 p. 44.

**6**



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_Tilak Marapone, P.C._ with _N. Ladduwahetti_ and _Sarath Weerakoon_ for 1st
defendant-appellant.

_ _

_R. K. W. Goonesekera_ with _G. L. Geethananda_ for plaintiff-respondent.  
_  
Rohan Sahabandu for 2nd defendant-respondent._

_ _

_Manohara de Silva_ for 4th defendant-respondent.  
_  
No appearance_ for 3rd defendant-respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._



April 4, 1996.  


**AMERASINGHE, J.**

** **

I am in agreement with my brother Dheeraratne that the decision reported sub.
nom. Ranhotidewayalage Rana v. Ranhotidewayalage Kiribindu(1) does not operate
as res judicata. I agree with my brother Dheeraratne that the appeal should be
allowed and that the judgments of both courts below should be set aside and
that judgment shall be given and order made and entered dismissing the
plaintiff's action.



Ukkuwa had two children: a daughter, named Kiribindu, and a son, named Rana.
UKkuwa died in 1957. The matter in issue is whether Kiribindu (the plaintiff-
respondent) was entitled to inherit a moiety of her father's intestate estate
and thereby acquired an interest in the lands sought to be partitioned in the
action instituted by her.



The 1st defendant-appellant, and the 3rd and 4th defendant respondents, who
are the children of Rana, maintain that Kiribindu was married in diga and
thereby lost her right of succession to her father's estate.



Kiribindu's position is that, although her marriage was registered as a diga
marriage, she never left her mulgedera, after her marriage to Piyasena. She
had continued to live there with her husband, Piyasena, until his death and
ever afterwards. A diga married woman lives in her husband's home, whereas a
binna married daughter lives in her father's home or properties. She had never
lived in any place other in her father's house. In the circumstances,
Kiribindu was in fact a binna - married daughter or, alternatively, she had
regained  


**7**



rights of succession appropriate to that of binna - married daughter by
continuously residing in the mulgedera and/ or by maintaining a close
connection with it by staying there to look after the children of her brother
Rana, whose wife had died shortly before Kiribindu's marriage to Piyasena.



Both parties rely on section 9 (1) of the Kandyan Law Declaration and
Amendment Ordinance which refers to diga and binna marriages. The Ordinance
does not define what these terms mean, and therefore it is necessary to try to
ascertain what these terms mean, for the decision in the matter before us
rests entirely upon the question whether the marriage of the plaintiff-
respondent, Kiribindu, was a diga marriage or a binna marriage.



# BINNA MARRIAGE AND DIGA MARRIAGE

** **

J. Armour, Niti Nighanduwa or Grammar of (Kandyan) Law, (1842) (Perera's
Edition) (p. 10), and Sawers (Memoranda of the Laws of Inheritance & C., and
notes on Sir John D'Oyly's exposition of the Kandyan Law by Simon Sawers,
Judicial Commissioner (1821-1826), Kandyan Provinces, Ceylon, commonly called
Sawers' Digest of the Kandyan Law Ed. by Earle Modder (1921), (p. 31), (p.
31), stated that marriage among the Kandyans may be considered as of two
descriptions: (1) marriage in diga; and (2) marriage in binna. This position
is accepted by Frank Modder, The Principles of Kandyan Law, 2nd Ed. (in
collaboration with Earle Modder), (1914), paragraph 126, p. 229, as well as by
F A. Hayley, in his Treatise on the Laws and Customs of the Sinhalese
including the Portions still surviving under the name Kandyan Law (1923) at p.
193.



In paragraph 127 at p. 229 Modder states that "A marriage in diga is when a
woman is given away, and is, according to the terms of the contract, removed
from her parents' abode, and is settled in the house of the husband."



In his "Comment" to paragraph 127, Modder states as follows:



Armour, 5, - The word diga from di, root, da, to give, is, according to some
scholars a derivative from dirga, long, the bride being sent away to a
distance, that is to her husband's house - The

**8**



conducting of a wife to, and the living in the husband's house or in any
family residence of his, or if he does not own house and lands, the taking her
as his wife and the conducting away from her family to a place of lodging,
constitutes a diga marriage. - The predominant idea is the departure or
removal from the family or ancestral home. This is of the same nature as
marriages among Europeans and is the more common of the two marriages. A
plurality of daughters in a family necessitates this mode of marriage with
regard to the majority of them, the common property being too limited in
extent to be enjoyed by a numerous family. The marriage of the daughters and
their departure from the parental residence generally operate a forfeiture of
the inheritance and thereby reduce the number of shareholders ...



Later, in paragraph 128 at p. 232, Modder states that "A marriage in binna is
where the bridegroom is received into the house of the bride, and according to
certain stipulations, abides therein." In his "Comment" to that section,
Modder (232-235) makes the following explanation:



Armour 5, Sawers, 34, - The word binna seems to be derived from the fact of
the husband coming or entering (ba, to come or descend) into the wife's
family. The term is invariably connected with the word bahinawa, going down.
Other derivations make binna a contraction of bihini, which again is derived
from bhagini (root bhag) to divide, to take oneself, possess, enjoy carnally);
or make it equivalent to bhinna, broken split. merged, united. - This form of
marriage occurs only in cases where the bride is an heiress or the daughter of
a wealthy family in which there are few or no sons. The bridegroom does not,
by such a union, acquire any right to his wife's property, which remains her
own, and subject to her sole control ... In a binna connection, the wife is
the head of the family, and she alone can regulate the management of the
household. The whole property, movable and immovable is subject to her will,
while the husband has no control over any portion of it during her lifetime.
He is, besides, bound to obey her, and is subject to all her whims and
caprices; she may even order him out of her house at any time he happens to
incur either the displeasure of her parents, or, which is more frequent, the
jealousy of herself.

**9**



The right of expulsion was also exercised by the brothers, and at times, by
the children of the wife by a former bed. The position of a binna husband was,
under all the circumstances, a precarious one; whence had arisen the old
Kandyan adage that a husband settling in binna should always have ready at the
door-way his walking-stick, a torch, and talipot, articles of travel,
indispensable to an emergency, for he may be unceremoniously turned out at any
moment, no matter at what time of the day, and in what weather, he would have
to depart and find his way out. On the death of the wife intestate, her
children and their issue, and failing them, her ascendants and collaterals,
succeed to her property in preference to her binna husband  
  
Modder (p. 232) quotes Chambers' Encyclopaedia Britannica as stating that:



"A marriage in beenah is especially interesting because disclosure of it which
is given in the book of Genesis. In beenah marriage, (the word is taken from
Ceylon), the man goes to live with his wife's family usually paying for his
footing in it by service, he is, in general an unimportant person in the
family, and the children are not his, - they belong to the family, and the
kindred of his wife. "

  
The emphasis is mine.



At p. 233 Modder quotes Genesis xxiv, 1-8 as stating: "Now Jacob made a beenah
marriage" and considers other Biblical cases. He also points out at p. 234
that "Among the semites of Arabia, beenah marriage was maintained for women
down to a comparatively late period ... Marriage by purchase ultimately
supplanted the beenah marriage among the Hebrews and became the prevailing
marriage among the Arabs ..."



The subordinate position of a husband married in binna in relation to rights
of succession to the properties of his wife does not explain why his wife was
entitled to succeed to her father's properties, whereas if she had been
married in diga, she would have forfeited her rights to inherit her paternal
properties, her brothers and binna \- married sister's, as Sawers (1), very
significantly, puts it "or rather

**10**



their children" (See also Hayley: 372), alone becoming entitled to such
properties. (See Ukkoo Hamy v Appu(2), Herathhamy v. Podihamy(3)).



A diga marriage was not a device to get rid of surplus daughters; nor was a
binna marriage a device to find some compliant male who was willing to endure
the "whims and caprices" of an "heiress". Usually, a daughter who was married
in diga was given her dowry, which was ordinarily a matter of arrangement
between the bride's parents and the bridegroom and his family. There have
always been women, including Kandyan women, who preferred to do what they
wished rather than conforming with traditional arrangements. Where a woman
married of her own accord, her marriage would, as we shall see, be a diga
marriage. A diga married woman became a member of her husband's family and
ceased to be a member of her parental family for purposes of succession to her
father. She was excluded from the succession to her father's estate "chiefly
due to her separation from the father's house and union with a different
family to bear children who will belong to a different gens." (See Hayley at
331 and 333).



On the other hand, if the daughter had been married in binna, she remained a
member of the father's family for the purposes of succession and shared her
father's estate equally with her brothers (D.C. Kandy 706 1834 Austin 10), and
while her own title was, in some cases, defeasible, she transmitted an
absolute interest to her issue. (Hayley 370, 378). Attention is drawn to the
words I emphasized in the passage quoted by Modder from Chambers'
Encyclopaedia and to Sawer's observation "or rather their children", quoted
above, in referring to a binna - married daughter's rights of succession to
her father's property: These observations indicate the reason why a Binna -
married daughter inherited her father's property and why her children
inherited her father's property: They were members of the daughter's father's
family."



Hayley (p. 167) explains the binna form of marriage in the following words:



"The binna marriage is a device similar in effect, and probably akin to, the
Indian method of raising up by "an appointed daughter" a



**11**



son who shall perform the religious rites necessary for the salvation of the
grandfather's soul. "Since from the hell called put the son preserves the
father, therefore putra was he called."



After citing Manu IX. 138 in support of the above proposition, and stating
that "We find the term bhinna-gotra sapindas in Bengal applied to kinsmen
sprung from a different family in the male line, such as a daughter's son:
Mayne, Hindu Law and Usage, 7th Ed: pp. 680, 787", Hayley (167) states as
follows:



"in a Buddhist Community the necessity of obtaining a putra for the
maintenance of prosperity in the future life did not exist; but the advantage
of recognizing a daughter's son as heir, on the failure of sons, is obvious,
when the desire of keeping property in the family is borne in mind. The
religious foundation for the usage becomes a secular one. Although this may be
its later history, the binna marriage has probably come down from a time when
descent was traced through females."



Although if a daughter was married in diga she lost her rights of inheritance
to her father's lands, yet a diga married daughter was never abandoned by her
family. Her rights of succession to her father's properties was another
matter. If she returned to her parents home, e.g. on account of the
dissolution of the marriage by death or divorce, or because of ill-treatment
or because she had been reduced to penury by her husband's misfortune or bad
conduct, although she did not ordinarily recover any right to inherit (Armour
6566; Niti. 62, 65, 66), she was entitled to live in the mulgedera and receive
support. (See Sawers P. 5; Hayley 384, 388). Moreover, a diga - married
daughter was excluded from inheriting her father's property only if there were
sons, binna - married daughters, or unmarried daughters, by the same wife or
issue of any of them, in her father's family. (Hayley, 370, 389). Thus in
Herathgedera Malhamy v. Belikotoowe Punchyralle(4), Heratralle, the
proprietor, died leaving two sons and a grandson, who was the only child of
the proprietor's daughter who had been married in binna (after having
previously lived in diga with the same husband) and had predeceased her
father. One third of Heratralle's estate was adjudged to the grandson by right
of his mother.

**12**



In Herathgedera v. Be ikotoowe (5), Bajooralle having died, his widow and two
children (both daughters) quitted the deceased's family house, leaving the
estate in possession of Bajooralle's mother and his deceased binna sister's
son. These two daughters were given away in diga by their mother, but were
notwithstanding declared to be his lawful heirs, in preference to his nephew
(his binna sister's son) and to his mother. One of the daughters died in diga.



In Palleywatte Nandoowa v Kaluwa Dureya(6), the deceased's only daughter was
preferred to his brother's son.



In Yattewerragedera Rammela v. Kowralle(7), it was held that it is not
according to Kandyan custom that a brother has a right to a share of a
deceased brother's property in the event of the deceased brother leaving but
female issue. On the contrary an only daughter has a right to inherit the
whole of her father's share of the parveny property.



Being a matter that determined rights of succession, it must be expected that
what the character of a marriage was going to be would be carefully considered
by the parties to the marriage and their parents and not left to be casually
determined. As Garvin, SPJ explained in Chelliah v. Kuttapitiya Tea and Rubber
Co.(8) (supra) at p. 94 "Whether a marriage is to be diga or binna would
naturally be determined by the negotiations which precede the marriage."
Hayley (p. 194) said that "Whether any particular alliance is of the nature of
binna or diga is a question of fact, not dependent on any particular form or
ceremony, but on the intention of the parties and their parents." The
intention of the parties and their families was stressed by Bertram, C.J. in
Mampitiya v. Wegodapela (9).  
  
In that case, at p. 130, Bertram, CJ. said:



"A marriage is a consensual contract. If there is any question as to whether
any particular marriage has a particular character, that is a question of the
intention of the parties."

**13**



At p. 131 Bertram, C.J. said:



"We start, therefore, with the conclusion that the marriage actually
celebrated, according to the intention of the parties, and those connected
with them, was a diga marriage."



Later, at p. 132, the Chief Justice said:



"I think ... that we must take it to be the law that what works the forfeiture
is not the ceremony, but the severance. No doubt by contracting a marriage in
diga, in which the bride's family participated, the parties bound themselves
to each other and the family that the bride should be conducted in accordance
with custom, and should settle in the house of her husband."



# USUAL PLACE OF RESIDENCE ACCORDING TO CUSTOM



Since a diga marriage was one in which the wife was treated as a member of the
husband's family, it would be usually agreed that the bride would leave her
parental home and live with her husband and become a part of his family. And
so, after the celebration of such a marriage, the bride would be expected to
be conducted in procession to the home of her husband. And if the woman went
away to become a member of her husband's family, she forfeited her rights of
inheritance to her father's properties. As L. W. de Silva, A J said at p. 565
in James v. Medduma Kumarihamy(10), we should apply section 114 of the
Evidence Ordinance and hold that:



"In the absence of evidence to the contrary, we are entitled to presume that,
according to the terms of the marriage contract, the common course of natural
events followed consistent with the ordinary habits of Kandyan society,
resulting in a severance of the diga woman from her father's house. This
involved a forfeiture of her right to the paternal inheritance."



SEVERANCE FROM HER FAMILY BY JOINING ANOTHER FAMILY AND NOT THE PLACE OF
RESIDENCE IS THE TEST



Ordinarily, if there was a "conducting away" after the celebration of a
marriage, it was indicative of the fact that the daughter was married in diga.
Consequently, her rights of succession would be determined

**14  
 **

by reference to her status as a diga married daughter. The fact that a diga
married daughter usually lived in her husband's house, and that a binna
married daughter usually lived in her father's house, however, did not
necessarily mean that the test of the character of a marriage was the place of
her residence. The mere fact that a daughter went away from the mulgedera and
was physically separated from it did not mean that she thereby contracted a
diga marriage and consequently forfeited her rights of inheritance to her
father's properties. That would have been the case if what brought about the
forfeiture was physical severance from the mulgedera. However, that was not
the law. The crucial question is not her physical separation from the
mulgedera, even to live with a man, but whether the woman went to live with
the man as his wife and became a member of his family. In Menikhamy v.
Appuhamy(11), the daughter left home, taking service as a cook and thereafter
becoming the mistress of a man called Muniandy.



De Sampayo, J. said:



"It is the going out in diga that works the forfeiture: that is to say, the
woman should be conducted by, or go out to live with a man as his wife. -Now
the plaintiff did not leave her home with any such intention.She Of for the
purpose of employment in the first instance, and her subsequent relations with
the Tamil man did not, in my opinion, constitute a case of going out in diga.
The commissioner thought that the reason for forfeiture in her case was
stronger because she brought disgrace on her family. But the forfeiture under
the Kandyan law, was not based upon any circumstance of disgrace to the
family, **but rather upon the primitive idea of severance of family ties
involved in a woman going out and becoming as it were a member of the
husband's family. ... "**

  
The emphasis is mine.



In Kalu v. Howwa Kiri(12), Lawrie, J observed that:

  
"... the old disability still attaches to the act of being conducted from a
father's house by a man and the going with him to live as his wife in his
house."

**15**



The emphasis is mine.



In that case, Lawrie, J. said that a woman married in diga "ceased to be a
member of her father's family and she did not regain her full rights even
though she returned."  


The emphasis is mine.



In Punchi Menike v. Appuhamy et al.(13), Wood Renton, J. at p. 354 said:



"The general rule undoubtedly is that when a woman marries in diga, that is to
say, when she is given away, **and is, according to the terms of the
contract** , conducted from the family house, or mulgedera, and settled in
that of her husband, she forfeits her right to inherit any portion of her
father's estate. But this forfeiture was an incident, not so much of the
marriage, as of the quitting by the daughter of the parental roof to enter
another family..."



The emphasis is mine.



In the same case, De Sampayo, J. said at p. 358:



"The point to be kept in view in all cases, I think, is that the essence of a
diga marriage is the severance of the daughter from the father's family, **and
her entry into that of her husband** and her consequent forfeiture of any
share of the family property."



The emphasis is mine.



In Fernando v Bandi Silva(14), Wood Renton, C.J. said that in the case of a
daughter married in diga:



"... forfeiture is due not so much to the marriage as to the severance,
effected by the marriage, of the daughter's connection with her father's
house. ..."



The emphasis is mine.

**16**



In Dingiri Amma v Ratnatilaka(17), Tambiah, J. said:



"It is going out in diga and severance from the mulgedera during the lifetime
of the father which brings about forfeiture and not merely a temporary
departure."



The question whether a marriage is to be treated as diga or binna, with great
respect, does not depend on whether there was a 'temporary' departure from or,
conversely, ,a permanent residence in, the mulgedera, but whether, in the
circumstances, it could be held that there was a severance from the mulgedera,
not in the sense of physically leaving her anscestral home, but in the sense,
as it were of the destruction, of "the daughter's connection with her father's
house", as Wood Renton J. explained in Fernando v. Bandi Silva(14), ceasing
"to be a member of the father's family", as Lawrie, J. put it in Kalu v. Howwa
Kiril(12), or as Wood Renton, J. explained in Punchi Menike v. Appuhamy(13)
(supra), quitting the parental roof "to enter another family" or as de
Sampayo, J. explained in Menikhamy v. Appuhamy(11), (supra), the daughter had
gone out "becoming as it were a member of the husband's family".



CHIEF JUSTICE BERTRAM'S ERRONEOUS OBITER DICTUM IN MAMPITIYA V. WEGODAPELA



Bertram, C.J. in Mampitiya v. Wegodapela(9) said:



"... we must take it to be the law that what works the forfeiture is not the
ceremony, but the severance. No doubt by contracting a marriage in diga, in
which the bride's family participated, the parties bound themselves to each
other and the family that the bride should be conducted in accordance with
custom, and should settle in the home of her husband."



There is no difficulty in accepting that as an accurate statement of the law.
However, with great respect, the following observations of the Chief Justice
are misleading:



"But if this, for whatever reason, was not done, and, if with the acquiescence
of her family the bride remained in the mulgedera, then the forfeiture was
never consummated."

**17**



In the case before Bertram, C.J., although the certificate of marriage showed
that the daughter had been married in diga, it was established that she had
not been formally conducted to her husband's house; that she continued to live
in the mulgedera, where her first two children were born and brought up; that
she did not go to her husband's home, except, possibly for a visit, during the
early days of her married life, and also for a few months at a later date,
during a period in which there was a family estrangement, and in which her
third child was born at her husband's old home. During this absence, the other
children of the marriage remained with the wife's family. Apart from this,
though her husband was from time to time living away from her in the discharge
of official duties, she lived at first at the mulgedera of the family,
subsequently, at a neighbouring walauwa purchased by her brother, and
afterwards again at the mulgedera, and (apart from the period of estrangement
above referred to) she never at any time cut herself off from the family.
Moreover, there was the fact that the daughter and her husband had sold a part
of the walauwa "inherited by her brother" to a Colombo proctor, without any
"effective step" being ever taken "to bring about a forfeiture of the
(woman's) interest." In the circumstances, it was held that, although the
woman had been married in diga, no forfeiture of her rights had been incurred
and that she had retained her rights of inheritance. There was, therefore, not
merely acquiescence in her residence but a recognition of her rights of
ownership in her anscestral properties.



With great respect, neither the dicta cited by the Chief Justice from the
decisions in Kalu v. Howwa Kiri(12), Menikhamy v. Appuhamy(11), Punchi Menike
v. Appuhamy(13), nor the decision in Fernando v. Bandi Silva(14), referred to
by the Chief Justice support the conclusion that if "for whatever reason" the
daughter remained in the mulgedera with the "acquiescence of her family", then
the "forfeiture was never consummated". "Consummation of the forfeiture", had
never been referred to in any earlier case. The essence of a diga marriage was
not the physical severance (of which it might have been evidence), but the
leaving of her family for the purpose of entry into the husband's family. The
reason for being in the mulgedera is always an important consideration, for
upon it may depend the character of the marriage. Was her presence due to her
being settled in binna or

**18**



because of some other reason, such as destitution or a family arrangement?
Moreover, mere acquiescence on the part of family in her living in the
mulgedera did not per se convert her diga marriage into a binna marriage: The
acceptance of the daughter, notwithstanding her earlier marriage in diga, as a
binna - married daughter, either married to the same man or to another man, is
quite a different matter.



Bertram, C.J. said that his view of the law was "confirmed by two
circumstances". "The first is this: If a woman, without any legal marriage,
leaves her mulgedera and settles in the home of a man, in a relationship of
the same nature as a diga marriage, she thereby forfeits her right of
inheritance. (See Modder p. 244, Kalu v. Howwa Kiri (12)) (supra) and the
other cases cited in the same paragraph."



In Kalu v. Howwa Kiri(12), the question was whether a woman whose marriage was
not registered was thereby deprived of her rights of inheritance, for there
was no valid marriage in terms of the law which makes registration a sine qua
non for a valid marriage. (Cf. Kuma v. Bandar's'; Podi Nona v. Herat
Banda(16). Lawrie, J. held that, notwithstanding the law relating to
registration, "the old disability still attaches to the act of being conducted
from a father's house by a man and the going with him to live as his wife in
his house." The relevant fact was that the woman had not merely departed from
her parental home to live with a man, but departed to live with him in diga
marriage.



Bertram, C.J. drew attention to "other cases" cited by Modder at p. 244 (p.
255 2nd Ed.). I shall now examine those cases.



In Punchimahatmaya v. Charlis (18), Hutchinson, C.J. and Middleton, J. held
that under Kandyan Law a woman who leaves her parental house and makes her
husband's house her abode and lives in diga with him, although she contracts
no legal marriage, forfeits her right to her paternal inheritance.



In Kotmale v Durayar(19) Wendt, J. held that under Kandyan Law a woman going
out in diga would not be entitled to claim a share of her

**19**



paternal inheritance although she may not have contracted a legal marriage.



In Ukku v. Kirihonda (20), a Kandyan woman, having for two years cohabited
with a Kandyan man in the mulgedera of her father, went with that man to his
house and lived in it for some years, and their marriage was then registered.
The marriage certificate described the marriage to be a binna marriage.
Moncrief, A.C.J. held that "the evidence of the register, good as it is prima
facie, may be rebutted by evidence. The Commissioner had accepted the fact
that the woman had many years ago left the parental house and married in diga.
Moncrief, A.C.J. upheld that view. It was argued in that case that the date of
marriage was the date of its registration, 1894, and that the parties had at
that time declared their marriage to be a binna marriage. The question was, it
was submitted by counsel, therefore, settled by the declaration of the
parties. Moncrief, A.C.J. said as follows (at p. 106):



"if (learned counsel, Mr. Bawa) is right with regard to the date of the
marriage, I think it is possible that his argument would hold, because if the
parties married in 1894 and at the time declared they were marrying in binna,
and the date given was the real date of the marriage, I am not aware of any
reason to prevent them from doing what they intended to do, i.e., to contract
a marriage in binna; so that the argument put forward on the other side to the
effect that, as the parties were living together in 1894 in the husband's
house, a marriage in binna could not be set up, would probably fail. But Mr.
Pereira further urged that the date of the marriage given in the register does
not conclude the parties, and that the real date of the marriage is clearly
shown from the terms of the Ordinance to mean the date at which the parties
began to treat themselves as married persons and to live as married persons.



Reference on that point was made to section 11, according to which "no
marriage contracted since the Ordinance No. 13 of 1895 came into operation, or
to be hereafter contracted, shall be valid unless registered in the manner and
form" as therein provided.

**20**



The question is what the word "marriage" means there. Mr. Pereira suggested,
and with some reason 1 think, that it means any connection instituted by rites
or ceremonies which, according to custom, would be considered a valid marriage
but for the special provisions of the statute law. If that interpretation of
the word is correct, I am inclined to think his argument to the effect that
subsequent registration dates back to the institution of their irregular
marriage is correct, because the provision is to the effect that something
shall be valid upon registration, and that something is an irregular marriage,
which is void for want of registration, and possibly took place some years
before.



With some diffidence I am inclined to think that subsequent registration dates
back to the original beginning of the connection between the parties. ... I
think the appeal should be dismissed, inasmuch as the question comes
ultimately to be, what the conduct of the parties was when they came to live
together."



After referring to the decision of Moncrief, J, Modder (p. 255) refers to a
decision in Dingirihamy v. Mudalihamy et al(21). That decision was later
reported in 16 NLR 61. In that case Pereira, J. agreed with the decision of
Moncrief, J. in Ukku Kiri Honda (20) and held that "the registration dates
back to the actual native ceremonies performed for the purpose of constituting
the marriage."



In Kalu v. Howwa Kiri(12), Punchimahatmaya v Charlis (18), Kotmale v.
Duraya(19), Ukku v. Kirihonda(20) and Dingirihamy v. Mudalihamy(21), (see also
Dissanayake v. Punchi Menike(22); and Tennakoon Mudiyanselage Ukku Amma and
Others v. Vidanagamage Beeta Nona(23)), there were marriages. They were at the
time they were entered into not registered, but the man and woman in each of
those cases had contracted marriages according to the laws, institutions and
customs in force, and were diga or binna marriages. Foreiture depends on the
fact that a marriage was a diga marriage and not on whether it was a
registered marriage.



A word of explanation about the registration of marriages would perhaps
clarify the matter. There being no written law to regulate the subject of
matrimonial alliances, with a view to preventing or

**21**



minimizing what were regarded as "loose and casual connections and fitful
cohabitations of the sexes, with the paternity of the offspring resulting from
such pernicious intercourse, ever enveloped in a cloud of doubt and
uncertainty" (Modder p. 222), "a number of very aged Kandyan Chiefs, to whom,
in the course of nature, marriage must be of very little concern, waited upon
Sir Henry Ward [the Governor] and asked that all marriages in the Kandyan
Provinces might be restricted and registered. This was gravely cited as an
expression of opinion in favour of an Ordinance. No wonder the late Lord
Lytton [Secretary of State for the Colonies] was amazed and sceptical.
Experience had shown that there was at that time, not only no widespread
desire among the Kandyans for the change, but that in many outlying districts
at some little distance from the central capital, the people had never heard
of the proposal, until after the passing of the Ordinance No. 13 of 1859."
(Digby, **Life of Sir Richard Morgan** ).



Instead of confining itself to the introduction of a system of voluntary
registration, the Ordinance attempted at regulating the status of all existing
unions contracted according to the customs of the country. Further, it
provided that future registered marriages could only be dissolved by the
tedious and expensive process of a legal suit for divorce on grounds similar
to those prescribed by English Law. As Modder pointed out (pp. 223-225), the
Ordinance did not work very well. Indeed, the District Judge of Kandy, Mr.
Berwick, said that "the effect of the new law was to bastardize and disinherit
multitudes of the generation then being born, who would otherwise have had
under the old law the status of legitimacy ... They were unsettling the rights
of the property of the next two generations, and must foresee an immense flood
of litigation and discontent and of grievous moral hardship in the future."



Despite all the tinkering which the main enactment received from the amending
Ordinances No. 4 of 1860, 8 of 1861 and 14 of 1866, Sir Hercules Robinson
(afterwards Lord Rosmead), then Governor, wrote as follows in 1898:



"It is probably within the mark to assume that two-third of the existing
unions are illegal, and that four-fifths of the rising generation, born within
the last eight or nine years, are illegitimate.

**22**



The oldest child born since the bringing into operation of Ordinance No. 13 of
1859 cannot now be more than nine years of age; but fifteen or twenty years
hence, or sooner, if matters be left as they are, a state of antagonism must
arise between the natural and legal claimants to property which it is
impossible to contemplate without dismay."



The Ordinance was not repealed, but amendments were made in enacting Ordinance
No. 3 of 1870, as Sir Hercules Robinson explained in his opening speech in the
Legislative Council in 1869, to provide "relief for those, who under the
mistaken supposition that they were complying with its provisions had
committed bigamy, and by affording greater facilities for the dissolution of
registered marriages in cases in which the parties to them were unable, from
an incompatibility of temper, or any other cause, to live happily together."
Sir Hercules observed that "It was not forgotten that it was hopeless to force
European usages and opinions in regard to such domestic concernments upon an
Eastern people, until they were themselves prepared for the adoption of
Western views of morality by an actual change of habits..."



Indeed, the Kandyan population had been wholly unprepared for the radical
changes introduced in 1859. The strange provisions regarding registration were
largely disregarded. As Modder explained (pp. 255-256):



"Villagers do not comply with the provisions of the Ordinance, not because
they are immoral, or that they prefer to form illicit connections, but simply
because they will not take the trouble to register what they and all their
neighbours regard as an honourable union without registration. It is well-
known that there exists no real objection on their part to the formality
prescribed by law, and they are quite ready to recognize and appreciate the
provision as a necessary safeguard of the interests of the wife, as of the
children. Still, the absence of registration carries no stigma, as it does
among western nations, and since a thing which may be done on any day is done
on no day, it has come about that the ceremony of registration is largely
neglected. "

**23**



Marriages continued, despite the Ordinance, to be contracted according to
custom; and as we have seen, rights of inheritance were determined by
reference to the character of such marriages as being binna or diga,
notwithstanding the fact that the marriages were not valid for want of
registration. As Lawrie, J. after noting the freedom of a diga - married wife
to leave her husband as well as her precarious position on account of her
liability to be "turned out whenever her husband got tired of her" in olden
times, observed in Kalu v. Howwa Kiri (12) (supra):



"A woman who lives in diga, but whose marriage is not registered, is in very
much the same legal position as a diga married woman was before the Kandyan
Marriage Ordinance was passed. Her position is equally free and equally
precarious."



"The Ordinance now gives privileges to those who register their marriages, and
especially to their children, but the law as to the rights of daughters
married in binna or in diga has not been changed, and the old disability still
attaches to the act of being conducted from a father's house by a man **and
the going with him to live as his wife in his house. "**



The emphasis is mine.



If Bertram, C.J. was suggesting on the basis of decisions like Kalu v. Howwa
Kiri (12) that forfeiture resulted from mere physical separation and co-
habitation, with great respect, that is a position that cannot be supported.
Forfeiture was the consequence of a diga marriage.



We have seen that in Menikhamy v. Appuhamy(11) (supra) - the case in which the
woman left her home to take up duties as a cook and later lived with a man
named Muniandy - the Court held that in the circumstances there was no
marriage in diga and, therefore, no forfeiture. "diga" and "binna" do not
describe a married woman's place of residence. They describe the nature of her
marriage whatsoever her place of habitation may be.



There must be a diga marriage for the forfeiture to come into operation.
Modder, at p. 232 and at p. 430, reports the decision of Withers, J. in Bindi
Menika v. Mudianse(24), as follows:

**24**



"A woman, leaving home to live with a man in diga does not thereby form a diga
marriage, if this man was found to have a wife at the time."



Modder (paragraph 241 at p. 429) states that "Unless a daughter has been
formally married away in diga, or unless she obtains a settlement in the house
of an acknowledged husband, she will not lose her right of sharing in the
estate of her parents." In his Comment at p. 430, he explains that if the
parents had neglected to have their daughter married, and the daughter
contracted clandestine intimacies and at times absented herself from home and
lived elsewhere in concubinage, yet if she returned and her parents received
her again into the family, and if she afterwards remained in the father's
house, she will not be regarded as a daughter who had been disposed in diga,
and she will, therefore, in the event of her parent dying intestate, be
entitled to a share of the said parent's landed property equally with her
brother.



Modder cites a case reported in Armour: 61 in which it had been decided that
"A daughter, whom her father had consigned to the care and protection of some
relation, being afterwards married in the said relation's house to a person of
another family, if the husband did not condut her thence to his own house,
that marriage will not be a reckoned one in diga, and the daughter will,
therefore, continue to have a claim on her father's estate. ..."



Modder also cites Punchimahatmaya v. Charlis(18), (supra) Kotmale v.
Duraya(19), (supra), and Kalu v. Howwa Kiri(12), (supra), and quotes Mr.
Justice De Sampayo's words in Menikhamy v Appuhamy(11) and refers to De
Sampayo, J.'s observation in that case that it is "the going out in diga that
works the forfeiture; that is to say the woman should be conducted by, or go
out to live with a man as his wife.



Admittedly, the contracting of a diga marriage resulted in the forfeiture of a
daughter's rights of inheritance to her father's properties. The fact that a
marriage was invalid because it was unregistered did not mean that there was
no marriage; for there may have been a customary marriage; and if such a
marriage was a diga marriage, the forfeiture would come into operation even
though the

**25**



marriage was not registered. Bertram, C.J., it seems, supposed that where a
marriage was not registered, there was no marriage. Therefore, if there was a
forfeiture, it was due to the mere departure from the mulgedera and not on
account of marriage. And therefore where the woman remained in her father's
house, there was no departure and therefore there was no forfeiture. With
great respect, the Chief Justice was mistaken, for the cases show that the
forfeiture was brought into operation by the woman joining another family by
contracting a diga marriage. Where no such marriage is contracted, the
departure of a daughter from the mulgedera does not result in the forfeiture
of her rights of inheritance to her father's properties.



REMAINING IN OR RETURNING TO THE MULGEDERA DOES NOT NECESSARILY RESULT IN A
RETENTION OR RE-ACQUISITION OF RIGHTS.



The view that a woman married in diga who for "whatever reason" remains in the
mulgedera does not forfeit her rights or if she returns to the mulgedera she
regains her rights, if there has been 'the acquiescence of her family',
because in such a case, there has been no "severance" from the mulgedera, is
untenable. The acceptance of the daughter back into the household as a member
of the family, in the sense relevant to the concept of binna marriage, is the
decisive matter. On the other hand, in the words of Modder (paragraph 251 p.
466) "The return of a diga married daughter to the family house, either before
or after the father's death does not necessarily vest her with binna rights."



There is no doubt that in certain circumstances, a diga - married daughter may
acquire the rights of inheritance appropriate to that of a binna - married
daughter. Hayley at p. 389 summarizes the position as follows:



"3\. If the diga - married daughter returns during her father's lifetime,
**and is allowed to settle on the estate in binna with her former husband or a
new husband,** she acquires all the rights of a binna married daughter.



4\. If the diga - married daughter returns after her father's death, she does
not recover her right to succeed, **unless the other heirs**

**26**



**themselves give her in binna marriage, or expressly consent to her marriage
with either her former husband or a new husband being considered a binna
marriage, "**



The emphasis is mine.



As it was in Mampitiya v Wegodapela(9), there was no question of a **return**
of the daughter to her mulgedera: in the matter before us, Kiribindu, the
plaintiff. respondent, never left her parental home. However, as Bertram, C.J.
observed (p. 133) in Mampitiya v. Wegodapela(9), if in certain circumstances
after celebrating a diga marriage, a daughter may regain binna rights, "surely
a fortiori **under appropriate conditions** she may also retain them."



The emphasis is mine.



There is no dispute that Kiribindu, the plaintiff-respondent, never left her
parental home and lived in it before and after the death of her father.
However, was **she allowed to settle in** binna in the mulgedera? Living in
the mulgedera (or on ancestral properties e.g. see D.C. Kurunegala 19107
(1873) Ill Grenier 115; Dingiri Amma v. Ukku Amma(25), having a binna
connection of Gonigoda v. Dunuwlla (26)cf. also Doratiyawe v. Ukku Banda
Korale(27), did not automatically confer rights of inheritance on a daughter
who had been married in diga. Her rights would depend on whether her residence
could be regarded as a **settlement in** binna in the house or property of the
father. Whether there was a settlement in binna would depend on the
establishment of that fact established by the evidence in a particular case.
In Re Mahara Ratemahatmaya(28), where a man lived for some years in the family
house of a woman with the intention of forming a marital connection, it was
held by Rowe, C.J. and Morgan J. that, unless there be some substantial proof
to the contrary arising from a proved disparity of rank or other legal
obstacle, that would amount to a marriage in binna.



On the other hand, as we have seen, if a daughter who had gone out in diga be
divorced, or left a widow, or ill-treated or reduced to penury by her
husband's misfortune or bad conduct, she is entitled, on returning to her
parents, **to live with them** and be supported.

**27**



However, although there was residence, that alone did not confer the rights of
a binna married daughter on such a person.

  
Sawers (Chapter l, paragraph 3 p. 2) states as follows:



"Daughters, while they remain in their father's house, have a temporary joint
interest with their brothers in the landed property of their parents; but this
they lose when given out in what is called a diga marriage, either by their
parents, or brothers, after the death of the parents. It is, however, reserved
for the daughters, in the event of their being divorced from their diga
husbands, or becoming widows destitute of the means of support, that they have
a right to return to the house of their parents and there to have lodging and
support and clothing from their parent's estate; but the children born to a
deega husband have no right of inheritance in the estate of their mother's
parents."



Armour ( p. 66) gave the following illustration:



"A daughter, whom the father had disposed of in diga having been afterwards
divorced from her husband and reduced to destitution, and having therefore
returned to her father's house and remained there until her father's death,
will not have thereby become invested with the right of sharing in her
father's estate; the whole thereof will devolve to the son and to the binna
daughter."



Indeed, a daughter in want may be allotted lands for cultivation in lieu of
maintenance (e.g. see Dissanekgedera Sirimal Etena v. Her brother
Kooderalle(29), but in that event she was merely a tenant at will and acquired
no vested, permanent interest. (see Hayley p. 388 and p. 390 and Wettaewe
Bandi Appu and Kirry Menike v. Ismail Naide(30).



Armour ( p. 67) gives the following illustrations:



"But, if the diga married daughter did not return to the house of her father
until after his demise, if she came back destitute, after the death of her
father, and if her brother did then not only allow her lodging in the house,
and supply her with the necessaries of life, but if he even permitted her to
have a second husband in the said

**28**



house, and moreover, allowed her son, born under the diga coverture, to
cultivate a portion of the deceased father's lands, - all those circumstances
will not invest her with the rights of (a) binna married daughter, and she
will not have thereby acquired a permanent title to a portion of her father's
lands \- it being here premised that the said son and daughter were issue of
the same bed.



And if a diga married sister returned along with her husband, and her brother
gave them a lodging in the deceased father's house, and assigned to them a
portion of the paternal estate for their maintenance, temporarily, that
portion will not eventually devolve to the said sister's issue, but will at
the death of the said sister, revert to the brother, or he being dead, to his
issue.



If a daughter, who had been married out in diga, did, after the death of her
husband, and subsequent to the demise of her father also, return to her
deceased father's house, and remain there in the state of widowhood, and if
she and her children, who were born under the diga coverture, were even
allowed by her brother to possess a portion of the father's lands, yet such
possession will not invest her with a permanent right to that portion, and
therefore, the same will not, at her death, devolve to her said children."



In Kattikande Menikhamy v. Baala Etana(31), it was stated as follows: "
According to the only system the assessors are acquainted with, being that
which was followed by the Maha Nadoo, and which they believe was enforced in
all cases in every part of the Kandyan country, the whole of the property in
question should be adjudged to the 1st plaintiff in parveny, reserving only a
certain life interest therein to her father's widow, the defendant, and
recognizing also the right of Kirry Etana, the eldest daughter, to be
subsisted on the estate in case of her being reduced to destitution. But
neither the defendant as widow of the proprietor, **nor Kirry Etana their
daughter, on the ground of having returned to and dwelt on the estate, would
be entitled to a permanent hereditary interest. From this she, Kirry Etena,
was cut off according to universal custom of these Provinces by being given
out in diga marriage by her father. "**

**29**



In Galgamegedera Alenso Naide v. Heykeladeniya Etenec(32), it was decided that
Loku Naide's three sisters having been disposed of in diga thereby forfeited
their right to inherit their father's lands, and although the 2nd and 3rd
sisters had afterwards returned through necessity **and dwelt on the estate
and had possession of part of the lands,** neither they nor their children
were allowed to have recovered the right of inheritance.



In Udurawela Polwattegedera Punchyralle v. Do. (VP) Dukgannaralle(33), there
were five sons and four daughters. The father had divided all his lands
(except a small portion) amongst his sons. All four daughters were disposed of
in diga, but subsequently the 1st **daughter returned and died in the father's
family house** , leaving a daughter. The 2nd daughter died in her husband's
house, leaving a daughter. The 3rd daughter returned destitute from her
husband's house **and lived in her native village**. The 4th daughter died
without issue. By the decree of court, **the allotment of the father's lands
were confirmed to the sons** and the reserved portion thereof was adjudged to
the surviving daughter and the child of the 1st daughter. No portion of the
father's lands was allowed to the 2nd daughter's child.



Even where there was no destitution, the return to the family home or lands
did not necessarily convert a diga marriage into a binna marriage.



In the Ambaliyadde case(34), two brothers had four children by a joint wife,
viz., one son and three daughters. Owing to domestic discord, the two brothers
separated and divided the children between them, one taking the son and a
daughter, and the other taking the two other daughters under his care. One of
the latter daughters, who as well as her two sisters had been given away in
diga, **returned to the parent's house after her husband's death and in the
lifetime of her father, and there lived ever since, enjoying also the produce
of the garden. Her son born in diga was also brought up in her father's house.
It was decided that the son was the sole heir to both the fathers and the
whole of their estate was adjudged to the son's children. The litigating**

**30**



**daughter was only permitted by the terms of the decree to have occupancy of
part of the house during her natural life.**



In Boombure Kalu Etena v. Punchyhamy(35), the proprietor left three sons and a
daughter. The latter was first married out in diga but **returned with her
husband after the death of their parents, and her brother allowed her husband
to possess a portion of the family estate. The daughter obtained no permanent
settlement on the estate after her return**. The 1st son died without issue.
The 2nd son left a daughter. The 3rd son left a son. The estate was adjudged
to be **equally divided between the 2nd son's daughter and the 3rd son's son.
The claim of the daughter (who had several husbands successively in her
parent's house) was dismissed.**



In Marassenagedera Kaloomenika v. Udagedera Punchymenika (68), the proprietor
had left a son and an infant daughter. The latter was given away in diga in
the same village, after her father's death, but had no possession of any part
of her father's lands from the time of her marriage until after her brother's
death, **when she recovered a share of the lands by a decision of the chief.
However, by the Judicial Commissioner's decree, the award of the chief was
annulled and the whole of the lands were adjudged to the brother's children,**
who were all daughters  
  
As we have seen, Modder (p. 323) quoting Chambers' Encyclopaedia Brittanica,
pointed out that in a binna marriage "the man goes to live with his wife's
family usually paying for his footing in it y service". What was usual, in
that regard, however, as in the matter of residence, was not an absolute test
of the character of a marriage. The mere fact that services were rendered on
occupied paternal properties does not alter the status of a diga married
daughter. In Mahenegedera Baale Etena v. Riditotuwegedera Ukkuralle(36), the
proprietor died leaving one son and four daughters. One of the daughters had
been disposed of in diga in the father's lifetime, and another was
subsequently given away in diga by her brother; she, however, came back and
**lived in her father's house with her husband, who cultivated a portion of
the land, doing service for the same.** It was decided that neither the widow
nor any

**31**



of the daughters had a right to inherit, and the whole estate was adjudged to
the proprietor's son.



The position that the change of residence of a diga married daughter does not
alter the character of her marriage was recognized by the Supreme Court in
Kalu v. Howwa Kiri(12), Lawrie, J. explained the law as follows:



"In olden times, a Kandyan woman, married in diga, could leave her husband's
house whenever she chose, and was liable to be turned out whenever her husband
got tired of her; but, though she thus gained only a precarious position by
being conducted from her father's house, the legal consequences of such a
conducting were fixed. She ceased to be a member of her father's family, **and
she did not regain her full rights, even though she returned or was sent back
in a few days. "**



The emphasis is mine.



Perera, A J in Dingiri Amma v. Ukku Amma(25), affirmed the general validity of
the principle. His Lordship said:



"The case of Kalu v. Howwa Kiri ... was cited to me in which Justice Lawrie
has held that disabilities in the case of diga married daughters resulted from
the "act of being conducted from the father's house by a man and the going
with him to live as his wife in his house", and it was argued that, in that
view, where once the event took place, the disabilities remained unchanged.
**That is so, no doubt, as a general rule, and it may also be that generally
speaking, a diga married daughter did not regain her full rights even though
she returned to her father,** or was sent back in a few days... ."



The reference to regaining "full interests" is misleading. Every daughter,
including one married in diga, is under the law entitled as a matter of right
to support if she is in need of it. She does not regain any rights or
interests. It is always there. As far as the rights of inheritance are
concerned, if a woman is married in diga, her return

**32**



to the mulgedera does not automatically restore to her the rights she lost
when she married, and in the words of Lawrie, J, "ceased to be a member of her
father's family".



IF A DIGA MARRIED WOMAN IS REMARRIED IN BINNA OR READMITTED INTO HER FATHER'S
FAMILY BY A BINNA SETTLEMENT CLEARLY SHOWING THAT A BINNA CONNECTION WAS
INTENDED, SHE REGAINS THE RIGHTS OF A BINNA MARRIED DAUGHTER TO INHERIT HER
INTESTATE FATHER'S PROPERTIES.



Where a diga married daughter returns to her parents' home after the
dissolution of her marriage by the death of her husband or by

divorce, she does not ordinarily recover any right to inherit her father's
property, whether she returns before or after her father's death. (Kalu v.
Howwa Kiri(12); Punchimahatmaya v. Charlis(18); Kotmale v. Duraya(19); The
Ambaliyadde Case (34)).



If, however, with the consent of her parents she marries again in binna, then
her previous marriage is disregarded and the full rights of a binna - married
daughter accrue to her. (D.C. Kandy 18457 (1894) Austin's Appeal Reps. 96;
Tikiri Kumarihamy v. Loku Menika"", Babanissa v. Kaluhami(38), states as
follows:



"A daughter, however, who may have been given out in deega, should she after
her return to the house of her parents, with the consent of her family, get a
beena husband in the house of her parents with the consent of her family, the
issue of this connexion will have the same right of inheritance in their
maternal grandfather's or grandmother's estate as the issue of her uterine
brothers."



If a daughter returns to her mulgedera with the man to whom she had been
married in diga, during her father's lifetime and is all

to settle on the estate in binna by her father, she acquires all the rights of
a binna-married daughter (Hayley 389).



Armour (p. 65) states that if a daughter who had been married in diga returned
with her husband and obtained a binna settlement in



**33**



her father's house, died before her father, leaving issue, a son, that son
will succeed to his mother's interests in his maternal grandfather's estate.



Armour (p. 66) states that a daughter who had been married out in diga, but
had afterwards returned to her father's house with her husband and dwelt there
in binna; a daughter who settled in diga and who received her father into her
house and rendered him assistance until his demise; and a grand-daughter, the
child of a son, who died before his father, have equal rights and the
ancestor's lands will, therefore be divided equally amongst them in equal
shares.



Admittedly, when he gave her away in diga the daughter would have been given
her dowry (see Hayley 331-336). However, the other children have no vested
interest in the paternal property during their father's life, so that he is
not prevented from disregarding the dowry already advanced and reinstating his
daughter in the family. He must manifest his intention of reinstating the
daughter in the family. Such an intention may (not must) be inferred from his
permitting the daughter to dwell in the mulgedera or some portion of his
estate **in binna marriage.** (See Hayley 385; Modder 464).



In Bandy Ettene v. Bandy Ettene(39), Cayley, J. observed as follows:



"it appears to the Supreme Court that the case is substantially one in which a
diga married daughter returns with her husband to her father's house and in
which the father assigns them a part of his house, and puts them in possession
of a specific share of lands. In cases of this kind, the diga married daughter
regains her binna rights." for, as Armour 64, explains, "such arrangement will
be equivalent to a binna settlement, and, therefore, in the event of the
father's death, the said daughter will be entitled, as well as her brother, to
inherit a share of their father's landed property."



At p. 387, Hayley explains that:



"It makes no difference whether the daughter returns and contracts a second
marriage, or brings back to the paternal abode

**34**



the husband with whom she previously departed in diga. If the return was
before the father's death, the marriage may be converted into a binna one,
with full effect in respect of inheritance, **but it must clearly appear that
a proper binna connection was intended.** In D. C. Kurunegala 19107, (1873)
Grenier 111, where a diga married daughter returned to her father's house with
her husband and was given a portion of the paternal estate on which she built
a house and resided permanently, it was held that she had recovered the rights
of a daughter married in binna. So too if the return is after her father's
death, there is nothing to prevent the heirs from recognizing the conversion
of the marriage into binna, but stronger proof would presumably be required
than in the case of a new marriage."



The emphasis is mine.



In Dingiri Amma v. Ratnatilaka(17), one of the daughters who had married,
after the dissolution of the marriage, had returned to the mulgedera and with
the acquiescence of the father, had contracted a binna marriage. Tambiah, J
(Sinnetamby, J agreeing) said (at pp. 166-167) that in considering whether the
two other daughters who had married in diga "re-acquired binna rights, it must
be shown that they were not only received by (the father] and those who were
entitled to the inheritance at the mulgedera but further that they had
acquiesced in their acquiring binna rights and agreed to share the
inheritance."



The emphasis is mine.



In Samerakongedera Punchyralle v. Punchi Menikal(40), the plaintiff's paternal
grandfather and grandmother both possessed lands. They had two daughters and a
son. The son at first had his wife in d but afterwards removed with her to her
parents' house and there cohabited in binna. The two daughters were both
married out in diga, but one of them (the defendant) afterwards came back to
her father's house in her father's lifetime, accompanied by her husband and
fever since as in beena". The son died in his wife's house leaving two
children, the plaintiff and his sister. The father died next

**35**



"having received assistance from the **beena** daughter for many years (just
before his death he granted a scratched ola to his said daughter, but it was
set aside as invalid by the terms of the Proclamation,) DECIDED, waiving the
question of the talipot, that defendant has a right to inherit equally with
her brother as it was proved that she resided with her husband in her house
for many years previous to the latter's death. Plaintiff's claim therefore is
dismissed, he being already in possession of one-half of his grandfather and
grandmother's estate."



It is perhaps not unreasonable to assume that the talipot, if admitted, might
have shown that a grateful father bequeathed property to the daughter. In any
event in accordance with the recognized principles of Sinhala laws and
customs, the decision that the defendant had a right in the event of intestacy
to inherit with her brother was based not on the fact of residence, but rather
on the fact that the father had permitted the daughter and her husband to live
in his house "as in beena". he had attempted to reward his dutiful daughter
who is, not without great significance, described in the report as a "beena
daughter", notwithstanding the fact that she had earlier been married in diga.



Modder (paragraph 250 (3) at p. 456) states that a diga married daughter
acquires binna rights "On returning home along with her husband, and attending
on, and rendering her father assistance until his death. "In his "Comment" on
that paragraph, he states as follows:



"If the daughter who had been married in diga, returned along with her husband
and attended on her father and rendered him assistance until his death, and if
the son had been settled away in binna elsewhere, and died before his father,
leaving issue a son, in such case, the rights of the said daughter will be
equal to those of the son's son, and they will accordingly be entitled to
equal shares of the inheritance. (Armour 64; Marshall 329, x.57 D. C.
Madawalatenna 590, (1834 Morgan, 12 s.73.))."



Modder (paragraph 250 (4) at p. 456) states that a diga married daughter
acquires binna rights "On coming back and attending on,



**36**



and assisting her father during his last illness, and the father on his death-
bed expressing his will that she should have a share of his land." In his
"Comment" on that paragraph, he states at pp. 465-466 as follows:



"If the father left a son and a daughter, minors, by one wife, and a son and a
diga married daughter by another wife, if that diga married daughter came back
and assisted her father during his last illness, and if the father had,
therefore, on his death-bed, expressed his will that his diga daughter should
have a share of his lands, notwithstanding her being settled in diga, in that
case, the diga daughter will be entitled by virtue of such nuncupative will to
participate equally with her uterine brother, and their paternal half-brother
and half-sister, in the father's estate; the father's landed property will
thus be divided equally between the two families, one moiety to the diga
daughter and the other moiety to the other son and daughter. (Armour, 65).
Ord. No. 7 of 1840, section 2, does not recognize a nuncupative will of this
nature."



I shall deal with the Madawelatenne case(41) referred to by Modder later on. I
shall also deal with the question of a woman married in binna leaving a child
in the mulgedera when she subsequently departed from her father's house. What
I should like to point out here is that in a "note" to the discussion of that
matter, Sawers (Chapter I paragraph 9 pp. 3-4) refers to the case of the
daughter previously married in binna but later living in diga acquiring binna
rights by  
  
"visiting [her father) frequently and administering to his comfort, and
especially by being present, nursing and rendering him assistance in his last
illness; and this would especially be the case where there were two daughters
and no sons either in reestablishing the right of one to the entire estate
against the other daughter married in deega, or for a half of the estate
should the other daughter be married in beena; but should there be a son,
besides these two daughters, under such circumstances, and he living at home,
in that case, the son or his heirs would get the half of the estate, and the
other moiety would be divided between the two daughters of their heirs; but
should the son have been living out in beena, and the parent have been
depending on his

**37**



daughters and their husbands for assistance and support, in that case, he
would only be entitled to one-third and the daughters and their children to
one-third."



It hardly comes as a surprise that in such circumstances a father would, as a
matter of reciprocity, wish to re-admit his diga - married daughter into his
family and thereby recognize the discharge of her filial duties
notwithstanding the fact that she had earlier gone away to become a part of,
and to serve the purposes and interests of, another family.



The decision in Batterangedera Horatala v. Her full brother Kalua(42), also
underlines the importance of the father's permission to readmit a diga-married
daughter upon return with her husband to his family. The report of that
decision is in Hayley, Appendix II, at pp. 45-46. It is as follows, except for
the emphasis, which is mine:



"Ukkuwa was proprietor of an estate of 5 pelahs. He had a son, the defendant,
and three daughters. One of the latter was married in beena, the other two, of
whom plaintiff is one, were given out in deega. Plaintiff had two deega
husbands, but after the death of one of the husbands, plaintiff and the
surviving husband returned to her father's house. Ukkuwa died nine months ago
intestate, but it was stated that he had settled on his first mentioned beena
daughter 2 pelahs of his land, and at his death bequeathed 5 lahas to
plaintiff, leaving the remainder 2 1/2 pelahs to defendant. The other daughter
who continued in deega was left nothing. **As defendant distinctly
acknowledges that plaintiff returned to her father's house with of course his
permission,** 25 years ago, and continued to reside in it with her husband up
till her father's death, **this readmission into the family house** restores
to her all the rights of a beena marriage ..."



In Punchi Menike v. Appuhamy(13), de Sampayo, J. said:



"The point to be kept in view in all cases, I think, is that the essence of a
diga marriage is the severance of the daughter from the father's family and
her entry into that of the husband, and her consequent forfeiture of any share
of the family property; and the

**38**



principle underlying the acquisition of binna rights, as I understand it, is
that the daughter is readmitted into the father's family and restored to her
natural rights of inheritance. **This of course is not a one-sided process;
the father's family must intend or at least recognize the result. "**



A WOMAN MARRIED IN BINNA MAY WITHOUT A CHANGE IN REGISTRATION OR A SPECIAL
CEREMONY CONVERT THE CHARACTER OF HER MARRIAGE.



The second circumstance adduced by Bertram, C.J. for his view that if parties
who had been married in diga, contrary to what was agreed, did not conduct the
bride to the husband's home, then, for "whatever reason [this] was not done,
and, if with the acquiescence of her family the bride remained in the
mulgedera, ... the forfeiture was never consummated", was as follows: "The
circumstance that if a woman, duly married in binna subsequently without any
formal ceremony, or change in the registration, leaves her mulgedera and
settles in the home of her husband, this of itself works a forfeiture. (See
Madder, p. 247, and the Madawalatenna Casel(41))."  
  
I shall deal with the Madawelatenne Case (41) later on in considering the so-
called "close-connection with the mulgedera" theory.



Modder (paragraph 247 p. 442) states that "A binna marriage is sometimes
converted into a diga one, in which event it is subject to all the incidents
of that form of marriage." In his "Comment", Modder explains as follows:



"A daughter married in binna, quitting her parents' house with her children to
go and live in diga with her husband, before her parents' death, forfeits for
herself and her children the right to inherit any share of her father's
estate, she having at the time a brother or binna married sister." (Sawers 3;
Marshall 329; Armour, 59).



But if a daughter, who had been settled in binna was childless, and if after
her father's death, she quitted his house and went away and settled in digs,
in that case she will have no permanent right to a portion of her father's
landed property, the whole whereof

**39**



will then remain to her full brother or full brothers and their issue.
(Armour, 60). ..."



Where a woman married in binna left the home of her father and settled in diga
in the home of her husband, she could, without a ceremony, have converted her
marriage into a diga marriage, and thereby deprived herself of her rights of
paternal inheritance. In Bertram, C .J.'s words in Mampitiya v. Wegodapela(9),
(supra), (p.132): "What works the forfeiture is not the ceremony, but the
severance". One might have added, "Nor is it the direction in which the bridal
procession went after the ceremony that mattered." As we have seen, physical
absence is only evidence of "severance" from the family. As we have seen a
diga marriage takes place if a woman goes to live with a man as his wife and
quits the parental roof to "enter into another family". (Wood Renton, J. in
Punchi Menika v Appuhamy(13), (supra)). It is "the severance of the daughter
from the father's family and her entry into that of her husband" (De Sampayo,
J. in Punchi Menike v. Appuhamy(13) (supra), it is going out and "becoming as
it were a member of the husband's family" (De Sampayo, J. in Menikhamy v.
Appuhamy(13) (supra), it is the fact that a woman "ceased to be a member of
her father's family" (Lawrie, J. in Kalu v Howwa Kirit(12) (supra)), that
makes such conduct a diga marriage. Neither registration nor a particular form
of solemnization determines the character of a marriage, either at the time of
contracting it or subsequently. That however does not mean that the character
of a marriage is determined by quitting or, "for whatever reason", remaining
in the mulgedera.



Marriage, being an important event in one's life, was solemenized. There were
various ceremonies that were performed. (E.g. see Sawers Ch. V11 paragraphs 1
& 2 p. 30-31; Armour pp. 10-11; see also M. B. Ariyapala, Society in Mediaeval
Ceylon, (1956) at p. 355; Ralph Pieris, Sinhalese Social Organization, (1956),
197 et seq.; John D'Oyly, Sketch of the Kandyan Constitution, ed. U. B.
Turner, 1929, 82 et seq.). However, it was never in dispute that the
contracting of a marriage did not depend on the performance of specific
ceremonies. For instance Armour, at p. 11 states:



"These formalities and ceremonies are not however observed in every case and
are not always considered as necessary to

**40**



constitute lawful wedlock. If the man and wife were equals in respect of
family, rank, and station in society, and if their parents countenanced and
sanctioned the alliance, their cohabitation will be deemed a lawful union, and
their issue will be acknowledged as legitimate and therefore entitled to all
the rights of legitimate children, although the usual wedding ceremonies had
not preceded the espousal."



Modder: 248-249, writing in 1914, noted that the magul paha were at that time
rarely held and that the tendency to conform to western ideas was taking over.
He refers to the exchanging of wedding rings and the introduction of wedding
cake as examples. More importantly, he observes that  
  
"As the formalities and ceremonies known as the "Five feasts" could only be
properly observed by the higher and more influential classes, they were not
always considered necessary to constitute lawful wedlock. It was sufficient
(1) if the man and woman were of the same caste; (2) if they were equal in
respect of family, rank and station in society; and (3) if the alliance was
countenanced and sanctioned by their parents, or if dead, the parties were of
the same caste, and the man publicly acknowledged the woman to be his wedded
wife. The cohabitation would then be a lawful union, and the union thereof
entitled to all the rights of legitimate children." (Armour 6; Sawers 33).



Hayley (at p. 175) states as follows:  


The essentials of a legal marriage when carefully examined have been only
three:

  
(1) The parties must have had the connubium:

  
(2) They must have not been within the prohibited degrees of relationship:



(3) They must have cohabited with the intention of forming a definite
alliance:



It was also requisite:  


(4) That the consent of parents and relations should be given; and  
  
(5) In the case of chiefs of high rank, the consent of the King.



**41**



With regard to the approval of parents and relations, Hayley (p. 175) points
out that although it was ordinarily stated to have been one of the essential
conditions, it seems doubtful whether "its absence was itself sufficient to
make the marriage null and void". If the marriage was not null and void, it
would, as we shall see, have been a diga marriage.



Regardless of the nature of the solemnization, if what was requisite according
to custom to make a marriage had taken place, it was either a binna marriage
or a diga marriage. Whether a marriage was a binna marriage or a diga marriage
depended, not on any ceremony, but on whether the intention was that the woman
was to remain in her family or to join the husband's family, Forfeiture
depended on whether a marriage was a diga marriage, i.e whether the daughter
was to belong to her husband's family. And so, indeed, as Bertram, C.J. said,
"Forfeiture may, therefore, arise irrespective of any formal marriage
ceremony".



Undoubtedly the place of residence is an important indicator of the character
of a marriage. Ordinarily, in the absence of contrary evidence we ought to be
entitled to presume that the common course of usual events consistent with the
ordinary practices of Kandyan society followed. And so, a woman who after
marriage lived in her mulgedera with her husband may be supposed to have been
settled in binna. On the other hand, it would be expected that a woman married
in diga would have been led away from her parental home. It was a symbolic
manifestation of the departure of the woman to join another family and bear
children who will belong to a different gens. Such a person would live in her
husband's home or upon the ancestral property of her new family. However, if
it was agreed that the marriage was diga marriage, it would be a. diga
marriage, irrespective of the fact that the bride took up residence in her
father's house.



It cannot be accepted as a correct statement of the law that if a daughter,
despite the fact that she was, and was said in her certificate of marriage to
have been, married in diga, "for whatever reason", did not in fact leave the
mulgedera, she was therefore married in binna. It was usual for a diga-married
woman to be

**42**



conducted to her husband's home and for her to live with her husband in his
house. However, it does not follow that if a woman in fact lived in the
mulgedera "for whatever reason", then the marriage was a binna marriage. The
determination of the character of a marriage is, perhaps unfortunately, but
nevertheless, somewhat more complex than seeking a response to the simple
question: "Where did she live"?



MARRIAGE IN DIGA OF HER OWN ACCORD IS NEVERTHELESS A DIGA MARRIAGE SUBJECT TO
THE INCIDENTS OF THAT FORM OF MARRIAGE.



Although Bertram, C.J. stated that his view of the law was confirmed by two
circumstances, he also said (at p. 133) that "It is also significant that if a
daughter goes out in diga of her own accord, that is to say, without being
given away by any member of her family, the forfeiture is none the less
effected. (See Meera Saibo v. Punchirala(43) and Ram Etana v. Nekappu(44)).
Forfeiture may, therefore, arise irrespective of any formal marriage
ceremony."



Although generally marriages were arranged and their terms negotiated, and
usually took place with the consent of her parents, a woman was free to
contract a diga marriage. But if she did so, it would be subject to the usual
rule of forfeiture. (See Modder paragraph 242 and Comment at page 432, and at
pages 428 and 432 citing, among other authorities, Armour:42 and Wood Renton
and Grenier, J.J. in Ram Etana v. Nekappu(44) and Hutchinson, C.J. and Van
Langenberg, A J in Meera Saibo v. Punchirala (43)). Forfeiture takes place,
not because the woman acts without her parent's approval of her own accord,
but because the woman by contracting a diga marriage had become a member of
another family. That does not directly or indirectly support the conclusion
that if a woman, for "whatever reason" remains in the mulgedera she has the
rights of a binna-married daughter.



# THE CLOSE CONNECTION WITH THE MULGEDERA THEORY



Reliance was placed by Bertram, C.J. in Mampitiya v. Wegodapela(9), (supra) at
133, and by learned counsel for the

**43**



plaintiff-respondent in the matter before us, on certain decisions recognizing
an exception to the general rule excluding a diga - married daughter from the
intestate estate of her father if she had kept up "a close connection" with
her father's house.



The "close connection" in the matter before us, apart from the residence of
the plaintiff-respondent, was based on the fact that she remained in the
mulgedera to look after her brother's children. I shall deal with her role as
a guardian under the caption "Section 9 of the Kandyan Law Declaration and
Amendment Ordinance". I wish to deal here with the "close connection" theory
in general.



In Dingiri Amma v. Ukku Amma(25), the plaintiff first lived with her husband
in her father's house. The marriage was afterwards registered, and then both
husband and wife lived at times in the plaintiff's mulgedera and at times in
the husband's house, until the mulgedera was taken down. Then the plaintiff's
husband built a new house in the garden on which the mulgedera had stood, and
the two of them lived there. At the date of the trial, the plaintiff had lived
in the new house for twenty years. On these facts, Pereira, AJ held that, if
the plaintiff had been married in diga at all (as to which there was some
doubt), she had reacquired the rights of a binna \- married daughter.
Admittedly, if in the circumstances, it was the view of the Court that by his
conduct the father had shown that he had allowed his daughter to settle on the
family property in binna with her husband, then it would have been correct to
conclude, as the Court did, that the daughter had acquired all the rights of a
binna - married daughter.



However, as Hayley (p. 380) points out, Pereira, A J based his finding to some
extent on an extract from Perera's Collection p. 173; and "another instance"
in Marshall's Judgments p. 329 to the effect that a marriage in diga does not
divest the wife of her inheritance where she has always kept up a connection
with her father's house. Perera's Collection 173 and Marshall's Judgments 329,
deal not with two but with one and the same case. Moreover, Perera, A J
probably did not study the report of the relevant case in Marshall's
Judgments, but confined himself to a reading of Perera's Collection which
quotes a passage from Morgan's Digest incorrectly summarizing the relevant

**44**



case, namely No. 590 Madewelatenne case 3rd May 1834 reported in Marshall's
Judgments"". Since it is the misunderstanding of that case that was the source
of the "close connection" theory, I shall reproduce the relevant report in
Marshall in full. Under the caption "Kandy - Law of Inheritance", Marshall
stated as follows:



"58\. On this branch of the subject the following case from Madewelatenne was
decided in 1834. A father dying about 1814 left six pellas of land, and on his
deathbed gave a Talipot to his son, the Defendant, telling him to support his
mother to whom he gave two other Talipots, and who took the produce of one of
the pellas till her death, which happened about 1826; from that time the
defendant, her son, took the produce of this pella as well as of the other
five, the present action was brought for a share of the land by a daughter who
had been married in Deega, but who it appeared had frequently resided at her
father's house, where several of her children were born, it further appeared
that she and her children were in a state of destitution. The Talipots given
to the mother were not to be found; - in his answer, the defendant stated with
great particularity the division made by his father of his lands, alleging all
those which he now possessed had been bestowed on him by his father, and that
his sister, the plaintiff, had forfeited, those which had been given to her
for non-performance of Government services, but of this he offered no proof:
The Assessors in the original Court were of opinion that the plaintiff, in
consideration of his distressed circumstances, was entitled to the pella which
his Mother had enjoyed, - the Judicial Agent, that she was only entitled to
support for her life, but on reference to the Court of the Judicial
Commissioners [this being before the New Charter came into operation] that
Court decreed, that she was not entitled to anything. On appeal to the S.C.,
it was decreed that the plaintiff be put into possession of the Pella
possessed by her mother till her death; the S.C. adopted the opinion of the
Assessors in the Court of Madewelletenne for the following reasons:"
Independently of the state of destitution in which it appears that the
plaintiff now is, and which of itself would entitle her to some assistance
from the estate of her deceased parents, it appears that, though she was
married in Deega, she always kept up a close connection with her father's
house, in which indeed

**45**



three of her children were born, another reason is, that the defendant,
although he undertook to assert in his answer that the plaintiff had received
a share of the paternal lands which he even specifically described, yet has
not shewn that she received any part thereof; again it appears that the
father, on his death bed, gave one Talipot to the defendant, and two others to
his wife; what has become of those two latter olas does not appear, but it is
not improbable that one of them may have been intended for the plaintiff, more
especially considering the frequency of her visits to the parental residence.
"No. 590 Madewelatenne, 3rd May 1834."



What Morgan said in his Digest (1862) at p. 15 was this:  


"73\. - A marriage in Deega does not divest the wife of her inheritance where
she has always kept up a close connexion with the father's house; and this
independently of the state of destitution in which she may be, and which of
itself would entitle her to some assistance from the estate of her deceased
parents. - No. 690, D. C. Madewelatenne, (M)."



As Hayley (p. 380-382) points out: "... Now it is clear that this judgment
does not justify the summary in Morgan's Digest to the effect that, a marriage
in diga does not divest the wife of her inheritance where she has always kept
up a close connection with her father's house; and this independently of the
state of destitution in which she may be, and which of itself would entitle
her to some assistance from the estate of her deceased parents. Apart from the
fact that the words used were obiter dicta, since the plaintiff in the case
was destitute, and that several other considerations admittedly contributed to
the decision, attention need only be drawn to the fact that the daughter was
only awarded the one-sixth which her mother had possessed and not the half
share to which she would have been entitled if her marriage did not "divest
her of her interest."



In discussing Dingiri Amma v. Ukku Amma(25), Lascelles, C.J. in Appuhamy v.
Kiri Menika(45), suggests that the decision of Pereira, J. was based on the
fact that the woman had not merely been permitted to live in the mulgedera and
ancestral property but that she had been given a binna settlement, which, as
we have seen, entails more than residence. The Chief Justice stated (at p.
240) as follows:

**46**



"Pereira, J. held, on the authority of D .C. Kurunegala, 19,107, reported in
Modder 66, that, even if the plaintiff were married in diga, she had acquired
binna rights. D.C. Kurunegala, 19,107, was decided on appeal on the ground
that it was substantially a case where a diga married daughter returned with
her husband to her house and was given a binna settlement."



If a binna settlement had been made, there is no difficulty. It is then not a
mere matter of residence or keeping up connections. D.C.Kurunegala 19,107 is
reported in Part III Grenier at 115-116. The daughter had been married in diga
but she had returned with her husband to the family property, Mighamulawatte.
She was given exclusive possession of a piece of land therein and she built a
house on it and so, lived "in the same garden but in a different house" ever
since. The District Judge held that in accordance with the principles set out
in Armour p. 67; Austin p. 22 and in D.C.Kandy 16679, the daughter had not
acquired binna rights. In appeal Cayley, J. set aside the judgment. His
Lordship said: "it appears to the Supreme Court that the case is substantially
one in which a deega-married daughter returns with her husband to the father's
house, and in which the father assigns to them a part of his house and puts
them in possession of a specific share of his lands. In cases of this kind a
deega-married daughter regains her binna rights. See Perera's Armour p. 64."



In Ukku v. Pingo(46), Wendt, J., with whom Hutchinson, C.J . concurred, held
that a daughter, who married in diga after her father's death retained her
share by leaving behind in the mulgedera a child previously born to her there
as mistress of her brother-in-law.  


The decision appears to be based on Sawers' Digest of the Kandyan Law (Earle
Modder's edition 1921) Ch. I Section 9 p. 3 (Cf. Marshall's Judgments at 329;
Hayley Appendix I p. 6)which is as follows:



"A daughter married in beena quitting her parents' house with her children to
go and live in deega with her husband, before her parents' death, forfeits
thereby for herself and her children a right to inherit any share of her
parents' estate, (she having at the time a brother or a beena married sister),
unless one of her children be left in her parents' house."

**47**



Sawers refers only to a binna - married daughter, the position of whose
children bears no analogy whatever to that of a diga-married daughter and her
children. (See Hayley at p. 372 and p. 382). The object of a binna marriage,
as we have seen, is not to benefit the daughter "but to raise up heirs to the
proprietor by an artificial relationship. It results from this that while the
issue of the binna marriage take a vested interest either in possession or
reversion, the mother's interest is defeasible and will come to an end if she
subsequently leaves the family property and assumes a position equivalent to
that of a woman married in digs." (Hayley 372).



In Appuhamy v. Kiri Menika(45), the woman was married in diga and went out to
live with her husband at a place situated about two miles from her mulgedera.
One of her children was left in the mulgedera and brought up by her
grandmother. There was evidence that the woman "kept up a constant and close
connection" with the mulgedera. Lascelles, C.J. and Wood Renton J. held that
in the circumstances the woman did not forfeit her rights. Lascelles, C.J .
referred to the decision in Ukku v. Pingo(46) and observed that the decision
in that case was based on the passage in Sawers and that the passage in Sawers
dealt with the case of a woman married in binna. Lascelles, C.J. proceeded on
the basis that the Court did not "appear to have attached any importance to
this distinction", namely, whether the woman who left her child behind was
married in binna or digs. Indeed, it did not; but it seems almost certain that
a different, conclusion would have been reached had the importance of the
distinction been brought to the notice of the Court.



Lascelles, C.J. then observed that the decision in Dingiri Amma u Ukku
Amma(25) (supra) was based on D.C. Kurunegala 19, 107 which he said was
"substantially a case where a diga married daughter returned with her husband
to her father's house **and was given a binna settlement.**



The emphasis is mine.  


Lascelles, C.J. also considered Tikiri Kumarihami v. Loku Menika and
Others(47), The Chief Justice said that in that case "a passage



**48**



from Solomons' Manual of Kandyan Law is cited with approval, to the effect
that a binna married daughter who left her parents to marry in diga forfeited
for herself and her children all right to inherit 'unless she left one or more
children at her parents' house."  


Neither the decision in Tikiri Kumarihami v. Loku Menika and Others (47), nor
the passage in Solomons provides any basis for the conclusion of Lascelles,
C.J. that a woman married in diga did not forfeit her rights although she
lived away from the mulgedera provided that she left a child at the mulgedera
who was brought up by the grandmother and kept up a "constant and close
connection" with the mulgedera. The judgment of the Court delivered by Morgan,
C.J. is reported as follows:



"The plaintiff was first married in deega to Hataraleeadela, but she was
called back to the mulgedera by her parents and lived there with her child.
She afterwards married Toradeniya and although the evidence is conflicting in
this respect, the Supreme Court concurs with the District Court that that was
a marriage in beena. Her right therefore to the paternal inheritance revived.
She was subsequently, after the demise of both her associated fathers, married
out in deega by her brothers to Dohegrinne, but she left her youngest child of
the beena marriage at the parents' house. "If a daughter married in binna"
says the late Mr. Solomons in his excellent manual of Kandyan Law, p. 17,
"left her parents with children in order to contract a second marriage in
deega she forfeited for herself and children all right to inherit any portion
of her parents' estate unless she left one or more of the children of the
beena marriage at her parents house."



In Tikiri Kumarihami v. Loku Menika and Others (47), (supra), the diga-married
daughter had been recalled by her parents. Moreover, she had then been married
in binna. Her rights to paternal inheritance revived. And when, after the
death of her associated fathers she was given away in diga by her brothers,
she left her youngest child in the mulgedera. As I have pointed out above, the
position of.the children of a binna marriage bears no analogy whatever to that
of a diga-married daughter or her children: The "same principle", as
Lascelles, C.J. supposed, is not equally applicable to the child of a binna
married daughter and the child of a diga married daughter.

**49**



Hayley at p. 378 sets out the relevant principles applicable when a daughter
changes the character of her marriage. Later, at p. 383, he makes the
following explanation:



"As the binna-married daughter's children are regarded as belonging to their
mother's family, if her parents, on her departure in diga, keep one or more of
them in the mulgedera, they tacitly recognize the continuance of such
children's position in the family. These considerations have no application to
the issue of a diga - married daughter who belong to their father's house."



Both Lascelles, C.J. and Wood Renton, J. in Appuhamy v. Tikiri Menika(45)
refer to Madawelatenne(41). Wood Renton, J. (p. 241) concludes that "an
original marriage or a remarriage in binna seems to be not a condition of the
general rule laid down in the Madawalatenne case(41) but merely evidence of
the closeness of the original, or resumed, connection with the parents'
household, which enables the married daughter's rights of inheritance to be
preserved." As Hayley (p. 380) points out "A glance at the report shows that
the judgment [in Madawelletenne] did not purport to lay down any rule of law."



Hayley (p. 382) submitted that the hesitation expressed by Lascelles, C.J. in
coming to his decision in Appuhamy v. Kiri Menika(45) was "well founded, and
that the law laid down in this and the preceding cases is not supported by the
authorities and is contrary to the principles of Sinhalese Law."



Although Siripaly v. Kirihame(48), is not a case which relied on the so-called
"close connection" principle, I should like to refer to it since the facts
bear some resemblance to those in Tikiri Kumarihami v. Loku Menika and
Others(47) and because it underlines the fact that it is not residence but the
intention to restore a person's rights that matters. The daughter in this case
too had been married out in diga but was recalled during her father's lifetime
to the family house. She settled there in binna with her divorced husband's
brother. Th e documents filed in the case proved "beyond all doubt" that the
otter children of her father "recognised that she had regained her position as
one of [her father's) heirs. After her father's death, the woman

**50**



again left the paternal house and lived with her second husband in diga. Wood
Renton, J. (De Sampayo J. agreeing) held that in the circumstances the
daughter had regained her binna rights.



Siripaly v Kirihame(48) was cited with approval in Dingiri Amma v.
Ratnatilake(17), (supra). In that case, Tambiah, J. said (at pp. 166-167) that
in trying to establish that a daughter who had married in diga had re-acquired
binna rights, "it must be shown that they were not only received by [the
father] and those who were entitled to the inheritance at the mulgedera **but
further that they acquiesced in their reacquiring binna rights and agree to
share the inheritance. "**



The "close connection" theory was considered by Bertram, C.J. in Banda v.
Angurala(49). The Chief Justice underlined the decisive importance of the
intentions of the concerned members of the family as manifested by their
conduct. As explained by Tennekoon, C.J. in Gunasena and Others v. Ukkumenika
and Others(50), although in some cases, of which Appuhamy v. Kiri Menika(45),
and Punchi Menika v. Appuharny(13), are examples, "the question whether a
daughter who had forfeited her rights to the paternal inheritance had regained
such rights was tested largely by reference to the maintenance of a connection
with the mulgedera, yet in the case of Banda v Angurala(49), (supra) Chief
Justice Sir Anton Bertram held that the regaining of binna rights may be
evidenced by material other than a connection with the mulgedera.



Although in Mampitiya v. Wegodapela(9) (supra), Bertram, C.J .suggested that
it was residence in or absence from the mulgedera that was the decisive
factor, in Banda v. Angurala(49) (supra), the Chief Justice said that "there
is nothing magic about the mulgedera."



In Banda v. Angurala(49), (supra), Punchi Appuhamy had two daughters and three
sons. The two daughters were married in diga. One of the daughters went to
live with her husband and at the time of the action to partition the
properties of Punchi Appuhamy, many years after his death, she was still
there. The matrimonial history of the second daughter was uncertain. Her
original husband was said to be dead, and she was said to have married twice
subsequently.

**51**



However, there was no question that at her original marriage she left the
mulgedera and went to live in that of her husband. One of the three brothers
had died. The Chief Justice said (p. 277):



"A recital of these facts would seem to suggest conclusively that the
partition must be conducted on the supposition that [the daughters] had lost
all rights of inheritance from their father, Punchi Appuhamy, unless it can be
shown that in some way they regained binna rights, and the question for
determination is whether they have done so. In all previous cases the question
for the recovery of binna rights has always appeared to turn upon something
done in connection with the mulgedera, such as a resumption of residence
there; the cultivation of the paternal lands held in connection with it; the
leaving of a child in the mulgedera or the maintenance of a close connection
with the mulgedera. But in this case nothing of the sort is suggested. The
claim to binna rights, however, in this case is based upon circumstances of a
very significant and unequivocal character which f will proceed to examine."  


After examining numerous deeds (pp. 277-278), Bertram C.J. found that,
notwithstanding the diga marriages of the two daughters, their two surviving
brothers over many years had executed a series of deeds, inter se, and with
others, "clearly based upon the supposition that their sisters retained rights
in the paternal inheritance". His Lordship said (p. 278 in fin. - 280).



"The question now arises: What is the effect of this very remarkable series of
documents? The point at issue is the forfeiture of certain rights of
inheritance. Any forfeiture may be waived by those in whose benefit it takes
place. It has been customary in considering whether a forfeiture of binna
rights has been waived to look at the matter from the point of view of the
connection of the daughter in question with the mulgedera. But in my opinion
there is nothing to show that this is the only test. To use a favourite phrase
of the later Lord Bowen, "There is nothing magic about the mulgedera. Where a
forfeiture has taken place it is not the connection with the mulgedera which
restores the binna rights, it is the waiver of the forfeiture, of which the
connection with the **  
 **

**52**



mulgedera is the evidence. As was said by Wood Renton C.J. in Fernando v.
Bandi Silva(14), the instances given in the text books on Kandyan Law of the
cases in which binna rights can be regained are illustrations of a principle
and not categories exhaustive in themselves. **The underlying principle is
that the forfeiture by a marriage in digs of the diga married daughter to a
share of the inheritance, may be set aside by her readmission into the family
".**

** **

The real question is: Have the brothers waived the forfeiture of their
sisters' rights? It seems to me there can be only one answer to this question.
On any other supposition the series of deeds above recited would be absolutely
unintelligible.



The learned Commissioner's judgment is very concise. He simply says that he is
satisfied "from the long string of deeds produced that the girls, though they
were given out in diga, still held these property rights in the paternal
estate and **those rights were long recognised by the family. I therefore**
hold that they did not lose their rights to the estate although their
marriages were registered as diga." For the reasons I have explained, I agree
with the conclusion of the learned Commissioner and dismiss the appeal.



The emphasis is mine.



# KANDYAN LAW OR THE PRINCIPLES OF ESTOPPEL?



Basnayake, J. in Appu Naide v. Heen Menika(51), (Gratiaen, J. agreeing) said
that the rule applied by Bertram, C.J. in Banda v. Angurala(49) "has its
origin in the Roman Law (Code 1.3.51) according to which everyone is at
liberty to renounce any benefit to which he is entitled." Basnayake, J. (at p.
65) proceeded to hold that he preferred to apply the doctrine of
"acquiescence" rather than the "associated doctrine of 'waiver' applied by Sir
Anton Bertram".



Bertram, C.J. did not dispose of the matter before him on the ground of
"waiver": the disposal of the lands was regarded in the circumstances as
evidence of readmission into the family. Obviously,

**53**



the fact that those in whose hands lie the decision of readmission may also be
persons whose rights may be adversely affected by acquiescing in conduct that
is consistent with readmission to the family. (See Hayley: 387). However,
readmission to the family is not based upon estoppel by conduct. As we have
seen, the cases show that residence in and possession of family lands and the
taking of their produce may sometimes be regarded as insufficient evidence of
readmission to the family and a consequent change of marital status. So also
the sale, lease or mortgage of family lands may in some cases not be
sufficient evidence of readmission. It may be due to some other arrangement
not connected with marital character. The principles of Kandyan Law relating
to the rights of succession of daughters married in diga or binna would have
no relevance. Rights pertaining to the property might, however, be ascertained
in such cases by the application of principles such as those relating to
estoppel by conduct or representation.



In the case before Basnayake, J. the land in question was owned by one
Appuhamy. Appuhamy had a son and two daughters. The two daughters were married
in diga. The District Judge had found that the daughters had reacquired their
binna rights. No reasons for this appear in the judgment. The facts, however,
showed that the brother and sisters had possessed the paternal land in common
and equal shares in pursuance of an agreement between them. Deeds were
produced to show that the brother and sisters had jointly sold some of the
inherited lands to outsiders. Counsel contended that the fact that the brother
had renounced his right to certain immovable property belonging to the family
which he permitted them to treat as their own although they were not entitled
to do so, did not confer any rights on the daughters. He submitted that, in
any event, the fact that the brother did not insist on his rights to ancestral
lands did not entitle the defendants to claim binna rights in them. Basnayake,
J. said at p. 54:



There is no evidence that the defendants reacquired binna rights, nor does
learned counsel for the respondents seriously contend that the defendants had
acquired binna rights, but he relies on the longstanding family arrangement by
which the brothers and sisters enjoyed the ancestral lands in equal shares.
... In the instant case the

**54**



deeds produced and the oral evidence.... go to show that despite the fact that
the defendants were not entitled to a share of the ancestral lands, including
the land in dispute, they continued to possess and enjoy the subject-matter of
the action and other lands as if they had not gone out in deega. I am unable
to see anything in the statements of Kandyan Law by Sawers and Armour which
has a direct bearing on the case under consideration. The nearest case is
found in Armour where he discusses the right of a deega married sister who
gets possession of the paternal lands. He says [Armour, **Grammar of the
Kandyan Law,** edited by Perera p. 55):



"if after the father's death, the daughter was married out in deega by her
brother, or by their mother, the said daughter will thereby lose her right to
a share of the inheritance, and consequently her brother will then become sole
heir to the father's landed property. And although the said deega married
sister did afterwards get possession of a portion of her father's lands, she
will not have a permanent title of that portion, it will at her death revert
to her brother, or he being dead, to his issue - it being premised that the
said parties were full brother and sister, and that the latter had remained in
her deega settlement until her death."



As there is no rule of Kandyan Law which is applicable to the present
question, it must be decided according to general principles of law. ... I
prefer to apply to this case the doctrine of acquiescence rather than the
associated doctrine of waiver applied by Sir Anton Bertram ... The [daughters
married in diga] with the knowledge of their brother ... enjoyed two-thirds of
the land as their own for over thirty years ... His evidence and his conduct
show that he was not unaware of his rights and that he assented to the
defendant's dealing with the lands in the way they did. He cannot now be
allowed, after standing by, with a knowledge of his rights, to deny the
defendants the right to the land which they have enjoyed as their own for so
many years.



In Gunasena and Others v. Ukkumenika and Others(50), the question that arose
was whether three daughters who had been married in diga before the death of
their father had "reacquired

**55**



binna rights". Besides the daughters, the father had four sons. Upon the death
of the father, the eldest son applied for Letters of Administration referring
to all the children, including the daughters, and their mother as the heirs in
law and next of kin. No objection was made to this description and Letters
were granted, estate duty was paid and final accounts were filed. However,
when application was made for a judicial settlement of the accounts of the
Administrator, the petitioner stated that the sole heirs were the four sons,
that the widow was entitled to a life interest in the acquired property and
that the three daughters "having been married out in diga have forfeited their
rights of succession to their father's estate." The three daughters filed
objections pleading, inter alia,



(a) that the male children of the deceased had waived the benefit accruing to
them by reason of the diga marriages and had treated them as heirs to the
estate of their deceased father notwithstanding the diga marriages;

  
(b) that on account of the rules of. waiver and estoppel and by their conduct
the male children of the deceased had forfeited their claims to the entire
estate and that accordingly the three daughters were entitled to share the
said estate along with the male children.



In support of their objections, the daughters relied on (1) the fact that the
administration proceedings had been conducted on the footing of the averments
in the application for Letters of Administration that the daughters were their
father's heirs; (2) the execution of three deeds of sale in which the title of
the sons and daughters was said to be "by right of paternal inheritance"; and
(c) the admission of title of the three daughters in D.C. Kurunegala Case No.
21281P: For, when a land that had belonged to their father was sought to be
partitioned, all the children (and the widow) had filed one answer.



Tennekoon, C.J. (with Weeraratne and Sharvananda, J.J. agreeing) observed at
p. 531 that according to the only witness called, and through whom the
marriage certificates were produced, the three sisters after marriage in diga
resided in their husbands' homes and exercised no rights in respect of the
mulgedera or any of

**56**



their father's properties other than those given to them upon marriage. The
Chief Justice said:



"No evidence whatsoever was called by the three sisters. In this state of the
evidence one has to proceed on the basis that neither before [the father's]
death nor thereafter do any of those acts which are customarily regarded in
Kandyan Law as evidence of readmission of a diga married daughter into the
father's family; there was for instance no evidence whatsoever to indicate
that any of the daughters maintained a close and constant connection with the
mulgedera, or left a child to be brought up at the mulgedera or maintained an
intimate relationship with the pater-familias, or possessed any of the family
lands. The case for the three ... sisters was thus based only on 'waiver' by
the brothers of the forfeiture as evidenced in the documents referred to above
or in the alternative on 'acquiescence' by them in the sisters exercising
rights in the paternal property by the same documents."



After examining the evidence adduced, and stating (at p. 534) that a daughter
married in diga can "in certain circumstances" have the forfeited rights
revested in such a daughter, Tennekoon, C.J. stated that, although in certain
earlier cases the question whether rights forfeited by a diga married daughter
had been regained had been "tested largely by reference to the maintenance of
a connection with the mulgedera", yet Bertram, C.J. in Banda v. Angurala(49)
held that "the regaining of binna rights may be evidenced by material other
than connection with the mulgedera. After quoting the observations of Bertram,
C.J. reported at p. 278, Tennekoon, C.J. (at p. 535), observed that the case
was followed by Basnayake, J. in Appu Naide v. Heen Menika(51). He then quotes
the observations of Basnayake, J. in Appu Naide v. Heen Menika at p. 65 where
Basnayake, J. had expressed a preference to apply the doctrine of
'acquiescence' rather than "the associated doctrine of 'waiver' applied by Sir
Anton Bertram." Tennekoon, C.J. then quotes De Sampayo, J.'s statement in
Punchi Menike v. Appuhamy(13) wherein reference is made to the "principle
underlying the acquisition of binna rights", namely that "the daughter is re-
admitted into the father's family and restored to her natural rights of
inheritance. This of course is not a one-sided process; the father's family
must intend or at least recognize the result."

**57**



Tennekoon, C.J. (at pp. 535-536) then goes on to state as follows:



"Upon an examination of these and earlier authorities it would appear that the
re-acquisition of binna rights by a daughter who has gone out in diga can be
established by proving the exercise by such diga married daughter of rights in
the mulgedera or in the paternal property as though there had been no
forfeiture, coupled with acquiescence on the part of the father or he being
dead, of the brothers in such exercise of rights; the exercise of rights in
the paternal property will include the execution by the diga married daughter
of deeds of sale, lease or mortgage of paternal property with the knowledge
and acquiescence of the father or the brothers and is not confined to proof of
possession of those lands. From such facts a waiver of the forfeiture can be
inferred and for such a waiver to be effective it is unnecessary to show that
the waiver, or the acquiescence in the exercise by the diga married daughter
of rights in the paternal properties resulted in the latter altering her
position for worse. This is a part of the rule of estoppel by conduct or
representation and is no part of the Kandyan Law relating to waiver by the
father or the brothers of the forfeiture that occurs upon a diga marriage of
rights to the paternal inheritance. From the documents that have been proved
in this case, it is plain that the appellants have without question - except
belatedly - acquiesced in the sisters exercising rights of disposal over the
paternal properties. ... Notwithstanding these deeds being set aside, the fact
of their execution with the acquiescence of the brothers remains unaffected.
... These two deeds together with deed No. 352 ... and the pleadings and
consent decree in the partition action D.C. Kurunegala Case No. 2128/P **can
only be explained on the basis that the sisters had re-acquired binna rights
in the paternal properties**. The proceedings in the testamentary case also
show that until the judicial settlement of accounts the brothers all proceeded
on the basis that the sisters were heirs at law of [the father] not only in
respect of the movable properties but also of the immovable properties."



The emphasis is mine.

# 58

#  

# SECTION 9 OF THE KANDYAN LAW DECLARATION AND AMENDMENT ORDINANCE



In Gunasena and Others v Ukkurnenika and Others(50), (supra), the District
Judge had held that all three sisters were heirs of their father and were
entitled to shares in his immovable properties. However, Tennekoon, CJ
(Weeraratne and Sharavananda, JJ. agreeing), while affirming the District
Judge's decision in so far as the 2nd and 3rd respondent sisters were
concerned, allowed the appeal only in so far as it concerned the 4th
respondent - the third sister - and held that the 4th respondent was not
entitled to succeed to her deceased father's immovable properties. The reason
given for differentiating between the 4th respondent sister (who was married
on 24 October, 1944) and her two sisters, the 2nd respondent (who had married
on 11 th July, 1935) and the 3rd respondent (who had married on 14th October,
1938) was that the other two sisters had been married before 1st January,
1939, the date on which the Kandyan Law (Declaration and Amendment) Ordinance
(Cap. 59) came into force; whereas the 4th respondent having married after the
coming into operation of the Kandyan Law (Declaration and Amendment) Ordinance
(Cap. 59) cannot be admitted to binna rights in view of section 9 (1) of that
Ordinance. That section, Tennekoon, C.J. said, provides, inter alia, that:



"No conduct after any marriage (whether binna or diga) of either party to that
marriage or any other person shall ... cause or be deemed to cause a person
married in diga to have the rights of succession of a person married in binna
or a person married in bin to have the right of succession of a person married
in diga."



In Alice Nona v. G. Sugathapala(52), the matter did not relate to the rights
of succession but to the question of maintenance. However section 9 (1) of the
Kandyan Law Declaration and Amendment Ordinance was applied. The applicant had
contracted a binna marriage. She claimed maintenance. The husband offered to
maintain her on condition of her living with him. The wife, however, refused
on the ground that it she changed her residence and went to live with the
husband, her rights of inheritance might be affected. The

**59**



magistrate held that this was not a sufficient reason within the meaning of
section 4 of the Maintenance Ordinance for the wife to refuse to live with her
husband. In appeal, Tennekoon, J. upheld the decision of the magistrate. He
said that "Under the law now governing the rights of binna married daughters
change of residence cannot affect the nature of the marriage or her rights to
succession. See section 9 (1) of the Kandyan Law Declaration and Amendment Act
... Admittedly the marriage was one contracted after 1938 and the provisions
of this section will accordingly apply ..."



In Yaso Menika v. Biso Menika(53), the 8th, 9th and 10th respondents claimed
the right to succeed to the intestate estate of their father. T. S. Fernando,
J. (Abeyesundere, J. agreeing) held that it appeared from the 8th respondent's
"own evidence that she had married and moved away from her parent's household
and had not come back to reside therein. Her claim to succeed to the deceased
intestate's property therefore failed in any event. The learned District
Judge, while holding that the 8th respondent was not entitled to succeed in
her claim, held that the other two claimants were so entitled because, to use
the learned Judges own words, although they were given out in diga they have
come back to the [parental home] and are entitled to a share of the acquired
property.



... The question arising in this case appears to have been decided in the
District Court without paying any regard to the relevant provisions of the
Kandyan Law Declaration and Amendment Ordinance. Sections 9 and 15 of this
Ordinance are not merely relevant but they also effectively bar [the 9th and
10th respondents from succeeding to any rights in the acquired property of
[their father]. In the case of ... the 9th respondent, there is no dispute
that she was herself married in diga in 1950. Her claim to succeed is
therefore barred by section 9 (1) of the Ordinance referred to above which
enacts that "a marriage contracted after the commencement of this Ordinance in
binna or in diga shall be and until dissolved shall continue to be for the
purposes of the law governing the succession to the estates of deceased-
persons, a binna or diga marriage, as the case may be, and shall have full

**60**



effect as such; and no change after such marriage in the residence of either
party to that marriage or of any other person shall convert or be deemed to
convert a binna marriage into a diga marriage or a diga marriage into a binna
marriage or cause or be deemed to cause a person married in diga to have the
rights of succession of a person married in binna, or a person married in
binna to have the rights of succession of a person married in diga."



In the case of ... the 10th respondent, we have permitted the production
before us by her of her birth certificate; an examination of that document
reveals that [the father] had not registered himself as her father, ...
Section 15 (c) of the Ordinance aforesaid precludes [the 10th respondent] in
these circumstances from maintaining her claim to a share of the acquired
property of [her father].



The appeal has to be allowed and the order made by the District Court
declaring the 9th and 10th respondents entitled to a share of the deceased
intestate is accordingly set aside...



In Ranhotidewayalage Rana v. Ranhotidewayalage Kiribindu(1), the plaintiff-
respondent, Kiribindu, who was the younger sister of the defendant-appellant,
Rana, instituted an action for a declaration of title to a half share of a
land called 'Gallajjewatte' and for damages for wrongful possession of her
share by the defendant. The plaintiff averred that the property in suit
belonged to her father, Ukkuwa, and though married in diga, she did not leave
the mulgedera and thereby, when her father died intestate, she became entitled
to a share of the paternal land called 'Gallajjewatte'. The defendant-
appellant filed answer denying the right of the plaintiff to inherit from her
father as she had contracted a diga marriage in her father's lifetime after
January, 1939. The defendant had married and lived in the mulgedera with his
wife and children. The plaintiff and her parents too lived in that house.
Shortly before the plaintiff got married, the defendant's wife died. The
plaintiff married one Piyasena on 27 July, 1939. The marriage certificate
stated that the marriage was in diga. Piyasena died in 1946. Ukkuwa died in
1957. The plaintiff's position was that although she married in diga, she
remained in the

**61**



mulgedera to look after the minor children of the defendant, her brother Rana.



The learned District Judge held that on the evidence for the plaintiff, which
he accepted, the plaintiff did not shift her residence though the marriage was
registered as a diga marriage. The argument in appeal proceeded on the basis
of this finding and the question for determination was this: As the plaintiff
did not leave the mulgedera notwithstanding her diga marriage, had she
forfeited her right to the inheritance of her father's estate?



The Supreme Court was called upon to interpret section 9 (1) of the Kandyan
Law Declaration and Amendment Ordinance. Thamotheram, J. (Ismail, J. agreeing)
proceeded to consider the law before the enactment of section 9 (1).

  
Thamotheram, J. (at p. 79) concluded that



"The position before the amendment under consideration in this regard was that
it was possible to contradict a certificate of registration which stated that
the marriage was in diga or in binna by oral evidence ... The effect of the
amendment was that it was no longer possible to prove the character of
marriage by oral evidence.



In this respect the law as it was before was amended. The character of the
marriage contracted remained so during marriage and after dissolution, it
being a question of fact, the best and only evidence was the certificate of
registration."



With great respect, I am unable to agree that section 9 made the marriage
certificate the best and only evidence of the character of the marriage. Had
the marriage certificate been the "only" admissible evidence, how was it
possible for Thamotheram, J. to conclude that, although the certificate in the
case before him stated the marriage to be diga in character, the woman was
entitled to a half share of her father's land called 'Gallajjewatte'? That was
possible because he took the woman's continuous residence in the mulgedera
from the time of the marriage and/or the fact that she had maintained a close

**62**



connection with the mulgedera to be evidence of the fact that the marriage,
notwithstanding what the certificate had said, was from its inception a binna
marriage or that it had been later converted into a binna marriage.



Section 9 provides as follows:  


"(1) A marriage contracted after the commencement of this Ordinance in binna
or diga shall be and until dissolved shall continue to be, for all purposes of
the law governing the succession to the estates of deceased persons, a binna
or diga marriage, as the case may be, and shall have full effect as such; and
no change after any such marriage in the residence of either party to that
marriage and no conduct after any such marriage of either party or of any
other person shall convert or be deemed to convert a binna marriage into a
diga marriage or a diga marriage into a binna marriage or cause or deemed to
cause a person married in diga to have rights of succession of a person
married in binna, or a person married in binna to have rights of succession of
a person married in diga.



(2) Where after the commencement of this Ordinance a woman leaves the house of
her parents and goes out in diga with a man, but does not contract with that
man a marriage which is valid according to law, she shall not by reason only
of such departure or going out forfeit or lose or be deemed to have forfeited
or to have lost any right of succession to which she is or was otherwise
entitled."



Section 9 (1) applies to a case of a marriage contracted after the
commencement of the Ordinance. In terms of section 2, the date of commencement
is 1st January, 1939. The marriage in the case before Thamotheram, J. and in
the matter before us, took place on 27th July, 1939, and so section 9 (1) is
applicable.



Was the marriage in binna or diga? There is no definition of what these terms
mean in the Ordinance, and therefore the matter must be decided by reference
to the principles of Kandyan Law. Since the certificate of marriage states
that the marriage was a diga marriage,

**63**



as the Court did in Mampitiya v Wegodapela(9) (supra), we should begin with
the conclusion that the marriage actually celebrated by Kiribindu, the
plaintiff-respondent, was a diga marriage.



Section 9 (1) provides that a binna or diga marriage shall be and until
dissolved continue to be for all purposes of the law governing the succession
to the estate of deceased persons a binna or diga marriage, as the case may
be. The relevant period commences from the time the parties began to treat
themselves as married persons and to live as married persons. (Kale v. Howwa
Kiri(12) (supra); Punchimahatmaya v Charlis(18) (supra); Kotmale v Duraya(19)
(supra); Ukku v. Kirihonda(20) (supra); Dingirihamy v. Mudalihamy et al(21)
(supra); Sinno v. Appuhamy(54); Dissanayake v. Punchi Menike(22), (supra) and
Tennekoon Mudiyanselage Ukku Amma and Others v. Vidanagamage Beeta Nona(23)
(supra)). In the case before us the relevant date was the same as the date of
the registration of the marriage, namely 27th July, 1939. It was not a case
like Ukku v. Kirihonda(20) or Dingirihamy v. Mudalihamy(21) or Sinno v
Appuhamy(54), Dissanayake v. Punchi Menike(22) or Tennekoon Mudiyanselage Ukku
Amma and Others v. Vidanagamage Beeta Nona(23), where the registration took
place a long time after the marriage, by which date, the character of the
marriage may have been altered. In the circumstances what Kiribindu and her
husband and their father intended at the time of marriage was that which they
told the registrar they were doing, namely, contracting a diga marriage. (Cf.
the observations of Moncrief, ACJ in Ukku v. Kirihonda(20) quoted above). The
certificate of marriage was in terms of section 39 of Ordinance No. 3 of 1870
and section 28 of the Kandyan Marriage and Divorce Act, No. 44 of 1952, the
"best evidence" of the character of the marriage in the technical sense in
which that phrase has been used in dealing with matters of the kind before us.  


The "best evidence" principle was introduced by section 39 of Ordinance No. 3
of 1870. in many instances, the registration took place after the traditional
ceremonies had taken place. Sometimes this happened after many years. The
provision was intended to exclude oral testimony of what took place. Moreover,
as the sensational "Kurunegala Polyandry Case" (Regina v Opalangu(55))

64  


showed, such a rule was desirable if misinterpretation of what took place at
the registry was to be avoided.



Section 28 of the Kandyan Marriage and Divorce Act, No. 44 of 1952 re-enacted
the provisions of section 39 of the 1870 Ordinance.

The rule has continued to serve the useful purposes for which it was intended.
E.g. see Ukku v. Kirihonda(20); Ram Etana v. Nekappu(44); Dingirihamy v
Mudalihamy(21); Sinno v. Appuhamy(54); Kiri Banda v Silva(56); Dullewe v.
Dullewe(57); See also Dissanayake v. Punchi Menike(22) and Dingiri Amma v
RatnatillakaI(17) Mampitiya v. Wegodapela(9); Seneviratne v. Halangoda(58);
Chelliah v. Kuttapitiya Tea and Rubber Co.(8) H. P James v. Medduma
Kumarihamy(59); Tennekoon Mudiyanselage Ukku Amma and Others v Vidanagamage
Beeta Nona(23).



Kiribindu's case is that she did not forfeit her rights because she never left
the mulgedera. As we have seen, residence is only evidence of the character of
a marriage. It is not conclusive evidence. Mr. Marapana was right in pointing
out that "none of the sources on Kandyan Law classify married women as those
who lived in the mulgedera as opposed to those who left the mulgedera in
referring to their rights to the paternal inheritance." In the matter before
us, Rana's wife had died shortly before Kiribindu's marriage. Therefore,
although she was married in diga, she remained in her father's house to look
after her brother's motherless childrei.. No doubt she rendered a most
valuable and praiseworthy service; but that alone would not convert her diga
marriage into a binna marriage.



The following illustration given by Armour (pp. 61-62) clarifies the position
of a daughter like Kiribindu, who was married in diga, but who resided in the
mulgedera to play the role of a guardian to minor children at the mulgedera:
She does not thereby acquire the rights of a daughter married in binna:



"The father having died intestate, leaving issue by the same wife, an infant
son, an infant daughter, and a daughter married out in diga, and also a grand-
daughter, the child of a predeceased daughter, (by the same wife), who was
married out in diga, all his **  
 **

**65**



lands will devolve to the infant daughter and to the son. **Should the
surviving diga daughter then return to the deceased father's house, and in the
capacity of guardian to her infant brother and sister, manage the affairs of
their father's estate, and if she then gave away her younger sister in diga
marriage, the said younger sister will thereby lose her right to a share of
the said lands, and the brother will then become sole proprietor thereof, but
the elder sister, who had returned home, although she acted as guardian to her
brother and younger sister, and had managed the estate, will not have thereby
acquired the rights of a binna daughter ... "**



The emphasis is mine.



The matter before us was not a case in which a diga-married daughter returned
during her father's lifetime and was **allowed by her father** ,
notwithstanding arrangements regarding her dowry, to settle on the father's
property in binna with her former husband or a new husband; in which case, as
we have seen, she would have acquired all the rights of a binna-married
daughter. The father probably never intended her to settle in his house in
binna. At the time of the marriage, it was known that Kiribindu would remain
in the mulgedera, not because a binna settlement was intended, but to look
after Rana's children. If residence in the mulgedera was because a binna
settlement was intended, why did her father give her away in diga unless he
clearly intended that and no other status for his daughter, although he knew
that the daughter would continue to live in the mulgedera? There was nothing
to show that he ever changed his mind. Hayley (p. 372) points out that a binna
marriage was not contracted for the benefit of the daughter, but to raise up
heirs to the proprietor by an artificial relationship. If he was right in his
explanation, the need for a binna marriage did not exist in Ukkuwa's family,
for he had a son, Rana, and Rana had three children at the time of Kiribindu's
marriage.



As we have seen, whether a marriage was to be in diga or binna would
ordinarily have been determined during negotiations which preceded the
marriage. In my view, by reason of a family arrangement agreed upon at the
time of the marriage, of which a binna settlement was no part, Kiribindu was
to remain in the

**66**



mulgedera to look after Rana's children. For her part, she and her husband had
a place of residence and support. In addition, she had the good fortune to
remain at home, despite the fact that she had been married in diga and would
ordinarily, according to custom, have had to go away. Sawers (Chapter I,
paragraph 14, p. 5), after stating that "Daughters must accept the husband
chosen for them by their parents, or in the event of their parents being dead,
by their brothers, and must go out in diga, adds the following "Note":
"Proverb: Women are born to three miseries or great evils:- 1st, to quit the
place of their birth; 2nd, to the pains of childbearing; and 3rd, to be under
subjection to their husbands."



There was nothing, except for the mere fact of residence, to suggest that the
daughter was allowed to settle in binna. On the other hand, there was the
contemporaneous recording by the Registrar of Marriages of the intention of
the parties that the marriage was a diga marriage despite the fact that it was
known that the residence of the daughter and her husband would be at the
mulgedera. Chelliah v. Kuttapitiya Tea and Rubber Co.(8) (supra), was
different. In that case, the daughter's marriage was registered as a diga
marriage; however she never left her father's home and lived there
continuously until her death with her husband. Three children were born to
this marriage. All of them were born in the mulgedera. The whole family lived
together and the daughter and her husband possessed the fields and gardens and
lands belonging to her father. The lands in dispute were cultivated by the
husband, for which he was given a share of the produce. In the circumstances,
it was argued that if the daughter did by the mere fact of having contracted a
marriage declared to be in diga sustain a forfeiture she re-acquired those
rights and was fully revested with them. Garvin, SPJ (Jayewardene, J agreeing)
held at p. 96 that "the conclusion was inevitable that (the daughter) was
fully vested with the rights of inheritance and did in fact inherit her
father's property ..."



In Mampitiya v. Wegodapela(9) (supra) the woman was given away in diga after
her father's death by her brother. However, the evidence satisfied the Court
that the family had intended a binna connection. Although Bertram, C.J. did
state that if for "whatever reason" a daughter married in diga who remained in
the mulgedera retained her binna status, as we have seen, the remarks were
obiter, for there were

**67**



other considerations that admittedly contributed to the decision. Moreover, as
we have seen, the authorities do not support such a view.



In the matter before us the marriage of Kiribindu, the plaintiff respondent,
was a marriage in diga, and in terms of section 9 (1) of the Kandyan Law
Declaration and Amendment Ordinance, for the purpose of the law governing her
succession to the estate of her deceased father, Ukkuwa, a diga marriage and
must have full effect as such. The effect of her diga marriage was that she
lost her right of succession to the estate of her father. Therefore she had no
right, title or interest in the lands which she seeks to partition, for those
were not lands she could have inherited from her father.



Mr. Goonesekera submitted that section 9 (1) had no applicability in the
determination of the matter before us. He argued that the scope of section 9
(1) was limited to the determination of rights flowing from the form of a
marriage, as for instance in the determination of the rights of a diga married
widower to the estate of his deceased wife or child, or in deciding upon the
right of succession of a woman to the estate of her deceased husband. It did
not, he said, apply to rights of succession that did not depend on marriage.
"A long line of cases", he said, had established that it is the departure from
the parental house that results in the loss of rights of inheritance, "and not
the form of the marriage." Consequently, "there is nothing in section 9 (1) to
alter a diga married daughter's right to paternal inheritance if in fact,
either there was no severance from the mulgedera or there was a departure and
a subsequent return to the mulgedera, for whatever reason, and restoration to
the family unit. This interpretation," he submitted, was "strengthened by
section 9 (2) which he said recognizes the loss of rights by mere departure,
without marriage, leaving it open for the reacquisition of rights on return."



The rights of succession of a Kandyan daughter to the intestate estate of her
father has always depended on whether she was married or unmarried. If she was
married, those rights depended on whether she was married in binna or diga. In
certain cases, where the woman had left her parental home, she lost her
rights, not because she left her parent's home, but because she did so in
order to, and did, contract a diga **marriage**. I have discussed this matter

**68**



above and pointed out that leaving the home, for example to seek employment,
or even to cohabit with a man, in circumstances in which a daughter could not
be held to have contracted a diga marriage, did not cause a forfeiture because
there was no marriage although there was a separation from the parental
household. Section 9 (2) was not a recognition of a loss of a daughter's
rights upon leaving her home, but an attempt to avoid what, the Kandyan Law
Commission in its report at paragraph 169, described as the "curious results"
flowing from the decisions in cases like Kalu v. Howwa Kiri(12), (supra),
Punchimahatmaya v. Charlis(18) (supra), and Kotmale v. Duraya(19). The Court
had in those cases correctly, according to the principles of Kandyan Law,
decided that a daughter married in diga, albeit married according to the
customs of the land, forfeits her rights, even though the marriage was not
registered, and therefore invalid in law. Section 9 (2) sought by legislative
intervention to eliminate the anomalies resulting from the application of the
Kandyan Law in the context of the law making registration the basis of a valid
marriage. It sought so to do by making the principle of forfeiture operative
only if a marriage was valid in law by registration and not merely valid on
account of conformity with customary law.



The "long line" of decisions referred to by Mr. Goonesekere, as we have seen,
were concerned with the test of "severance". That test has been concerned with
ascertaining whether, upon marriage, the woman became a part of the husband's
family, or whether she belonged to her father's family. Where she became a
part of her husband's family, she was said to be a person married in diga.
When she was a member of her father's family, she was said to be married in
binna. Customarily, a woman, who was married in diga left her parental home
and went to live with her husband, whereas a woman married in binna usually
lived with her parents in her father's house or on his properties. There were
exceptions. However there was no requirement in law making it a condition of a
binna marriage that the woman shall live in her parental home. Nor was there a
requirement that a woman married in diga must live in her husband's house. If
in a particular instance, the normal course of conduct was not followed, the
circumstances must be examined to ascertain why that was the case. If it is
claimed that a woman who contracted a marriage of one character had the
character of her marriage altered, it must be

**69**



ascertained by an examination of the evidence in the case, including, but not
limited to, the place of residence, whether that was in fact the case. Where
the daughter never left the mulgedera, was she permitted to do so because it
was intended that she should continue to be a member of her father's family?
Upon the return of a daughter married in diga was she, as Mr. Goonesekere put
it, "restored to the family unit", or was she merely permitted for other
reasons, such as the exercise of her right to shelter and support in the event
of destitution, or on account of some family arrangement, without a binna
connection being intended? The submission that the mere fact of remaining in
the mulgedera for "whatever reason", gives a diga married daughter the rights
appropriate to a binna married daughter, notwithstanding the obiter dictum of
Bertram, C.J. to that effect in Mampitiya v Wegodapela (supra) at p. 132 -
there was much more than residence in that case - is untenable in the light of
a careful consideration of the authorities.



Mr. Goonesekere submitted that "Forfeiture was not an incident of marriage,
but quitting the paternal roof. So that if the connection with the mulgedera
was re-established in full, the logic of Kandyan family relations required
that the right of inheritance was regained." Forfeiture was an incident of a
diga marriage, because the daughter is given her dowry and sent off to join
another family and to bear children who will belong to a different gens. When
she ceases to belong to her father's family, she ceases to have rights of
inheritance to her father. Those rights belong only to the members of the
father's family. If the daughter was recalled or returned, her marriage may be
converted into a binna marriage with full effect in respect of inheritance, if
it is clearly established that a binna connection was intended, i.e. if she
was intended to become a part of the father's family, or as Mr. Goonesekere
said, "if the connection with the mulgedera was **re-established in full**."



In the matter before us, the plaintiff-respondent's husband, Piyasena, died in
1946. What was the effect of that? Ukkuwa, her father, died in 1957. In
Ranhetidewayalage Rana v. Ranhetidewayalage Kiribindu(1), Thamotheram and
Ismail, JJ. held that, section 9 (1) of the Kandyan Law Declaration and
Amendment Ordinance provided that so long as a marriage subsists no change in
the character of the marriage can be established by proof of change

**70**



of residence or conduct of either party to the marriage or any other person.
However, after the dissolution of the marriage, "a change can alter the
situation. A bride can regain her lost rights after the marriage is no more
..." (per Thamotheram, J. at p. 80). "After dissolution of marriage the diga
married woman can regain her lost rights by change of residence, etc". (per
Thamotharam, J. at p. 91).



In that case, Weeraratne, J. in a dissenting judgment, held that the character
of the marriage remains the same before and after dissolution. With that
position, I am in complete agreement. Kiribindu did not upon the dissolution
of her marriage revert to the position of an unmarried daughter. There was
obviously no marriage; but her status as one who had been married in diga
continued. Consequently, as we have seen (e.g. in considering Kalu v. Howwa
Kiri(12) (supra); Punchimahatmaya v. Charlis(18) (supra), Kotmale v.
Duraya(19) (supra), the Ambaliyadde case(34) (supra), Jud. Com. Kandy 5137
(supra); Armour 65-66; Nitiniganduwa 62, 65, 66.), a diga-married daughter who
returned to her father's house after the dissolution of her marriage was not
entitled to a share of her father's intestate estate. Hayley (p. 384) states
as follows on the basis of various authorities he cites:



"The frequency of divorce, and the simplicity with which marriages are
dissolved, make it important to consider the position of a daughter who
returns from her diga-husband's house. In such a case, she does not ordinarily
recover any right to inherit, whether she returns before or after her father's
death. If, however, with the consent of her parents, she marries again in
binna, then her previous marriage is disregarded and the full rights of a
binna-married daughter accrue to her."



With great respect, I am unable to agree with Weeraratne, J.'s opinion that
section 9 (1) has the effect of precluding a change of status even after the
dissolution of the marriage. In the most obvious case, her father could, after
the dissolution of the marriage, have arranged a binna marriage for the
daughter and reinstated her in the family, as for instance, as we have seen
the father did in the case of one of his three daughters in Dingiri Amma v.
Ratnatilaka(17) (supra). See also D.C. Kandy 18457, (1894) Austin 96;
Babanissa v.

**71**



Kaluhamil(38). We have also seen that in Siripaly v. Kirihame(48) (supra) the
daughter who was married in diga was, after the dissolution of her marriage
during her father's lifetime, recalled to the family house and settled in
binna with her divorced husband's brother. Consequently, it was held, her
binna rights had "revived".



The right to contract another marriage after the dissolution of a former
marriage is an important right. Such a marriage would have to be a binna or
diga marriage if it was a Kandyan marriage. Section 9 (1) did not expressly or
by implication provide that the intention of the parties to the earlier
marriage determined the character of the second marriage. The section was
formulated to avoid such a situation. There was also a preservation of the
exercise of rights relating to the family in certain circumstances. The Niti
Nighanduwa (Translated by Le Mesurier and Panabokke, (1979)) p. 27 states that
a man who has an only daughter who is divorced and given in charge of her
mother, has a right to insist on her being married in binna in his presence
"so as to preserve his family name and anscestral lands". (See Hayley p. 168
footnote (x)). Alternatively, the father could, after the dissolution of a
marriage, do certain things to manifest his intention of a binna settlement.
The legislature had good reasons for not paying heed to the view of the
Kandyan Law Commission (paragraph 174) that "in no circumstances can a
marriage once registered as in diga be altered into a binna one and vice
versa" and for ignoring its recommendation (at p. 40) that "A marriage
registered as a diga marriage should always be deemed to be a diga marriage,
and a marriage registered as a binna marriage should always be deemed to be a
binna marriage." The legislature, no doubt, recognized the desirability of
reducing litigation, which the commissioners were confident would be achieved
by the adoption of their recommendations which they said would "settle several
vexed questions and close up for all time a fertile source of litigation"
(paragraph 175); but they did so by limiting the proof of change of marital
character by evidence of change of residence or conduct of the parties to the
marriage or any other person, to the period commencing with the marriage until
its dissolution; and not legislating that if a woman had been married in diga
or binna, then for all time, under whatsoever circumstances, and for the
purposes of determining her rights of succession, she would remain a diga or
binna married woman, as the case may be.

**72**



In the case before us, if her father's intention had been that Kiribindu's
marriage should be in binna, and he had made a mistake in agreeing that the
marriage to Piyasena should be in diga, upon the dissolution of her marriage
on the death of her husband, Piyasena, he could have arranged a binna marriage
for her. He did not do so. Nor did he do anything after Piyasena's death to
manifest his intention that a binna settlement was ever intended. He had
contemporaneously with the celebration of the marriage agreed that it should
be a diga marriage in which the daughter would for certain purposes, including
her rights of succession, belong to her husband's family, although she would
remain at home to look after her brother's children, since their mother had
died. After the dissolution of the marriage brought about by Piyasena's death,
he was content to let her status remain as it was. He did not do anything from
which it could be inferred that he had readmitted her into his family. If we
were to delve further, and accept Hayley's explanation (cf. also the passage
cited above from Chamber's Encyclopaedia and the citation I have made from the
Niti Nighanduwa p. 27; and Modder's statement quoted above that a binna
marriage occurs only in cases in which "there are few or no sons") of a binna
marriage, an explanation that helps to make sense of many a principle relating
to the law of succession, there was no need for a binna marriage, for Ukkuwa
had no problem about raising heirs, or preserving his family name and
anscestral lands.



For the reasons stated in my judgment, I hold that Ranhotidewayalage
Kiribindu, the plaintiff-respondent, had no right, title or interest in the
lands sought to be partitioned. The appeal is allowed and the judgments of
both courts below are set aside. I make order dismissing the plaintiff's
action. The parties will bear their own costs of this Court and the Courts
below.



**FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree.



**WIJETUNGA, J.**



I have had the advantage of reading in draft, the judgments of my brothers
Amerasinghe, Dheeraratne and Wadugodapitiya.  


I am in respectful agreement with the conclusions and the orders proposed by
my brothers Amerasinghe and Dheeraratne.



**73**



**DHEERARATNE, J.**

** **

Introduction  


Plaintiff-respondent (Kiribindu) filed this action to partition 6 lands
described in the plaint. There was no dispute that Ukkuwa, Kiribindu's father
was at one time the owner of all those lands. The only contest in the case
arose regarding the devolution of the interests of Ukkuwa, who died in 1957,
admittedly leaving as his children daughter Kiribindu and son Rana. Rana died
in 1971 leaving as his heirs his children the 1st defendant-appellant and 3rd
and 4th defendant-respondents. Kiribindu was married to one Piyasena on
27.7.1939 and according to the relevant entry in the certificate of marriage
it was in diga. Ordinarily, under Kandyan Law, Kiribindu's marriage in diga
would result in a forfeiture of her right to succeed to the paternal
inheritance. It appears that shortly before Kiribindu got married, her brother
Rana's wife died leaving three minor children (present 1st defendant-appellant
and 4th and 6th defendantrespondents). Kiribindu's husband Piyasena died in
1946. Kiribindu claimed half share of the lands sought to be partitioned on
the basis that she is entitled to half share of her paternal inheritance. The
contesting defendants prayed for dismissal of Kiribindu's action on the basis
that she had no interests in the lands inasmuch as she had forfeited her
rights to paternal inheritance by her contracting a diga marriage. However,
Kiribindu's claim was based on two alternative hypotheses viz.



(1) Primarily because of need to look after her brother Rana's motherless
minor children, she never left the mulgedara; and severance of the connection
with the mulgedara being the predominent idea of a Diga marriage, she never
forfeited but preserved her rights to the paternal inheritance.



(2) Even if she lost her right to succeed to her paternal inheritance by
virtue of her diga marriage, she reacquired that right during her father's
lifetime, by her continuous residence in the mulgedara after the death of her
husband in 1946.



Kiribindu also claimed that the decision in the earlier action DC Kegalle
L/16312 between her and her brother Rana for declaration of



**74**



title in respect of another land, relating to the devolution of her father
Ukkuwa's interests, is res judicata between the parties. That case went up in
appeal and the decision of the Supreme Court is reported as Ranhetidewayalage
Rana v. Ranhetidewayalage Kiribindul(1). In that case Thamotheram, J. and
Ismail, J. with Weeraratne, J. dissenting, inter alia held on a construction
of section 9 of the Kandyan Law Declaration and Amendment Ordinance No. 39 of
1938 **that after dissolution of a marriage of a Diga married woman** , she
can reacquire her lost right to succeed to her paternal inheritance by change
of her residence to the mulgedara.



In the present action learned District Judge held with Kiribindu on the
question of res judicata and ordered interlocutory decree of partition be
entered. The Court of Appeal affirmed that judgment and the 1st defendant (a
son of Rana) has now appealed to this Court. Special leave was granted by this
Court on the question of applicability of subsection 9(1) of the Kandyan Law
Declaration and Amendment Ordinance No. 39 of 1938 in the light of the earlier
Supreme Court decision and whether a plea of res judicata on account of the
earlier decision bars the present action. In terms of Article 132 (3) of the
Constitution, His Lordship the Chief Justice being of opinion that the
question on which leave was granted is one of general and public importance,
decided that this appeal be heard by a bench of five judges of this Court.



**The Plea of Res Judicata**



The plea of res judicata was upheld by the original Court mainly because it
felt it was bound by the earlier decision of the Supreme Court and had no
authority to review the correctness of that decision. The doctrine of estoppel
per rem judcatam is based on the maxims interest rei publicae ut sit fines
litium (it is in the public interest that there should be an end to
litigation) and nemo debet bis vexari pro una et eadem causa (no man should be
vexed twice over the same cause). The doctrine of precedent does not depend on
those maxims but depends simply upon the desirability of certainty and
uniformity of the law. (For the contrast see Waring, Westminster Bank Ltd. v.
Burton Butler and Others (60). )



**75**



The earlier action was between Kiribindu and Rana; Rana's children who are
defendants in the present action being those who have succeeded to the rights
of Rana are his privies. There is no question therefore about the sameness of
the parties in both actions. Learned counsel for Kiribindu contends that
although the subject matter of the two actions are different, the grounds of
the plaint and the media through which relief is claimed are identical; there
is a final decision on the question whether Kiribindu did acquire binna rights
or not; therefore the earlier action is res judicata between the parties on
the basis of issue estoppel. Learned counsel relied on the decisions of
Dingiri Menika v. Punchi Mahatmaya(61), Appuhamy v. PunchihaMy(62), Morais v.
Victoria(63) and Krishnan v. Thurairajah(64). Learned counsel for the
appellant on the other hand contended that an erroneous decision on a pure
question of law even though res judicata between the parties and their privies
on the same cause of action, it is not res judicata between the same parties
in respect of a different cause of action or where different relief is sought.
The earlier action between the parties was a case of declaration of title to a
land called Gallajjewatte; in the present action the relief claimed and the
subject-matter are different, in that Kiribindu seeks to partition some other
lands. Learned counsel for the appellant relied on the decisions in
Katiritamby v. Parupathi Pillai(65), Guneratne v Punchibanda(66) and K.
Subramaniam v. Kumaraswamy(67). In the last of those cases Sansoni J. at page
131 explained the legal position as follows:



"The question of law involved, and I should add that is a pure question of law
and nothing else, is the correct interpretation of certain provisions of the
Jaffna Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance Ordinance (chapter 48) and Ordinance
No. 58 of 1947, by which it was amended. The 1st defendant by deed acquired
several allotments of land from time to time during the subsistence of his
marriage with one Rasammah. She has died leaving her husband (the 1st
defendant) and four children (8th to 11th defendants). The judgment against
which it is sought to appeal decided the rights of 1st, 8th, 9th, 10th and
11th defendants in respect of one land so acquired.

  
Mr. Chelvanayakam submits that this judgment is res judicata as regards the
rights of these parties in respect of all other lands which were similarly
acquired by the 1st defendant; it is necessary to have the decision considered
by the Privy Council. If this submission were

**76**



correct it would be a strong reason for allowing this application. But Mr.
Renganathan challenges its correctness and he relies on the judgment in
Katiritamby v. Parupathi Pillail(65). It was there decided that an erroneous
decision on a pure question of law will operate as res judicata quoad the
subject-matter of the suit in which it is given, and no further. Unlike a
decision on a question of fact or of mixed law and fact, an erroneous decision
on the law does not prevent the Court from deciding the same question arising
between the same parties in a subsequent suit according to law. Caspersz on
Estoppel was cited as an authority by Garwin AJ. in his judgment (de Sampayo
J. agreeing). This judgment was followed in Guneratne v. Punchi Banda(66) by
Schneider J., (Maartensz AJ. agreeing). In view of these two decisions of this
Court I do not consider it necessary to discuss the other authorities cited in
the course of the argument. Assuming, then, that the other lands which were
purchased upon other deeds by the 1st defendant during the subsistence of his
marriage with Rasammah were purchased under circumstances which were exactly
similar to those under which the land now in dispute was purchased, the rights
of the parties under those deeds and the manner of devolution of those lands
upon the death of Rasammah raise pure questions of law to which the rule
already enunciated would apply. It should therefore, be open to the 1st
defendant, if he is so advised, to canvass the correctness of the judgment
already given when those questions arise for decision".



We have not been convinced why we should depart from the dicta of Sansoni J.
and that leaves it open to us to consider whether the earlier decision is
erroneous in law or not.



**Registration Conferring Validity of Marriage.  
**  
The forms of marriage recognized by Kandyan Law are diga and binna. "In the
former, which is the usual type of alliance in a patriarchal system, the
husband conducts his bride to his own house or that of his parents, and she
becomes, so long as the marriage subsists, a member of his family. The latter
... is perhaps the older form. In modern times it is usually entered into only
when the bride is an heiress. The husband is brought to the house of the wife
or her relations, the essential factor being his residence on the property
belonging to the wife's family, not necessarily that of her father. He

**77**



continues throughout the alliance in a subordinate and somewhat humiliating
position" (Hayley 193). What were the essentials of a Kandyan marriage in
early times? The vagueness of the ideas regarding marriage is expressed by
Hayley at page 174 as follows; "The marriage laws present us at the outset
with a curious anomaly. Although the status of the wife is one of great
importance, conferring on her substantial rights in her husband's property
after his decease, and in spite of the fact that persons of good caste and
positions ` display a keen concern in the prevention of any kind of
mesalliance, whereby the fair name of the family may be degraded, there was
nevertheless, prior to recent legislation on the subject, a remarkable
vagueness of ideas with regard to the inception, maintenance, and dissolution
of matrimonial alliances. Wedding ceremonies were elaborate and among persons
of wealth and position, costly, but the most elaborate ceremony guaranteed no
more permanence to the union, than mere cohabitation. The poorer classes
habitually dispensed with any ceremony, a practice which appears to have
increased in more modern times, especially where the bride has been married
before, which is frequently the case, for Knox says, "Both women and men do
commonly wed four or five times before they can settle themselves to their
contention." Hayley continues;



"The essentials of a legal marriage when carefully examined appear to have
been only three:  


(1) The parties must have had connubium;

  
(2) They must not have been within the prohibited degrees of relationship;

  
(3) They must have cohabited with the intention of forming a definite
alliance.

  
It was also requisite,

  
(4) That the consent of the parents and relations should be given; and  
  
(5) In the case of chiefs of high rank, the consent of the king.



The approval of parents and relations is ordinarily stated to have been one of
the essential conditions, but it seems doubtful, for reasons stated below,
whether its absence was of itself sufficient to make the marriage null and
void."



The nightmare caused to the then administrators of the country by the fluidity
of the institution of the Kandyan marriage, is perhaps ****



**78**



reflected in the carefully worded preamble to the Kandyan Marriage Law
Ordinance, No. 13 of 1859, by which for the 1st time registration was made
essential for the validity of a Kandyan marriage. That preamble reads; -



"Whereas it was agreed and established by a convention signed at Kandy, on the
2nd day of March, in the year of Christ 1815, that the dominion of the Kandyan
Provinces was vested in the Sovereign of the British Empire, saving to all
classes of people in those Provinces, the safety of their persons and
property, with their Civil rights and immunities according to the Laws,
Institutions, and Customs established and in force amongst them. And saving
always to the Sovereign of the British Empire, the inherent right of
government to redress grievances, and reform abuses in all instances whatever,
particular or general, where such interposition shall become necessary. And
whereas, accordingly, the rights and liabilities of the Kandyans, (as far as
they have not been affected by Local Ordinances), have always been adjudicated
upon by Courts of Law of the island, in accordance with the Laws, Institutions
and Customs, established among the Kandyans; and whereas the right reserved as
above-mentioned to the Sovereign has from time to time, through the Governors
and the Councils of this Island, as the circumstances of the people have
become changed by the influence of a just Government, the spread of education,
and the extension of commerce;



And whereas the customs of the Kandyans, now considered as law regulating the
contract of Marriage, permits a man to have more than one living wife, and a
woman to have more than one living husband.



And whereas this custom is wholly unsuited to the present conditions of the
Kandyans, and is in no way sanctioned by their National Religion; and whereas
such custom is a great hardship and oppression to the industrious classes, and
the frequent cause of litigation, leading to murders and other crimes;



And whereas from the circumstances aforementioned, the Marriage custom of the
Kandyans is become a grievance and an abuse, within the meaning of the said
Convention, and a large and influential portion of the Kandyan people have
petitioned for redress and reform of the same. And whereas it is expedient, in
order to such

**79**



redress and reform, that Her Most Gracious Majesty should, in accordance with
the said Convention, make provision through the Legislature of this Island for
the contracting and solemnizing of Marriages within the said Provinces, and
for registration of such Marriages, and for the dissolution of such Marriages
and matters relating to the same."



By that Ordinance registration was made compulsory (section 2) for the
validity of a Kandyan Marriage, which feature was continuously adopted by
subsequent legislation. Poligamy was made illegal (section 6) and punishable
(section 33). There was no requirement to specify the character of marriage at
registration i.e. whether diga or binna. About the working of that Ordinance,
Modder at pages 28-29 states, (with the tinkering which the main enactment had
received from the amending Ordinances No. 4 of 1860, 8 of 1861 and 14 of 1866,
the true effect of this legislation was not realized till some time
afterwards. Sir Hercules Robinson, (afterwards Lord Rosmead), then Governor,
wrote in 1868:- 'It is probably within the mark to assume that two - thirds of
the existing unions are illegal, and four - fifths of the rising generation,
born within the last eight or nine years, are illegitimate. The oldest child
born since the bringing into operation of Ordinance No. 13 of 1859 cannot now
be more than nine years of age; but fifteen or twenty years hence, or sooner,
if matters be left as they are, a state of antagonism must arise between the
natural and legal claimants to property, which is impossible to contemplate
without dismay.' The Ordinance No. 13 of 1859 was repealed by the Amended
Kandyan Marriages Ordinance No. 3 of 1870 which enabled inter alia the type of
marriage to be specified at registration of the marriage; if not specified the
marriage was presumed to be contracted in diga. Unions contracted before and
after the Ordinance No. 13 of 1859 came into operation were validated and
issues of such unions were legitimized.



Section 39 read - "The entry as aforesaid in the register of marriages and in
the register of divorces shall be the best evidence of the marriage contracted
or dissolved by the parties, and of the other facts stated therein. If it does
not appear in the register whether the marriage was contracted in Binna or
Diga, such marriage shall be presumed to have been contracted in Diga until
the contrary be shown." The Kandyan Marriage and Divorce Act, No. 44 of 1952  


**80**



repealed Ordinance No. 3 of 1870 and section 28 of this Act retained the "best
evidence" rule.



Judicial decisions, however, relating to section 39 of Ordinance No. 3 of 1870
appear to have applied the "best evidence" rule with some degree of laxity,
because most of the entries in the registers were not contemporaneous, but
have been made long after the de facto or customary marriage took place. See
Ukku v. Kirihonda(20). Dingirihamy v Mudalihamy et al(21). Sinno v
Appuhamy(54). It was held in a series of cases that the entry regarding the
character of marriage is not conclusive and could be rebutted by evidence to
the contrary and that section 39 itself indicated the exceptional cases in
which oral evidence may be permitted. The intention of the legislature in
enacting section 39 appears to have been frustrated by this line of judgments.



**Forfeiture and Reacquisition of Diga Married Daughter of Rights to Paternal
Inheritance.**



Mr. Goonesekera for the 1st defendant-respondent contended that although the
old treatises such as Sawers, Armour and Niti Nighanduwa may not have been
clear on this matter, preferring to restrict the rights of the diga married
daughter to one of maintenance only, judicial decisions did recognize the
rights of the diga married daughter preserving or reacquiring the right of
succession to paternal inheritance. Hayley at pages 379 to 382 regarded the
exception made in the case of a diga married daughter who has kept a close
connection with her father's house by certain "modern" judgments contrary to
the principle of Kandyan Law. As regards reacquisition of binna rights by
returning to the mulgedera Hayley at page 389 summarized the position as
follows: "If the diga married daughter returns during her father's lifetime,
and is allowed to settle on the estate in binna with her former husband or a
new husband she acquires all the rights of a binna married daughter." "if the
diga married daughter returns after her father's death, she does not recover
her right to succeed, unless the other heirs themselves give her in binna
marriage, or expressly consent to her marriage with either her former husband
or a new husband being considered a binna marriage." "Digs married daughter
who returns in destitute circumstances is entitled to maintenance out of the
family estate even in the hands of a purchaser for value."

**81**



Judicial decisions placing strong reliance on the concept of attachment to or
severance from mulgedera the sole criteria to determine the character of the
marriage proceeded to decide whether the diga married woman forfeited or
reacquired the right to inherit paternal property. In Kalu v. Howwa Kiri(12)
it was held that going out in diga with a man although no valid marriage was
contracted worked forfeiture of rights to inherit father's property. In
Chelliah v. Kuttapitiya Tea and Rubber Co. (18) it was held that a diga
married daughter remaining in the mulgedera does not forfeit her rights to
inherit paternal property. In Mampitiya v. Wegodapela(9) it was held that if
the bride was not conducted in accordance with custom but she remained in the
mulgedara, the forfeiture was never consummated. In Appuhamy v. Kiri
Menika(45) it was decided that keeping close contact with the mulgedera after
the diga marriage does not work forfeiture of the right to inherit paternal
property by a diga married daughter; however, whether the diga married woman
preserves her binna rights or reacquires them, her husband will continue to
possess the rights of a diga married husband. See Seneviratne v.
Halangoda(58).



Some later decisions have taken the view that where forfeiture has taken place
by reason of diga marriage, it is not the connection with the mulgedera which
restores binna rights, but it is the waiver of the forfeiture by the father or
those who were entitled to paternal inheritance which mattered; the evidence
of that being the connection of the mulgedera. See Bertram C.J. in Banda v.
Angurala(49). In Appu Naide v. Heen Menika(57). Basnayake J. preferred to
apply the doctrine of acquiescence rather than the associated doctrine of
waiver applied by Bertram C.J.; so did Tambiah J. in Dingiri Amma v.
Ratnatilaka(17). In Gunasena and Other v. Ukkumenika and Others(50)',
Tennakoon C.J. called it waiver of forfeiture - estoppel by conduct or
representation which he said was no part of the Kandyan Law.



# THE KANDYAN LAW COMMISSION



In 1927, in pursuance of a resolution adopted by the Legislative Council, a
Commission was appointed to "codify" the Kandyan Law. However in 1930, that
Commission was terminated and the Kandyan Law Commission was appointed
consisting of the same personnel with the exception of Dr. Hayley who was
substituted as the Chairman.



**82**



The new Commission was appointed with amended terms of reference viz. "for the
purpose of considering the present state of the Kandyan Law and making
recommendations thereon". (Dr. Hayley resigned later; and most other personnel
changed from time to time).



The report of the Commission was published in September 1935 as Sessional
Paper xxiv of 1935. I shall set down in full the portion of that report
(sections 168 to 176 at pages 23 and 24) relevant to the decision in this
case.



168\. Children - (i) Children: The position of daughters married in diga and
binna and unmarried daughters.



**Exclusion of Diga Married Daughter from her Father's Estate -** The
comparatively simple rule excluding the diga married daughter from the
inheritance has become complicated at the outset owing to the modern ideas
regarding marriage, and, in particular, the requirement of registration. It is
true that, according to Kandyan ideas, it was the conducting of the daughter
away from the father's family, with the dowry, that was the origin of her
exclusion, but then in the early times the conducting of a daughter by a man
of equal caste with the consent of her relations constituted a marriage,
particularly in the case of low rank who could not afford costly ceremonies.



169\. Where, therefore, decisions like Kalu v. Howwa Kiri(12) have laid down
that the departure of the daughter without registration of the marriage is
sufficient to cause a forfeiture, although they appear to follow Kandyan
principles, they, in fact, lead to curious results. The woman's marriage will
not be recognized in law. She will, therefore, not only lose her share in the
father's state, but she will also be unable to claim life interest in her
husband's acquired property should he predecease her, and her children being
illegitimate, will not be able to succeed to their father's paraveni.



170\. Conversely, this departure with the husband was held to be so essential,
in Mampitiya v. Wegodapela(9) that notwithstanding the registration of
marriage as a diga one, the Court allowed the fact that that daughter
continued to live with her parents virtually to convert it to a binna
marriage, entitling her to a share in her father's estate. The result of this
decision is to allow proof in every case of the nature of

**83**



the marriage in order to contradict the register, although section 39 of
Ordinance No. 3 of 1870 says that registration of the nature of the marriage
shall be the best evidence.



171\. As it is only in matters connected with succession that the difference
between diga and binna marriages is of importance, we are of opinion that
modern conditions make it advisable to enact that a marriage registered as
diga marriage should be deemed to be a diga marriage, and a marriage
registered as a binna marriage should be deemed to be a binna marriage, and
conversely that the exclusion of the daughter from the inheritance will only
take place where there has been a diga marriage valid in law, and contracted
during the life time of her father.



172. **Diga Married Daughter who has kept up a close connection with her Father's House.** \- A similar matter needing examination is the position of a diga married daughter who has "kept a close connection with her father's house." Starting with certain observations of Pereira J. in 1905 in the case of Dingiri Amma Ukku Banda(25) a series of modern decisions, of which reference need be made only to Appuhamy v. Kiri Menika(45), has evolved a rule, which was probably unknown to Kandyan Law, that a diga married daughter who keeps up a close connection with her father's house does not forfeit her rights to inherit from her father's estate.



173\. Two other questions which may also be examined at this stage are those
of a diga married woman who acquires the status of a binna married woman by
reason of a subsisting diga marriage being altered into a binna one, and of a
binna married woman who acquires the status of a diga married woman by reason
of her subsisting binna marriage being altered into a diga one.



174\. There is no doubt that Kandyan Law recognizes both these cases, but it
is not necessary to deal in detail with the law relating to them, nor to
examine further the rights, if any, under the old law, of a diga married woman
who has kept up a close connection with her father's house, because we are of
opinion that the time has when an end must be made of the nice questions which
arise and the

**84**



interminable argument and litigation that they give occasion to, on these
cases continuing to be accorded legal recognition, and would therefore
recommend that it be declared that a marriage registered as in diga or binna
shall for all purposes be deemed to be a marriage in diga or binna as the case
may be, and that in no circumstances can a marriage, once registered as in
diga be altered into a binna one, and vice versa.



175\. We are of the opinion that the recommendations if given legal effect
will settle several vexed questions and close up for all time a fertile source
of litigation.



The recommendations of the Commission relevant to the abovementioned matters
are given at page 40 of the report and are expressed in the following manner;  


(1) (i) A marriage registered as a diga marriage should always be deemed to be
diga marriage, and a marriage registered as a binna marriage should always be
deemed to be a binna marriage.

  
(ii) in the case of a daughter, her exclusion from the inheritance to take
place only where there has been a diga marriage valid in law and contracted
before the death of the father.

  
(iii) Where a daughter is married in diga after her father's death and the
other heirs are willing to make a settlement on her, provision to be made
whereby the other heirs shall have a right of emption at the market value of
her share.



Since certain speculative arguments seem to have been presented in the earlier
case on what may or may not have transpired in the State Council at the
passage of the Ordinance, I shall briefly refer to some important facts
obtained from the National Archives in that regard. The Draft (Bill) dated
1.12.1936 of the proposed Ordinance and titled "an Ordinance to declare and
amend the Kandyan Law in certain respects" gave the objects and reasons as
follows:- "The object of this Bill is to give Legislative effect to the
recommendations made by the Kandyan Law Commission which was published as
Sessional Paper XXIV of 1935".

85



Clause 9 of the Bill read:



9(1). A marriage contracted in binna or in diga as the case may be, or deemed
by the provisions of the Amended Kandyan Marriage Ordinance, 1870, or any
other law for the time being in force, to be or to have been so contracted,
shall be and until dissolved shall continue to be, for all purposes of the law
governing succession to the estates of deceased persons, a binna or a diga
marriage, and shall have full effect as such; and no change in the residence
of either party to the marriage, and no conduct of either party to the
marriage or of any other person, shall convert or deemed to have converted a
binna marriage into a diga marriage, or a diga marriage into a binna marriage,
or cause or deemed to have caused a person married in diga to have the rights
of succession of a person married in binna, or a person married in binna to
have the rights of succession of a person married in diga.



(2) Whenever the rights of any person in relation to the law of intestate
succession under this Ordinance or otherwise depend upon or are affected by
the fact that any person is married, or married in diga or binna, as the case
may be, the marriage must be a marriage valid in law, and, in particular, a
woman shall not lose any right to which she would otherwise be entitled by
reason of her having left her parents' house and gone out in diga, unless she
shall have contracted a marriage valid in law.



The draft was referred to a Select Committee of the State Council and the only
amendment adopted regarding clause No. 9 aforesaid appears to be that it
should not be given retrospective effect. The clause then came up for
consideration as amended (in the present form as it appears in the Ordinance)
and passed by the Council with the rest of the clauses.



Section 9 of the Ordinance reads:



9(1). A marriage contracted after the commencement of this Ordinance in binna
or in diga shall be and until dissolved shall

**86**



continue to be, for all purposes of the law governing the succession to the
estates of deceased persons, a binna or a diga marriage, as the case may be,
and shall have full effect as such; and no change after any such marriage in
the residence of either party to that marriage and no conduct after any such
marriage of either party or of any other person shall convert or deemed to
convert a binna marriage into a diga marriage or a diga marriage into a binna
marriage or cause or deemed to cause a person married in diga to have rights
of succession of a person married in binna, or a person married in binna to
have rights of succession of a person married in diga.



(2) Where after the commencement of this Ordinance a woman leaves the house of
her parents and goes out in diga with a man, but does not contract with that
man a marriage which is valid according to law, she shall not by reason only
of such departure or going out forfeit or lose or deemed to have forfeited or
to have lost any right of succession to which she is or was or otherwise
entitled on the death of any person intestate.



**Construction of Section 9 of the Kandyan Law Declaration and Amendment
Ordinance No. 39 of 1938**



Before the earlier case between the parties was decided, there were few
decisions of the Supreme Court, where the view was taken that a diga married
daughter, having married after the Kandyan Law Declaration and Amendment
Ordinance came into operation, cannot be admitted to binna rights in view of
section 9 of the Ordinance. See Guna na and Others v. Ukkumenika and
Others(50), Yaso Menika v. Biso Menika(53) and as obiter in Alice Nona v. G.
Sugathapala(51).



It was common ground between the majority view and the minority view in the
earlier case that according to the Kandyan Law applicable before the Ordinance
came into operation, it was possible for a woman married in diga to show that
binna rights were reacquired by her (a) during the subsistence of the marriage
and (b) even after dissolution of the marriage. The majority and the minority
view differed on the construction given to the words "shall be and

**87**



until dissolved continue to be" in section 9(1). The majority view was that it
was these words which inhibited reacquisition of binna rights of a diga
married woman only during the subsistence of the marriage and not after
dissolution of the marriage.



But before I consider which of the two constructions is correct, let me advert
to a new argument presented to us by Mr. Goonasekera which was probably not
presented to Court in the course of arguments in the earlier case. It is Mr.
Goonasekara's contention that the subsection 9(1) is applicable only to
determine rights of succession under the Kandyan Law which flow from forms of
marriage, like succession of a diga married widower to his deceased wife's
estate or to a child or to rights of succession on death of a husband; the
section does not extend to cover rights of succession which are not dependent
on marriage; if the correct position taken by the long line of judicial
decisions is that the departure from the parental house that results in the
loss of rights of inheritance and not the form of marriage, then there is
nothing in subsection 9(1) to alter a diga married daughter's right to
paternal inheritance if in fact there was no severance from the mulgedara or
there was a departure and subsequent return to the mulgedara. Mr. Goonasekara
submits that the construction he advances is strengthened by subsection 9(2)
which recognizes loss of rights by more departure without marriage, leaving
open for reacquisition of rights on return.



It appears to me that attachment or severance from the mulgedara loomed large
in deciding acquisition of rights at a time when marriage laws were not well
defined. The element of registration introduced to confer validity on the
Kandyan marriage with the concomitant evidentiary value attached to the
entries in the marriage register has substantially altered the picture.
Subsection 9(2) refers to a situation where a woman goes in diga with a man
but does not contract with that man a valid marriage. In that case she does
not forfeit any right of succession which she is or was entitled on death of
any person intestate. In such a situation, in relation to paternal property
she has to be treated in all probability as an unmarried daughter. An
unmarried daughter's position before the Kandyan Law

**88**



Declaration and Amendment Ordinance came into operation was that in the first
instance, on the death of her father she shared the inheritance equally with
her brothers and binna married sisters; but this interest was temporary or
defeasible or transient joint interest which she later lost by a subsequent
diga marriage (Hayley 273 & 278). The Ordinance made a significant change in
this regard, which I think has direct bearing on the problem at hand.
Subsection 12(1) of the Ordinance reads:



"The diga marriage of a daughter after the death of her father shall not
affect or deprive her of any share of his estate to which she shall have
become entitled upon his death, provided that if within a period of one year
after the date of such marriage the brothers and binna married sisters of such
daughter or any one or more of them, but if more than one then jointly and not
severally, shall tender to her at the fair market value of the immovable
property constituting the aforesaid share or any part thereof, and shall call
upon her to convey the same to him or to her or them, such daughter shall so
convey and shall be compellable by action to do so."



It is significant that the right of emption is not given to any diga married
sister who never left the mulgedara or reacquired binna rights by readmission
to the mulgedera.



In this background let me consider the meaning of the subsection 9(1) taking
it part by part.  
  
A marriage contracted  
  
A valid marriage contracted  in terms of the taw currently in operation.
Section 3 (b) (regarding registration); section 5 (1) (prohibited degrees of
relationship); section 6 (relating to a second marriage without dissolving the
first) of the Kandyan Marriage and Divorce Act, No. 44 of 1952, are all
attracted. Going in diga with a sans registration is n o marriage  
  
After commencement of the Ordinance



According to section 2, after 1.1.1939.

# 89

#  

# In binna or diga



The two types of marriage recognized in Kandyan Law. These are not defined in
the Ordinance and for that matter not even in the Kandyan Succession Ordinance
or Kandyan Marriage and Divorce Act.



**shall be and until dissolved continue to be,**



The marriage status ends with dissolution; therefore the marriage will be diga
or binna as long as the marriage subsists - until it is dissolved; no marriage
could be switched midstream from one type to another. Obviously, it could not
be so switched after dissolution.



**For all purposes of the law governing succession to the estates of deceased
persons,**

** **

The point at which succession to the estates of deceased persons could take
place is not restricted to the period of subsistence of the marriage and there
is no room to assume it is so restricted. The point at which succession takes
place could be during the subsistence of the marriage or after dissolution. In
the case of the succession to the estates of husband and wife inter se, it
must necessarily happen after the death of one party and therefore after
dissolution of the marriage.

** **

**a binna or diga marriage, as the case may be, and shall have full effect as
such;**



A marriage cannot be binna for one purpose and diga for another; or partially
binna or partially diga.

** **

**and no change after any such marriage in the residence of either party to
that marriage**



After such marriage, means after the marriage contract takes place; and
therefore includes both the period during which the marriage subsists and the
period after its dissolution.

**90**



**and no conduct after any such marriage of either party to that marriage or
of any other person  
**  
Here too, the term after any such marriage, includes both periods of
subsistence of marriage and after its dissolution. Conduct would include,
execution of deeds, enjoyment of property, reception by parents or brothers
etc.



shall convert or deemed to convert a binna marriage into a diga marriage or a
diga marriage into a binna marriage



This idea of conversion of one type of marriage into another seems to suggest
subsistence of the marriage and it therefore relates to change of residence of
parties to the marriage and conduct of the parties as aforesaid, after
marriage, but before dissolution of marriage.



or cause or deemed to cause a person married in diga to have rights of
succession of a person married in binna, or a person married in binna to have
the rights of succession of a person married in digs.



1\. No change of residence of either party to that marriage, and

  
2\. No conduct of either party to that marriage or of any other person;



both (change of residence and conduct) taking place after such marriage, which
includes the period after dissolution as well, cause ... a person married in
one type of marriage to have rights of succession of a person married in the
other type.

  
**conclusion**  


For the above reasons I hold that the earlier decision was erroneous in law.
Kiribindu, in terns of section 9 (1) of the Ordinance, could not have
preserved or reacquired a right of succession to

**91**



paternal property, by reason of her having contracted a diga marriage. Her
change of residence or conduct after marriage could not have altered her
rights. She gets no interest from the lands sought to be partitioned.



The appeal is allowed and the judgments of both courts below are set aside.
Judgment is entered dismissing the plaintiff's action. The parties will bear
their own costs of this Court and of all Courts below.



We are indebted to learned counsel for their invaluable assistance.



**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.**



I have had the benefit of reading the judgment of my brother, Dheeraratne, J.
and must state that the facts of this case have been adequately set out by him
and need no further elaboration. On the application of the law to the facts,
however, I hold a different view.

There is no dispute that the question that arises for adjudication in this
case is one of succession by the daughter, Kiribindu (plaintiff respondent) to
a share of the property of her late father, Ukkuwa. The vital or relevant date
which has to be taken into account, therefore, is, the date of Ukkuwa's death,
and, the pivotal question that arises for consideration is, "what was
Kiribindu's status on the day her father, Ukkuwa, died?;" for, as Wood Renton
C.J. (with de Sampayo J., agreeing) said, in Siripaly u Kirihame(48): "it is
only reasonable that in such circumstances the binna married daughter's title
to a share in the paternal inheritance should be held to have crystallized at
the time of her father's death." The answer to this question would, in my
view, determine whether or not Kiribindu is entitled to a share of the
paternal inheritance. Kiribindu's father Ukkuwa died in 1957, and there is no
question of the fact that, at her father's death Kiribindu was an unmarried
woman living in her father's house; never having severed her connections with
the mulgedera. Kiribindu married Piyasena in diga on 27.7.39, but continued,
notwithstanding the diga marriage, to live in her father's house (the
mulgedera); never having

**92**



left it or severed connections with it. Although this marriage was dissolved
on Piyasena's death on 30.7.1946, Kiribindu never contracted a subsequent
marriage but continued as before, to live in the mulgedera.



It is of importance to note that even though her marriage certificate stated
that she married in diga, Kiribindu was never conducted out of the mulgedera
either by her husband Piyasena or by his family. On the contrary, the couple,
after their diga marriage, continued to live in the mulgedera. The fact is not
contested, that Kiribindu never left her father's house, for the reason that
she was needed there to fulfil a family obligation. It appears that sometime
prior to her marriage to Piyasena, her sister-in-law, the wife of her only
brother, Rana, died prematurely, leaving three, minor children (1st defendant-
appellant, and the 4th and 6th defendant-respondents); the responsibility for
whose care and upbringing naturally devolved on Kiribindu. Thus, the then
unmarried Kiribindu was in fact required by her father and her only brother,
Rana, to remain in the mulgedera in order to look after the latter's three
minor children, and, function as their foster mother. Further, according to
the admitted facts, this situation continued without change despite her
subsequent marriage in diga to the aforementioned Piyasena in 1939. It needs
to be mentioned that it is this self-same brood of three minor children, who,
as the 1st defendant-appellant and the 4th and 6th defendant-respondents, are
now seeking to contest Kiribindu's claim to her paternal inheritance.



Thus it was, that even though the certificate of registration of marriage
stated that the marriage was in diga, Piyasena and Kiribindu continued after
their marriage, to five in the mulgedera, and Kiribindu, even after her
husband's death in 1946, never remarried, but continued to live in the-
mulgedera. The important fact then, is that all her life, i.e. before her
marriage, after her marriage and during her widowhood, Kiribindu always lived
in her father's house, the mulg ra, and never left it or severed connections
with it either physically or otherwise. Therefore, when her father died in
1957, she was in fact an unmarried daughter living in the mulgedera as set out
above. Hence, in the particular circumstances of this case, questions

**93**



such as re-acquisition of rights, reversion, conversion of one type of
marriage to another, severance from the mulgedera, change of residence and
return, subsequent conduct of the parties to the marriage, acquiescence,
waiver of forfeiture etc., do not arise.



According to the submissions of learned Counsel, the law applicable is the
Kandyan Law Declaration and Amendment Ordinance No. 39 of 1938 (date of
assent: 1st January, 1939) and section 9 (1) thereof states as follows:  


"A marriage contracted after the commencement of this Ordinance in binna or in
diga shall be and until dissolved shall continue to be, for all purposes of
the law governing the succession to the estates of deceased persons, a binna
or a diga marriage, as the case may be, and shall have full effect as such;
and no change after any such marriage in the residence of either party to that
marriage and no conduct after any such marriage of either party to that
marriage or of any other person shall convert or be deemed to convert a binna
marriage into a diga marriage or a diga marriage into a binna marriage or
cause or be deemed to cause a person married in diga to have the rights of
succession of a person married in binna,. or a person married in binna to have
the rights of succession of a person married in diga.



Applying the law to the facts, one finds that the crucial words as far as this
case is concerned are: "...and, until dissolved shall continue to be ..." This
is to say, a diga or binna marriage shall continue to be such only as long as
the marriage itself subsists. Once the marriage is dissolved, the labels
"diga" and "binna" fall away and cease to apply, and once that happens, the
words "diga" and "binna" cease to be of any consequence, "for all purposes of
the law governing the succession to the estates of deceased persons." The
words quoted above, viz, "until dissolved shall continue to be", are indeed
essential for the correct working of the section. For one thing, it obviates
difficulties which would arise, e.g., in a situation where a woman married in
diga, chooses, after the dissolution of such marriage, to contract a marriage
in binna, during the lifetime of her

**94**



father, and, to go even further, where, upon the dissolution of such second
marriage, she contracts a third marriage, this time in diga, once again! Then
again, it seems clear that the labels "diga" and "binna" cannot exist
independently, by themselves, but must necessarily qualify and apply only to a
subsisting marriage. Thus, if there is no marriage subsisting, questions
regarding diga and binna cannot arise in the first place. It is important to
note also, that nowhere is there even a suggestion that the status of
widowhood must continue to bear the yoke of diga or binna for life.



Therefore, a marriage contracted in diga, as in the instant case, "shall for
all purposes of the law governing the succession to the estates of deceased
persons," be and continue to be a diga marriage until, and only until
dissolved. To repeat, Kiribindu's marriage in diga was dissolved upon the
death of her husband Piyasena in 1946 whilst her father, Ukkuwa, was still
alive. Thenceforth, in terms of section 9 (1), she ceased to be a diga-married
woman and assumed the status of a single unmarried woman. And, if as set out
above, she never re-married and never left or severed connections with the
mulgedera, she automatically became entitled to a share of the paternal
inheritance upon her father's death in 1957, inasmuch as she was in fact an
unmarried daughter.



Thus, it appears that section 9 (1) of the Ordinance applies only to marriages
which in fact subsist on the relevant date. It does not apply to the facts of,
and will not govern the instant case, where the marriage has been dissolved
and has ceased to exist. Further support for this preposition may be had from
the sub-heading and the marginal heading to section 9, both of which deal only
with "marriages", i.e. subsisting marriages.



Therefore the question that has arisen in the instant case, viz: whether the
daughter, Kiribindu is entitled to succeed to a share of her paternal
inheritance, must be decided upon considerations which are independent of
section 9 (1) of the Ordinance. As set out above, it is my view that
Kiribindu, the Plaintiff-respondent in this case is

**95**



entitled to her natural rights of inheritance, and must succeed to her
paternal inheritance in terms of the law of succession. Since she was one of
two children of the deceased Ukkuwa, she would be entitled to half the
paternal inheritance.



I would therefore dismiss this appeal with costs.



_Appeal allowed._

_ _

_Plaintiff 1st respondent's action dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/8.html_  

