##  Violet Perera v. Asilin Nona - SLR - 1, Vol 1 of 1996 [1995] LKSC 8;
(1996) 1 Sri LR 1 (7 July 1995)

**1**

**VIOLET PEREIRA  
v.  
ASILIN NONA**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO, J.  
AMERASINGHE, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S. C. APPEAL NO. 63/94  
C.A. NO. 140/87.  
D. C. COLOMBO NO. 6039 RE.  
MAY 17, 1995.  
  
_Landlord and tenant - Payment of rent under section 21 of Rent Act - Payment
to authorized person._  
  
The plaintiff's mother after an unsuccessful attempt to evict the defendant
gifted the tenanted premises to her daughter the plaintiff. The defendant was
duly informed of this by the plaintiff's lawyer and the lawyers who attested
the deed, but the defendant called for a copy of the deed from the plaintiff's
mother and receiving no response continued to deposit the rent in the
Municipality in favour of the plaintiff's mother. The plaintiff filed this
suit in August 1984 and summons was ordered on 13.11.84. On 14.11.84 the
defendant delivered to the Municipality rent for September and October 1984.  
  
**Held** :  
  
(1) The defendant was not justified in not paying rent to the plaintiff. A
request for the documents may have been justified if conflicting claims were
being made as for instance by persons claiming under a Last Will, intestacy,
and donation. This was not one of those instances.  
  
(2) The Municipal Council cannot transmit money orders (or other documents
such as cheques) made out in favour of one person to another.  
  
(3) The defendant has not complied with the requirements of section 21(1) of
the Rent Act whereunder the tenant must pay the rent to the authorized person.
A payment to the authorized person means, prima facie, an actual payment to
him i.e. one which augments his funds. Section 21(3) requires him to transmit
the amount of such payment to the landlord; this means prima facie that he
must make a payment to the landlord and not merely transmit the document
deposited by the tenant.  
  
(4) The purpose of section 21 is not to substitute the authorized person for
the postal services, or other means of delivery or tender of rent payments
(whether

**2**

made by cheque, money order or otherwise). The purpose is to prevent a tenant
who wishes to pay rent to the landlord being placed in a real difficulty or
dilemma - as where the landlord refuses or evades the acceptance of rent, or
there is uncertainty as to who the real landlord is. In those situations, a
payment by the tenant which augments the funds of the authorized person is
equivalent to a payment to the landlord.  
  
**Per Fernando, J.**  
  
The tender to, or deposit with the authorized person of money orders, cheques
or other instruments made out in favour of someone other than the autho­rized
person is not, properly speaking, a payment to the authorized person. However,
it is arguable that such instruments are also within the scope of section 21,
if made out in favour of the real landlord provided that they are duly
realised. But if it turns out that the real landlord is not the person in
whose favour such instrument is drawn, then clearly the tenant cannot be
regarded as having paid the rent to the landlord of the premises. In case of
doubt as to who the landlord is, the tenant will be well-advised to pay the
authorized person.  
  
**Cases referred to:**  
  
1\. _De Alwis v. Perera_ (1951) 52 N. L. R. 433.  
  
2\. _Silva v. Muniamma_ (1955) 56 N.L.R. 357.  
  
3. _De Silva v. Abeyratne_ (1955) 56 N. L. R. 574.  
  
4. _Perera v. De Costa_ (1955) 57 N.L.R. 283.  
  
5. _David Silva v. Madanayake_ (1967) 69 N. L. R. 396.  
  
6. _Perera v. Padmakanthi_ (1987) 2 Sri L. R. 1.

7\. _Subramaniam v. Pathmanathan_ (1984) 2 Sri L. R. 252.  
  
8\. _Seelawathie v. Ediriweera_ S.C. 65/87 - S. C. Minutes of 3.11.89.  
  
9\. _Perera v. De Saram_ S. C. 27/92 - S.C. Minutes of 26.10.93.  
  
10\. _Perera v. De Silva_ (1988) 1 Sri L. R. 351.  
  
**APPEAL** from judgement of Court of Appeal.  
  
_Faisz Mustapha_ P.C. with Hemasiri Withanachchi for Plaintiff-Respondent- ­
Appellant.  
  
_S. Mahenthiran_ for the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**3**

July 7, 1995.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.**  
  
This appeal involves a question of law as to how a tenant should pay rent
under section 21 of the Rent Act, No 7 of 1972.  
  
The original landlord of the premises in suit failed in an action to eject her
tenant, the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent ("the Defen­dant"). Within a month,
A. W. de Silva, Notary Public, acting on be­half of the original landlord,
wrote a letter dated 16.12.82 to the De­fendant informing her that the
landlord had gifted the premises to her daughter, the Plaintiff-Respondent-
Appellant ("the Plaintiff") by Deed No. 293, dated 8.12.82, attested by
himself, and asking her to attorn to, and pay rent to, the Plaintiff. A
similar letter dated 17.12.82 was written to the Defendant, by a lawyer acting
on behalf of the Plaintiff.  
  
The original landlord, by a letter dated 12.1.83, informed the Mayor of
Colombo (the "authorized person" as defined by section 21(4) of the Rent Act)
that the premises had been transferred to the Plaintiff, and that the tenant
had been duly notified; she asked that the Plaintiff's name and address be
substituted as the landlord entitled to receive the rent of the premises. She
copied this letter to the Defendant.  
  
On 25.1.83 an Attorney-at-Law replied on behalf of the Defendant to the letter
of 16.12.82. However, he wrote to the original landlord, and not to A. W. de
Silva, N. P. He asked for a certified copy of the deed for perusal, saying
that his client had instructed him to make that request; he gave no other
reason for this request, and did not even hint at any uncertainty about the
transaction. This letter was not copied to the Plaintiff, nor was the
Plaintiff asked for a copy of the deed, by that or any other letter. There was
no response to this letter.  
  
It is common ground that (a) in respect of the period January 1983 to August
1984, the Defendant delivered to the Municipal Council, money orders in favour
of the original landlord, (b) the Municipal Coun­cil issued receipts to the
Defendant in which the Plaintiff's mother was described as landlord, and (c)
these money orders were neither sent to the Plaintiff by the Municipal Council
nor claimed by her.  
  
The Plaintiff filed action for ejectment in August 1984; on 13.11.84,

**4**

order was made for the issue of summons; and on 14.11.84 the Defen­dant
delivered to the Municipal Council money orders in respect of rent for
September and October 1984 made out in the name of the Plaintiff.  
  
When the issues were first framed, the Plaintiff proceeded on the ba­sis that
she was entitled to ejectment because the Defendant had failed to attorn.
However, thereafter an issue was framed on the basis of ar­rears of rent. It
is on that issue that the trial and the appeals in both Courts proceeded.  
  
No submission has been made on the question of attornment. It is settled law
that a tenant's continuation in occupation of the rented premises, after
receiving notice of the transfer and of the transferee's election to recognise
him as the tenant, constitutes an exercise of the tenant's option to
acknowledge the transferee as the landlord; that the tenant thereupon becomes
liable to pay the rent to the transferee; and that on default, the transferee
is entitled to sue the tenant for rent, damages and ejectment: see De Alwis v.
Perera,(1) Silva v. Muniamma (2), De Silva v. Abeyratne (3), Perera v. de
Costa(4), David Silva v. Madanayake(5), Perera v. Padmakanthi(6) ,Subramaniam
v. Pathmanathan,(7) and Seelawathie v. Ediriweera.(8)  
  
The only question that was argued, in both Courts, was whether the Defendant
had duly discharged her obligation to pay rent, for the period January 1983 to
August 1984, by tendering to the Municipal Council money orders in the name of
the original landlord. It is agreed that if this does not constitute due
payment of rent to the Plaintiff, under and in terms of section 21 of the Rent
Act, the District Court was right in giving judgment for the Plaintiff (for
rent, damages and ejectment), and that the Court of Appeal ought not to have
reversed that judgment.  
  
**Section 21 provides:**  
  
21\. (1) The tenant of any premises may pay the rent of the premises to the
authorized person instead of the landlord.  
  
(2) Where any payment of any rent of any premises is made on any day in
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1), it shall be deemed to be a
payment received on that day by the landlord of the premises from the tenant
thereof.

**5**

(3) Where the rent of any premises is paid to the authorized person, the
authorized person shall issue to the tenant of the premises a receipt in
acknowledgement of such payment, and shall transmit the amount of such payment
to the landlord of the premises. It shall be the duty of such landlord to
issue to the authorized person a receipt in acknowledgement of the amount so
transmitted to him.  
  
(4) In this section, "authorized person", with reference to any premises,
means the Mayor, or Chairman of the local authority within whose
administrative limits the premises are situated or the person authorized in
writing by such Mayor or Chairman to receive rents paid under this section, or
where the Minister so determines, the Board of the area within which the
pemises are situated.  
  
Learned Counsel for the Defendant submitted that;  
  
(1) The Defendant was entitled to continue to pay rent to the original
landlord until she was given a copy of the deed, because she was naturally
apprehensive about this transaction occurring so soon after an unsuccessful
attempt to eject her; he concedes, however, that in her evidence she neither
gave such a reason for this request, nor explained why she had suddenly
started making payments in the name of the Plaintiff in November 1984;  
  
(2) The original landlord's letter of 12.1.83 constituted a direction to the
Municipal Council to transmit payments of rent to the new landlord, the
Plaintiff; and that the defendant was not in default - the default, if any,
was that of the Municipal Council, which failed to transmit the payments to
the Plaintiff; and  
  
(3) In any event, the tenant's obligation under section 21 was satisfied, even
if the rent had not actually been transmitted to the landlord. Since it has
been held in Perera v. de Saram, that the mere deposit of rent, even without
specifying the name of the landlord, was sufficient, it follows that the
tender of the money orders in the name of the original landlord was also
sufficient.  
  
In this case the three letters which the Defendant received, between 16.12.82
and 12.1.83, were perfectly clear and quite unambiguous. It is difficult to
understand why her lawyer asked for a copy of the deed. If he

**6**

really required it, he should have asked either the Plaintiff, who, as the
donee, would have had the original in her possession, or A. W. de Silva the
Notary who had attested it. Instead he chose to ask the donor, who had no
further interest in the matter; as far as she was concerned, she had done her
duty by informing her tenant of the transfer, and her failure to reply, or to
furnish a copy of the deed, cannot be held against the Plaintiff.  
  
Further, it should have been obvious to the Defendant's lawyer that the
Defendant ran no risk whatever in paying rent to the person designated by the
original landlord. If in fact the premises had not been transferred, the
original landlord would have been estopped from claiming that the Defendant
had fallen into arrears simply because she had paid rent as directed by the
former. If the premises had been transferred, payment to the transferee was in
order.  
  
I therefore cannot accept the submission that the Defendant was justified in
not paying rent to the transferee pending clarification. A request for the
documents may have been justified if there had been some doubt as to the
Plaintiff's right to receive the rent: such doubts may have arisen, for
instance, upon the death of the landlord if conflicting claims were then made,
by persons claiming under a last will, intestacy, and donation, respectively.
This is not one of those instances.  
  
I hold that the Defendant was not entitled to continue to treat the original
landlord as her landlord, or to pay rent to her.  
  
Learned Counsel's second submission is wholly without merit. The letter of
12.1.83 cannot possibly be treated as a direction to the Municipal Council to
accept money orders in the name of the original landlord, and to transmit them
to the new landlord. It was plainly a notification that the transferee should
be substituted, in all respects, as landlord. In any event, any uncertainty in
this respect was not created by the Plaintiff, and cannot be held against her.  
  
Equally, the Municipal Council cannot be blamed for not transmitting money
orders (or other instruments) such as cheques, made out in favour of one
person, to another. That would not only have been improper, but might even
have resulted in allegations of misappropriation. Further, money orders in her
mother's name would have been of no use to the

**7**

Plaintiff. Learned Counsel submits that the Plaintiff could have returned
those money orders to the Defendant and obtained replacements. That, however,
is not the object of section 21\. If that was what the Defendant wanted, much
time and energy could have been saved by making pay­ments to the Plaintiff
directly, in the first instance.  
  
Finally, the Defendant has not complied with the requirements of sec­tion
21(1). That section requires the tenant to "pay" the rent to the "au­thorized
person". A payment to the authorized person means, prima fa­cie, an actual
payment to him, i.e. one which augments his funds. He is then required by
section 21(3) to "transmit the amount of such payment to the landlord; this
means prima facie, that he must make a payment to the landlord, and not merely
transmit the document deposited by the tenant.  
  
In the case of a payment to the authorized person, the tender of a cheque, if
issued without funds or if payment is stopped, will obviously not constitute a
payment in terms of section 21(1); and the landlord will therefore not be
deemed, under section 21(2), to have received payment of the rent.  
  
The purpose of section 21 is not to substitute the authorized person for the
postal services, or other means of delivery or tender of rent payments
(whether made by cheque, money order or otherwise). The purpose is to prevent
a tenant who wishes to pay rent to the landlord being placed in a real
difficulty or dilemma - as where the landlord refuses or evades the acceptance
of rent, or there is uncertainty as to who the real landlord is. In those
situations, a payment by the tenant which augments the funds of the authorized
person is equivalent to a payment to the landlord.  
  
While this question was not expressly discussed in Perera v. de Saram(9), it
would seem that the payment in that case was to the authorized person:
Dheeraratne. J. observes that the landlord's name was not entered in the
receipts or in the Rent Register.  
  
However, it has been held that section 21 should not be construed in an unduly
narrow and technical manner: **Perera v. de Silva** ,(10). The tender to, or
deposit with the authorized person of money orders, cheques or other
instruments, made out in favour of someone other than the authorized person,
is not, properly speaking, a payment to the authorized person.

**8**

However, it is arguable that such instruments are also within the scope of
section 21, if made out in favour of the real landlord provided that they are
duly realised. But if it turns out later that the real landlord is not the
person in whose favour such instrument is drawn, then clearly the tenant
cannot be regarded as having paid the rent to the landlord of the pre­mises.
In case of doubt as to who his landlord is, the tenant will be well­-advised
to pay the authorised person.  
  
Here there was no doubt as to the person entitled as landlord, to the rent as
from January 1983: by tendering or depositing money orders in favour of the
former landlord the Defendant did not discharge her obligation to pay rent in
terms of section 21 or the common law. She was therefore in arrears of rent.  
  
The Plaintiff's appeal succeeds. The Judgment of the Court of Appeal is set
aside, and the judgment of the District Court is restored. The Appellant will
be entitled to costs of appeal in both Courts in a sum of Rs. 5,000.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/8.html_  

