##  Amerajeewa v. University of Colombo - SLR - 327, Vol 2 of 1993 [1993] LKSC
8; (1993) 2 Sri LR 327 (11 June 1993)

327

AMERAJEEWA **  
v.  
UNIVERSITY OF COLOMBO **

SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J.  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
GOONEWARDENA J. AND  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
S. C. APPEAL NO. 12/93.  
C. A APPEAL NO. 271/88.  
LT APPLICATION NO. 8/1193/96.  
JUNE 11, 1993.

_     Industrial Dispute - Wrongful termination of services of employee -
Death of employee - applicant- Dismissal of application - Substitution of
widow \- are right of the applicant in an application to the Labour Tribunal
transmissible on his death when the application is still pending? Right of
appeal of person not a party and seeking substitution - Audi alterm partem
rule of natural justice - Res litigiosa - S. 31C(2) of Industrial Disputes
Act. _

When an applicant seeking relief in the Labour Tribunal dies when the
application is pending, the question that arise is whether rights in the Res
litigiosa are transmissible and if so, to whom. When the application for
substitution by the dead applicant's widow was dismissed without affording her
a hearing there was a breach of the audi alteram partem rule of natural
justice. This makes the ex -party orders of dismissal of the application by
the Labour Tribunal on being informed of the death of the original applicant
null and void.

Although the Industrial Disputes Act does not prescribe the procedure to be
followed for substitution in the room of a applicant who dies during the
pending of the application, s. 31 C(2) confers powers upon the Tribunal to
devise a suitable procedure.

**Cases referred:**

_1\. Arnolda v. Gopalan (1961) 64 NLR 153._  
_  
2 Goonetilleke v. Walker and Sons Co. Ltd. (1977) 79(2) NLR 563, 564._  
_  
3\. Menchinahamy v. Muniweera (1950) 52 NLR 409, 415._

328

**APPEAL** from Judgment of the Court of Appeal.

Chula de Silva, P.C. with A. G. l. Tilakawardene, Mrs. S. Meevanapalana and M.
Hussein for - appellant.

  
_Gomin Dayasiri with Ajith Perera and Manjula Sirimanne for Employer -
respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult_

June 23, 1993  
**FERNANDO, J.**

The Appellant is the widow of a store-keeper ("the Applicant") who was first
employed by the Respondent in 1979. Upon the termination of the Applicant's
services on 25.2.86, he made an application to the Labour Tribunal on 5.4.86,
alleging that his services had been wrongful terminated and praying for re-
instatement with back wages, compensation for wrongful termination, and other
equitable relief.

After the evidence of two witnesses had been led, the Applicant died on
5.12.87, in consequence of a motor accident. The case was called on 13.5.88,
and was postponed for 21.6.88 as the applicant was not present. On 21.6.88 the
applicant's (former) representative was present and the Tribunal was informed
that the Applicant had died. Thereupon the President made order:

"Both parties state that the Applicant has died. This application cannot
therefore be considered. The application is dismissed."

A formal order in identical terms was made on 1.8.88. On 5.8.88 the Appellant
filed a petition and affidavit in the Tribunal stating that she, being the
widow of the Applicant, was entitled to be substituted in his place, that she
wished to continue with the proceedings to recover compensation and damages
for wrongful termination, gratuity and other reliefs; she prayed that she be
substituted and that the application be fixed for further hearing. The Labour
Tribunal took no action in respect of that petition. On 15.8.88 the Appellant
filed a petition of appeal to the Court of Appeal stating:

329

"5. By an order dated 1.8.88 received by the Appellant on 5.8.88, the teamed
Labour Tribunal President dismissed the application on the ground that the
applicant had died and therefore this application cannot be considered.

6\. The Appellant is the widow of the above Applicant and is entitled in law
and in equity to continue the said application and to obtain relief.

8(c) The learned President erred in Law in failing to address his mind as to
whether the said decease had vested rights which were
transmissible/transmitted to his heirs.

(d) The learned President erred in law in failing to issue notices on the
heirs of the said deceased prior to making the said order.

(e) The learned President violated the principles of Natural Justice in not
affording the appellant an opportunity of being heard prior to making the said
order of dismissal."

She prayed that the order dated 1.8.88 be set aside, that the Tribunal be
directed to substitute her in place of the deceased, and that the Tribunal be
directed to hear the evidence and make a just and equitable order. The Court
of Appeal having dismissed the appeal, the Appellant comes to this Court with
special leave to appeal.

The essence of the Applicant's case was that the rights of the Applicant in
the pending application were rights transmissible upon his death ; that upon
his death those rights devolved on her ; that she was thus a person entitled
to an opportunity of being heard before any order adverse to the interests of
the heirs of the deceased was made ; that the Tribunal had erred in failing to
give such a hearing; further, that the Tribunal had failed to consider whether
the rights of the deceased were transmissible, and if so, to whom, and had
instead wrongly- assumed that upon the death of an applicant the application
had necessarily to be dismissed ; and that therefore the order dismissing the
application and subsequent proceedings should be set aside, and fresh
proceedings taken, as from the date of dismissal, in regard to substitution
and thereafter upon the merits.

330

The principal questions which the Court of Appeal had to decide were therefore
whether the orders of 21.6.88 and 1.8.88 were wrong and void for failure of
Natural Justice, and whether the Tribunal was wrong in assuming that upon the
death of an applicant the right to sue did not survive. There was also a
question as to whether the Appellant, who not been substituted, was entitled
to file an appeal since she was not a party ; the Respondent did not submit
that the Appellant had no right of appeal, and that question was not
considered by the Court of Appeal.

The Court of Appeal failed to deal with the question whether the audi alteram
partem rule had been breached. Without considering the facts of the particular
case, and the nature of the rights asserted and the reliefs prayed for, the
Court proceeded to hold that a contract of employment was of a personal
nature, that the death of the workman would bring that contract to an end,
that no interest devolved on the heirs who were accordingly not entitled to
continue the proceedings. In coming to this conclusion reliance was placed on
the decision in _Arnolda v Gopalan_ ,(1) that a Labour Tribunal had no
jurisdiction under the Industrial Disputes Act to order the widow or legal
representative of a deceased employer to pay the workman any wages,
compensation or gratuity due for the period that he was employed under the
deceased. That case however dealt with a very different situation. There it
was the employer who had died, and death was before any application had been
filed. That case did not consider or decide the position in regard to the
death of an applicant after proceedings had commenced. There is at least one
important difference, in that death before litigation commences only involves
the question of transmissibility of (contractual) rights, whereas death
pending litigation involves the further question of transmissibility of a res
litigiosa (cf. Lee, Roman-Dutch Law, 5th ed, P. 238). The Court of Appeal also
referred to an observation in Goonetilleke v. _Walker Sons & Ltd. _(2), that
there is no legal machinery in the Act for substitution in place of any
deceased party in the course of the proceedings before the Tribunal ; the
Court of Appeal accordingly held that there is nothing in the statute which
empowered the Appellant to be substituted. That observation was clearly an
obiter dictum, for what was there considered was not death pending proceedings
in the Tribunal, but the death of an applicant-appellant pending appeal.

331

This appeal has been referred to this Bench of five Judges as learned
President's Counsel for the Appellant stated that he was contesting the
correctness of the decision in _Arnolda v. Gopalan_ (1) and the obiter dictum
in Goonetilleke v. _Walker Sons Co. Ltd_. (2)

Upon being notified of the death of the Applicant, two questions arose for
determination by the Tribunal : Whether the rights of the deceased Applicant,
in the pending application, were rights which were transmissible upon death ;
if so, upon whom did those rights devolve. These were questions of mixed fact
and law. The Tribunal erred in assuming, without inquiry, that upon the death
of the Applicant the application had necessarily to be dismissed : this
decision was ex parte because the person who had previously represented the
deceased Applicant had no longer any authority to represent either the
deceased or persons claiming through him. Any person claiming interests on the
basis that the Applicant rights were transmissible on death should have been
heard before determining those questions. While it is correct that the
Industrial Disputes Act does not prescribe the procedure to be followed in
such a situation, yet section 31C(2) confers powers upon the Labour Tribunal
to devise a suitable procedure. It was therefore incumbent upon the Tribunal
to have taken some appropriate steps to give notice to interested persons so
as to satisfy the basic requirements of Natural Justice. It was only
thereafter that the Tribunal could have proceeded to inquire into and
determine those questions. This failure to do so renders the order of 21.6.88
and all subsequent orders and proceedings null and void (see _Menchinahamy v.
Muniweera_ , (3)).

This Court is therefore not called upon at this stage of the proceedings to
answer the two questions which the Labour Tribunal failed to determine. It is
therefore unnecessary to consider the correctness of the decision in _Arnolda
v. Gopalan_ (1) and the obiter dictum in Goonetilleke v. _Walker Sons & Co
Ltd_, (2) but this must not be assumed to be approval thereof.

The appeal is accordingly allowed. The Judgment of the Court of Appeal, as
well as the order dated 21.6.88 and all subsequent orders and proceedings in
the Labour Tribunal, are set aside. The Labour Tribunal is directed to call
this case on 16.8.93 to fix a date for inquiry ; and thereafter to inquire
into and determine whether the rights of the deceased Applicant were
transmissible upon his death, and, if so, to whom, after hearing the Appellant
and any other

332

interested persons. The Tribunal will hear and determine the application as
soon as possible. The Appellant will be entitled to costs, in both Courts, in
a sum of Rs. 5,000/-.

**AMERASINGHE, J. -** I agree.

  
**DHEERARATNE, J. -** I agree.

  
**GOONAWARDENA, J. -** I agree.

  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed case sent back_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/8.html_  

