##  Rev. Dharmatilleka Thero v. Rev. Buddharakkita Thero - SLR - 405, Vol 1 of
1993 [1992] LKSC 8; (1993) 1 Sri LR 405 (18 December 1992)

**405**

**REV. DHARMATILLEKA THERO** **  
v.** **  
REV. BUDDHARAKKITA THERO**

SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,  
AMERASINGHE, J. AND  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
SC NO. 9/90.  
SC Spl. LA 15/90.  
CA/LA 25/90.  
CA 154/79F.  
DC KALUTARA 2496/1  
DECEMBER 18th, 1992.

FEBRUARY 11th, 17th AND 18th, 1993.

AND MARCH 09th, 1993.

_     Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law - Pupillary succession to Viharadhipathyship
\- Prima facie evidence identifying robing tutor - Samanera Declaration -
Upasampada Declaration._

While the Samanera Declaration constitutes prima facie evidence of what is
contained, the particulars contained in the Upasampada Declaration made with
reference to the Upasampada ceremony which is a formal and solemn ceremony can
be used to displace the prima facie evidence contained in the Samanera
Declaration. On this basis the common robing tutor of both plaintiff and
defendant can be identified. The robing date determines the seniority.

**Case referred to**

_Jinawansa Thero v. Piyaratna Thero (1982) 1 Sri LR 273, 278, 279._

**APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.

406

_E S. Amerasinghe P.C. with M. B. Peramuna and Harsha Amerasekera for
plaintiff - appellant._  
_  
A. C. Goonaratne Q.C. with P. A. D. Samarasekera P.C., B. Rajapakse and C.J.
Ladduwahetty for the defendant - respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

April 29, 1993.  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

Arama Dhammatilake Thero instituted these proceedings against Batuwanhena
Buddharakkita Thero for a declaration that he is the lawful Viharadhipathi of
the temple called Kettarama Kande Vihare at Kaluwamodera in Aluthgama in the
Kalutara District; he also asked that he be restored to possession of the
temple and its temporalities. In his plaint he averred that at one time
Saranatissa Thero was the Viharadhipathi and upon his death he was succeeded
by Jinarama Thero who died on 3rd September, 1976. It was the claim of the
plaintiff that upon the death of Jinarama Thero on 3rd September, 1976, it was
he who was entitled to the Viharadhipathiship of the temple, as the senior
pupil of Jinarama Thero. The defendant in his answer, while denying the claim
of the plaintiff, pleaded that it was he who was the senior pupil of Jinarama
Thero.

At the hearing before the District Court and the Court of Appeal it was common
ground that -

(a) the applicable rule of succession to the Viharadhipathiship is that which
is known as the Sisyanu Sisya Paramparawa rule;

(b) that both the plaintiff and the defendant claim succession to the
Viharadhipathiship through Jinarama Thero who was the undisputed last
Viharadhipathi;

(c) the plaintiff was robed as a Samanera on 30th September, 1952, and his
robing tutors were Saranatissa Thero and Jinarama Thero;

407

(d) the defendant was robed on 2nd November, 1951, and his robing tutor was
Saranatissa Thero;

(e) the plaintiff and the defendant were each presented for ordination by both
Saranatissa Thero and Jinarama Thero, and they were both ordained on 15th
June, 1961.

In brief, the case for the plaintiff was that when he was robed on 30th
September, 1952, Jinarama Thero was one of his robing tutors but when the
defendant was robed on 2nd November, 1951, Jinarama Thero was not one of the
robing tutors of the defendant. The plaintiff therefore claimed that he alone
was robed by Jinarama Thero and that in law he succeeded to the
Viharadhipathiship under the Sisyanu Sisya Paramparawa rule of succession. On
the other hand, the defendant's case was that Jinarama Thero was one of his
robing tutors and since he was robed on a date prior to the robing of the
plaintiff, he became the senior pupil of Jinarama Thero.

Thus it is seen that the only question that arises for decision on this appeal
is whether Jinarama Thero was also a robing tutor of the defendant. Both the
District Court and the Court of Appeal held that Jinarama Thero was also a
robing tutor of the defendant and dismissed the plaintiff's action. The
Plaintiff has now appealed to this Court.

No questions of Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law arise on this appeal. The appeal
turns purely on the evaluation of the evidence placed before the District
Court.

The case for the plaintiff rests very largely on the document P3 which is a
certified copy of the Samanera declaration of the defendant. P3 is in Form B
in the Schedule to the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance and is prepared in
terms of section 41 (2) (a) (ii) of the Ordinance. Mr. Amerasinghe for the
plaintiff-appellant relied very strongly on the contents of cage 7 of P3 which
gives the name of Saranatissa Thero alone as the robing tutor of the
defendant. What is more, P3 has been signed by Saranatissa Thero as the robing
tutor and the signature of the defendant too appears on P3. Mr. Amerasinghe
rightly emphasised the fact that the contents of P3 are " prima facie evidence
of the facts contained therein in all courts and for all purposes....... ".
(Section 41 (6) of the Ordinance)

408

There is no doubt that P3 is prima facie evidence of the fact that the robing
tutor of the defendant was Saranatissa Thero. The meaning of the expression "
prima facie evidence " in s. 41 (6) was considered by Samarakoon C. J. in
_Jinawansa Thero vs. Piyaratna Thero_ (1). This expression does not mean
conclusive evidence. It is evidence which could be rebutted by other evidence,
direct or circumstantial, oral or documentary. " Oral evidence may be led to
disprove entries therein " per Samarakoon C.J. in Jinawansa Thero vs.
Piyaratne Thero (supra). In short, the statement in P3 that Saranatissa Thero
was the robing tutor of the defendant will prevail unless displaced by other
admissible evidence.

It was the contention of Mr. A. C. Gooneratne for the defendant respondent
that the entry in cage 7 of P3 was incomplete for the reason that Saranatissa
Thero was only one of the robing tutors of the defendant and that the other
was Jinarama Thero. In support of his submission, Mr. Gooneratne placed strong
reliance on P10 which is a certified copy of the Upasampada Declaration of the
defendant which is in form A of the Schedule to the Buddhist Temporalities
Ordinance (s. 41 (2) (a) (i) of the Ordinance). Cage 7 of P10 gives the names
of the robing tutors of the defendant as Saranatissa Thero and Jinarama Thero.

On the other hand, Mr. Amerasinghe strenuously contended that P10 was not a
document which could possibly displace the statutorily recognized evidentiary
value of P3. Counsel emphasized that P3 related to and was contemporaneous
with the event which is relevant to this case, namely the robing of the
defendant. P10, on the other hand, came into existence 10 years later and
related not to the robing but to the ordination of the defendant.

It seems to me, however, that the evidentiary value of P10 cannot be lightly
dismissed in that way. In the first place, P10 has been signed not only by
Saranatissa Thero but also by Jinarama Thero, both certifying to the
correctness of the particulars contained in P10. Secondly, there is the
intensely relevant evidence of the plaintiff himself of what actually took
place on the occasion when the defendant was presented for ordination at the
Malwatta Maha Vihara in Kandy .It is to be noted that the plaintiff too was
presented for ordination on the same occasion by Saranatissa Thero and
Jinarama Thero. The testimony of the plaintiff reads thus :-

409

(Jinarama Thero and Saranatissa Thero came for the Upasampada ceremony. Both
of them were present at the time of the Upasampadawa. I was told that there I
will be asked " who robed you ", I said I was robed by Saranatissa Thero and
Jinarama Thero. The defendant priest said the robing tutors were Heenatiyagala
Jinarama Thero and Pothuwila Saranatissa Thero.

Q. That statement was made before those two priests?

A. Yes.

Q. Those two priests didn't say that it was wrong?

A. No.

Q. Those two priests at that stage accepted that they robed the defendant
priest ?

A. Accepted..........").

The evidence in the case shows that the ordination or Upasampada ceremony is a
formal and solemn ceremony which takes place before an august assembly of
monks and in the presence of the Mahanayake of the Malwatta Chapter. The
evidence clearly establishes that it was on an occasion such as this and in
the very presence of Jinarama Thero that the defendant had publicly declared
that Jinarama Thero was also one of his robing tutors. In my view, the
evidence of the plaintiff set out above constitutes strong confirmation of the
correctness and the truth of the statement in cage 7 of P10.

Mr. Amerasinghe pointed out that P10 contains an incorrect statement. The
incorrect statement is with reference to cage 21 which reads " Serial number
in Samanera Register, if any ". The answer

410

given is " " (No). This is not a correct statement because the defendant did
have his Samanera Declaration, P3. However, the defendant in his evidence
stated that it was not he who entered the particulars in P10. It seems to me
that this incorrect statement does not in any material way detract from the
evidentiary value of P10.

As submitted by Mr. Gooneratne, P10 does not really contradict P3; it rather
supplements the statement in cage 7 of P3. The fact that P3 constitutes "
prima facie " evidence of the facts contained therein is not a bar to evidence
being admitted to supplement the statements found in P3. I accordingly hold
that PI O displaces the prima facie evidence of P3, and that Jinarama Thero
was also one of the robing tutors of the defendant.

Before I conclude it is right to add that the Upasampada Sittu (V3) and the
invitation to the Upasampada ceremony (P5) relied on by Mr. Gooneratne are
documents of an equivocal nature and do not tend to rebut the prima facie
evidence in P3. The oral evidence of Loolbaddawe Uparatana, which was somewhat
discredited by the letter V8, makes no significant impact on the plaintiff's
case.

In the result, the appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.

**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.

  
**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/8.html_  

