##  Sannasgala v. University of Kelaniya and Members of the University Senate
- SLR - 193, Vol 2 of 1991 [1991] LKSC 8; (1991) 2 Sri LR 193 (5 September
1991)

### Page 193



## SANNASGALA

**v.**

**UNIVERSITY OF KELANIYA AND**

**MEMBERS OF THE UNIVERSITY SENATE**

** **

SUPREME COURT.

AMERASINGHE, J., KULATUNGA, J. AND

DHEERARATNE, J.

S. C. APPEAL NO. 47/87.

C.A. NO. 91/83.

JULY 04, 1991



_Mandamus ‑ University of Ceylon Act, No. 1 of 1972 section 81(7) ‑Higher
Education Act, No. 20 of 1966 ‑ Validity of rules made on 28.12.1962 under the
Vidyalankara University Act, No. 45 of 1958 ‑ Univer­sities Act, No. 16 of
1978 ‑ Was power to confer degrees under the 1962 rules kept alive? ‑
Promissory estoppel ‑ Can it legitimate an act which is ultra vines? ‑
Articles 118 and 127 of Constitution ‑ Point being raised for the first time
in appeal_.



The Faculty of Arts of the Vidyalankara Campus provisionally registered the
petitioner as a candidate for the award of the D. Lit. Degree. The Exa­miners
approved the granting of the Degree to him on his thesis entitled "Sinhala
Vocables of Dutch Origin". However, further steps were not taken to confer the
degree sought, but the petitioner was informed that action had been stayed on
the direction of the Vice‑Chancellor until regulations were formulated by the
Senate for the conferment of degrees.



The Petitioner filed an application for the issue of a writ of mandamus.



Section 81(7) of the University of Ceylon Act,  No. 1 of 1972 saved only the
rules made after the coming into operation of the Higher Education Act,

No. 20 of 1966. The rules approved on 28.12.1962 by the Senate of the
Vidyalankara University established under the Vidyodaya and Vidyalankara
Universities Act, No. 45 of 1958 suffered a statutory demise with the repeal
of the Act of 1958 by the Higher Education Act, No. 20 of 1966. With the
enactment of the Universities Act, No. 16 of 1978 (s. 139), Vidyalankara

Campus was deemed to be a University established under the Act, No. 16 of 1978
and given the name University of Kelaniya.





### Page 194



            Section 81(7) of Act, No. 1 of 1972, preserved only the rules made under the provisions of Act, No. 20 of 1966. The rules made in 1962 were repealed along with its enabling Act, No. 45 of 1958 and were not revived by s. 81(7) of Act, No. 1 of 1972.



Although the Vidyalankara Campus registered the petitioner as a candi­date for
D. Litt Degree on 02.07.1976 and his thesis on "Sinhala Vocables of Dutch
Origin" was approved by the examiners, still the action of the Univer­sity in
staying the conferment of the degree until regulations were formu­lated by the
Senate for the conferment of degrees did not put the University in breach of
any statutory obligation as the rules made in 1962 had no statu­tory force in
1976.



In the absence of rules, the only statutory basis for the petitioner's
appli­cation for a degree in 1976 is s. 4 (h) of Act, No. 1 of 1972 which
empowers the University to confer degrees on persons who are employed on the
staff of the University, therefore the most that the petitioner would be
entitled to by way of a Writ of mandamus will be a direction to the University
of Kelaniya to consider his application for a degree since all those taken
under the rules of 1962 have to be disregarded as invalid. The petitioner
however insists that he is entitled to a degree and all that the University
has to do is to confer the degree. Accordingly the petitioner has failed to
establish that the respondents are subject to any public or statutory duty
which entitles him to mandamus.



Per Kulatunge J: "I am inclined to the view that even if the rules marked 'A'
(rules of 1962) have statutory force the petitioner has no such absolute right
to a degree as he claims, to the exclusion of any discretion exercisable by
the competent body in that regard".



The argument based on promissory estoppel was raised at the hearing without
notice to the other side. Articles 118 and 127 of the Constitution enable the
Supreme Court to allow an appellant to urge before it grounds of appeal other
than the one on the basis of which the Court of Appeal granted leave if the
material on record warrants the determination of the same, sub­ject however to
the limitation that it may not permit a party to raise a new point if the
other party had no proper notice of the new ground, or would suffer grave
prejudice by the belated stage at which it is raised. No notice has been given
and it would also cause prejudice.



Per Kulatunge J:



" It (promissory estoppel if applied) would create a situation where the
University would be compelled to confer a degree by estoppel. It would not



### Page 195



be in the general interest of University education; and even if estoppel is
relevant such a situation is undesirable and should preferably be avoided".



Promissory estoppel is based on a clear promise or assurance on the basis of
which one party has acted to his detriment in respect of the legal relations
between the parties. Once this happens the person who gave the promise or
assurance cannot revert to their previous legal relations but he must accept
their relations subject to the qualification which he himself has so
intro­duced. This doctrine applies to public authorities. One of the
qualifications to this doctrine is that the promisor can resile from, his
promise on giving reasonable notice, giving the promisee a reasonable
opportunity of resuming his position.



As early as June 1977 the authorities had given the petitioner notice that

they were resiling from the promise if any, given to the petitioner ‑ the
rea­son being the absence of rules. This was reasonable notice of lack of
author­ity to consider the petitioner's case.



            Estoppel cannot leginmate _ultra vires_ action.



**Cases referred to:**



1\.         _Attorney ‑General of Hong Kong v. Ng. Guen Shin_ [1983] 2 All ER
346, 351

2\.         _R v. Secretary of State for the Home Department ex parte Khan_
[1985] 1 All ER 40.

3\.         _Albert v. Veeriahpillai_ [1981] 1 Sri LR 40



**APPEAL** from the judgment of thse Court of Appeal.



_H. L. de Silva_ P.C. with _Gomin Dayasiri_ and _N. M. Musafer_ for
petitioner.



_Douglas Premaratne_ Addl. Solicitor‑General with _Sri_ _Skandarajah_ State
Counsel for respondents.



(N.B.   Counsel for respondents was not heard as admittedly written
submis­sions had not being filed in terms of Rule 35 (b) of the S.C. Rules)



_Cur. adv. vult._



### Page 196



SEPTEMBER 05, 1991



**Kulatunga, J.:**



The petitioner‑appellant (hereinafter referred to as the peti­tioner) appealed
to the Court of Appeal for an order in the nature of a writ of mandamus
directing the respondents (The University of Kelaniya and the Members of the
Senate of that University) to take steps necessary for the conferment of the
degree of Doctor of Letters on him. The petitioner was a member of the
academic staff of the former Vidyalankara Campus of the University of Sri
Lanka established under the provisions of the University of Ceylon Act, No. 1
of 1972 (now University of Kelaniya under the provisions of the Universities
Act, No. 16 of 1978). Pursuant to an application made by the petitioner on
25.01.1976 the Faculty of Arts of the Vidyalan­kara Campus provisionally
registered him on 02.07.1976 as a candidate for the award of D. Litt. Degree
on his thesis titled "Sinhala Vocables of Dutch Origin". Prof. J. Honda of the
University of Utretcht Holland and Prof. Heinz Bechert of Gottingen University
West Germany were appointed examin­ers to evaluate the petitioner's thesis. At
the request of Prof. Bechert the petitioner submitted his other research works
and publications for the purpose of evaluating his candidature for the D.Litt.
Degree. On 11.10.76 Prof. Honda approved the granting of the Degree on the
petitioner. This was followed by the approval of Prof. Bechert on 19.04.77.



Notwithstanding the recommendations of the two examin­ers, further steps were
not taken to confer the degree sought; but by his letter dated 09.06.1977
(Exhibit ‘G') President of the Vidyalankara Campus informed the petitioner
that action had been stayed on the direction of the Vice‑Chancellor until
regu­lations are formulated by the Senate for the conferment of degrees. This
was followed by numerous representations by the petitioner to the then
University of Ceylon and thereafter to the University of Kelaniya. He
contended that the University



### Page 197





was both competent and obliged to confer the degree but the authorities of
these Universities failed to do so. Consequently, the petitioner made this
application to the Court below.



The University of Ceylon was empowered by s.4(h) of Act, No. 1 of 1972 to
confer on persons who are employed on the staff of the University, degrees in
accordance with the procedure prescribed by rules made by the authorities and
other bodies of the University in terms of the provisions of s. 36; and
according to the records of the Vidyalankara Campus the Committee of the
Sinhala Department considering the peti­tioner's application for the D.Litt.
Degree decided on 10.03.1976 that __



"The Senate had approved and published rules and regu­lations regarding the
procedure to be followed for the conferment of the Degree of Doctor of
Letters. Accord­ingly as only printed books and articles of outstanding
research work will be considered for the award of this Degree, such printed
publications should be forwarded to the Examinations and Academic Branch".



The relevant rules relied upon by the petitioner have been produced marked
‘A'. These are rules approved on 28.12.1962 by the Senate of the Vidyalankara
University established under the provisions of the Vidyodaya and Vidyalankara
University Act, No. 45 of 1958. It is common ground that the said rules were
repealed with the repeal of that Act by the Higher Edu­cation Act, No. 20 of
1966; there is also no provision in the repealing Act to keep alive the rules
approved under the repealed Act. It was under these rules that all the steps
for the examination of the petitioner for the D.Litt. Degree were taken.



The Court of Appeal held that the rules produced marked ‘A' had no legal
validity in 1976 and the Vidyalankara Cam­pus when it purported to accept the
application of the peti­tioner for the DLitt. Degree in 1976 was acting
outside the



### Page 198



powers given to it under the statute; that as such the Univer­sity was not
under a legal duty or obligation to confer a degree and the petitioner had no
legal right in that regard, enforceable by mandamus.



The petitioner contended that the rules marked ‘A' have force by virtue of s.
81 (7) of Act, No. 1 of 1972 which reads __



81 __                 "Subject to the provisions of this Act and of any
appropriate instrument, the following provisions shall apply as from the date
on which an old Univer­sity and the Secretariat of the National Council of
Higher Education become a section of the University-

                        ..................................... 

                        ..................................... 



(7)        All statutes, ordinances and rules made by the Authorities of the
old Universities and the National Council of Higher Education shall be deemed
to be statutes, ordinances and rules made by the Universi­ties"



The petitioner took up the position that s.81(7) of the Act resuscitated the
rules made in 1962. This would require the expression "old Universities" in
s.81(7) to be interpreted to include the Universities which existed at any
time prior to the enactment of the University of Ceylon Act, No. 1 of 1972. If
that interpretation is correct then s.81(7) would revive the rules marked ‘A';
and the University had acted within its pow­ers and incurred a statutory
obligation to proceed with the steps for confering the degree sought by the
petitioner.



It was argued that with the enactment of the Universities Act No. 16 of 1978
the obligation so incurred devolved on the University of Kelaniya in terms of
the provisions of s.139 and s.141(3) of the Act. Under s.139 Vidyalankara
Campus is deemed to be a University established under this Act and it is given
the name "University of Kelaniya". Under s.141(3) all obliaations incurred by
the old University shall be deemed to





### Page 199



be incurred by a Higher Educational Institution established under this Act
which in the instant case will be the University of Kelaniya. The petitioner
also invoked the provisions of s.6(3) (b) and (c) of the Interpretation
Ordinance (Cap.2) in favour of the continuity of the obligation.



The Court of Appeal rejected the petitioner's interpretation of s.81(7) of
Act, No. 1 of 1972 in view of the definition of "old University" in s.87 in
terms of which it means any Uni­versity established or deemed to be
established under Act, No. 20 of 1966\. The Court was of the view that "rules"
saved by s.81(7) of Act, No. 1 of 1972 are those made by such a Univer­sity
after the coming into operation of Act, No. 20 of 1966 and that s.81(7) did
not revive the rules marked ‘A' made in 1962 which were therefore devoid of
statutory force; there was stat­utory demise of these rules after which no
fresh rules were made under the provisions of Act, No. 20 of 1966; and in the
absence of any rules in the matter, the University did not incur a statutory
obligation in 1976 towards the petitioner and hence no obligation devolved on
the University of Kelaniya to com­plete the incompleted steps for the
conferment of a degree on the petitioner. In the result the Court of Appeal
dismissed the petitioner's application but gave leave to appeal to this Court
on the question whether under s.81(7) of Act, No. 1 of 1972 the rules made by
the Authorities of the Vidyalankara Univer­sity even prior to 1966 were deemed
to be rules made by the University of Ceylon established under Act, No. 1 of
1972.



At the hearing before us it was pointed out that the respon­dents had failed
to file written submissions and in terms of Rule 35(b) they are therefore not
entitled to be heard. Mr. P. L. D. Premaratne, learned Additional
Solicitor‑General for the respondents stated that he has no explanation for
the failure to file written submissions except to state that when they were
due the brief was not with the Attorney‑General. Accordingly, we only heard
the submissions of Mr. H. L. de Silva PC, learned Counsel for the appellant.
He reiterated the petition­er's submissions made before the Court of Appeal
and drew



### Page 200



our attention to s.87 of Act, No. 1 of 1972 which defines "old University" as
any University established or **deemed to be** **established** under Act, No.
20 of 1966. He submitted that the Vidyodaya University established under Act,
No. 45 of 1958 is an old University contemplated by s. 81(7) of Act, No. 1 of
1972; that on an interpretation of this section the rules made in 1962 by the
Vidyodaya University are deemed to be rules made under Act, No. 1 of 1972; and
that the section refers to rules made before and after 1966. He submitted that
this was deliberate because there were no rules made under Act, No. 20 of
1966.



In the alternative the learned President's Counsel raised a new ground in
support of the petitioner's claim which ground he conceded has not been urged
in the application for leave to appeal. He invokes the doctrine of promissory
estoppel which is derived from a principle of equity of ancient origin. He
submits that inasmuch as the University of Ceylon held out to the petitioner
in 1976 that there were rules approved by the Senate governing the procedure
for the conferment of the D.Litt. Degree, the University of Kelaniya is now
estopped from declining to complete steps in that regard on the ground that no
such rules had been made. He cited Halsbury Vol. 16 4th Ed. p.1017; _Attorney
‑General of Hong Kong v. Ng Yuen Shiu_ (1) and _R. v. Secretary of State for
the Home Depart­ment, ex parte Khan_ (2).



On the question of the interpretation of s.81(7) of Act, No. 1 of 1972, I
agree with the opinion of the Court below that it only contemplates rules made
after the coming into operation of Act, No. 20 of 1966. That interpretation is
in accord with the plain meaning of words used in the enactment. If as
sub­mitted by Counsel Parliament intended to resuscitate the rules made even
prior to the enactment of Act, No. 20 of 1966 Par­liament would have employed
words which are clear and unambiguous. In the absence of such language I hold
that s.81(7) preserved only those rules which were made under the provisions
of Act, No. 20 of 1966; and that the rules marked







### Page 201



‘A' made in 1962 which were repealed along with its enabling Act, No. 45 of
1958 were not revived by that section. As such the said rules have no
statutory force in 1976 and the Univer­sity incurred no statutory obligation
when it purported to entertain the petitioner's application for a degree in
terms of these rules.



In the absence of rules, the only statutory basis for the petitioner's
application for a degree in 1976 is s.4(h) of Act, No. 1 of 1972 which
empowers the University to confer degrees on persons who are employed on the
staff of the Uni­versity; therefore the most that the petitioner would be
entitled to by way of a writ of mandamus will be a direction to the University
of Kelaniya to consider his application for a degree since all those steps
taken under the rules marked ‘A' have to be disregarded as being invalid. But
Mr. de Silva PC informed us that the case for the petitioner is that he is
entitled to a degree; that all that is left for the University to do is to
confer the degree which is a ministerial act; and that the petitioner prays
for a direction accordingly ordering the respondents to proceed to confer the
degree. In the light of my findings the petitioner has failed to establish
that the respondents are subject to any public or any statutory duty which
entitles the petitioner to the order he seeks to obtain. I am inclined to the
view that even if the rules marked ‘A' have statutory force the petitioner has
no such absolute right to a degree as he claims, to the exclusion of any
discretion exercisable by the competent body in that regard.



I now come to the other ground for relief namely, promis­sory estoppel which
was urged for the first time before us. In _Albert v. Veeriahpillai_ (3) it
was held that the cumulative effect of Articles 118 and 127 of the
Constitution enable the Supreme Court to allow an appellant to urge before it
grounds of appeal other than the one on the basis of which the Court of Appeal
granted leave, if the material on record warrants the determination of the
same, subject however to the limitation



### Page 202



that it may not permit a party to raise a new point if the other party has had
no proper notice of the new ground, or would suffer grave prejudice by the
belated stage at which it is raised. The appellant has not given any notice to
the respondents of the point he now raises. It seems to me that in the
circumstan­ces of this case it would also cause much prejudice to the
respondents if they are directed on the basis of this point to confer a degree
on the petitioner. It would create a situation where the University would be
compelled to confer a degree by estoppel. It would not be in the general
interest of University education; and even if estoppel is relevant such a
situation is undesirable and should preferably be avoided. I am therefore of
the view that this Court should not entertain the new ground. But as we have
heard Mr. de Silva PC on it I would like to examine the merits of his
submission.



Promissory estoppel is based on a clear promise or assu­rance given on the
basis of which one party has acted to his detriment in respect of the legal
relations between the parties. Once this happens the person who gave the
promise or assu­rance cannot revert to their previous legal relations but he
must accept their relations subject to the qualification which he himself has
so introduced. This doctrine applies to public authorities. Halsbury Vol. 16
4th Ed. p. 1017; Wade.Adminis­trative Law 6th Ed. p.261. One of the
qualifications to this doctrine mentioned by Halsbury is that the promisor can
resile from his promise on giving reasonable notice giving the promi­see a
reasonable opportunity of resuming his position.



It was on 09.06.1977 that the petitioner was informed of the suspension of
action on his application until regulations are formulated by the Senate for
the conferment of degrees; but the petitioner was not prepared to accept this
position. He persisted in his demand that he is entitled to the degree and
continued his correspondence even after the enactment of Act, No. 16 of 1978.
In a reply dated 11.03.1982 (Exhibit S (1) the Vice ‑ Chancellor of the
University of Kelaniya informed the petitioner as follows .:



### Page 203



"The Senate of the University of Kelaniya has not yet formulated rules
governing the award of the Degree of Doctor of Letters.



The former Senate House also did not have such regula­tions on which to judge
the award of such degree and which were acceptable to the Senate.



Whilst not detracting from your ability and competence as a scholar, you must
realise that I am bound by the regulations and rules of conduct laid down by
the Senate".



Thus the authorities had as early as June 1977 given notice to the petitioner
that they were resiling from the promise, if any, given to the petitioner.
That was done on a serious ground namely the absence of rules. I am inclined
to the view that this was reasonable notice in view of the fact that in the
absence of rules the University lacked the power to consider the petitioner's
case. The petitioner did not insisst on rules being made but persisted in his
demand for the conferment of a degree and eventually complained to the Court
below. In all the circumstances, I do not think that the petitioner can invoke
the doctrine of promissory estoppel against the respondents.



The decisions in _Attorney ‑General of Hong Kong v. Ng Yuen Shiu_ (1) and _R.
v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex- parte Khan_ (supra) cited
by the Counsel for the petitioner are of no assistance. In the first case an
order for the removal of the petitioner from Hong Kong under its immigration
laws was challenged and in the second case an order refusing the entry of a
foreign child to the United King­dom for adoption was challenged. The ground
of challenge was that these orders had been made without giving a proper
hearing in breach of an undertaking by the authorities as to the procedure
they would follow giving rise to a legitimate expectation in that regard.
These decisions have no application



### Page 204



to the instant case where the defence of the resondents relates not to the
petitioner's right to be heard but to the lack of sta­tutory authority to
confer degrees. In fact in the first of the decisions cited the Privy Council
held that a public authority is bound by its undertakings as to the procedure
it would fol­low, **provided those undertakings did not conflict with its
statu­tory duty** (1983) 2 All ER 346 at 351)



There is also the qualification that estoppel cannot legiti­mate ultra vires
action. Thus Wade Administrative Law 6th Ed. p.262 observes __



"In public law the most obvious limitation on the doc­trine of estoppel is
that it cannot be invoked so as to give an authority power which it does not
in law pos­sess. In other words no estoppel can legitimate action which is
_ultra vires_ ".



For the foregoing reasons, I affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeal and
dismiss the appeal. In the circumstances of this case, I am of the view that
each party should bear his costs and hence make no order as to costs.



**Amerasinghe, J. __**   I agree.

**  **

**Dheeraratne, J. __  ** I agree.



Appeal dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/8.html_  

