##  Samanthilaka v. Ernest Rerera and Others - SLR - 318, Vol 1 of 1990 [1990]
LKSC 8; (1990) 1 Sri LR 318 (29 June 1990)

**

318

SAMANTHILAKA  
v.  
ERNEST PERERA AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
H. A. G. DE SILVA, J., AMERASINGHE, J. AND DHEERARATNE, J.  
S. C. APPLICATION No. 65/88,  
JUNE 11, 1990.

_

Fundamental Rights -Infringement of the fundamental right of freedom from
arrest except according to procedure established by law \- Article 13(1) and
(2) of the Constitution - Cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
- Article 11 of the Constitution -Burden of proof - Nature of the jurisdiction
exercised in terms of Article 126 of the Constitution - Necessary parties -
Failure to name respondents responsible for the infringement,

_

(1) The court will look for a high degree of probability in deciding which of
the facts alleged have been established. But the court will not place an undue
burden on a petitioner in his quest for access to justice. Financial
constraints and the obstructions encountered in procuring material will be
taken into account.

(2) In the exercise of its jurisdiction in terms of Article 126 of the
Constitution, the Court is determining whether these rights of individuals
which have been declared and guaranteed by the Constitution have been denied
by a failure on the part of the State to discharge its complementary
obligations. The State necessarily acts through its servants, agencies and
institutions. But it is the liability of the State and not that of its
servants, agents or institutions that is in issue. It is not a question of
vicarious liability. It is the liability of the State itself. An investigation
of the personal conduct of officials is not the function of the Court in the
matter of an application for relief and redress under Article 126 of the
Constitution.

(3) The person who has infringed or is likely to infringe a fundamental or
language right is not a necessary party in the sense in which that phrase is
used in connection with ordinary civil litigation. The failure to make a
person who is alleged to have violated or is likely to violate a fundamental
or language right a respondent is not a fatal defect. Indeed, such is the
nature of the obligation under Rule 65 that the failure of a petitioner to
personally, as distinguished from officially, identify the person violating
his fundamental rights (and personally, therefore, being unable to name such
person in his petition), or that he was mistaken (with the result that a wrong
person is named as respondent) will not stand in the way of a petitioner's
application for relief if the court is satisfied that a violation of a
fundamental or language right had been occasioned by executive or
administrative action.

(4) The fact that the second respondent had been wrongly added or that the
three police officers named in the petition have not been named as respondents
is of no consequence if infringement by executive or administrative action is
established.

**

Cases referred to:

**_

(1) S. Wijeratne and Another v. N. Wijeratne (1971) 74 NLR 193._  

_

(2) Saman v. Leeladasa and Another [1989] 1 Sri LR 1, 33, 39._  

_

(3) Ganeshanathan v. Vivienne Goonewardene and Another [1984) 1 Sri LR 319,
330 331,352._  

**319**

_

(4) A K Velmurugu v The Attorney -General 1 FRD 426, 440._  

_

(5) Vivienne Goonewardene v. Hector Perera and Others 2 FRD 426, 440._  

_

(6) M. K W. Alwis v Quintus Raymond and Others .SC Application Alb. 145 of
1967S. C. Minutes of 21.7. 1989._  

_

(7) Subramaniam Ragunathan v. M Thuraisingham, and the Attorney-General S. C.
Application 158 of 1988 - S. C. Minutes of 23.8.1989._  

_

(8) Mariadas Raj v. Attorney-General and Others [1982] FRD 397, 404, 406._  

_

(9 Katunayakage Damesius Perera and Another v. R. Premadasa and Others (1979)
1 FRD 70, 72._  

_

(10) Mrs. W. M. K. de Silva v. P Senaratne [ 1989] 2 Sri LR 393.

_**

APPLICATION** complaining of infringement of fundamental rights.

_

Sanath Jayatilake with Jayanthe Wewelwala for petitioner._  

_

Mervyn Samarakoon SSC for 1st and 4th respondents._  

_

Lakshman Ranasinghe for 2nd and 3rd respondents.

Cur. adv. vult

_

June 29, 1990.  
**AMERASINGHE, J.

**

This is an application under Article 126 of the Constitution in which
Gamaralalage Samanthilake alleged that her rights under Articles 11, 12, 13,
and 14 of the Constitution were violated by certain police officers. Leave to
proceed with her petition was, however, limited by the Court to Articles 11,
13, (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution.

The violations complained of by the petitioner concerned her fundamental right
of freedom from arrest, except according to procedure established by law
[Article 13 (1)]; her right to personal liberty and freedom from detention or
custody, except after being produced before a judge of the nearest competent
court, upon and in terms of an order of such judge made in accordance with
procedure established by law [Article 13 (2)]; and the right to be free from
torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. [Article 11].

Being serious allegations of misconduct on the part of an agent of the State -
the Police - I looked with caution for a high degree of probability in
deciding which of the facts alleged had been established. At the same time, I
was anxious to ensure that, in her endeavour to have access to justice; an
undue burden was not imposed upon the petitioner. She was a sixteen year old
student, with limited financial resources belonging as

**320**

she did to a family whose members depended upon the collection of cashew nuts
for their existence. Moreover, having been subject to vexation at the hands of
the colleagues of those officers whom she might have called upon for further
evidence in support of her application, she was more likely to have found
obstruction rather than assistance in her search for additional material.

Upon a careful consideration of the affidavits and the helpful analysis of the
evidence therein contained by learned Counsel for the applicant and the
respondents; and upon an examination of the Medico-Legal Report submitted to
this Court, the following facts have emerged.

On January 26, 1988, on hearing that her brother, Senerath Shantha, had been
taken into custody, after making inquiries at various police stations, she
found him at the Gampaha Police Station with signs of physical abuse. On
February 12, 1988, another brother of the petitioner, Sugath Kamalasiri, was
arrested and detained at the Gampaha Police Station. When, after several
unsuccessful attempts to see Sugath Kamalasiri, she and her mother did see him
on February 14, 1988, the petitioner observed that his face and legs were
swollen and that her brother was hardly able to speak. The petitioner and her
mother were told by some police officers at the Police Station that this was
the result of his not giving correct information. They were asked to advice
him to disclose all the information he had. The applicant responded by stating
that those who had laid violent hands on her brother should be prosecuted. On
subsequent visits, she had been requested by the Police to persuade her
brothers to disclose the information they supposed the brothers to have had.
Senerath Shantha was then transferred to the Peliyagoda Police Station.

The Peliyagoda Police Station does not thereafter figure in the applicant's
complaint and I am of the opinion that there are no grounds whatsoever for
alleging that the second respondent, the Officer-in Charge of the Peliyagoda
Police Station, was guilty of any improper conduct towards the applicant.

The conduct of certain officers of the Gampaha Police Station, however gives
the petitioner sufficient cause for complaint.

On March 6, 1988, as stated by the Inspector-General of Police in his
affidavit, a "Police Party" visited the home of the Petitioner. The Inspector-
General of Police in his affidavit identifies and names two

**321**

Police Officers who were members of the "Police Party". One was a Police
Constable (hereinafter referred to as the Police Constable) and a Sub-
Inspector of Police who led the "Party". Both these officers were named and
identified by the Petitioner. The Inspector-General of Police states that
there was information that the Petitioner knew the movements of Sanjeeva,
alias Jayadeva Kankanamalage Jayasuriya, who was wanted in connection with a
case of murder and that the Police questioned her in this regard during the
visit of the Police Party. The Inspector -General of Police in his affidavit
admits that the Petitioner's brother, Senerath Shantha, had been arrested by
the army in connection with the unlawful possession of firearms and while "he
was running away after setting fire to a boutique which sells Lakehouse
Newspapers." In the circumstances, the Petitioner's assertion that what she
was questioned about was the alleged subversive activities of her brothers and
their friends appears to be more probable than the averment that the
investigation related to a murder. When she denied that they were concerned
with any political activities, the Police officers examined her school books
and departed after one of the Police Officers had placed a gun on her chest
and threatened to kill her unless she spoke the truth.

On March 9, 1988, according to the affidavit of the Inspector General of
Police, "a Police party" had gone again to the petitioner's house. This, he
says, was to question her with regard to Jayasuriya who, they believed, had
been visiting the Petitioner. Although the respondents deny it, it appears
from a consideration of the evidence in the affidavits submitted by the
petitioner to be more probable that the Police Party took the petitioner to
the Police Station in their vehicle on the occasion of their second visit.
When the petitioner's mother had protested that she could not permit her young
daughter to go alone, she was allowed to accompany her, but only until they
had reached the Police Station, at which stage the mother was put out of the
vehicle and left to hear her daughter wailing in the distance.

The petitioner who had been taken into the Police Station was interrogated
about the alleged subversive activities of her brothers and their friends and
she was repeatedly assaulted with clubs.

Counsel for the respondents submitted that although the petitioner had, in her
affidavit, stated that she had been assaulted with clubs, this

**322**

was contradicted by her evidence contained in the Medico Legal Report where
she had given a history of assault with an iron rod and a broom stick. I see
no difficulty here, for any staff used as a weapon, including an iron rod or a
broom stick, for the purposes of this case, could sufficiently and
appropriately be described as a "club."

The Petitioner was then compelled to witness a brutal assault on her brother,
Sugath Kamalasiri, after his hands and legs had been tied together and as he
lay suspended from an iron bar supported by two tables. More interrogation and
assaults on both the petitioner and her brother followed until the officers
decided to leave, the Police Constable announcing as he retired that "the
rest" was left for the morrow. The petitioner was then moved to a cell and
asked to sleep on the floor. A female police officer who was placed in charge
of the petitioner was ordered not to give her any food and to prevent her
parents visiting her.

On March 10 the Police Constable and other officers, in keeping with the
promise of the Police Constable, returned to interrogate the petitioner. The
Police Constable slapped her and threatened her. When he tried to seduce her,
she cried helplessly. Her parents had attempted to see her on that day, but
were denied access to her. Instead of the comfort of seeing her parents, she
was further interrogated and shown her brother, Sugath Kamalasiri, in pain,
prostrate on the floor after he had been assaulted. The Police Constable had
on that occasion pointed to her brother and said: "See what has happened to
your brother. Tell the truth at least now." All the Petitioner could do, she
says, was to weep "silently on seeing my brother in pain."

On March 11 the Police Constable took the Petitioner home and handed her over
to her father.

On March 12, at the request of the Petitioner's mother, a neighbour, H. D.
Kasthuriarachchi, took the Petitioner to the General Hospital, Colombo where
the Petitioner was examined by several doctors. The Medico-Legal Report issued
by the Assistant Judicial Medical Officer under caption "Short History Given
by Patient" says: "Assault by Police in Police Station on 09.03.88 night with
broom stick and iron rod."

The Assistant Judicial Medical Officer describes seven contusions on the arms,
left scapula, lower back across the midline, buttocks and left thigh of the
Petitioner.

**323**

The police officers had called at the Petitioner's residence on March 27 to
take her for further questioning, but, it seems, without success. According to
learned Counsel for the petitioner, she had by then, for reasons that are not
difficult to understand, abandoned her usual home.

So much for the facts.

There was no dispute with regard to the law or its application to the facts of
this case except with regard to one matter of some importance. Learned Senior
State Counsel submitted that the failure of the Petitioner. to add as
respondents the Police Officers whom she had identified and named in her
Petition and Affidavit, rendered her petition fatally detective, for those
police officers were "necessary parties." In support of this view, the learned
Senior State Counsel relied solely upon the decision of the Supreme Court in
S. Wijeratne and Another v. N. Wijeratne (1). That decision was concerned with
an appeal from a District Court in an action for the partition of a land. One
of the defendants had not been made a party to the appeal and the Supreme
Court upheld a preliminary objection to the hearing of the appeal on the
ground that the failure to add a necessary party was a defect which required
the Court to dismiss the appeal which, therefore, had not been property
constituted.

Respondents to an ordinary civil appeal are adversarial parties whose
competing claims are determined by the Court and, understandably, in terms of
section 756 of the Civil Procedure Code notice of appeal ought to be furnished
to them.

Respondents to a petition for relief or redress in respect of the infringement
or imminent infringement of a fundamental right or language right stand on a
different footing. The Court is not, in such a matter, adjudicating upon the
disputed rights and conflicting interests of the petitioner and respondents.
It is, in such a matter, exercising its jurisdiction in terms of Article 126
of the Constitution to determine whether there is an infringement or imminent
infringement by executive or administrative action of any fundamental right or
language right declared and recognized by Chapter III or Chapter Not the
Constitution. The decisions of this Court make it abundantly clear that in the
exercise of its jurisdiction in terms of Article 126 of the Constitution, the
Court is determining whether those rights of individuals which have been
declared and

**324**

guaranteed by the Constitution have been denied by a failure on the part of
the State to discharge its complementary obligations. (Samara v. Leeladasa and
Another (2)). The State, necessarily, acts through its servants, agencies and
institutions: But it is the liability of the State and not that of its
servants, agents or institutions that is in issue. It is not a question of
vicarious liability. It is the liability of the State itself. (See Saman's
Case, supra, especially at pp. 27-40).

Rule 65 (1) of the Court made under Article 136 of the Constitution (see
Gazette Extraordinary of 8.11.78) provides that

"Where any person applies to the Supreme Court by a petition in writing for
relief or redress in respect of the infringement or of an imminent
infringement of any fundamental right or language right by executive or
administrative action in terms of Article 126 (2) of the Constitution, he
shall -

(a) ............

(b) name in his petition the Attorney -General and any person or persons who
he alleges have infringed or are about to infringe his fundamental or language
rights as the respondents.

(c) ............

(d) ............

(e) ............

(f) ............

One purpose of naming the officials concerned is to identify those who could
help the Court in the exercise of its inquisitorial functions in clarifying
disputed facts. Another is to facilitate proof that the act in question was an
executive or administrative act. The given title or description of a state
officer or other person could be so indicative as to reduce the petitioner's
burden of adducing evidence to establish that the act in question was an
executive or administrative action. For instance, to say that Mr. X the
respondent was a Police Officer or The Secretary of a Ministry might provide a
clue as to the capacity in which Mr. X acted. It

**325**

is in no way conclusive of the matter, for it may be established in the
circumstances of a case that Mr. X, whatever his designation or title may have
been, in doing the act complained of, was not, after all, exercising an
executive or administrative action. It may have been a purely private act or
one which was in no way connected with the performance of his official duties.
There would then be no executive or administrative action and the State would,
therefore, not be liable, (See Saman v. Leeladasa and Another (2)).

It has been said, that another purpose of Rule 65 is to give an officer named
as a respondent, the opportunity of defending himself. (See per Ranasinghe, J.
in Ganeshanathan v. Vivienne Goonewardene and Three Others, (3) . This is an
opportunity primarily for defending his conduct with the object of exculpating
the State and incidentally exonerating himself personally. However, an
investigation of the personal conduct of officials is not, in my view, the
function of this Court in the matter of an application for relief and redress
under Article 126 of the Constitution. That is a matter to which the attention
of the appropriate persons may, if the circumstances warrant, be directed by
this Court for such action as it may deem to be necessary. This has been the
practice of this Court in the past. (e.g. see A. K. Velmurugu v. The Attorney-
General and Another (4),Vivienne Goonewardene v. Hector Perera and Others (5),
Cf. M. K. W. Alwis v. Quintus Raymond and Others (6) and Subramaniam
Ragunathan v. M. Thuraisingham and The Attorney-General (7). And so I propose
to do in this case, confirming, with respect, the customary action of the
Supreme Court, in this regard. In so doing I am not condemning anyone but
assisting the Government to become aware of violations so that, through
appropriate measures, it could restore and ensure the respect for fundamental
rights which it expects of its servants, agents and institutions. The
measures, with deterrence and prevention in view, may include the punishment
of transgressors, filling gaps in the laws or procedures and strengthening
protecting institutions.

The person who has infringed or is likely to infringe a fundamental or
language right is not a necessary party in the sense in which that phrase is
used in connection with ordinary civil litigation. The failure to make a
person who is alleged to have violated or is likely to violate a fundamental
or language right a respondent in a petition for relief under Article 126 of
the Constitution is not, in my view, a fatal defect. Indeed, such is the
nature of the obligation under Rule 65 that the failure of a petitioner to

**326**

personally, as distinguished from officially, identify the person violating
his fundamental rights, (and presumably, therefore, being unable to
personally, name such person in his petition), or that he was mistaken (with
the result that a wrong person is named as a respondent) will not stand in the
way of a petitioner's application for relief if the Court is satisfied that a
violation of a fundamental or language right had been occasioned by executive
or administrative action. (See Mariadas Raj v. Attorney-General and Others
(8), at pp. 404, 405, per Sharvananda, J. at pp. 404, 405, Ganeshanathan v.
Vivienne Goonewardene and Three Others (3) per Samarakoon, C.J. at pp. 330
-331.See also Katunayakage Damesius Perera and Another v. R. Premadasa and
Others (9), (1979) Fundamental Rights Decisions 70 at p.72; Saman v. Leeladasa
and Another (2).

In the case before us, the fact that the second Respondent has been wrongly
added and the fact that the three police officers named by the Petitioner in
her Petition have not been mentioned as Respondents are of no consequence with
regard to the question of establishing executive or administrative action,
since I am of the view that there is sufficient evidence to show that the
infringement of the Petitioner's fundamental rights was caused by Police
officers acting in the course of their duties under colour of office.

Nor was the State placed at any disadvantage by the Petitioner's failure to
name as Respondents the Police officers she identified. The State could have
submitted the affidavits of those persons if, as the learned Senior State
Counsel suggested, their evidence was important.

Naturally, if their information was to be on the sparse lines of those of the
second and third Respondents, such affidavits may have been advisedly omitted,
adding as they would but little to the weight, and nothing at all to the
quality of the evidence already adduced on behalf of the State. As for the
opportunity for the officers who may have wished to have explained their
personal conduct, they would. I hope. be given every opportunity to do so when
their conduct, personally, rather than their conduct as agents of the State,
is called in question in another place and at another time by other
authorities. For the reasons stated in. my judgment I make order As follows:

(1) I hold that Gamaralalage Samanthilaka, the Petitioner. in this case, was
arrested by the Police and held in custody and

**327**

detained and deprived of her personal liberty by the Police without being
produced before a Judge and otherwise than according to procedure established
by law, and, consequently, that the said Petitioner is entitled to a
declaration that the State has acted in violation of her rights under Article
13 (1) and (2) of the Constitution.

(2) I further hold that the said Gamaralalage Samanthilaka was subjected by
the Police to such severe physical and mental pain as amounted in law (Cf. Mrs
W. M. K. de Silva v. P. Senaratne et al (10) to cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment and punishment and, consequently, that the said Petitioner is
entitled to a declaration that the State has acted in violation of her rights
under Article 11 of the Constitution.

(3) The State shall be liable to pay a sum of Rs.25,000 to the Petitioner by
way of compensation and Rs. 2,500 as costs.

(4) The Inspector-General of Police, who in paragraph 9 of his Affidavit has
informed the Court that he has "given instructions to all the Police Stations
concerning the manner in which a suspect taken into custody should be treated
by the Police officers and if it transpires that these instructions have been
violated that disciplinary action will be taken against them, and also if
there is evidence against any officer steps will be taken to prosecute him in
court", shall give effect to the said undertaking within three months of this
Order.

(5) For the purpose of assisting the Inspector- General of Police to comply
with the direction contained in paragraph (4) above, the Registrar of The
Supreme Court shall forward to the Inspector General of Police a certified
copy of this judgment together with certified copies of the Petition and
Affidavits filed in this case.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J. -** I agree.

**R. N. M. DHEERARATNE, J. -** I agree.

**_Application allowed._**

_**Compensation ordered.**

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1990/8.html_  

