##  Mendis v. Pfizer - SLR - 204, Vol 1 of 1988 [1988] LKSC 8; (1988) 1 Sri LR
204 (30 March 1988)

**204**

**

MENDIS  
V.  
PFIZER

**

SUPREME COURT.  
L. H. DE ALWIS, J., SENEVIRATNE, J. AND G. P. S. DE SILVA, J.  
S.C. 21/86; C.A. 587/76 (F).  
D.C. PANADURA 13670.  
JANUARY 26 AND FEBRUARY 10, 1988.

_

     Civil Procedure-Action for goods sold and delivered-Sequestration before judgment-Actual terms of mandate for sequestration different from the order of Court-Claim by person not defendant to property sequestered-Claim upheld and suit for damages for wrongful sequestration-s. 653 of the Civil Procedure Code-Forms in 1st Schedule of C. P. C.

_

**205**

In the course of an action for recovery of Rs. 39,000 due on account of goods
sold and delivered against one Paulus carrying on business under the name,
style and firm of Victory Pharmacy the plaintiff obtained a Mandate in Form
104 of the First Schedule CPC for sequestration before judgment against the
said Paulus.

Although the Court ordered a Mandate to issue to the Fiscal to seize and
sequester the business known as Victory Pharmacy and any other property
movable or immovable to the value of not less than Rs. 44,000, the Mandate
itself commanded the Fiscal to seize and sequester the house, lands, goods,
money, securities for money and debts of the defendant to the value of Rs.
44,000. Although the Form 104 did not provide for this the Mandate had
recitals referring to the suit against Paulus and his fraudulently alienating
the Pharmacy and his assets and his imminent departure, being here on a
Temporary Residence Permit .

On 28.10.71 at 11.55 a.m. the Deputy Fiscal went to the premises where Victory
Pharmacy was run and seized and sequestered the movable property of the
business. At 3.45 p.m. of the same day Mendis the appellant claimed the
business as its legal owner. His claim was upheld in claim proceedings on
8.9.1972 and he then filed the present action to recover Rs. 50,000 as damages
for the wrongful seizure and sequestration. This action was dismissed in the
District Court. Mendis' appeal to the Court of Appeal was also dismissed.

**

Held-

**

(1) Forms in schedules are inserted merely as examples, and are only to be
followed as far as the circumstances of each case may admit. The Mandate must
be read as a whole. The Judge's Order specifically directed the Fiscal to
seize and sequester the business known as Victory Pharmacy along with any
other property of the defendant. These directions were embodied in -the
Mandate though as recitals. The Mandate covers the seizure of Victory Pharmacy
and the Fiscal had authority to seize and sequester it. The petition,
affidavit and order of Court can be relied on and show that the seizure and
sequestration of Victory Pharmacy were authorized by the Mandate. The
operative part must be read with the recitals and Order of Court.

(2) The seizure of the business authorized by the Mandate referred not only to
the incorporeal right to carry on the business but also the goods of the
business.

(3) The argument that the Fiscal had seized Victory Pharmacy belonging to
Mendis when the order was against Paulus does not make the defendant liable to
damages without proof of malice where the seizure and sequestration of the
goods of the Pharmacy were under judicial sanction which cannot be said to
have been obtained improperly or without reasonable and probable cause by the
respondent: for the Pharmacy still belonged to the defendant Paulus a non-
national on a Temporary Residence Permit and it was on the very day that the
Mandate issued that Paulus conveyed the Pharmacy to Mendis on a deed for a
consideration not fully settled on the date of its execution and with a
condition permitting Paulus to remain on the premises. Further at the time of
the seizure Paulus was still in occupation and his name still appeared on the
business Register as proprietor.

**206**

**

Cases referred to :

**

( _1) Attorney-General v. Lamplough (1878) 3 Ex. D. 214, 229.

(2) Turquand v. Board of Trade (1886) 11 A. C. 286.

(3) Ramanathan Chetty v. Meerasaibo Marikkar 32 NLR 193.

(4) De Alwis v. Murugappa Chettiar 12 NLR 383

(5) Hert v. Cohen 16 Buchanan 363.

(6) Hoye v. Bush (1840) Court of Common Pleas, Vol. 1 pg. 784.

_**

APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.

_

Nimal Senanayake P.C. with Miss S. M. Senaratne, Miss A. B. Dissanayake,

Miss A. Adolphus, Miss Shiranthi de Saram and Jayantha Wewelwela for
appellant.

P. A. D. Samarasekera, P.C. with A. C. B. Britto Muttunayagam for respondent.

_

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 30, 1988

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J.

**

The respondent, Pfizer Ltd., instituted D.C. Colombo case No. 74222/M against
one Paulus who was the proprietor of a business carried on by him under the
name, style and firm of Victory Pharmacy at No. 384, Main Street, Panadura,
for the recovery of a sum of Rs. 39,000 on account of goods sold and delivered
to him.

During the pendency of the action the respondent made an application to the
District Court under section 653 of the Civil Procedure Code to seize and
sequester the said business of Victory Pharmacy and any other houses, lands
and goods, security for money and debts etc., belonging to the said Paulus, on
the footing that the latter was fraudulently alienating his property with
intent to avoid payment of the said sum. The application was supported in
court on 21.10.1971 and court made order (D9) on the same day directing that a
mandate D10 in form No. 104 of the first schedule to the Civil Procedure Code
be issued to the Fiscal, Western Province, "to seize and sequester the
business called and known as the Victory Pharmacy, No. 384, Main Street,
Panadura and any other property of the defendant whether movable or immovable
to the value of not less than Rs. 44,000."

The Mandate, D10, however commanded the Fiscal "to seize and sequester the
house, lands, goods, money, securities for money and debts of the said
defendant to the value of Rs. 44,000."

**207**

On 28.10.1971 at 11 .55 a.m. the Deputy Fiscal of Panadura went to the
premises No. 384, Main Street, Panadura, and seized and sequestered the
movable property of the said business of the Victory Pharmacy.

The appellant in this case arrived at the premises at 3.45 p.m. that day and
made a claim to the said business as its legal owner. His claim was inquired
into and upheld by the District Court in case No. 294/C of 8.9.1972.

The appellant subsequently instituted action No. 13620 in the District Court
of Panadura against the respondent to recover a sum of Rs. 50,000 as damages
alleged to have been caused as a result of the wrongful seizure and
sequestration of the goods of the said business of Victory Pharmacy which
belonged to him.

After trial the learned District Judge dismissed the action on the ground that
the mandate authorised the Deputy Fiscal to seize and sequester the goods of
the business of Victory Pharmacy, that the seizure and sequestration were not
wrongful ; that the defendant company, Pfizer Ltd., had reasonable ground to
believe that the business blonged to Paulus; and that it acted in good faith
and without malice.

The appellant appealed from the order of the learned District Judge to the
Court of Appeal which dismissed the appeal and affirmed the Judgment of the
District Court.

The appellant has now appealed to this court against the judgment of the Court
of Appeal after obtaining leave to appeal from that court.

The contention of Mr. Senanayake for the appellant was that the mandate issued
to the Fiscal did not authorise him to seize the business of Victory Pharmacy,
although the order of court directed it, and that both the District Court and
Court of Appeal were in error in holding that the Mandate did so. The seizure
was therefore wrongful.

He also contended that the Mandate authorised the Fiscal to seize and
sequester Victory Pharmacy belonging to the judgment-debtor, Paulus, and not
to the appellant. Paulus had sold the Victory Pharmacy on 21.10.71 to the
appellant who became the owner on Indenture

**208**

No. 1083(P5). The seizure and sequestration of the goods in the Pharmacy on
28.10.71 by the Fiscal, at the instance of the appellant it was submitted was
wrongful and the respondent was liable for damages sustained by him without
proof of any malice.

He submitted that the District Court had erred in holding that the respondent
was not liable in damages inasmuch as it acted in good faith and without
malice in causing the Fiscal to seize and sequester the goods in Victory
Pharmacy.

In view of Mr. Senanayake's first contention, it is necessary to reproduce the
entirety of the Mandate D1-0 issued by the District Court to the Fiscal. It
reads as follows:

"To the Deputy Fiscal, Panadura.

Whereas it appears that James Parathesy Paulus, the defendant in the above
case and the proprietor of Victory Pharmacy carrying on business under the
said name at No 384, Main Street, Panadura, is fraudulently alienating his
property and assets and negotiating the sale of the business carried on by him
under the name, style and firm of Victory Pharmacy at No. 384, Main Street,
Panadura and is winding up his business activities.

And whereas the defendant above named is a non-national of Indian origin whose
stay in Ceylon has been under and by virtue of a Temporary Resident Permit,
which will expire shortly and the said defendant is scheduled to leave the
Island at the end of October 1971.

And whereas no payment whatsoever has been received from the above named
defendant either in full settlement or in reduction of the Plaintiff's claim
which is still justly due.

And whereas the said business belonging to the said defendant and carried on
by him at the above address is the most valuable asset possessed by him and
since endeavors are being made to sell the said business.

And whereas the above named defendant is fraudulently alienating his property
and is preparing to shortly leave the Island with intent to avoid payment of
the plaintiff's claim and since the plaintiff has no security to meet the
claim from the defendant and the plaintiff above named has verified his demand
to the satisfaction of this court.

You are therefore commanded to seize and sequester the houses, lands, goods,
moneys, securities for money and debts of the said defendant, to the value of
Rs. 44,000 where so ever and in whose custody or possession so ever the same
may be within this District, and to retain and secure the same until the said
defendant shall appear and abide by the order of this court or until you
receive further directions from

**209**

this court herein and to give due notice in writing to all persons in whose
possession or power the property whether movable or immovable shall be, of
this sequestration, and requiring them to reserve and retain the same, and all
issues, rents, profits and interest accruing there from to abide the order of
this court. And you are further commanded on the day of 29.10.1972, next to
inform this court what property you shall have so seized and sequestered with
the true value of the same and in whose possession the same respectively was
at the time of seizure and have you there this mandate.

sgd. Additional District Judge  
Colombo

This 21st day of October, 1971."

Learned Counsel for the appellant vehemently submitted that the language of
the mandate issued in terms of form No. 104 must be strictly construed
especially as it authorised the seizure and sequestration of property prior to
judgment, under section 653 of the Civil Procedure Code.

Form No. 104 in the First Schedule of the Civil Procedure Code is very brief
and while providing for setting out the necessary averments, states that; the
Mandate commanding the Fiscal, should proceed as in Form No. 38, with the
necessary modifications, namely, 'You are therefore commanded to seize and
sequester the houses, lands, goods, moneys, security for money and debts of
the said ... to the value of According to learned Counsel the operative part
of the Mandate is that contained in the last paragraph, and that commands the
Fiscal to seize and sequester the property of the defendant, but makes no
reference to the business of Victory Pharmacy carried on at No. 384, Main
Street, Panadura. The earlier paragraphs of the Mandate, he submitted, contain
merely a recital of certain matters but gave the Fiscal no authority to act
upon their contents. Learned Counsel submitted that Form 104 does not provide
for recitals. The seizure and sequestration of Victory Pharmacy were therefore
not made under #9; the Mandate and are wrongful.

I regret I am unable to agree with learned counsel's contention. "As a general
rule, forms in schedules are inserted merely as examples, and are only to be
followed implicitly so far as the circumstances of each case may admit.' Per
Brett, C.J., in Attorney-General v. Larnplough (1) referred to in Craies's
Statute Law, 7th Ed. pg. 224 "An Act is to be read as a whole. It is an
elementary rule that

**210**

construction is to be made of all the parts together, and not of one part only
by itself.' Turquand v. Board of Trade, (2) per Lord Blackburn and cited by
Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Ed. pg. 58. In my view these
principles of construction apply equally to the Mandate in question.

The Mandate must be read as a whole. The opening paragraph of the Mandate
refers to James Parathesy Paulus, the defendant in the case, as the proprietor
of the Victory Pharmacy business carried on at No. 384, Main Street, Panadura.
Paragraph (4) recites that the said business belonging to the defendant is the
most valuable asset possessed by him. The recital in the Mandate is a
reproduction of certain statements in the petition D7 and affidavit D8 made in
support of the application for seizure and sequestration of the property of
Paulus and of the order D9 made by the court allowing the application. The
learned Judge's order specifically directed the Fiscal to seize and sequester
the business called and known as the Victory Pharmacy, along with any other
property of the defendant, whether movable or immovable.

These directions have been embodied in the Mandate. No doubt they are in the
form of recitals. But they specifically state, inter alia, that the Victory
Pharmacy is the defendant's most valuable asset and suggest that it is the
most suitable property for seizure and sequestration by the Fiscal.

In my view, the Mandate covers the seizure of Victory Pharmacy as property
belonging to the defendant, Paulus. The Fiscal therefore had authority under
the Mandate to make the seizure and sequestration of the said pharmacy. In
this case, moreover; it is the respondent and not the Fiscal who is held
responsible for the seizure, and it is the respondent who is sued for the
alleged wrongful seizure. In order to ascertain whether the Mandate authorised
the seizure of Victory Pharmacy, it is open to the respondent to rely on his
petition D7, affidavit D8 and the order of court D9. These documents show
without any doubt that the seizure and sequestration of Victory Pharmacy by
him were authorised by the Mandate.

I agree with the view of the Court of Appeal that the construction of the
Mandate depends not only on the terms of its operative part, but on the
entirety of the Mandate including the recitals read in the light of the order
directing its issue.

**211**

Learned Counsel next submitted that even if the Mandate authorised the seizure
of the business of Victory Pharmacy it related only to an incorporeal right
like the goodwill and right to carry on the business, but not to the goods in
the pharmacy. I do not agree. The business that Paulus was carrying on and
which the Plaintiff purchased on P5 was the Victory Pharmacy, No. 384, Main
Street, Panadura. The business of a pharmacy necessarily involves the sale of
medicinal drugs for profit and the stock-in-trade clearly forms part and
parcel of the business. "The assets of a business firm includes not only the
stock in trade and book debts, furniture, tools, machinery etc., but also an
intangible but very often valuable property, called goodwill." Underhill Law
of Partnership, 8th Ed. page 121 : As a matter of fact what Paulus sold to the
plaintiff on deed 1083 of 21.10.1971 (P5) was "the business carried on under
the name, style and firm of Victory Pharmacy at No. 382, 384 and 386, Main
Street, Panadura, together with the goodwill, stock-in-trade, furniture and
fittings..." The goods therefore seized by the Fiscal on 28.10.71 are clearly
part and parcel of the business of the pharmacy, which he was authorised to
seize and sequester on the Mandate D10.

Learned Counsel next contended that the Mandate authorised the Fiscal to seize
the goods of Victory Pharmacy belonging to Paulus, the defendant in that case,
and not the goods of the appellant to whom Paulus had sold them. The seizure
and sequestration of the goods of Victory Pharmacy by the respondent was
therefore wrongful and he is liable for damages without proof of malice. The
goods were seized by the Fiscal in Victory Pharmacy on their being pointed out
by B. Sathurukulasinghe, a Director of the appellant Company-Vide Fiscal's
Report D 11 .

Learned Counsel relied strongly on the judgment of the Privy Council in the
case of Ramanathan Chetty v. Meerasaibo Marikkar (3), where it was held that
when the defendant caused the Fiscal to seize the goods of the plaintiff under
a writ, which directed the Fiscal to seize the goods of another person, the
plaintiff can recover damages without proof of malice.

In Ramanathan Chetty's case Lord Russel of Killowen who delivered the judgment
of the Privy Council referred to the local case of De Alwis v. Murugappa
Chettiar (4), 12 N.L.R. 383 and to the South African case of Hart v. Cohen
(5).

**212**

In De Alwis v. Murugappa Chettiar it was held that where in a judgment
creditor procures the seizure of property belonging to a third party against
who there is no writ or warrant, he is liable in damages, whether he acted
maliciously or not. It is no defence that the judgment creditor acted under a
mistake. The facts of that case are clearly distinguishable and indicate that
the plaintiff-judgment-creditor was aware that the goods he caused to be
seized did not belong to the judgment debtor. The judgment debtor was the
father-in-law of the plaintiff in that case. Hutchinson, C.J., said "the goods
were the furniture in the plaintiff's house, in which he and his wife lived,
and the debtor did not live; the defendant had previously had the debtor
examined by the court as to his means; the debtor had sworn on examination
that he had no property, and the defendant had then prosecuted him for
obtaining money from him on the false representation that he had property. The
District Judge found that the seizure was wrongful, and that it was calculated
to disgrace the plaintiff, (who was the Interpreter Mudaliyar of the Police
Court of Kandy).... The defendant in this case is therefore liable for the
wrongful seizure, whether he acted maliciously or not." Middleton, J., said:
"In the present case the act of seizure was committed in effect without
judicial process, as the process in the hands of the Fiscal's Officer was
against the goods of the judgment-debtor and not against the goods of the
plaintiff and as De Villiers, C.J., in the case above (of Hart v. Cohen) said
"here is on the face of it an illegality for which the owner has his remedy
without proof of malice.

Nathan in his treatise, Common Law of South Africa, Vol. 111, (at page 1700,
footnote) refers to the South African case of Hart v. Cohen (5), and quotes De
Villiers C.J., in that case as follows: "Voet (47.10.7) enumerates among 'real
injuries' execution against the goods of a person other than the debtor
against whom judgment has been given. In his enumeration he does not, however,
draw a sufficiently clear distinction between acts done in excess of or
without judicial process and acts done under the sanction of judicial process
improperly obtained. Where execution has been issued against the goods of a
person other than the debtor against whom the writ had been obtained, there
is, on the face of it, an illegality for which the owner has his remedy
without proof of malice. But where the creditor acts under the sanction of
judicial process something more is required than proof that the writ ought not
to have been granted, for there must be proof of malice and want of reasonable
and probable cause on the part of the creditor in obtaining the writ.

**213**

The Privy Council in Ramanathan Chetty's case said that, "A distinction must
be drawn between acts done without judicial sanction and acts done under
judicial sanction improperly obtained. If goods are seized under a writ or
warrant which authorised the seizure, the seizure is lawful, and no action
will lie in respect of the seizure unless the person complaining can establish
a remedy by some such action as for malicious prosecution. If however, the
writ or warrant did not authorise the seizure of the goods seized, an action
would lie for damages occasioned by the wrongful seizure without proof of
malice." The case of Hoye v. Bush (6), cited by learned Counsel for the
appellant is distinguishable because the defendant arrested the plaintiff
under a warrant describing him as John Hoye when his real name was Richard
Hoye. Even though the party arrested was the person to whom the warrant was
really intended to apply the misdescription of the person's name in the
warrant was held not to have brought the plaintiff within the protection of
the warrant.

In the present case the court order and the mandate read as a whole authorised
the seizure of Victory Pharmacy carried on at No. 384, Main Street, Panadura,
belonging to the defendant in that case, viz: Paulus. The seizure and
sequestration of the goods of the Pharmacy by the Fiscal therefore, at the
instance of the respondent, was an act done under judicial sanction. The
question then arises whether the sanction of the court was obtained improperly
or without reasonable and probable cause on the part of the respondent.

To ascertain that, it is necessary to examine the events preceding the
application for the mandate, and even, in my view,, the circumstances
subsequent to it, which throw light on it.

The Respondent Company (Pfizer Ltd) which was the plaintiff in D.C. Colombo
case No. 74222/M sued one Paulus as defendant, for the recovery of a sum of
Rs. 39,000 for goods sold and delivered to him. After action was filed, it
made an application by petition D7 and affidavit D8 on 19.10.71 seeking a
mandate under section 653 of the Civil Procedure Code to seize and sequester
the business called and known as Victory Pharmacy at No. 384, Main Street,
Panadura and any other property belonging to the defendant. It was alleged
that the defendant was a non-national of Indian Origin who was residing in
Ceylon on a Temporary Resident Permit and that the Plaintiff verily believed
that he was fraudulently negotiating to alienate his property

**214**

and leave the island in order to avoid payment of the Plaintiff's claim. The
Defendant had, in fact, advertised the Pharmacy for sale in the newspapers.

On the averments set out in the respondent's petition and affidavit the court
was satisfied that the defendant was fraudulently alienating his property to
avoid the payment of the debt to the respondent and allowed the respondent's
application to seize and sequester the business called and known as Victory
Pharmacy carried on at No. 384, Main Street, Panadura, and any other property
of the defendant on 21.10.71.

The Fiscal executed the Mandate only on 28.10.71 by which date the Pharmacy
had been sold by Paulus to the appellant. The appellant made a claim to the
Pharmacy, and it was upheld by court. The order of court is therefore res
judicata between the parties.

To get back to the question whether the sanction of the court was improperly
obtained by the respondent on the basis that the pharmacy belonged to Paulus,
it must be noted that on 19.1'0.71, when the application was made under
section 653 of the Civil Procedure Code, the pharmacy did belong to Paulus.
The application was allowed by court and the mandate issued on 21.10.71. On
that very date Paulus conveyed the pharmacy to the appellant.

According to P5 the full consideration on the deed was not paid. There was
still due a sum of Rs. 10,000 for the payment of which time was given till
31.10.71. One of the conditions of P5 was that Paulus was entitled to remain
in the shop premises (residential quarters). This condition was evidently
embodied in P5 by Paulus, to ensure the payment of the balance consideration
by the appellant, before handing over possession of the business and premises
to him.

The Fiscal executed the Mandate on 28.10.71 at 11.55 a.m. and seized the goods
in the pharmacy at premises No. 384, Main Street, Panadura. At the time of the
seizure Paulus was still in occupation. Any reasonable person would have
concluded from that fact that Paulus was still the owner of the pharmacy. The
plaintiff was not present in the shop at the time, as one would have expected
him to have been, if he had actually taken possession of it. He came nearly
four hours later at 3.45 p.m. with a lawyer and claimed the property by
purchase on a

**215**

deed. The deed was not produced before the Fiscal. No change in the name board
of the pharmacy had been made to indicate that the new owner was the
appellant. On the date of the seizure by the Fiscal, ' namely 28.10.71,
Paulus' name still appeared as owner of Victory Pharmacy in the Business Names
Register which the respondent had taken pains to examine. The Registrar of
Business Names was informed of the change of ownership only on 3.11.71 and the
change was thereafter effected only on 12.11.71. Paulus was therefore in de
facto possession and occupation of the business premises at the time of the
Fiscal's arrival and the Fiscal has recorded that fact in his report to court,
D11.

In the light of all these circumstances it cannot be said that the order of
court and the mandate were obtained by the respondent improperly or without
reasonable or probable cause.

I accordingly dismiss the appeal with costs and affirm the judgment of the
Court of Appeal.

**

G. P. S. DE SILVA, J.

**

The plaintiff filed this action against the defendant (Pfizer Ltd.) for the
recovery of a sum of Rs, 50,000 as damages for the wrongful seizure and
sequestration of the goods of the business known as 'Victory Pharmacy' carried
on at No. 384, Main Street, Panadura. In case No. 74222/M instituted in the
District Court of Colombo, the defendant (in the instant case) had applied for
and obtained a mandate of sequestration against one Paulus who owed a sum of
Rs. 39,000 on account of goods sold and delivered. The petition and the
affidavit in terms of section 653 of the Civil Procedure Code filed in the
said case No. 74222/M have been produced as D7 and D8 respectively. The order
of the District Court of Colombo allowing the application under section 653 of
the Civil Procedure Code was marked in evidence as D9 and the Mandate of
sequestration addressed to the Deputy Fiscal, Panadura, as D10. D10(a) is the
report of the Deputy Fiscal wherein he states that on 28.10.71 he seized and
sequestered the moveable property of Victory Pharmacy, 384, Main Street,
Panadura. The property was pointed out by Saturukulasinghe, one of the
Directors of the defendant-Company, as belonging to the .said Paulus.

It is the evidence of the Fiscal that the plaintiff in the present action
arrived at the premises at about 3.45 p.m. and preferred a claim to

**216**

the business (Victory Pharmacy) as being its lawful owner. The plaintiff's
claim was upheld by the District Court on 8.9.72 in case No. 294/C and it is
now agreed that this order is res judicata between the parties to the present
action. The position therefore is that the plaintiff was on 28.10.71, the date
of seizure and sequestration of the business, its owner, having purchased it
from Paulus on 21.10.71 on the Indenture P5.

After trial, the District Judge held (a) that the seizure and sequestration of
the goods of the business of Victory Pharmacy was not wrongful; (b) that the
defendant had acted in good faith and without malice. The plaintiff's action
was accordingly dismissed. The plaintiff appealed to the Court of Appeal
against the judgment of the District Court. The Court of Appeal affirmed the
judgment of the District Court. The plaintiff has now preferred this appeal
against the judgment of the Court of Appeal, having obtained leave to appeal
from the Court of Appeal.

The principal submission of Mr. Senanayake, Counsel for the plaintiff-
appellant, was that the Fiscal derived his authority solely from the mandate
of sequestration (D10). Counsel emphasized (a) that the only document in the
hands of the Fiscal was D 10; (b) that the law (s. 653 and Form No. 104 of the
first Schedule to the Civil Procedure Code) requires the Fiscal to act in
strict compliance with the mandate of sequestration; (c) that the 'Mandate'
(i.e. the operative part of D 10) nowhere authorizes the Fiscal to seize and
sequester the . business of Victory Pharmacy.

The first question that arises for decision on this appeal is whether the
seizure and sequestration of the business known as Victory Pharmacy was
without judicial sanction, as contended for on behalf of the plaintiff-
appellant. It seems to me that this question cannot be answered by reference
only to the 'operative part' of D10, as we were invited to do by Mr.
Senanayake. It is a principle of construction of documents that a document
must be fairly read as a whole, in order to ascertain its true intent and
meaning Moreover, I cannot agree that the matter in issue has to be decided
solely on the basis of the formal mandate of sequestration, ignoring the other
documentary evidence (D7, D8 and D9) placed before the Court. In my view,
these documents are relevant to the question whether the seizure and
sequestration of the property was with or without judicial sanction. A

**217**

narrow and restrictive approach to this question is not warranted, for the
concept of 'judicial sanction' in the present context must be viewed broadly.
It is to be noted that the party sought to be made liable is the defendant and
not the Fiscal.

The petition D7 and the affidavit D8 were filed in the District Court on 19th
October 1971, well before the date of the sale of Victory Pharmacy to the
plaintiff. Paragraphs 5, 6, 10 and 12 in D7 read thus

"(5) That the plaintiff-petitioner has been receiving information that the
defendant-respondent is alienating his property and assets negotiating the
sale of the business carried on by him under the name style and firm of "The
Victory Pharmacy" at No. 384, Main Street, Panadura, and is winding up his
business activities.

(6) That the plaintiff-petitioner is reliably informed that the defendant-
respondent is a non-national of Indian origin whose stay in Ceylon has been
under and by virtue of a temporary resident permit.

(10) That the business belonging to and carried on by the defendant-respondent
at No. 384, Main Street, Panadura, under the name, style and firm of "The
Victory Pharmacy" is the most valuable asset possessed by the defendant-
respondent. The plaintiff-petitioner states that endeavours are being made to
sell the said business.

(12) By reason of the above premises it has become necessary for the
plaintiff-petitioner to move court for an order of sequestration in respect of
the said business known as -The Victory Pharmacy" and carried on by the
defendant-respondent at No. 384, Main Street, Panadura, and any other houses,
lands, goods, securities for moneys and debts whatsoever and in whose custody
the same may be, to a value of not less than Rs. 44,000.Paragraph (a) in the
prayer in D7 is in the following terms:

"(a) that the court do order that a mandate be issued to the Fiscal, Panadura,
under the provisions of ss. 653 & 654 of the Civil Procedure Code to seize and
sequester the business called and known as the Victory Pharmacy at No. 384,
Main Street, Panadura, and of any and all other houses, lands, goods,
securities for monies and debts whosesoever and in whose

**218**

custody the same may be belonging to the defendant-respondent to the value of
not less than Rs.44,000''

After hearing counsel, the District Judge made his order D9 dated 21.10.71 on
the basis of the averments in D7 and D8. It was not denied that these
averments were factually correct as on the date the application was made to
Court. The concluding paragraph of D 9 reads thus:

'I allow the application of the plaintiff and I direct that a Mandate in form
'104 of the first Schedule be issued to the Fiscal, Western Province,
directing him to seize and sequester the business called and known as the
'Victory Pharmacy', No. 384, Main Street, Panadura, and any other property of
the defendant whether movable or immovable to the value of not less than Rs.
44,000/. The Mandate of sequestration to issue on the Plaintiff furnishing
security in a sum of Rs. 3000/- (Rupees three thousand only) in cash.'

The next document is D 10 signed by the District Judge and dated 21.10.71. The
recitals in D 10 include the following:

"Whereas it appears that James Parathasy Paulus the defendant in the above
case and the proprietor of the Victory Pharmacy carrying on business under the
said name at No. 384, Main Street, Panadura, is fraudulently alienating his
property and assets, negotiating the sale of the business carried on by him
under the name style and firm of the Victory Pharmacy at No. 384, Main Street,
Panadura, and is winding up his business activities .

And whereas the said business belonging to the said defendant and carried on
by him at the above mentioned address is the most valuable asset possessed by
him and since endeavours are being made to sell the said business.

And whereas the above named defendant is fraudulently alienating his property
and is preparing to shortly leave the Island with intent to avoid payment of
the plaintiff's claim and since the plaintiff has no security to meet the
claim due from the defendant and the plaintiff above named has verified his
demand to the satisfaction of this Court."

**219**

The operative part of D 10 reads thus

"You are therefore commanded to seize and sequester the houses, lands, goods,
moneys, securities for money and debts of the said defendant to the value of
Rs. 44,000 where so ever and in whose custody or possession the same may be
within this District...............".

It is true, as submitted by Mr. Senanayake, the operative part of D 10 makes
no reference at all to the seizure and sequestration of the business of
Victory Pharmacy. To that extent, D 10 is not in accord with D9, the order of
the District Court. D9, however, is the "judicial order" made upon the
application D7 read with D8. D 10 derives its sanction from D9. It is manifest
upon a reading of D 9 that there is a clear, explicit and unequivocal
direction to seize and sequester the business called and known as "The Victory
Pharmacy at No. 384, Main Street, Panadura". The true legal basis and
foundation for the issue of the formal order of sequestration is contained in
D9. Therefore the Court of Appeal was, in my opinion, correct when it reasoned
thus"

....... the question whether the seizure and sequestration by the Deputy
Fiscal of the business are wrongful or not must, in my view, depend upon a
construction not only of the terms of the operative part of the mandate but of
the entirety of the mandate including the recitals read in the light of the
order directing its issue".

The finding that the seizure and sequestration by the Fiscal was with judicial
sanction is accordingly affirmed.

In support of his submission Mr. Senanayake relied strongly on the judgment of
the Privy Council in Ramanathan Chetty v. Meera Saibo Marikar, (3) Counsel
drew our attention in particular to the following statement of the law:

"A distinction must be drawn between acts done without judicial sanction and
acts done under judicial sanction improperly obtained. If goods are seized
under a writ or warrant which authorized the seizure, the seizure is lawful,
and no action will lie in respect of the seizure, unless the person
complaining can establish a remedy by some such action as for malicious
prosecution. If, however, the writ or warrant did not authorize the seizure of
the goods seized, an action would lie for damages occasioned by the wrongful
seizure without proof of malice".

**220**

It is true, as stressed by Mr. Senanayake, that the above passage refers only
to the "writ or warrant" and not to any other order made by court. But what is
relevant and important for present purposes is that the Privy Council was not
dealing with the situation that has arisen in the present appeal, namely, a
situation where the formal order of sequestration (D 10) is not in conformity
with the clear and express terms of the order of the District Court (D9). A
proposition of law enunciated in a judgment cannot be read in isolation,
divorced from the facts and circumstances the court was concerned with, rather
it should be read and understood in the context of the facts and circumstances
of the case. Thus it seems to me that the decision of the Privy Council is not
an authority for the proposition that the question whether the "acts done"
were with or without "judicial sanction" has to be determined by reference
only to "the writ or warrant".

The finding that the seizure and sequestration were "acts done" with judicial
sanction does not absolve the defendant from liability if there is evidence to
show that the conduct of the defendant in securing the seizure and
sequestration was lacking in bona fides. The Court of Appeal has rightly
addressed its mind to this aspect of the case and has given cogent reasons for
its finding that there was "reasonable and probable cause for obtaining the
order of seizure and sequestration". It is unnecessary to repeat those reasons
here. I am in agreement with the conclusion.

Finally, Mr. Senanayake submitted that, in any event, D9 authorized the
seizure and sequestration of only the business called and known as Victory
Pharmacy, but not the goods in the premises. Mr. Senanayake contended that the
seizure of the "business" means only the seizure of an "incorporal right",
namely, the goodwill and the right to carry on the business. This contention
does not commend itself to me. The opening words of the 2nd paragraph of D9
are "I allow the application of the plaintiff". The application is contained
in D7 and D8. On a fair reading of D7 and D8 it seems to me quite unreal to
take the view that what was sought to be seized and sequestered was not the
goods but an incorporeal right.

In the result, the appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.

**

SENEVIRATNE, J.** \- agree. _  
  
Appeal dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/8.html_  

