##  Erandaka and Another v. Halwela, Officer-In-Charge, Police Station,
Hakmana and Others - SLR - 268, Vol 1 of 2004 [2004] LKSC 8; (2004) 1 Sri LR
268 (27 February 2004)

**268**

**ERANDAKA AND ANOTHER  
v  
HALWELA, OFFICER-IN-CHARGE, POLICE STATION,  
HAKMANA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
S.N.SILVA, CJ.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
JAYASINGHE, J.  
S.C.(SPECIAL) NO.63/2001 (FR)  
28TH OCTOBER, 25TH NOVEMBER AND  
1ST DECEMBER, 2003  
  
_Fundamental Rights -Article 11 of the Constitution - No evidence
establish­ing individual liability - Assault during remand custody proved -
State liability for torture upheld.  
_  
The two petitioners were arrested on the morning of 14.8.2001 by the 2nd and
3rd respondent police officers and other police officers for alleged theft of
a water pump. They were examined by a medical officer of a hospital at noon
the same day who found no injuries on them. The same day they were produced
before a Magistrate who remanded them until 23.8.2001. Thereafter they
com­plained to court that they were assaulted by the 2nd and 3rd respondents
and another police officer at the police station and also by prison guards
including the 7th respondent. The petitioners were examined on 22.8.2001 by
the Judicial Medical Officer on the order of the Magistrate. The medical
report found 8 injuries on the 1st petitioner and 3 injuries on the 2nd
petitioner, most­ly contusions.  
  
There was no evidence to establish individual liability of any police officer
or prison officer, to the satisfaction of the court. But it was clear that the
petition­er had been assaulted whilst in prison.  
  
**Held:  
  
**The petitioner's rights under Article 11 of the Constitution had been
infringed whilst in prison custody, for which the State is liable. **  
  
Cases referred to:  
**  
1\. _Senthilnayagam v Seneviratne -_ (1981) 2 Sri LR 187  
  
2\. _Amal Sudath Silva v Kodituwakku -_ (1987) 2 Sri LR 119  
  
3\. _Jeganathan v Attorney-General - (_ 1982) 1 Sri LR 294  
  
4\. _Velumunasinghe v Attorney-General -_ (1981) FRD 180

**269**

5\. _Thadchanamoorthi v Attoreny-General -_ (1980) FRD 129  
  
6\. _Goonewardene v Perera_ \- (1983) 1 Sri LR 305  
  
7\. _Kapugeekiyana v Hettiarachchi -_ (1984) 2 Sri LR 153  
  
8\. _Malinda Channa Peiris v Attorney-General_ \- (1994) 1 Sri LR 1  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights

_A.H.H. Perera_ for petitioners  
  
_D. Akurgoda with Gamini Peiris_ for 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents. P.
Ranasinghe, State Counsel for 4th, 5th and 8th respondents. Rohan Sahabandu
for 6th and 7th respondents.

_Cur.adv.vult_

February 27, 2004  
  
**SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
  
**The two complainants are brothers who were residing with their mother at
Hakmana. The younger brother who was born in November 1984 was a minor at the
time material to this application and was represented by his mother and
therefore is the 2nd peti­tioner in this application.  
  
According to the petitioners, in the early morning of 14.08.2001, the 2nd and
3rd respondents together with some other members of the Hakmana Police Station
came to the residence of the petition­ers. The two brothers (hereinafter
referred to as the 1st and 2nd petitioners) were taken in a police vehicle to
the Hakmana Police Station. At the Police Station the two petitioners were
assaulted by the second, third and by another police constable whose identity
and the regimental number are not known to the petitioners. Thereafter the
petitioners were produced before the Magistrate on 14.08.2001 and they were
remanded until 23.08.2001. The peti­tioners alleged that, at the Remand
Prison, they were assaulted by three (3) Prison Officers at various times
during the first three days of their incarceration. The petitioners alleged
that they were beaten with short clubs similar to batons, that they were given
blows with their fists handcuffed and water was poured on them during such
beatings. The petitioners had identified the 7th respondent as one of those
persons who had assaulted them.

**270**

When these assaults were brought to the notice of the petition­er mother, she
had moved the Court by way of a motion and got the case against the
petitioners called on 16.08.2001 with a view to obtaining bail. This request
for bail, however was refused on the plea that investigations were not
concluded and the petitioners were once again sent to the Remand Prison. The
petitioners sub­mitted that as a consequence of the aforementioned motion, the
petitioners were threatened and were subjected to further assaults.The mother
had filed a further motion in Court on 20.08.2001 and brought the
aforementioned facts to the notice of the Magistrate whereupon an order was
made to produce the two petitioners in Court on 21.08.2001. When they were
produced in Court, the mag­istrate had made order directing the two petitioner
to be examined by the Judicial Medical Officer, Matara. The two petitioners
were granted bail on personal bonds in a sum of Rs. 25,000/-.  
  
The petitioner alleged that their fundamental rights guaranteed in terms of
Article 11 of the Constitution was violated by the 2nd, 3rd and 7th
respondents for which this Court granted leave to proceed under Article 11 of
the Constitution.  
  
Learned Counsel for the 2nd and 3rd respondents, who are Police Officers,
submitted that the petitioners have not sufficiently established their case
against the 2nd and 3rd respondents and that there is no material against
these two respondents to show that they had assaulted the petitioners. Learned
Counsel for the 7th respondent on the other hand contended that the 7th
respondent had no involvement in the incidents alleged by the petitioners.  
  
It is not disputed that the petitioners were arrested by the 2nd and 3rd
respondents. In fact the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents had averred that the
petitioners were arrested on 14.08.2001 not at 4.00 a.m. as claimed by the
petitioners, but at 10.15 a.m. on a complaint made against the petitioners of
an alleged theft of a water pump, belonging to one Wijetilake. The 1st, 2nd
and 3rd  respondents have produced affidavits from one Woman Police Constable,
Pathmawathie, who was on reserve duty at the time the petitioners were handed
over to the respondents (2R5) and an affidavit from Borala Liyana Pathiranage
Tissa, Reserve Police Constable No. 11921 (2R6). Both have averred in their
affidavits that the respondents did not assault the petitioners.

**271**

Soon after the arrest, according to the 2nd and 3rd respondents, the two
petitioners were produced before the Medical Officer of Narawelpita Government
Hospital, wherein the Medico-Legal Examination Forms show that there were no
injuries on the petitioners (1R2). According to these Medico-Legal Examination
Forms, the petitioners were examined by the Medical Officer at 12.20 p.m. on
14.8.2001. It is common ground that the petitioners were brought before the
Magistrate on the same day, viz.,14.08.2001, around 2.00 p.m., where on the
orders of the Magistrate the petitioners were sent to the Remand Prison.
Considering the contents of the Medico-Legal Examination Form, it appears that
the petitioners had not been subjected to any kind of torture until the time
they were produced before the Medical Officer. Moreover, there is no material
before this Court that at the time the petitioners were produced before the
Magistrate that they had informed the Magistrate that they were subjected to
torture while they were at the Police Station. Except for the version given by
the two petitioners, there is no other material before this Court in support
of the petitioners that the 2nd and 3rd respondents had assaulted them while
they were at the Police Station. The Medical Report of the Medical Officer at
Narawelpita Government Hospital, further strengthens the position of the 2nd
and 3rd respondents that the petitioners were not assaulted at the Police
Station. In such cir­cumstances I am of the view that the 2nd and 3rd
respondents cannot be held responsible for the alleged infringement of the
petiion-ers' fundamental rights in violation of Article 11 of the
Constitution.  
  
  
The petitioners' allegation on the assault while they were in Prison includes
three prison officers, but they have named only one officer, viz., the 7th
respondent (paragraph 20 of the petition). Learned Counsel for the 7th
respondent contended that the petitioners have categorically stated that, they
were assaulted by three prison officers at various times during the first
three days of their incarceration. In fact paragraph 20 of the petition refers
to the alleged assault being taken place during the first three days which
would amount to be the 14th, 15th and 16th August 2001.  
  
The submission of the learned Counsel for the 7th respondent is that on the
14th of August the 7th respondent had reported to work at 6.00 a.m. and had
signed off at 3.30 p.m. in the afternoon (7R1,

**272**

7R2 amd 7R8), On 15.08.2001 the 7th respondent had reported for work at 8.00
a.m., but had left at 9.10 a.m. Thereafter he had returned at 5.20 p.m. and
had signed oft at 5.3Q p.m. (7R3, 7R4 and 7R7). On 16.08.2001 he had been on
Parade Leave. Therefore learned Counsel for the 7th respondent submitted that
the 7th respondent Gould not have participated in the alleged assault, which
according to the petitioners, had taken place on the first three days of their
incarceration.  
  
The petitioners, it is to be noted, stated in their petition (para­graph 16)
that at the Hakmana police station the 2nd and 3rd respondents and another
Police Constable whose identity and reg­imental number are not known, had
assulted them. With regard to the assualt at the Remand Prison the
petitioners' position is that three Prison Officers including the 7th
respondent assaulted them at various times during the first three days
(paragraph 20).

In the aforementioned circumstances, it would be pertinent to consider the
Medico-Legal Report pertaining to the two petitioners.  
  
Both petitioners were produced before the Judicial Medical Officer on
22.08.2001. In the short history given by the petitioners to the Medical
Officer, the petitioners had categorically stated that, they were assaulted by
the Police and not by the Prison Officers.  
  
Notwithstanding the non availability of the identity of the persons who had
assaulted the petitioners, the Medico-Legal Reports of the petitioners reveal
that both petitioners have sutained injuries. As pointed out earlier at 12.30
p.m. on 14.08.2001, prior to the peti­tioners were produced before the
Magistrate, they were examined by the Medical Officer of the Government
Hospital at Narawelpita and according to those Reports (1R1 and 1R2) the
petitioners had not sustained any injuries.  
  
However, when the petitioners were examined on 22.08.2001 by the Judicial
Medical Officer, he had observed the following injuries:

  
_1st petitioner_  
  
1\. Tram Line Contusion 6 cm. x 1 cm. in size was situated on the upper region
of the back of the left chest wall. It was in transverse position.

**273**

2\. Tram Line Contusion 5 cm. x 1 cm. in size was situated on the back of the
left upper arm 16 cm. from the left elbow joint.  
  
3\. Tram Line Contusion 5 cm. x 1 cm. in size was situated on the back of the
left upper arm, 11 cm. from left elbow joint.  
  
4\. Tram Line Contusion 3 cm. x 1 cm. in size was situated over the right
upper scapular region. It was in transverse position.  
  
5\. Tram Line Contusion 4 cm. x 1 cm. in size was situated over the right
lower scapular region. It was in transverse position.  
  
6\. Tram Line Contusion 6 cm. x 1 cm. in size was situated over the back of
the right thigh 15 cm. from the right knee joint. It was extended upward
vertically.  
  
7\. Tram Line Contusion 3 cm. x 1 cm. in size was situated over the emiterior
aspect of the left upper arm 12 cm. from the elbow joint.  
  
8\. There was a facture of the crown of right central incisor tooth in the
upper law. This was confirmed by the Consultant, Dental Surgeon. (Report is
annexed).  
  
2nd petitioner  
  
1\. Tram Line Contusion 4 cm. x 1 cm. in size was situated over the upper
region of the back of the left chest-wall. It was in transverse position.  
  
2\. Tram Line Contusion 5 c.m. x 1 cm. in size was situated in the back of the
right thigh,13 c.m. above the knee joint.  
  
3\. There was tenderness over the nose. No evidence of fracture of the nasal
bone.  
  
Article 11 Of our Constitution refers to freedom from torture and reads as
follows:  
  
"No person shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment"  
  
The petitioners as submitted by the respondents were arrested

**274**

by the Police on suspicion of a theft of a water pump.  
  
When an allegation is made in respect of an infringement in terms of Article
11 of our Constitution, it is not necessary for the Court to take cognizance
of the personal antecedents of the petitioner, but consider only of the
circumstances the petitioner is com­plaining. In Senthilnayagam v Seneviratne
(1) Colin Thome,J. was of the view that,  
  
"The Courts have been jealous of any infringement of personal liberty and care
is not be exercised less vigi­lantly, because the subject whose liberty is in
question may not be particularly meritorious."  
  
In Amal Sudath Silva v Kodituwakku(2) Atukorale, J. has described the
protection guaranteed by Article 11, quite forcefully in the following terms:  
  
"It is therefore the duty of this Court to protect and defend this right which
is declared and intended to be funda­mental is always kept fundamental and
that the executive by its action does not reduce it to a mere illusion The
petitioner may be a hard-core criminal whose tribe deserve no sympathy. But if
constitutional guarantees are to have any meaning or value in our democratic
set-up, it is essential that he be not denied the protection guaranteed by our
Constitution."

It is therefore irrelevant to consider the circumstances in which the
petitioners were taken into custody and consideration should be given only to
the question as to whether the petitioners had suf­fered any kind of cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment while they were kept in the custody of the
respondents.

It is well settled law in this country that no person shall be sub­jected to
torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and thereby
the protection in terms of Article 11 of the Constitution is guaranteed to all
persons. When complaints are made in respect of violation of Article 11 of the
Constitution, such allegations are levelled against Public Officers and if
proved they could carry serious consequences against them. Therefore it would
be essential that allegations that have been complained of be strictly

**275**

proved. In fact in Jeganathan v Attorney-General it was held that where public
officers are accused of violating the provisions of Article 11, the
allegations must be strictly proved. A series of decid­ed cases Velumurugu v
Attorney-General, Thadchanamoorthi v Attorney-General, Goonewardene v
Perera(6), Kapugeekiyana v Hettiarachch(7) and Malinda Channa Peiris v
Attorney-General(8) has clearly laid down the principle that the civil
standard of persua­sion would apply and a high degree of certainty would be
required  'before the balance of probability might be said to tilt in favour
of a petitioner' who has been attempting to discharge his burden in proving
that his fundamental rights guaranteed in terms of Article 11 had been
violated by the respondents. However, as has been point­ed out in Malinda
Channa Peiris v Attorney-General (supra) 'unless the petitioner has adduced
sufficient evidence to satisfy the Court that an act in violation of Article
11 did take place, the petitioner will fail to obtain a declaration that
Article 11 was transgressed.'

In the instant case, although the petitioners have complained of violation of
Article 11 against 2nd, 3rd and the 7th respondents,  they have not adduced
sufficient evidence to show that the three respondents or some of them had
subjected the petitioners to tor­ture or to cruel, inhuman and/or degrading
treatment or punish­ment. In fact according to the material placed before this
court it appears that the 2nd, 3rd, and the 7th respondents had not taken part
in the alleged assault. In such circumstances, the petitioners have not
discharged their burden of proving that these 3 respon­dents or some of them
were responsible for the alleged violation of Article 11 and I am of the view
that without having sufficient mater­ial supporting the allegations against
each individual respondent,  viz. the 2nd, 3rd and the 7th respondents, they
cannot be held responsible for the alleged violation.

However, as pointed out earlier the Medico-Legal Reports reveal that both
petitioners having been tortured had sustained a considerable amount of
injuries. According to the Medical Report submitted by the 1st, 2nd and 3rd
respondents at the time petition­ers were produced before the Magistrate they
had no injuries. In such circumstances it is apparent that the petitioners
have sus­tained these injuries while they were in Remand Prison and there­by
although a particular respondent is not held responsible for the injuries
sustained by the petitioners, the State would become responsible for the
violation of the petitioners' fundamental right guaranteed to them under
Article 11 of the Constitution.

In the circumstances, I hold that the petitioners' fundamental rights
guaranteed in terms of Article 11 were violated by executive or administrative
action. The state is directed to pay a sum of Rs. 25.000/- each for the two
petitioners as compensation. This amount to be paid within 3 months from
today.

**SARATH N. SILVA, C J. - I agree  
  
JAYASINGHE, J. - I agree**

_**Relief granted.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/8.html_  

