##  Jamis v. Yapa and Others - SLR - 350, Vol 1 of 1987 [1987] LKSC 8; (1987)
1 Sri LR 350 (13 January 1987)

**

350

JAMIS  
v.  
YAPA AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., ATUKORALE, J. AND L. H. DE ALWIS, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 2/86.  
C.A. APPLICATION No. 1070/82.  
NOVEMBER 19, 1986.

_

Writ of Certiorari-Devolution of tenancy- Right of deceased tenant cultivator-
Succession-Jurisdiction-Agrarian Services Act No. 58 of 1979, ss. 8(1) and (2)
and 9(1).

_

The dispute was whether the paddy land was cultivated, as two distinct and
separate lots by the appellant's father and the 1st respondent's father or
whether it was cultivated as one land jointly by them. The devolution of the
tenancy right of the appellant's father who died in 1974 depended on the
resolution of this dispute. If the appellant's father had cultivated distinct
lots then his tenancy rights would devolve on his son the appellant. (s.8(1)
of the Agrarian Services Act). But if the two tots constituted one paddy land
and the appellant's father and the 1st respondent's father cultivated it
jointly then on the death of the appellant's father his rights would devolve
on the other cultivator. (S.8(2) of the Agrarian Services Act). The dispute
being in regard to the devolution of the deceased tenant cultivator's right,
it must under s. 9 of the Agrarian Services Act be referred for determination
to the Commissioner of Agrarian Services.

The question of the consequent amendment of the Agricultural Lands Register is
incidental to the decision on the question of the devolution.

Therefore the reference to the Agrarian Services Committee was wrong and the
Committee had acted without jurisdiction as also did the Assistant
Commissioner of Agrarian Services in entertaining and deciding the appeal.
This want of jurisdiction is not cured by the fact that the appellant
preferred the appeal to the Commissioner. Where there is a patent' want of
jurisdiction a party cannot by acquiescence or waiver confer jurisdiction.

**

Case referred to:

**_

Beatrice Perera v. Commissioner of National Housing_ \- (1974) 77 NLR 361.

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

Faiz Mustapha_ with _K. Balapatabendi_ for appellant.  

_

J. Wilson Fernando_ with _M. J. Hussen_ for the 1st respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**351**

January 13,1987.  
**L .H. DE ALWIS, J.

**

The appellant made an application to the Court of Appeal for the issue of
Writs of Certiorari to quash the decision of the Agrarian Services Committee
dated 31.6.1981 and the decision of the 7th respondent, the Assistant
Commissioner of Agrarian Services, dated 30\. 11. 1981. The Court of Appeal
affirmed the two aforementioned orders and dismissed the-application. The
appellant. now appeals from the judgment of the Court of Appeal with the
special leave of this Court..

According to the appellant, his father Charles and. the 1st respondent's
father Francis Yapa cultivated as tenant cultivators, two distinct and
separate lots of paddy field called Irikonda in extent 1 acre 2 roods and 2
perches. Each of their lots was 2' roods and 10 perches. He relied on the
certificate of tenancy (P1) issued in 1964 to his father Charles, the extracts
of the Paddy Lands Register for the years 1964 to 1970 (P2 to P4) and the
receipts for the payment of acreage tax made by his father from years 1962 to
1974 (P5 to P15). Upon the death of his father Charles in 1974, the appellant
cultivated his father's lot and his name was entered in the Paddy Lands
Register in 1975 (P16) as the tenant cultivator of that, lot.

In 1979 the appellant alleged that an amendment was falsely and wrongfully
made in the Agricultural Lands Register converting the two separate allotments
of paddy field into one paddy field and his name consequently was deleted from
the Register as the tenant cultivator of: the field. He protested against this
alteration to the Agrarian Services Committee and after several communications
and postponements he was eventually noticed to, appear at an inquiry on 11.
8.81.

The 1st respondent's case is that Charles and his own father Francis Yapa
cultivated an undivided paddy field in extent 1 acre 1 rood as joint tenant
culivators. On the death of the petitioner's father Charles his rights as
tenant cultivator devolved on` his own father, Francis Yapa. Francis Yapa then
died in 1976 and the extract or the Agricultural Lands Register 1 R6 shows
that his eldest son Siripala Yapa was registered as the tenant cultivator of
the entire field for that year, and in 1978 the 1st respondent's name was
entered, in the Register in place of his brother, Siripala (1 R7). The 1st
respondent

**352**

thereafter on 6.1.81 made an application to the Agrarian Services Committee,
himself making the allegation that the appellant had got his name falsely
inserted in the Paddy Lands Register.

The Agrarian Services Committee held an inquiry on 11.8.81 and by its order
which was conveyed to the 1st respondent and the appellant by letter dated
31.8.81 (P27/1R2) amended the Agricultural Lands Register by the deletion of
the appellant's name as tenant cultivator of the paddy field and by the
substitution of the name of the 1st respondent in its place. The order was
made on the basis that where a field is cultivated jointly the rights of a
cultivator who dies, devolves on; the other cultivator in terms of section
8(2) of the Agrarian Services Act No.58 of 1979.

The appellant appealed from this decision to the Assistant Commissioner of
Agrarian Services on 19.10.81. By letter dated 30,11.81 (P35/1R3) his appeal
was dismissed. He then made an application to the Court of Appeal for Writs of
Certiorari to quash the decisions P27 and P35 but his application was
dismissed and the orders affirmed.. The present appeal is from the judgment of
the Court of Appeal.

The only matter argued before us by learned counsel for the appellant was that
the dispute between the appellant and the 1st respondent related to tenancy
rights and should have been referred to the Commissioner for determination in
terms of section 9(1) of the Agrarian Services Act, and not to the Agrarian
Services Committee who had no jurisdiction to entertain it. It was therefore'
submitted that the decision of the Agrarian Services Committee, P27, was made
without jurisdiction and was a nullity. Further it was submitted that the
Commissioner of Agrarian Services to whom the appeal was made had no
jurisdiction as an appellate tribunal to hear it and consequently the Order
P35 made by him was without jurisdiction and void.

It is manifest that the inquiry of 11-8-81 was held into the application made
by the 1st respondent on 6.1-81 for the amendment of the Register of
Agricultural Lands. The letter of 31:8:81 (P27) conveying the decision of the
Agrarian Services Committee to the parties refers to this application and is
captioned "Reasons given at the inquiry into the amendment of the Register of
Names". The allegation of the 1st respondent was that the petitioner had
falsely had his name

**353**

inserted in the Register as tenant cultivator. The appellant himself states
that he complained to the Agrarian Services Committee that the 1st respondent
had got the two separate lots of paddy land entered as one paddy land in the
register and wrongfully had the appellant's name deleted from the register as
tenant cultivator. According to the appellant the inquiry, held on 11. 8.81
was into his protests regarding the amendment of the Paddy -Lands Register,
although P27 -clearly shows that it was held into the applications of the 1st
respondent. Be that as it may, the parties are nonetheless agreed that the
inquiry of 11.8.81 was held into an application for the amendment of the
Agricultural Lands Register.

The procedure for the amendment of the Agricultural Lands Register is set out
in the regulations made in accordance with section 45 (1) of the Agrarian
Services Act. This section provides for the preparation, revision and
maintenance of a register of agricultural lands and entrusts the Agrarian
Services Committee of the area where the lands are situated, with the task of
doing this. Section 45 (2) states that there shall be specified in the
register the name and extent of each agricultural land, the name of the
landlord and tenant cultivator or `owner cultivator and such other particulars
as maybe required by the Commissioner. Section 45 (3) makes such an entry in
the register prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein. Section 45(4) c
provides for the making of regulations in respect of the procedure to be
followed in the preparation and revision of the register and for a ;person who
claims to be entitled under this Act, to have his name :entered in the
register and for a person whose name is entered in the register to apply to
the Agrarian Services Committee to have the name of any other person removed
from the register.

Regulations have been made by the Minister of Agricultural Development and
Research under section 66 of the Agrarian Services Act and are published in
Government Gazette No. 66/14 of 14.12.1979 (p.36).

Every application for; the -amendment of the register must be made to the
Agrarian Services Committee under regulation 11 (1). The Committee after
inquiry allows or disallows the application under. regulation 12(1). An
aggrieved party may within 30 days of the order appeal to the Commissioner
whose decision; subject to an appeal to the Court of Appeal on a question of
law, is final.

**354**

An application to amend the Agricultural Lands Register therefore must be made
to the Agrarian Services Commitee.

Section 8 of the Agrarian Services Act, on the other hand, provides for the-
devaluation of rights of a tenant cultivator. Subsection (1) applies to a
tenant cultivator who does not cultivate a paddy land jointly or in rotation
with any other tenant cultivator and specifies the persons who succeed to his
rights on his death, where no nomination of a successor has been made,
Subsection -(2) relates to a tenant cuItivator who cultivates a paddy land
jointly or in rotation with any other tenant cultivator and provides that on
his death, his rights shall devolve on the other tenant cultivator or
cultivators.

Section 9 (1) provides that a dispute as to the person on whom the rights of
the tenant cultivator shall devolve on his death shall be -referred for
determination to the Commissioner within whose jurisdiction the land is
situated.

Any party aggrieved by the determination of the Commissioner may within thirty
days of the determination appeal to the. Court of Appeal on a question of Jaw.

A dispute thus in regard to devolution of a tenant cultivator's right on his
death must be referred to the Commissioner for determination.

The dispute in the present case is as to whether the paddy land in question
was cultivated jointly or not by the father of the appellant and the father of
the 1st respondent.. It was referred to the Agrarian Services Committee as
requiring the amendment of the Agricultural Lands Register. The question now
is whether such a dispute regarding the character of the cultivation of a
paddy--land, involves a dispute as to the devolution of the rights of .a
tenant cultivator. If it does it must then be referred for determination to
the Commissioner and nor to the Agrarian Services Committee.

Section 9 (1) of the Act provides that a dispute as to the person to whom the
right of such tenant cultivator under this Act devolves, shall be referred for
determination to the Commissioner; "such tenant cultivator under this Act"
refers to the two types of tenant cultivators described in section 8 (1) and
8(2): Section 8 (1) refers to a tenant cultivator who does not cultivate a
paddy land jointly with any other

**355**

tenant cultivator. On his death, in the absence of nomination of a successor,
his rights devolve in the manner specified in: the subsection. Section 8(2)
refers to a tenant cultivator who cultivates a paddy land jointly or in
rotation with any other tenant cultivator or cultivators and in that case, on
his death, his rights devolve on the other tenant cultivator or cultivators.
Subsection (1) and (2) to section 8 specify two different rules of succession
depending on the character of the cultivation of the paddy land by the tenant
cultivator. Hence before the specified rule of succession can be applied, it
must first be determined whether the paddy land was cultivated by the tenant
cultivator jointly or not. The determination of the character of the
cultivation is therefore fundamental to the devolution of the tenant
cultivator's rights.

In my view, therefore, the question whether a tenant cultivator cultivates a
paddy land jointly or not, is involved in a dispute regarding the devolution
of that tenant cultivator's rights. Section 9 which deals with disputes
relating to succession to a tenant cultivator's rights requires that the
dispute shall be referred to the Commissioner for determination.

In the present case the dispute centres on the question whether the paddy land
was cultivated as two distinct and separate lots by the appellant's father and
the 1st respondent's father or as one paddy land cultivated jointly by them.
On the determination of this dispute depended the manner of devolution of the
tenancy rights of the appellant's father who died in 1974. 1f he cultivated a
distinct allotment of paddy land, as maintained by the appellant, then his
tenancy right would devolve on his son the appellant according to section 8 (1
). But if the two lots constituted one paddy land and he cultivated it jointly
with the 1st respondent's father, as is the '1st respondent's case, then on
his death his rights would devolve on the other cultivator, namely the 1st
respondent's father in terms of section 8(2).

It is therefore abundantly clear that the dispute as to the character of the
cultivation necessarily involved a dispute as to the devolution of tenancy
rights.

It is true that the determination of the dispute entails the amendment of the
register but that is only incidental to the determination of the dispute.

**356**

In this case P27 in fact shows that the Agrarian Services Committee had come
to a finding that the rights of the appellant's father devolved on the 1st
respondent's father in terms of section 8 (2) of the Act, on the basis-that
the' paddy' land was jointly cultivated. In arriving at this decision the
committee was clearly deciding the question of the devolution of tenancy
rights, which by section 9(1) is entrusted for determination to the
Commissioner. The Committee therefore had no jurisdiction to determine the
dispute and their decision P27 is void for want of jurisdiction. Similarly the
Assistant Commissioner had no jurisdiction to entertain an appeal from that
decision and its order P35' is also a nullity.

No doubt the appeal was instituted by the appellant, but where there is a
patent want of jurisdiction in the matter, a party cannot by acquiescence or
waiver of objection confer jurisdiction on a body, which has none. Beatrice
Perera v. Commissioner of National Housing (1).

I am accordingly of opinion that the order of the Agrarian Services Committee
(P27) and the Order made in appeal by the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian
Services (P35) have been made without jurisdiction and are void.

I therefore set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and allow the
appeal. Writs of Certiorari will now issue to quash the decision of the 2nd to
the 6th respondents dated 31.8.1981 (P27) and that of the 7th respondent dated
30.1 1.1981 (P35).

As the appellant was himself responsible for the procedure adopted, I make no
order for costs in his favour.

**

SHARVANANDA, C.J. -** I agree.

**ATUKORALE, J. -** I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

_Writs of Certiorari issued .

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1987/8.html_  

