##  Rupasinghe v. Attorney General - SLR - 329, Vol 2 of 1986 [1986] LKSC 8;
(1986) 2 Sri LR 329 (15 July 1986)

**

329

RUPASINGHE  
v.  
ATTORNEY-GENERAL

**

SUPREME COURT.  
WANASUNDERA, J., COLIN-THOME, J., RANASINGHE, J., TAMBIAH, J.  
AND L. H. DE ALWIS, J.  
S.C. APPEAL 43/84-H.C. 624/B.  
FEBRUARY 17, 18, 19, 1986 AND JUNE 30, 1986.

_

Bribery - Bribery Act ss. 8, 16, 18(c) - Right to silence - The Code of
Criminal Procedure Act, section 1 10 - Evidence Ordinance, section 105 -
Burden of proof that gratification was authorised by law on the terms of his
employment.

_

The accused-appellant a public officer (interpreter of a court) was held to
have accepted a gratification of Rs. 50 from an accused person allegedly to
save him from a prison sentence. The accused was indicted before the High
Court on two counts under the Bribery Act. He was acquitted on count 1 but
convicted on count 2.

The accused-appellant while giving his own account of the incident relied on
three main defences:

1\. Violation of his right to silence by the police interrogators,

2\. Failure to accept his exculpatory statement that the money was an advance
for a translation job,

3\. Failure to consider the two charges separately

**330**

**

Held-

**

(1) Under section 110(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act the police are
invested with powers during the investigations of offences of examining orally
any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the
case and the person interrogated is bound to answer truly all such questions
relating to the case put to him except questions which have a tendency to
expose him to a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture. In Sri Lanka,
unlike in England, the right to silence is restricted only to questions which
would have a tendency to expose any person to a criminal charge or to a
penalty or forfeiture. Further if the accused person does make an
incriminating statement in answer to questions by the police that statement
shall not be proved against him at the trial as section 25 of the Evidence
Ordinance expressly forbids it subject to the proviso in section 27 of the
Evidence Ordinance.

(2) The exculpatory dock statement that the payment of Rs. 50 was an advance
fee for translating an appeal brief though admissible in evidence was belated
and not made at the earliest opportunity and was rightly rejected.

(3) The acquittal of the accused-appellant on the first count of having
accepted a gratification as an inducement or reward for interfering with the
due administration of justice-is an offence under s. 16 of the Bribery Act-did
not call for an independent review by the Court of Appeal of the facts
relating to count 2 where the accused was being charged for accepting a
gratification as a State Officer under s. 19 of the Bribery Act as amended by
Act No. 40 of 1958. There was no offence if the payment was authorised by law
or the terms of his employment but the burden of proving this was on the
accused in view of the provisions of the new proviso to s. 19 of the Bribery
Act brought in by the amendment. The accused had failed to discharge this
burden.

**

Cases referred to :

**_

(1) R v. May-(1952) 36 Cr. App. R. 91, 93.

(2) R v- Prager-(1972) 56 Cr. App. R 151(1972) 1 All E.R. 1114.

(3) Hall v. Regina-(1971) I All E. R. 322.

(4) R v. Whitehead-(1929)1 K 8 99.

(5) R v. Keeling-(1942) 1 All E. R. 507.

(6) R v. Feigenbaum-(1919) I K B 437.

(7) R v. Ryan-(1966) 50 Cr. App. R. 144, 148.

(8) R v. Sullivan-(7966) 51 Cr.App. R. 102.

(9) R v. Gilbert-(1978) 66 Cr. App. R. 237.

(10) R v. Lewis-(1973).57 Cr. App. R. 860.

(11) Nathen's Case-(1968) 52 Cr. App. R. 97.

(12) Van Cuylenberg v. Caffoor-(1933) 34 N.L.R. 433.

(13) Van Cuylenberg v. Sellamuttu-(1933) 35 N.L.R. 99.

(14) Deheragoda v Alwis-(1913) 16 N.L.R. 233.

(15) Sugathadasa v. The Republic of Sri Lanka-(1977) N.L.R. 495.

(16) The Queen v Kuaratne-(1968) 71 N.L.R. 529, 557.

(17) Mohamed Auf v. The Queen-(1967) 69 N.L.R. 337, 343.

_

**331**

**

APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

E. R. S. R. Coomaraswamy, P. C. with Lakshman de Alwis, Rohan de Alwis and
Ravi Algama for accused-appellant.

Asoka de Z. Gunawardena, D. S. G. with Nihara Rodrigo, S.C. for Attorney-
General.

Cur. adv. vult.

_

July 15, 1986. **  
COLIN-THOME, J.**

The accused-appellant was indicted under two counts as follows:

1\. That on or about the 2nd December, 1975 being an officer of the Homagama
Magistrate's Court, to wit, Interpreter Mudaliyar, you did accept a
gratification of Rs. 50 from Avis Singho as an inducement or reward for
interfering with the due administration of justice in Magistrate's Court,
Homagama, case No. 22928, an offence punishable under section 16 of the
Bribery Act I

2\. That at the same time and place aforesaid and in the course of the same
transaction you being a state officer, to wit, Interpreter Mudaliyar,
Magistrate's Court, Homagama, you did accept a gratification of Rs 50 from the
said Avis Singho an offence punishable under section 19 (c) of the Bribery Act
as amended by section 8 of the Bribery (Amendment) Law No. 38 of 1974.

The High Court Judge found the accused-appellant guilty under both counts. He
was sentenced to one year's rigorous imprisonment on each count, the sentences
to run concurrently, and to a fine of Rs. 1,000 on each count, in default of
payment of the fine to six weeks' rigorous imprisonment, and also to pay a
penalty of Rs. 100.

The accused-appellant appealed to the Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal
allowed the appeal against the conviction and sentence on count 1 and
dismissed the appeal against the conviction and sentence on count 2, subject
to the penalty of Rs. 100 being reduced to Rs. 50.

Avis Singho and one other were charged for theft in the Magistrate's Court,
Homagama, case No. 22929. On 11-11.1975 Avis Singho and his co-accused pleaded
guilty to the charge. They were finger-printed and warned to appear in Court
on 25.1 1.75 for sentence. Thereafter Avis Singho made representations to the

**332**

Supreme Court through his attorney-at-law alleging that he had been forced by
the Judge and the Interpreter Mudaliyar to plead guilty. He could not appear
before the Magistrate's Court on 25.11.75 and sentence was postponed for the
2nd December.

On 26.11-75 Avis Singho met the accused-appellant (hereinafter called the
appellant) to obtain relief by way of a light sentence. He hoped that the
appellant would not disclose to the Court that he had two previous convictions
for theft. The appellant promised to obtain some relief and solicited a sum of
Rs. 50. Avis Singho promised to meet the appellant on 2.12.75 the next calling
date with the money.

On 27.11.75 Avis Singho made a complaint to the Bribery Commissioner's
Department and it was decided to lay a trap for the appellant on 2.12.75.

Inspector V. Dharmapala who was in charge of the arrangements instructed Avis
Singho to meet the appellant along with Police Constable Bissomenika who was
to pose as his sister. He was also handed marked notes totalling Rs. 50 to be
given to the appellant. Inspector Dharmapala instructed Avis Singho to discuss
with the appellant about the money he had solicited and to inquire from him
the nature of the relief he would be granted. Avis Singho was also instructed
by Inspector Dharmapala to have this discussion with the appellant in the
presence and hearing of Bissomenika.

When Avis Singho along with Bissomenika met the appellant on 2.12.75 he merely
told the appellant "I have brought the money that I promised" and gave the
money to the appellant. The appellant put the money in his pocket. Avis Singho
failed to carry out two vital instructions given him by Inspector Dharmapala,
namely, to inquire from the appellant the nature of the relief he would be
granted and to discuss this matter in the hearing of Bissomenika.

At the trial Avis Singho insisted that he spoke to the appellant in a normal
tone to be heard by Bissomenika. On this point he was contradicted by
Bissomenika who stated that Avis Singho bent down and spoke to the appellant
softly contrary to Inspector Dharmapala's instructions and she did not hear
what he said. Avis Singho was also contradicted by his statement to the police
where he admitted that he "bent down and told the suspect in a soft tone that
he had brought the money he promised". He added "I thought that if I discuss
about the bribe in a loud tone, that the suspect would suspect me and not
accept the bribe from me. Hence I spoke to him softly".

**333**

Bissomenika stated that after the appellant accepted the marked notes she
asked him "Sir, will my elder brother go to jail?" The appellant replied that
he. would save her brother with a fine without sending him to jail.

Inspector Dharmapala stated that on receiving a prearranged signal he entered
the Courthouse and requested the appellant to hand over the bribe that he had
accepted. The appellant got up from his seat took a purse from his right hand
hip pocket, removed the marked notes from his purse and handed them to the
inspector. The case record was before the appellant on his table. Thereafter
the appellant was charged, taken into custody and searched. He was taken to
the residence of the Magistrate of Homagama and later brought to the Bribery
Commissioners Department where his statement was recorded.

The appellant made a dock statement. He stated that Avis Singho came to see
him on 14.11.7 5 and requested him to translate into English an appeal brief
and to type it in triplicate. He went through the copy of the appeal and told
Avis Singho that it would take time and asked him to bring it later with an
advance. On 2.12.75 Avis Singho met him with a female. He bent down and said
in a soft tone "I brought the advance. Keep it, otherwise 1 might spend it".
He accepted the money. The female asked him, "Sir, will my elder brother go to
jail?" He replied "He will go to jail on today's case". Then it struck him
that there was an earlier case, thereafter he told her "He will escape with a
fine". He did not tell her he would save Avis Singho with a fine.

He was taken by Inspector Dharmapala to the residence of the Judge. He told
the Judge "He (Avis Singho) paid off a grudge against Court".

He did not think  s proper for him to tell Inspector Dharmapala that the money
was taken as fees for translation and that this amount of money was taken an
advance. He intended to place these facts before the Bribery missioner but
unfortunately he was not taken before him. C. Amerasekera, Office Assistant of
the Ministry of Justice, called by the prosecution, stated that the appellant
was Interpreter in the Magistrate's Court of Homagama in 1975. He was a State
Officer. He was entitled to charge copying fees and translation fees but he
had to issue a receipt on Form 172 for those fees. In this case the appellant
had not issued a receipt to Avis Singho.

**334**

The main grounds of appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal were:

(a) That there was a misjoinder of charges.. Learned President's Counsel for
the appellant abandoned this submission in the course of the argument of this
appeal.

(b) That there was a material misdirection as to the right to silence of the
appellant.

(c) That there was a misdirection on a vital point used against .the
appellant, to wit, the contents of the reply that the appellant gave to the
question asked by Bissomenika, according to his dock statement.

(d) That there was a misdirection in acting on the findings of fact of the
High Court Judge (who failed to separate the evidence relating to the two
charges and to consider the two charges separately and whose judgment was set
aside on Charge 1) in the review by the Court of Appeal of the evidence
against the appellant on Charge 2, without an independent review.

Learned President's Counsel for the appellant submitted that as there was no
express provision in our law dealing with the legality and propriety of
comment by court on the right to silence exercised by an accused person during
the police investigation we should have regard to the provisions of section
100 of the Evidence Ordinance and have recourse to the corresponding lave of
evidence for the time being obtaining in England.

The imugned portions of the judgment of the Court of Appeal which learned
President's Counsel submitted violated the accused's "Right to silence" as
laid down in a series of English decisions stated, inter alia, that:

(a) "The accused stated that by his experience he thought it was not proper to
tell the inspector that he had accepted the money as an advance fee for
translations, because he was connected with the raid. This conduct of the
accused - appellant is strange. He is a senior, experienced officer of court
and being the Interpreter Mudaliyar of a Magistrate's court, he would have
known that it was important for him to tell his version, if the transaction
was an innocent and lawful one, at the earliest opportunity to a person in
authority. If he did not want to mention this to Inspector Dharmapala, he had
every opportunity to do so to the District Judge, who remanded him, if he
could have told the Judge as follows, He paid off a grudge against ` Court",
he could then surely have told him that he accepted Rs. 50 as an advance for
the translation of the appeal into English."

**335**

(c) "Then, he had every opportunity of informing the Bribery Commissioner of
his version, but he had not done so."

(d) "Though he stated that he wanted to tell his version of this transaction
to a public officer superior to Inspector Dharmapala, he has taken no steps to
do so."

(e) "It is very strange that it took him almost four and a half years after
the incident, to divulge his version for the first time in Court."

The origin of the Judges" Rules in England for the guidance of police officers
conducting investigations was in 1912. Since then these Rules have been
amended from time to time. Judges' Rules which came into effect on January 27,
1964 (see Home Officer Circular No. 89/1978) are not rules of law. In R v. May
(1) Lord Goddard observed:

"Judges' Rules are not rules of law but rules of practice drawn up for the
guidance of police officers; and if a statement has been made in circumstances
not in accordance with the Rules, in law that statement is not made
inadmissible if it is a voluntary statement, although in its discretion the
court can always refuse to admit it if the court thinks there has been a
breach of the Rules."

In R v. Prager (2) the Court of Appeal reaffirmed that the essence of
admissibility is that the statement was made voluntarily. This principle is
expressly left untouched by the Rules. The "non-observance (of the Rules) may,
and at times does, lead to the exclusion of an alleged confession; but
ultimately all turns on the Judge's decision as to whether, breach or no
breach, it has been shown to have been made voluntarily."

Rules II and III deal with the administering of a caution at different stages

II. As soon as a police officer has evidence, which would afford . reasonable
grounds for suspecting that a person has committed an offence. he shall
caution that person or cause him to be cautioned before putting to him any
questions, or further questions, relating to that offence. The caution shall
be in the following terms:

"You are not obliged to say anything unless you wish to do so but what you say
may be put into writing and given in evidence."

**336**

III (b) purpose of preventing or minimising harm of loss to sour prosecuted
for an offence, he shall be cautioned in the following terms:

(The caution here is similar to the caution in Rule 11).

IIl (b). It is only in exceptional cases that questions relating to the
offence should be put to the accused person after he had been charged or
informed that he may be prosecuted. Sub questions may be put where they are
necessary for to purpose of preventing or minimizing harm or loose to son
other person or to the public or for clearing up an ambiguity a previous
answer or statement.

(The caution here is similar to the caution in Rule 11).

In Hall v. Regina (3) a defendant was informed by a police office who did not
caution him, of an allegation made by a third pers against him. The defendant
remained silent. The Privy Council observed (per Lord Diplock at Page 324 )
that:

'It is a clear and widely-known principle of the common law Jamaica, as in
England, that a person is entitled to refrain for answering 'a question put to
him for the purpose of discover whether he has committed a criminal offence. A
fortiori, he is un no obligation to comment when he is informed that someone
has accused him of an offence. It may be that in very exceptic circumstances
an inference may be drawn from a failure to give explanation or a disclaimer,
but in their Lordships view silence ale on being informed by a police officer
that someone else has an accusation against him cannot give rise to an
inference that person to whom this information is communicated accepts the of
the accusation.'

The appeal was allowed and the appellant's conviction quash The Privy Council
affirmed the principles la id down in R v. Whiteh (4) and in R v. Keeling (5)
and disapproved of R. v. Feigenbaum (6)

In R. v. Whitehead (supra) it was held that the fact that the prise when
charged and cautioned made no denial of the charge could be corroboration.

**337**

In R. v. Keeling (supra) the appellant was convicted on a charge of having
unlawful carnal knowledge of a girl of 8 years. Having regard to her age, the
little girl was not sworn and according to the proviso to section 38 of the
Children and Young Persons Act, 1933, it was essential as a matter of law that
her evidence should be corroborated some other material evidence implicating
the appellant.

The Judge directed the jury that there was in fact the necessary corroboration
to be found, if they thought proper to take that view, in the conduct of the
appellant from first to last when the accusation in question was made against
him

The conduct referred to consisted of the appellant's answers at three stages
in the proceedings preliminary to his trial. When he was cautioned that he was
not bound to make any statement and told of the charge by the police officer
who arrested him, he said,

"I know what you mean, but not likely. She plays with the Sawbridge girl".

After the warrant had been read over to him, he said. "I have got you-nothing
to say".

At the hearing before the committing magistrate, the appellant was cautioned
in the manner provided by statute, thus

"Do you wish to say anything in answer to the charge? You are not obliged to
say anything unless you desire to do so but whatever you say will be taken
down in writing and may be given in evidence upon your trial."

Having been cautioned by the magistrate, his answer was as follows

"I am not guilty. I am going to state nothing."

The trial judge drew the attention of the jury to the prisoner's conduct. Each
of the three stages was mentioned by the trial judge and, in particular, he
referred to the failure of the prisoner to make any further statement before
the magistrates, and his failure to go, into the witness-box at the trial.

It was held:

"That some at least of the conduct to which the judge referred in his
direction to the jury, and most obviously the conduct of the prisoner when
addressed by the committing justices in not making any denial of the charge
beyond saying that he was not guilty.

**338**

cannot in point of law be regarded as affording corroborative material for the
jury. It is impossible to say whether that part, if any, of the statement
which was admissible would have been sufficient to satisfy the jury. The judge
told the jury that they could look at the prisoner's conduct from first to
last in failing adequately to deny the charge as affording the necessary
corroboration. In our opinion that conduct did not in point of law afford such
material. Accordingly, the conviction cannot stand and must be quashed, and
this appeal allowed."

On the other side of the dividing line is the case of R. v. Feigenbaum
(supra). The appellant was charged with having incited certain boys to steal
fodder. Evidence was given for the prosecution by the boys and also by a
police officer, who stated that he had called at the appellant's house, after
the boys had been arrested for stealing fodder, and had told him that the boys
giving their names, had informed the police that the appellant had sent them
to steal the fodder, that they had stolen fodder for the appellant on other
occasions, giving the dates and that the appellant had paid them specified
sums for the stolen fodder. The appellant had made no reply to this statement.
It was held that the jury had been rightly directed that they were entitled to
consider whether the appellant's failure to reply was not in the circumstances
some corroboration of the boys' evidence. (This decision was disapproved in
Hall v. Regina (supra)).

In R v. Ryan (7) the Court of Criminal Appeal observed that

". .. . it is wrong to say to a jury, 'Because the accused exercised what is
undoubtedly his right, the privilege of remaining silent, you may draw an
inference of guilt', it is quite a different matter to say 'This accused, as
he was entitled to do, has not advanced at any. earlier stage the explanation
that he has offered to you today; you, the jury, may take into account when
you are assessing the weight that you think right to attribute to the
explanation'".

In R v. Sullivan (8) the accused, who was convicted of smuggling watches from
Switzerland, had refused to answer questions asked by the Customs Officers.
During the course of his summing up the judge said to the jury:

"Of course, bear in mind that he was fully entitled to refuse to answer
questions, he has an absolute right to do just that, and it is not to be held
against him that he did that. But you might well think that It a man is
innocent he would be anxious to answer questions. Now, members of the Jury,
that is really what it amounts to."

**339**

The Court of Appeal said with reference to this (per Salmon, L.J. at 105)

"It seems pretty plain that all the members of that jury, if they had any
common sense at all, must have been saying to themselves precisely what the
learned judge said to them. The appellant was not obliged to answer, but how
odd, if he was innocent, that he should not have been anxious to tell the
Customs Officers why he had been to Geneva, whether he had put the watches in
the bag, and so on." ,

Then, after referring to the authorities, the judgment went on to say that
sometimes comment on the accused's silence was unfair but that there was no
unfairness in this case. It then continued

"The line dividing what may be said and what may not be said is a very fine
one, and it is perhaps doubtful whether in a case like the present it would be
even perceptible to the members of any ordinary jury."

The court held that they were compelled, in the existing state of the law, to
hold that the judge's comment was a misdirection, but they dismissed the
appeal under the proviso to section 4(1) of the Criminal Appeal Act 1907 (c.
23) on the ground that "no possible miscarriage of justice occurred".

In R v. Gilbert (9) the appellant was charged with the murder of one Taylor.
At the trial for the first time, when admitting that he had stabbed his
victim, he said he had done so, inter alia, in self defence. The trial judge
read the appellant's statement to the police to the jury and remarked that the
appellant was perfectly entitled to remain silent, but that he had made no
mention of self-defence in it. However, the Court of Appeal, consisting of
Lord Dilhorne, Lord Scarman' and Jupp, J., held that as the law stands no
comment is permissible that implies that the jury may draw an inference
adverse to the accused from his exercise of his "right to silence",
disapproving of the decision to the contrary in R v. Ryan (supra). Inspite of
the misdirection by the trial judge, the Court of Appeal held that,
nevertheless, as no miscarriage of justice had actually occurred, the Court
would, in its discretion, apply the proviso to section 2 (1) of the Criminal
Appeal Act 1968, and dismissed the appeal.

**340**

The court indicated however, that the law is unsatisfactory and hinted that it
was open to review in the House of Lords. If the House were to say that such
comments were permissible, the Judges' Rules would have to be altered,
particularly as to the wording of the caution.

In England under the Criminal Justice Act 1967, s. 11 (1)

"On a trial on indictment the defendant shall not without the leave of court
adduce evidence in support of an alibi unless, before the end of the
prescribed period, he gives notice of particulars of the alibi."

The 'prescribed period' means the period of seven days from the end of the
proceedings before the examining justices.

In R v. Lewis (10) the Court of Appeal held that a judge should not in his
summing-up comment unfavourably on the fact that the defendant, after arrest
and caution by the police, failed to say that he had an alibi, since under
section 11 (6) of the Criminal Justice Act 1967 the time at which notice of
alibi must be given has been prescribed by the legislature. The court,
however, held that despite the misdirection there was no miscarriage of
justice and applied the proviso to section 2(1) of the Criminal Appeal Act
1968.

The Court dismissed the appeal and the sentence was reduced.

The right to silence is a right against self-incrimination. This doctrine is
an aspect of the rules of procedure and evidence which, in their application
to criminal proceedings, are based on a compromise between the security of the
community and the rights of the accused. A traditional feature of the
"adversary" (as opposed to an 'inquisitorial') system of criminal
jurisprudence is the privilege against self-incrimination. The origins of the
doctrine against self-incrimination in the English Common Law are discernible
in the pronouncement of the later Stuart Judges which echoed the revulsion of
the community against the practice of the Court of Star Chamber of compelling
persons brought before it to testify against themselves on oath. The use of
the rack and other forms of torture to extort confessions or other
incriminating statements from persons accused of crime contributed to this
reaction. This privilege is also sacrosanct in the constitutional laws of the
United States of America and finds expression in the Fifth Amendment to the
American Constitution.

**341**

The condition of contemporary English law prompted far-reaching proposals by
the Criminal Law Revision Committee in its Eleventh Report (June 1972). They
made the following observations and recommendations: -

"28. We propose to restrict greatly the so-called 'right of silence' enjoyed
by suspects when interrogated by the police or by anyone charged with the duty
of investigating offences or charging offenders. By the right of silence in
this connection we mean the rule that, if the suspect, when being interrogated
omits to mention some fact which would exculpate him, but keeps this back till
the trial, the court or jury may not infer that his evidence on this issue at
the trial is untrue. Under our proposal, it will be permissible to draw this
inference if the circumstances justify it. The suspect will have the 'right of
silence' in the sense that it is no offence to refuse to answer questions or
tell his story when interrogated ; but if he chooses to exercise this right,
he will risk having an adverse inference drawn against him at his trial.

30\. In our opinion it is wrong that it should not be permissible for the jury
or magistrates' court to draw whatever inferences are reasonable from the
failure of the accused, when interrogated to mention a defence which he puts
forward at his trial. To forbid it seems to us to be contrary to common sense
and, without helping the innocent, to give an unnecessary advantage to the
guilty. Hardened criminals often take advantage of the present rule to refuse
to answer any questions at all, and this may greatly hamper the police and
even bring their investigations to a halt. Therefore the abolition of the
restriction would help justice."

The Report stated that Sir Norman Skelhorn (one of the members of the
Committee) had argued for an amendment of the law for these reasons in his
address "Crime and Punishment of Crime: Investigation of Offences and Trial of
Accused Persons" delivered at the Commonwealth and Empire Law Conference in
Sydney in. 1965. The present restriction on judicial comment was also strongly
criticized by Salmon, L.J., in giving the judgment of the Court of Appeal in
R. v. Sullivan (supra).

**342**

The Report added in paragraph thirty-one:

"31 . So far as we can see, there are only two possible arguments for
preserving the present rule

(i) Some lawyers seem to think that it is somehow wrong in principle that a
criminal should be under any kind of pressure to reveal his case before his
trial. The reason seems to be that it is thought to be repugnant-or, perhaps
rather, 'unfair'-that a person should be obliged to choose between telling a
lie and incriminating himself. Whatever the reason, this is a matter of
opinion and we disagree. There seems to us nothing wrong in principle in
allowing an adverse inference to be drawn against a person at his trial if he
delays mentioning his defence till the trial and shows no good reason for the
delay. As to the argument that it is 'unfair' to put pressure on a suspect in
this way, what we said above about fairness in criminal trials generally
applies. Bentham's famous comment (Treatise of Evidence, p. 241) on the rule
that suspects could not be judicially interrogated seems to us to apply
strongly to the 'right of silence' in the case under discussion. He wrote

'If all criminals of every class had assembled, and framed a system after
their own wishes, is not this rule the very first which they would have
established for their security? Innocence never takes advantage of it.
Innocence claims the right of speaking, as guilt invokes the privilege of
silence.'

(ii) It has been argued that the suggested change would endanger the innocent
because it would enable the police, when giving evidence, to suppress the fact
that the accused did mention to them the story which he told in court. But we
reject this argument for two reasons. First, we do not regard this possible
danger as a good enough reason for leaving the law as it now is. Second, it is
already permissible to draw an adverse inference from the fact that a suspect
told a lie to the police or tried to run away: and (as mentioned above) even
silence can be taken into account in assessing the value of the evidence given
by the accused in court. In neither of these cases is it considered a fatal
objection that the police might say falsely that the accused told the lie or
that he failed to tell his story.

**343**

32\. We propose that the law should be amended so that, if the accused has
failed, when being interrogated by anyone charged with the duty of
investigating offences or charging offenders, to mention a fact which he
afterwards relies on at the committal proceedings or the trial, the court or
jury may draw such inferences as appear proper in determining the question
before them. The fact would have to be one which the accused could reasonably
have been expected to mention at the time."

The Committee also recommended (in para. 40) that in any case where an adverse
inference may properly be drawn from the accused's silence, it will be
permissible to treat his silence as corroboration of the evidence against him
for any purpose for which corroboration is material. Since the caution
embodied in the Judges' Rules was inconsistent with this recommendation, it
was proposed that the Judges' Rules should be abolished, to be replaced by
administrative directions.

It would appear that many of the decisions of the Committee had not been
unanimous and there have been differences of opinion and dissents from some of
the members. There was also strong criticism of the recommendations from other
quarters. We were shown a critique of the Report by Sir Brian Mackonna in the
1972 Criminal Law Review, 605, where most of the grounds for the
recommendations have been critically examined and refuted. For the purpose of
this case, I shall draw attention to one or two relevant observations made by
Sir Brian.

Referring to the treatment of suspects by the Committee as falling into only
two classes, the guilty and the wholly innocent, which is undoubtedly too
simplistic, Sir Brian says at page 614

"That useful paper 'The Jury at Work' suggests that most suspects are in some
way implicated in the offence under investigation, either through their
presence at the scene of the crime, or through their commission of the actus
reus, the only question being about the state of their mind, intention,
knowledge and the like, or, in cases of violence, self-defence. All these
would have something to explain away, and they might not all feel confident of
their ability, without legal assistance, to select and state all the facts on
which their counsel might afterwards wish to rely in their defence.
Questioning by the police will not always be limited to an inquiry about the
facts to be relied on by the suspect in

**344**

his defence. It may take the form of an unfriendly cross-examination in the
course of which even an innocent man might contradict himself or be induced to
say something which he might afterwards wish to retract. It will be conducted
in the absence of any friend or adviser of the suspect who might be able to
support him if later he should wish to challenge the police account of the
interview I do not find it far-fetched to suppose that even an innocent man
might wish to reserve his defence until his trial, or at least until he had an
opportunity of being legally advised, and to postpone his cross-examination
until he would be protected by an impartial judge. "

The following observations by Sir Brian regarding the Committee's assumption
that police investigations are always above board may also have some bearing
on this matter. After referring to a statement by Winn, L.J., in Nathan's case
(11), to the effect that the police can now be trusted and that they "behave
with complete fairness towards those who come into their hands or from whom
they are seeking information-, Sir Brian states at page 617:

"The other view is expressed by three dissenting members of the Committee in
paragraph 52 of the Report. They speak of the practice of questioning suspects
in custody as being 'fraught with dangers'. They mention 'the danger of the
use of bullying and even brutal methods by the police in order to obtain
confessions' and continue

"As with the use of violence, it is impossible to assess the extent to which
the police at present commit perjury, but there is a widespread impression,
not only among criminals, that in tough areas a police officer who is certain
that he has got the right man will invent some oral admission (colloquially
known as a 'verbal') to clinch the case".

They cite this passage from the 1962 Report of the Royal Commission on the
Police:

'There was a body of evidence, too substantial to disregard, which in effect
accused the police of stooping to the use of undesirable means of obtaining
statements and of occasionally giving perjured evidence in a court of law.'

**345**

They refer to the use of oppressive methods

'it is demonstrated from time to time that even ordinary questioning can
produce false confessions, but the risk is greatly increased if oppressive
methods are used.'

They criticize the present methods of recording statements:

One may not even be sure that the officer understood what the suspect said, or
that the suspect understood the written statement when he read it through or
had it read to him..:. The possibilities of error are multiplied if, as often
happens, the statement is not reduced to writing at the time and signed by the
suspect'."

In 1982, Professor G. L. Peiris in an article in the journal LAWASIA entitled
"An accused person's privilege against self-incrimination", made a comparative
analysis of the English, New Zealand and South Asian Legal systems and brought
the wealth of his learning and knowledge in dealing with this same question.
In Part III of his article, he sums up the position with his mature
observations:

"The predominant criticism of the privilege is that it seriously impedes law
enforcement and is, therefore detrimental to the well-being of the community.
It has been argued that the obstacles it imposes in regard to the
determination of guilt may prove insuperable. The Supreme Court of Canada has
observed

'We have not yet arrived at the point that one accused of crime has so many
and so high rights that the people have none. The administration of our law is
not a game in which the cleverer and more astute is to win, but a serious
proceeding by people in earnest to discover the actual facts for the sake of
public safety.'

The most trenchant denigration of the privilege has been made by Bentham who
derisively declared that the privilege rested on two pivots-'the old woman's
reason' and 'the fox-hunter's reason.' The essence of the first reason is the
harshness of the consequences attending on self-incrimination. The second
reason, according to Bentham, purports to introduce into the law a spurious
notion of fairness.

**346**

In the Commonwealth as in the United States of America, there is a growing
body of informed opinion that the privilege against self-incrimination confers
on the accused too great a degree of protection at the expense of the
community. It is submitted, however, that in the context of investigation of
crime by the police in England, New Zealand and South Asian jurisdictions,
legal recognition of the privilege is supportable cogently on several grounds:

(a) But for the existence of the privilege, persons who are subjected to
police interrogation may be confronted with overwhelming difficulties
repugnant to accepted notions of equity and fair dealing. If a deponent were
compelled to answer questions truthfully and to provide incriminating evidence
against himself, the effectiveness of his defence in court may be greatly
imperilled.

(b) The use of the fruits of self-incrimination has a demoralising effect, at
least potentially, on the prosecution. A profound truth is reflected in
Wigmore's assertion that 'Any system of administration which permits the
prosecution to trust habitually to compulsory self-disclosure as a source of
proof must itself suffer thereby. The inclination develops to rely mainly on
such evidence and to be satisfied with an incomplete investigation of the
other sources. This danger is all the more real in the setting of the South
Asian legal systems. The Privy Council, dealing with considerations of policy
which militate against the reception in evidence of incriminating statements
made to police officers, has stated

'Police authority itself, however carefully controlled, carries a menace to
those brought suddenly under its shadow; and the law recognizes and provides
against the danger of such persons making incriminating statements with the
intention of placating authority.'

(c) Removal of the privilege is a potent disincentive to willigness on the
part of persons to participate in an inquiry conducted by the police into the
commission of an offence. The privilege may be seen as a means of securing for
the police the fullest possible information for the successful conduct of the
inquiry.

**347**

(d) Persons under interrogation by the police are often susceptible to direct
coercion and to insidious pressure. The reminder by the Supreme Court of the
United States that the police may accomplish their objectives 'not only with
ropes and a rubber hose, not only by relay questioning persistently,
insistently, subjugating a tired mind, but by subtler devices' is of
particular relevance in South Asian countries where popular attitudes to
police authority still contain a substantial element of diffidence and
apprehension. Consequently, survival of the privilege has the beneficial
result that inhibition is minimized, if not eliminated, and candour
encouraged, so that the reliability of statements made to the police during an
investigation is enhanced.

(e) Recognition of the privilege contributes to the preservation of a just
equilibrium between the individual and the State in the sphere of detection
and punishment of crime. One implication of the privilege is to require the
Government 'in its contact with the individual to shoulder the entire load'
and 'to leave the individual alone until good cause is shown for disturbing
him.' This ensures that the resources of the State are not exploited in a
manner intolerably oppressive to the individual.

(f) The privilege against self-incrimination provides a palliative against the
enforcement of harsh law and the application of unjust procedures. This is
responsible in large measure for the popularity which the privilege enjoys.

The Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure in England and Wales (1981), in its
Report had adopted the traditional attitude to the scope of the privilege and
declined to recommend any change of the existing law as to the consequence of
silence during the investigative stage and at the trial. The Commission
attached considerable weight to the argument that the right of silence formed
a vital issue in the whole constitutional relationship in a free society
between the individual and the State. The Commission no doubt took into
account the criticism of the- recommendations of the Criminal Law Revision
Committee by professional and law organization.

The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 gives a suspect in police custody a
statutory right to have someone informed of his arrest and of his place of
detention and the right to consult a solicitor privately if

**348**

he so requests. There are, however, some exceptions. There is a draft Code of
Practice formulated by the Home Secretary in terms of the Act which recognise
the right to silence. Paragraph 3 of the Code requires the officer authorising
detention to notify the suspect of the above right and also of his right to
consult the Code of Practice. Under paragraph 6, if the suspect is unable to
nominate a solicitor, he must be advised of the availability of duty
solicitors. It also states that-subject to certain exceptions-a suspect who
asks for legal advice may not be interviewed until he has received such advice
and that he can have his solicitor present when interviewed. The Code of
Practice also continues the old caution rule although branches of the Code are
rendered immune from criminal and civil proceedings. In all probability a
court could in its discretion exclude evidence which had been unfairly
obtained even in this regard.

We were also referred to an informative article by Professor Mong Hoong Yoo of
the University of Singapore entitled "Diminishing the Right to Silence: the
Singapore Experience' appearing in 1983 Criminal Law Review 89. This article
tries to evaluate the Singaporean experience during the five-year period
following the passing of the Criminal Procedure Code (Amendment) Act No. 10 of
1976. This amending Act embodied almost in to and even the identical
phraseology and language of the recommendations of the Criminal Law Revision
Committee's Eleventh Report on Evidence (1972). Prior to that, the legal
position both in Singapore and England appears to have been almost identical,
except for the fact that jury trials did not obtain in Singapore. The article
deals with "the right to silence" in its two aspects-out of court silence and
in-court silence-which are dealt with separately by the writer. From an
analysis of statistics, the writer concluded that accused persons rarely
remained silent out of court even before the amendments and that the
percentage of cases where the accused testified in court was slightly more in
the pre-amendment period than in the post-amendment period. The writer
concludes as follows at page 100:

"The two studies described above indicate that the amendments have not
materially assisted the Singapore police force and prosecuting officers in
their combat against crime. The tentative results suggest that the practical
value of the right to silence in court has hardly been effected by the
amendment. Hence those who regard the right to silence as 'golden' can rest
assured that the amendments have done little to tarnish its sheen."

**349**

In Sri Lanka the procedure regarding the investigation of offences by any
police officer or inquirer is laid down in Chapter X1, Part V, of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979. This Act repealed Chapters 11 and IV
of the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973. Chapter II of the
Administration of Justice Law, section 55 to 92, dealt with Criminal
Procedure. Section 70(4) stated:

S. 70(4). "it shall be the duty of a police officer before examining a person
to inform him that he is bound to answer truly all questions relating to such
case put to such person by him, except such questions as have a tendency to
expose him to a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture ; and such
person shall be bound to answer truly all questions relating to such case put
to him by such officer other than the aforesaid questions."

Section 70 of the Administration of Justice Law has now been replaced by
section 110 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979, which deals
with the examination of witnesses by any police officer or inquirer. Section
110(2) states as follows:

S. 110(2). "Such person shall be bound to answer truly all questions relating
to such case put to him by such officer or inquirer other than questions which
would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal' charge or to a penalty or
forfeiture."

Section 110(2) is almost identical with section 122(2) of the former Criminal
Procedure Code (Cap. 16). The only change in the wording is that "or inquirer"
has been introduced in s..110(2) after the words "such (police) officer."
Section 457(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979, states:

S. 457 (2) "Any appeal, application, trial, inquiry or investigation pending
in any court on the day immediately preceding the appointed date may be
disposed of, continued, held, or made as the case may be as nearly as may be
practical under the provisions of this Code."

In the instant case the alleged offences were committed on 2nd December, 1975.
The trial commenced on 7.4.1980. The trial in this case was pending when the
Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979 was certified on 8th March,
1979. Therefore the applicable law at this stage of the case is section 110(2)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979.

**350**

In Sri Lanka, unlike in England, the right to silence is restricted only to
questions which would have a tendency to expose any person to a criminal
charge or to a penalty or forfeiture. This has been the law in Sri Lanka for a
considerable period of time. Under section 110 (1) the police are invested
with powers during the investigations of offences of examining "orally any
person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the
case." In Sri Lanka, unlike in England, a reciprocal obligation is imposed on
the person interrelated, in that such person is declared to be "bound to
answer truly all questions relating to such case put to him by a police
officer or inquirer other than questions which have a tendency to expose him,
to a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture.". In Sri Lanka the right
to silence has been and is governed by statute and such questions are not
determined by the English Common Law and the English decisions pertaining
thereto.

The recognition of a general duty under our law to answer questions put by the
police during the investigation of a crime represents a sharp contrast with
English law which, as a rule, declines to impose an obligation to answer out-
of-court questions of the police.

The refusal to answer a question which a public servant is legally authorised
to ask constitutes an offence under section 177 of the Penal Code. In Van
Culenberg v. Caffoor (12) the appellant was charged under section 177 of the
Penal Code, that being legally bound under the provisions of section 122 (2)
of the Criminal Procedure Code to answer truly the questions put to him by a
Police Officer, relating to an offence, he refused to answer them on the
ground that they would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge. It
was held that in order to entitle a person to the privilege of silence under
such circumstances, the Court must see that there is a reasonable ground to
apprehend danger to such person' from his being compelled to answer. See also
Van Culenberg v. Sellamuttu (13) and Deheragoda v. Alwis (14). The danger to
be apprehended must be real and not imaginary.

The distinction between the law in Sri Lanka and the English Common Law
relating to the right to silence may be summarised as follows

(a) A person who is interrogated under section 110 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979, is under statutory compulsion to answer all
relevant questions other than those

**351**

which have an incriminating character. In Sri Lanka the right to silence does
not extend to an exculpatory statement. According to the Oxford Dictionary an
"exculpatory" statement is a statement which clears a person from a charge.
English law recognizes no duty to answer questions put by the police.

(b) There is no provision in Sri Lanka like the Judges" Rules in England for
the administrating of a caution to the accused while he is under interrogation
by the police;

(c) Under section 110(3) a statement made by any person to a police officer in
the course of any investigation may be used for the purpose of impeachment of
his credibility and not for the purpose of corroborating his testimony in
Court. In England a statement made by the accused to a police officer after he
has been cautioned is admissible as substantive evidence against him.

There is a statutory immunity in our law given to a suspect to decline to
answer any incriminating questions put by the police. However, if he does make
an incriminating statement in answer to questions by the police that statement
shall not be proved against him at his trial as section 25 of the Evidence
Ordinance expressly forbids it subject to the proviso in section 27 of the
Evidence Ordinance.

At the trial in this case the appellant made a dock statement. His defence was
that the Rs. 50 given him by Avis Singho was an advance fee for translating
his appeal brief into English. He was authorised by law to charge a fee for
translations.

The defence if believed exculpated the appellant completely under the proviso
to section 19(C) of the Bribery Act which states:

".... that it shall not be an offence for a State Officer to solicit or accept
a gratification which he is authorised by the law or the terms of his
employment to receive."

In his dock statement the appellant gave an explanation why he did not state
to a person in authority at the earliest opportunity that the money was an
advance fee for translating an appeal brief.

**352**

He stated that he thought it was not proper to state this to Inspector
Dharmapala as he was an officer who was connected with the raid and because
police officers try to establish a case somehow or other. The appellant did
not state that he expressly invoked the right to silence on the ground that
his answers would expose him to a criminal charge.

There is also no precise evidence whether a question was asked by Inspector
Dharmapala which would have given the appellant the reasonable apprehension
that by answering the question it would have a tendency to expose him to a
criminal charge. However, giving the appellant the benefit of the doubt on
this matter he has yet to explain why he did not tell the Judge at the
earliest opportunity, when taken to his residence, that the money he accepted
was an advance fee for translating an appeal brief. After all on his own
testimony, if he had opportunity and the time to tell the Judge: "He (Avis
Singho) paid off a grudge against court" he could quite easily and briefly
have told the Judge that the money was for translation of a brief.

A statement from the dock constitutes substantive evidence despite the lack of
oath or affirmation and the absence of cross examination which effects the
value of the statement: Sugathadasa v. The Rupublic of Sri Lanka (15), The
Queen v. Kularatne (16).

In order to assess the probative value of the dock statement in the instant
case it was necessary for the Court of Appeal to examine the infirmities in
that statement. In the exceptional circumstances of this case the Court of
Appeal correctly took into account the failure of the appellant to mention the
exculpatory statement in his defence at the earliest opportunity. The Court of
Appeal correctly had not treated the appellant's silence at the investigative
stage as corroboration of the evidence against him nor had it drawn an
inference of guilt from his silence. The Court of Appeal had taken the
appellant's silence into consideration in order to test the weight to be
attached to his dock statement, which it was entitled to do in the
circumstances of this case.

The accused under the Common Law systems has the assurance not merely that he
is entitled to remain silent but that the exercise of this right will cause
him no peril whatever. This consideration accounts largely for the hesitation
shown by English Judges to permit any unfavourable inference from the silence
of the accused at the time he

**353**

is charged. The law in Sri Lanka is not a creature of the English Common Law
but has received statutory expression in section 110 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act which casts a duty on a person to answer truly all questions put
to him by a police officer investigating an offence, except questions which
would expose him to a criminal charge. The refusal to answer such questions
may form the basis of a charge under section 177 of the Penal Code. In
exceptional circumstances a judge should not be inflexibly debarred from
commenting on the fact that the defence has not been divulged on a previous
occasion, but propriety of the comment depends on the nature of the
information that is withheld. In the circumstances of this case I hold that
the Court of Appeal was justified in commenting on the appellant's failure to
state his defence at the earliest opportunity at the pre-trial stage, and that
there was no material misdirection as to the right of silence of the
appellant.

The next submission of learned President's Counsel was that the Court of
Appeal had misdirected itself on a vital point regarding the contents of the
reply by the appellant to the question by Bissomenika "Sir, will my elder
brother go to jail?"

Learned President's Counsel submitted that since the evidence of Avis Singho
had been totally rejected by the Court of Appeal on the first charge the
evidence of Bissomenika as to what the appellant told her when she questioned
him about her brother's case assumes great importance as it is the only
independent item of evidence against the appellant.

The impugned passage in the judgment of the Court of Appeal reads:

"Then a female who had come with the complainant asked him whether her elder
brother would go to jail and he replied: 'He will go to jail in today's case.
Then it struck me that there was an earlier case. Thereafter, I told her that
I would save him with a fine'."

Learned President's Counsel submitted that this was a serious misstatement of
fact as the appellant had said in his dock statement:

"He will escape with a fine. I did not tell her that I would save him with a
fine".

**354**

It should be noted, however, that the sentence following immediately after the
impugned passage in the judgment in page 26 states:

"He said that he did not tell her that he would save her elder brother with a
fine."

At page 23 of the judgment the dock statement of the appellant has been
correctly quoted

"Then I told her he will escape with a fine."

The evidence of Bissomenika has been accepted both by the High Court and the
Court of Appeal. Bissomenika stated that when she asked the appellant

"Sir, will my elder brother go to jail?" He replied: "he would save his
brother with a fine without sending him to jail."

Taking into consideration all the circumstances connected with the
conversation between Bissomenika and the appellant I hold that no prejudice
was caused to the appellant.

The final submission of learned President's Counsel was that there was a
misdirection by the Court of Appeal in acting on the findings of fact of the
High Court Judge (who failed to separate the evidence relating to the two
charges and to consider the two charges separately and whose judgment was not
set aside on Charge 1) in the review by the Court of Appeal of the evidence
against the appellant on Charge 2, without an independent review.

Section 19 of the original Bribery Act (Cap. 26) did not have subsection (c).
It was introduced by section 13 of the Bribery (Amendment) Act No. 40 of 1958.
The new amendment reads:

S. 19(c).

"Who, being a public servant, solicits or accepts any gratification, which he
is not authorised by law or the terms of his employment to receive, shall be
guilty of an offence etc."

In Mohamed Auf v. The Queen (17) it was held (per H. N. G. Fernando, C.J.)
that where a public servant is charged under section 19 (c) of the Bribery
Act, with having accepted a gratification which he was not authorized by law
or the terms of his employment to receive, the burden of proving that the
gratification was unauthorized lies on the prosecution.

**355**

In consequence of this judgment section 19 of the Bribery Act was further
amended by section 8 of the Bribery (Amendment) Law, No. 38 of 1974 as
follows:

(1) by the substitution, for paragraph (c) of that section, of the following
paragraph:

"(c) who, being a state officer, solicits or accepts any gratification," ;

(2) by the substitution for the full stop at the end of the section, of a
colon ; and

(3) by the addition, at the end of that section, of the following proviso:

"Provided, however, that it shall not be an offence for a state officer to
solicit or accept any gratification which he is authorised by law or the terms
of his employment to receive."

A "gratification" under section 90 of the principal enactment includes money.
The relevant portion of section 105 of the Evidence Ordinance states:

S. 105.

"When a person is accused of any offence, the burden of proving the existence
of circumstances bringing the case within.... any special exception or proviso
contained in any other part of the (Penal) Code, or in any law defining the
offence, is upon him, and the court shall presume the absence of such
circumstances."

The effect of the new proviso to section 19 of the Bribery Act, is to shift
the burden to the accused to prove that any gratification received by him was
authorised by law or the terms of his employment.

The Court of Appeal in its judgment in the instant case has stated:

"In respect of Count 2, it was conceded by Learned Counsel for the accused-
appellant that the prosecution has proved beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused-appellant was a State Officer and that he had accepted a gratification
of Rs. 50, and that the burden was on the accused-appellant to prove on a
balance of probablity that he accepted this gratification which he was
authorised by law or the terms of his employment to receive."

**356**

The Court of Appeal and the High Court Judge had carefully scrutinized the
dock statement of the appellant which was the only evidence elicited by him at
his trial. For the reasons stated in the separate judgments the version given
in the dock statement was held to be false. I agree with this finding. The
result was that the appellant had failed to discharge the burden placed on him
by the proviso to section 19.

For the reasons stated in this judgment the appeal is dismissed. We affirm the
conviction of the accused-appellant under Count 2 of the indictment by the
Court of Appeal and we also affirm the sentence imposed on the accused-
appellant by the Court of Appeal.

**

WANASUNDERA, J.** \- I agree.

**

RANASINGHE, J. **\- I agree.

**

TAMBIAH, J.** \- I agree.

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J**. - I agree. _  
  
Appeal dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/8.html_  

