##  Arumugam Coomaraswamy v. Andris Appuhamy and Others - SLR - 219, Vol 2 of
1985 [1985] LKSC 8; (1985) 2 Sri LR 219 (19 June 1985)

**219**

**

ARUMUGAM COOMARASWAMY  
v.  
ANDIRIS APPUHAMY AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C. J., RANASINGHE, J. AND ATUKORALE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 38/84.  
C. A. No. 56/83.  
D. C. ANURADHAPURA10581/MB.  
MAY 23, 1985.

_

Addition of parties - Section 18 (1) Civil Procedure Code.

_

In deciding whether the addition of a new party should be allowed under
section 18 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code the wider construction adopted by
English Courts is to be preferred. Whenever a Court can see in the transaction
brought before it that the rights of one of the parties will or may be so
affected that other actions may be brought in respect of that transaction the
Court has the power to bring all the parties before it and determine the
rights of all in one proceeding. It is not necessary that the evidence on
issues raised by the new parties being brought in should be exactly the same.
It is sufficient if the main evidence and the main inquiry will be the same.
Even if the narrower construction is adopted a person who has to be bound by
the result of the action, or has a legal right enforceable by him against one
of the parties to the action which will be affected by the result of the
action should be joined ; so also where the question raised by the party
seeking to be added is so inextricably mixed with the matters in dispute as to
be inseparable from them and the action itself cannot be decided without
deciding it, then the addition should be made ; if the plaintiff can show that
he cannot get effectual and complete relief unless the new party is joined or
a defendant can show that he cannot effectually set up a defence which he
desires to set up unless the new party is joined, the addition should be
allowed.

**

Cases referred to :

**

(1) _Meideen v. Banda (1895) 1 NLR 51.

_

(2) _Ponnuthurai et al v. Nona Sulkies Juhar (1959) 57 CLW 79, 66 NLR 375.

_

(3) _The Chartered Bank v. L. N. de Silva (1964) 67 NLR 135.

_

(4) _Amon v. Raphael Tuck and Sons Ltd. [1956] 1 All ER 273.

_

(5) _Byrne v. Browne and Diplock (1889) 22 QBD 657.

_

(6) _Montgomery v. Foy, Morgan and Co. (1895) 2 Q.B. 321.

_

(7) _Norris v. Beazley (1877) 2 CPD 80, 83.

_

(8) _Fire, Auto Marine Insurance Co. Ltd v. Greene [1964] 2 All ER 761.

_

(9) _Gurtner   v. Circuit [1968] 1 All ER 328.

_

(10) _Weerapperuma v. De Silva_ (1958) 61 NLR 481.

(11) _G. A. Kalutara v. Gunaratna (1967) 71 NLR 58.

_****

**220**

**

APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

S. Mahenthiran_ for petitioner-appellant.

_

S. W. B. Wadugodapitiya, Additional Solicitor-General_ with _S. Hettige, S.C._
for 2nd and

3rd respondents.

_

P. K. Liyanage_ for plaintiff respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

June 19, 1985. **  
RANASINGHE, J.**

The appellant, who had obtained a lease of the land, which is the subject-
matter of these proceedings, from the Anuradhapura Preservation Board, entered
into a Lease Bond bearing No. 274 of 23.9.68 (X1) with the 2nd respondent and
also a Rent-Purchase Tenancy Loan Agreement with the 3rd respondent on
10.10.1973, in terms of which he was to construct a house on the said land
with the loan so obtained by him from the said 2nd and 3rd respondents and was
to repay the said amount fly monthly instalments. The petitioner has, after a
period of time, fallen into arrears ; and, when the 2nd respondent was
preparing to take steps against him the petitioner had entered into an
agreement on 4.4.76, (X2), with the plaintiff-respondent, and the members of
his (plaintiff-respondent's) family, to sell the said land and premises to the
plaintiff-respondent. The plaintiff-respondent had thereupon paid all the
arrears and also the other sums of money due from the appellant to the 2nd and
3rd respondents. Thereafter the petitioner, together with his wife and
children, requested, in terms of the aforesaid agreement X2, the 3rd
respondent, on 10.10.79, to transfer the said land and premises to the
plaintiff-respondent. The 3rd respondent had then entered into a lease with
the plaintiff-respondent, in respect of the said land and premises, upon the
document X3, on 1.6.80. The plaintiff-respondent had proceeded to pay the
instalments regularly ; but, on 28.7.82, the 3rd respondent had, by his,
notice X4, informed the plaintiff-respondent that he would be cancelling the
lease X3 entered into with the plaintiff-respondent.

The plaintiff-respondent thereupon instituted these proceedings on 12.10.82 in
the District Court, against the 2nd and 3rd respondents, to have the aforesaid
notice X4 declared null and void.

**

221

**

The 2nd and 3rd respondents, in their answer filed in February 1983; admitted
the agreement X3, but denied that the agreement X2 was revoked by them. They
also admitted the notice X4. They pleaded that the agreement X3 has been
cancelled by them with effect from 1.9.82. These respondents further moved
that, as the appellant was, by virtue of the aforesaid agreements - dated
23.9.1968, (X1) and dated 10.10.73 - the person entitled to the said land and
premises, the appellant should be made a party to the said proceedings.

The appellant himself has, by his application made on 4.5.83, sought to
intervene in the said proceedings. The position taken up by him briefly is
that the agreement 2, entered into by him with the plaintiff-respondent, is
vitiated by fraud and duress on the part of the plaintiff-respondent, and that
the lease, X1, entered into by the appellant with the 2nd and 3rd respondents
is still valid and operative, and that, therefore, he, the appellant, is
entitled to have himself added as a party to the said proceedings under the
provisions of sec. 18 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code. The plaintiff-
respondent opposed the said application. After inquiry the learned District
Judge dismissed the appellant's said application ; and the Court of Appeal has
affirmed the said order of dismissal.

The relevant provisions of sec. 18 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code, under and
by virtue of which the appellant seeks to be added as a party to these
proceedings, which the plaintiff-respondent has instituted only against the
2nd and 3rd defendant-respondents, are as follows

"The Court may on or before the hearing upon the application of either party
and on such terms as the Court thinks just, order that the name . . . . . be
struck out ; and the Court may at any time either upon or without such
application and on such terms as the Court thinks just, order . . . . . that
the name of any person who ought to have been joined, whether as plaintiff or
defendant or whose presence before the court may be necessary in order to
enable the court effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and settle all
the questions involved in the action, be added".

That the language of sec. 18 of the Civil Procedure Code corresponds with the
language of the relevant Rules of the Supreme Court of England, and that
guidance could, therefore, be sought from

**222**

English decisions upon similar questions has long been accepted by the Courts
of this Island ; _Meideen v. Banda_ (1) _; Ponnuthurai et al. v. Nona Bulkies
Juhar_ (2) _; The Chartered Bank v. L. N. de Silva_ (3) _.

_

The English rule, governing the addition of persons as parties to proceedings
which have already been instituted in court, was analysed by Devlin, J. in the
year 1955, __ in the Queen's Bench Division in the case of _Amon v. Raphael
Tuck and Sons Ltd._ (4) _._ An exhaustive consideration of the earlier
authorities on the subject resulted in Devlin, J. concluding that they fall
into two groups :, those that favour a "narrower construction" and those that
have adopted a "wider construction" of the relevant rule regulating the
addition of persons as parties to pending proceedings. The "wider
construction" was expounded by Lord Esher in the year 1889 _,_ in the case of
_Byrne v. Browne and Diplock_ (5) as follows :

"One of the chief objects of the Judicature Act was to secure that, whenever a
Court can see in the transaction brought before it that rights of one of the
parties will or may be so affected that under the forms of law other actions
may be brought in respect of that transaction, the Court shall have power to
bring all the parties before it, and determine the rights of all in one
proceeding. It is not necessary that the evidence in the issues raised by the
new parties being brought in should be exactly the same ; it is sufficient if
the main evidence and the main inquiry will be the same, and the Court then
has power to bring in the new parties, and to adjudicate in one proceeding
upon the rights of all the parties before it. Another great object was to
diminish the cost of litigation. That being so, the Court ought to give the
largest construction to those Acts in order to carry out as far as possible
the two objects I have mentioned."

Six years later, in 1895 _,_ Lord Esher once again adopted the same
construction in the case of _Montgomery v. Foy, Morgan and Co._ (6) __ in
these words :

" . . . . . . . where there is one subject-matter out of which several
disputes arise, all parties may be brought before the court, and all those
disputes may be determined at the same time......."

**223**

The earliest exposition of the "narrower construction" of the said Rule seems
to have been in 1877 __ by Lord Coleridge, C. J., in the case of _Norris v._
Beazley (7) :

"It seems to me to be correctly argued that those words plainly imply that the
defendant to be added must be a defendant against whom the plaintiff has some
cause of complaint which ought to be determined in the action, and that it was
never intended to apply where the person to be added as defendant is a person
against whom the plaintiff has no claim and does not desire to prosecute any."

In _Amon's_ case _(supra)_ the plaintiff claimed damages from, and also an
injunction against the defendants on the basis : that he invented a new design
of adhesive dispenser in the shape of a pen, known as the Fastik pen : that he
disclosed the "know-how" of that pen to the defendants in confidence during
negotiations between them in regard to the marketing of the pen by the
defendants for the plaintiff : that the negotiations failed : that there was
an implied contract that the defendants were to treat the information given to
them by the plaintiff as confidential : that the defendants have, in breach of
such contract, made use of such information to manufacture an adhesive
dispenser called the Stixit pen : that the said Stixit pen contained three
distinctive features of the plaintiff's Fastik pen. The defendants moved court
to join as a defendant D who alleged-that he, D., was the inventor of the said
Stixit pen, and that the defendants were under contractual obligation to him
to manufacture and distribute the Stixit pen in certain territories. After an
exhaustive consideration of all earlier English authorities Delvin, J.,
himself came down on the side of the "narrower construction", formulating the
test to be adopted in this way at page 290 :

"May the order for which the plaintiff is asking directly affect the
intervener in the enjoyment of his legal rights ?"

Having so formulated the test to be employed Delvin, J., proceeded to explain
it further thus :

"It must not be supposed that the test which I have employed can be applied to
every sort of application under the rule, and I am not attempting to lay down,
or holding that the authorities lay down, a test of universal efficacy. A
plaintiff may in the first instance, join as a defendant any person 'against
whom the right to any relief is alleged to exist' . . . . . If, after he has
issued his writ, he wants to join another defendant, no doubt he will have to
proceed under r.

**224**

11, but he will not have to show that the new defendant will be directly
affected by an order in the action as it is then constituted :what he
generally shows is that he cannot get effectually and completely the relief
for which he asks unless the new defendant is joined, and that, in that sense,
the new defendant is a necessary party to the action. Likewise, a defendant
who seeks to join another defendant does not inevitably have to show that the
new defendant will be directly affected by an order in the action as it is
constituted. He may succeed if he can show that he cannot effectually set up a
defence which he desires to set up unless the new defendant is joined with it,
or unless the order made binds the new defendant. It is not that the
construction of the rule differs according to circumstances. The construction
of the rule is and must be, the same in all circumstances ; but the test that
is appropriate to determine whether a party is necessary or not may vary
according to the circumstances."

At page 287 Devlin, J., also expressed the view that :

"the only reason which makes it necessary to make a person a party to an
action is so that he should be bound by the result of the action, and the
question to be settled, therefore, must be a question in the action which
cannot be effectually and completely settled unless he is a party."

On an application of the test so formulated by him to the facts of the case
before him, asset out earlier, Devlin, J.; concluded : that the test has been
satisfied : that not only the commercial interests of D., but also his (D's)
legal rights would be affected : that he has jurisdiction to make the order :
that, having regard to the questions involved in the case, it is proper that,
in the exercise of his discretion, he should make the order prayed for.

The decision in _Amon's case (supra)_ was followed in 1964, also in the
Queen's Bench Division in the case of _Fire, Auto Marine Insurance Co. Ltd.,
v. Greene_ (8), where Stephenson, J., took the view that a person cannot be
added as a party against the wishes of the plaintiff unless such person was -

" . . . . at least able to show that some legal right enforceable by him
against one of the parties to the action or some legal duty enforceable
against him by one of the parties to the action will be affected by the result
of the action."

**225**

The aforementioned constructions placed upon the said rule, regulating the
addition of parties m proceedings which are pending, by the English courts
have been considered by our courts in several cases. Sansoni, J., had occasion
to deal with it in the case of _Ponnuthurai et al. v. Nona Bulkies Juhar et
al, (supra)._ The plaintiff in that case instituted an action against two
defendants for a declaration of title and for restoration of possession. The
1st Defendant claimed tale upon a different chain of title, and the 2nd
defendant pleaded a purchase from the 1st defendant. After the case was fixed
for trial the intervenient moved to be added on the basis that he was entitled
to the land on a separate chain of title and that the title deed relied on by
the 1st defendant was a false document. He too moved for a declaration of
title m his favour and an ejectment of the defendants from the land. The
plaintiff did not object ; and the District Court allowed the intervenient's
application. In appeal, Sansoni, J., after a consideration of the judgment of
Devlin, J., in _Amon's case (supra)_ took the view that, although, if the test
formulated in _Amon's_ case _(supra)_ were to be applied to the facts of that
case on the basis that the plaintiff objects to the application for addition,
the intervenient's application must fail as the intervenient, who was not in
possession of the land in dispute, would not be affected in the enjoyment of
his any judgment that may be given in the action between the plaintiff and the
1st and 2nd defendants, yet, the intervention should be allowed as the
plaintiff himself does not object and as there is nothing in the rule which
forbids it The appeal was accordingly dismissed.

The provisions of sec. 18 (1 ) were also considered by the Supreme Court in
October 1964 m the case of _The Chartered Bank v_. _L. N. de Silva_ _(supra)_.
In that case the plaintiff, who had guaranteed a loan from the Bank to the 1st
and 2nd defendants, sued the two defendants for the recovery of the sum of
money which he had paid to the Bank upon the Bank demanding payment from him
as the guarantor of the two defendants. The defendants denied liability on the
ground that the Bank had, in breach of certain terms, wrongly called upon the
plaintiff to pay. On the date of trial the plaintiff and the two defendants
all moved to add the Bank as a party to the action under sec. 18 (1) C.P.C. as
the presence of the Bank was necessary "for the complete and effectual
adjudication of all matters in the case". The Bank objected ; but the
application was allowed by the District Court. In appeal, the order of the
learned District Judge was set aside on the

**226**

ground that : the cause of action against the defendants was quite different
from the cause of action against the Bank : the Bank was **** undoubtedly a
material witness, and the process of the court was available to the parties to
compel the Bank to produce the necessary documents : the Bank was not liable
to be added as a party. Sri Skanda Rajah, J., referring to the decision in
_Amon's case (supra)_ observed that the "more restricted interpretation"
referred to in that case "has found favour in recent decisions" and that the
Indian cases which follow the _Montgomery case (supra)_ "can no longer be
regarded as expressing the correct interpretation of the provision under
consideration". Alles, J., who concurred with Sri Skanda Raja, J. that the
Bank should not be joined as a party to the said proceedings, also agreed
"that the principle laid down in _Amon's case_ and followed in the later
decisions should be preferred to the broad generalisation of Lord Esher in
_Montgomery's case. "

_

A careful study of the judgments delivered in _The Chartered Bank case
(supra)_ reveals that the decision of the two judges was largely, if not
wholly influenced by their view that the English Courts have moved away from
the "broad generalisation" of Lord Esher in 1895, and have, in recent times,
favoured the "more restricted interpretation" adopted by Devlin, J. in _Amon's
case (supra)_ and that the views expressed by Lord Esher cannot then be
regarded as expressing the correct interpretation of the said rule. The most
recent decision of the English Courts, which was cited to us at the hearing of
this appeal upon this question - the decision (Denning, M.R. and Diplock,
L.J.) in the case of Gurtner v. Circuit (9) is one which has been made not
only several years later, on 14.12.1967, but is also a decision of the Court
of Appeal.

There are two other local decisions which need to be referred to. One is the
decision in the case of _Weerapperuma v. De Silva_ (10) __ decided on 28.7.58
in which Basnayake, CJ formulated the principle thus :

"When a question is so inextricably mixed with the matters in dispute in an
"action" as to be inseparable from them and the action itself cannot be
decided without deciding it, the question may be said to be involved in the
action. Any question arising on the case set up by an intervenient in his
petition and not arising in the case set -up in the pleadings of the parties
is not a question involved in the action."

**227**

The other is the case of _G. A., Kalutara v. Gunaratna_ (11). A co-owned land
had been used by all the co-owners for several years as a distillery and a
warehouse for manufacture of arrack ; and, when one of the co-owners brought
an action against the Government Agent to restrain him from issuing or
renewing a licence to manufacture arrack in favour of S, another co-owner,
alleging that the Government Agent and S were acting in concert wrongfully and
unlawfully, S was held to be entitled to be added as a party to the said
proceedings instituted against the Government Agent. Manicavasagar, J. based
the decision to permit the addition on the fact that there was also a claim
for relief which would affect S in the enjoyment of his legal rights.

The local decisions in the case of _Weerapperuma (supra),_ decided on 28.7.58,
_Ponnuthurai (supra)_ decided on 21.12.59, _The Chartered Bank (supra)_
decided on 6.10.64 and _G._ _A. Kalutara (supra)_ decided on 19.3.67, could
all be considered as having preferred the "narrower construction" placed upon
the Rule regulating the addition of parties in pending proceedings in England.
Even so, Sansoni, J. allowed the addition in _Ponnuthurai's case (supra)_ as
the plaintiff himself did not object, and as there was nothing "in the rule
which forbids it" ; and Manicavasagar, J. in the case of the _Government Agent
of Kalutara (supra)_ observed that the ground, on which the addition was in
fact being allowed in that case, was :

"not the only rule which would enable the Court to act under sec.18."

In _Gurtner's case (supra)_ the plaintiff, who had been severely injured on
being run down by the motor cycle ridden by the defendant, sued the defendant
for damages. When the plaintiff issued writ against the defendant, the
defendant was found to have gone to Canada about three years previously. The
defendant's insurers could not also be found. Thereafter, upon substituted
service being effected on the defendant, the Motor Insurers' Bureau, which had
entered into an agreement with the Minister of Transport in 1964 that, if a
judgment entered in favour of an injured person against a motorist is not
satisfied in full within seven days, the Bureau would pay the amount of the
judgment to the injured person, applied to be added as a defendant. The Court
of Appeal, which was called upon to consider whether the said Bureau could be
added as a defendant in the said proceedings, held that the said Bureau should
be added as a

**228**

defendant on its undertaking to pay any damages that might be awarded to the
plaintiff. Denning, M.R. was not disposed to accept the "narrower
construction" advocated by Devlin, J. in _Amon's case (supra)_ and followed by
Stephenson, J. in the _Fire, Auto Marine Insurance Co. case (supra)_ but
preferred to place the "wider construction" which had found favour with Lord
Esher in _Byrne v. Browne (supra) - and_ also later in the _Montgomery's case
(supra)._ Said Denning, M.R. at page 332 :

"It seems to me that, when two parties are in dispute in an action at law and
the determination of that dispute will directly affect a third person in his
legal rights or in his pocket in that he will be bound to foot the bill, then
the Court in its discretion may allow him to be added as a party on such terms
as it thinks fit. By doing so the court achieves the object of the rule. It
enables all matters in dispute 'to be effectually and completely determined
and adjudicated upon' between all those directly concerned in the-outcome."

Diplock, L.J., who too agreed that the intervenient, the Motor Insurance
Bureau, should be added, took the view that neither the test adopted by
Devlin, J. in _Amon's case (supra)_ nor that adopted by Stephenson, J., in the
_Fire, Auto, Marine Insurance case (supra)_ should be treated as
comprehensive. Devlin, J. approached the question from the standpoint of the
observance of the principles of natural justice : that the Bureau s
obligation, though not enforceable by the plaintiff, was, however, enforceable
by the Minister who was himself not a party to the action : that the rules of
natural justice require a person, who is to be bound by a judgment in an
action brought against another party and liable to the plaintiff on the
judgment, should be entitled to be heard in the proceedings in which the
judgment is to be obtained : that a matter in dispute is not effectually and
completely "adjudicated upon" unless the rules of natural justice are observed
and all those who will be liable to satisfy the judgment are given **** an
opportunity of being heard ; and concluded that :

"So long as the judgment is legally enforceable against the person sought to
be added either directly by the plaintiff or indirectly for his benefit by the
Minister, the court has jurisdiction to add such person as a party".

**229**

Devlin, J. emphasised that his judgment is based on the special position of
the Bureau under their contract with the Minister, and is not intended to have
any wider application than to that unique legal situation.

_

Gurtner's case (supra)_ does not seem to have been brought to the notice of
the Court of Appeal ; for, it has not been considered in the judgment of the
Court of Appeal.

On a consideration of the respective views, referred to earlier, which have
been expressed by the English Courts in regard to the nature and the extent of
the construction to be placed upon the rule regulating the addition of a
person as a party to a proceeding which is already pending in court between
two parties, the "wider construction" placed upon it by Lord Esher, which has
been set out above, commends itself to me. The grounds which moved Lord Esher
to take a broad view, viz. : to avoid a multiplicity of actions and to
diminish the cost of litigation, seem to me, with respect, to be eminently
reasonable and extremely substantial. Lord Esher's view, though given
expression to almost a century ago, is, even to-day, as constructive and as
acceptable. The plaintiff is undoubtedly the dominus litis and should not
lightly be made to battle it out with one whom he himself did not choose to be
his adversary in the proceeding he initiated. Even so, the situation which is
brought about by the said rule being made operative in this manner will not
cause prejudice to the plaintiff. On the contrary it could and would ensure to
his benefit.

The plaintiff-respondent has, in the plaint dated 12.10.1982, averred that the
appellant, who had entered into the agreement X1 with the 2nd and 3rd
respondents, an 4.4.76 entered into the agreement X2 with the plaintiff-
respondent : that, after the plaintiff-respondent paid all the arrears that
were due from the appellant under the said agreement X1 , the appellant, and
the appellant's wife and children, on 10.10.79, requested the 2nd respondent
to transfer the land and premises in question to the plaintiff respondent :
that, in pursuance of such request, the 2nd respondent then cancelled the
agreement, which the 2nd respondent had earlier entered into with the
appellant, and, on 1.6.80, entered into the agreement X3, with the plaintiff-
respondent : that the 2nd and 3rd respondents have sent the plaintiff-
respondent the notice X4 because the appellant is said to have sought to
withdraw the consent,

**230**

which the appellant had given to the transfer of the said land and premises to
the plaintiff-respondent, on the basis that such consent had been given under
duress : that the appellant has made the said application three years after he
had given his consent in October 1979 : that the respondent's conduct in
acceding to such a request is most unfair.

The basis of the plaintiff-respondent's claim is therefore : that the 2nd and
3rd respondents had executed a transfer of the land and premises which the
appellant was entitled to, in his name, with the consent of the appellant :
that the said respondents are now seeking to cancel the said transfer, in view
of certain representations which are said to have since been made by the
appellant : that such representations should not be accepted by the said
respondents. Although the plaintiff-respondent had in his prayer to the plaint
prayed for the execution of a deed of transfer in his name upon the payment by
the plaintiff-respondent of any balance sum of money due to the 2nd and 3rd
respondents from the appellant, and in the alternative, for payment of a sum
of Rs. 150,000 to the plaintiff-respondent as compensation, yet, at the
inquiry held on 9.5.83 before the learned District Judge, learned Counsel for
the plaintiff-respondent withdrew the claim for such relief and confined the
relief prayed for to that set out in paragraph ( _a_ ) of the prayer to the
plaint viz. : a declaration that the notice X4 is null and void. The basis
even for this claim for relief is, as set out earlier, that the agreement,
which had been entered into between the appellant and the 2nd and 3rd
respondents, has been cancelled, and, in its place, another agreement has been
entered into between him and the 2nd and 3rd respondents at the express
request of, and with the consent, fully and freely expressed, of the
appellant.

The 2nd and 3rd respondents admit that they did enter into the agreement X3;
of 1.6.80, with the plaintiff-respondent at the request of the appellant, but
they do not accept that the agreement, X1, which they had earlier entered into
with the appellant has been cancelled. They also plead :that X3 has since been
cancelled on 1.9.82, and that the plaintiff-respondent has no cause of action
against the said respondents : that, in view of the agreement the 2nd
respondent had entered into with the appellant in 10.10.73, the appellant
should be made a party to these proceedings.

Although the plaintiff-respondent has in his plaint averred that the said
agreement, X1, which the 2nd and 3rd respondents had entered into with the
appellant was cancelled, the 2nd and 3rd respondents

**231**

have, in their answer, repudiated the said plea. The appellant has himself, in
his petition and affidavit praying for intervention, specifically pleaded that
the original agreement entered into between him and the 2nd and 3rd
respondents has not been cancelled and is still in force.

There is no admission or other evidence to establish that either the agreement
X1, and/or the agreement said to have been entered on 10.10.73 between the 2nd
and 3rd respondents and the appellant, has been cancelled. The Court of Appeal
had misdirected itself in taking the view that the lease entered into by the
appellant with the 2nd respondent was revoked at the instance of the
appellant.

The agreement X3, upon the basis of which the plaintiff-respondent claims
relief, viz : the declaration set out in paragraph (a) of the prayer to the
plaint, is, on his own pleadings, founded upon the consent, which, the
plaintiff-respondent avers, was fully and freely expressed by the appellant
both to the cancellation, by the 2nd and 3rd respondents, of the agreement,
which the appellant had earlier entered into with the 2nd and 3rd respondents,
and to the 2nd and 3rd respondents thereafter entering into the agreement, X3,
with the plaintiff-respondent. The 2nd and 3rd respondents accept the position
that it was at the request of the appellant that X3 was entered into with the
plaintiff-respondents, but maintain that the earlier agreement with the
appellant was never revoked and that the person, who is entitled to the said
land and premises still is the appellant. The appellant too maintains that he
is still the owner of the said premises, and that his consent was obtained by
the plaintiff-respondent by duress. On a consideration of the issues that
would arise for adjudication upon the pleadings filed by the plaintiff-
respondent and the 2nd and 3rd respondents respectively, paying due regard, at
the same time, also to the position taken up by the appellant himself it seems
to me that any decision in these proceedings upon the question whether the
plaintiff-respondent is the person now entitled, in law, to the land and
premises - an answer to which question is a pre-requisite to the grant of a
declaration as is prayed for by the plaintiff-respondent \- will not be a
final solution unless and until the appellant himself can be held to be bound
by such decision. Furthermore, the issue relating to the validity of the
consent said to have been expressed by the appellant, and upon which the 2nd
and 3rd respondents had entered into whatever dealings they have had with the
plaintiff-respondent, cannot be effectually decided in the absence of the
person whose act

**232**

is being so considered. The validity of such consent cannot, in view of the
allegations made by the appellant, be resolved by merely calling the appellant
as a witness. Affording the appellant merely the role of a witness will not be
adequate for a full and fair determination of the issue relating to the
validity of the consent which alone had brought the 1st and 2nd respondents to
negotiate the agreement X3 with the plaintiff-respondent. Any decision of
these issues in a proceeding, -to which the appellant is not a party and by
the decision of which he will not be bound, will not effectively and finally
settle the issue of who is the person now entitled, in law, to the said land
and premises. The plaintiff-respondent would have to face the appellant sooner
or later before his rights can be finally and effectively determined. The
facts and circumstances relating to this matter are, therefore, such that the
application of the "wider construction", referred to above, makes, in my
opinion, a decision in favour of the appellant the only logical conclusion.

A consideration of the various tests formulated in the course of the
decisions, referred to earlier, which have adopted the "narrower construction"
seems to me to indicate that the facts, and circumstances relevant to this
question could even satisfy a few of the tests so adopted. For instance : the
view expressed by Devlin, J., in _Amon's case (supra)_ that "the only reason
which makes it necessary to make a person a party to an action is so that he
should be bound by the result of the action" : the view expressed by
Stephenson, J., in _Fire Auto Marine Insurance case (supra)_ that the party to
be added must be able at least "to show that some legal right enforceable by
him against one of the parties to the action . . . . will be affected by the
result of the action" : the view expressed by the Basnayake C. J. in
_Weerapperuma's case (supra)_ that a question is involved in the action "when
a question is so inextricably mixed with the matters in dispute . . . . as to
be inseparable from them and the action itself cannot be decided without
deciding it ", and that "any question arising on the case set up by an
intervenient in his petition and not arising in the case set up in the
pleadings of the parties is not a question involved in the action", may all be
satisfied by the appellant in this case.

The order of the District Court, dated 9.5.83, and the judgment of the Court
of Appeal, dated 11.5.84, are, therefore, both set aside.

**233**

The application of the appellant made to the District Court is accordingly
allowed ; and the appellant is directed to be made a party-defendant to the
action instituted in the District Court by the plaintiff-respondent against
the 1st and 2nd respondents.

The appellant is entitled to the costs of the inquiry held before the District
Court, and also to the costs of appeal, both in the Court of Appeal and in
this Court.

**

SHARVANANDA, C. J.** \- I agree.

**

ATUKORALE, J. **\- I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1985/8.html_  

