[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1988](./) >> **[1988] LKSC 1**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1988+1 or 1988+LKSC+1) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1988+LKSC+1) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Navaratnam v. Sabapathy - NLR - 566 of 71 [1988] LKSC 1; (1988) 71 NLR 566
(7 November 1988)

**566**

**1968** _Present_ **: Weeramantry, J.,** and **Wijayatilake, J.  
  
M. P. NAVARATNAM, **Petitioner, and **S. K. SABAPATHY  
**and 2 others, Respondents  
**  
_S. C. 395/68-Application for a Writ of Quo Warranto and/or Certiorari_**

_Village Councils Ordinance (Cap. 257), as amended by Ordinance No. 60 of
1961- Sections 17 (1) and 19 (2)-Mode of election of Chairman-Writ of quo
warranto-Circumstances when it will not be granted.  
_  
(i) Section 19 (2) (b) of the Village Councils Ordinance reads as follows :-  
  
" Where two or more candidates are proposed and seconded for election as
Chairman, the mode of election shall be either by open or secret voting
according as the members present may by resolution determine "

**567**

_**Held**_ , that the question whether the mode of electing the Chairman
should be by open or secret voting need not itself be decided by secret vote
if a member proposes that it should be so decided. The presiding officer of a
meeting ought ordinarily to be considered as being vested with a discretion to
decide such ordinary matters of procedure as are not expressly provided for by
statute or by rules governing the meeting.  
  
(ii) At a meeting held to elect the Chairman of a Village Council in terms of
section 19 (2) of the Village Councils Ordinance, the presiding officer,
instead of calling the name of each member and asking him how he desired to
vote, called upon those in favour of the candidate contesting the first
respondent to vote first and thereafter called upon those in favour of the
first respondent to vote. The voting body, however, was small, being sixteen
in number.  
  
_**Held**_ , that, although there was a non-compliance with the requirements
of section 19 (2) (c) of the Village Councils Ordinance, the irregularity
complained of did not really affect the result of the election. In such a
case, a writ of quo warranto is not granted.  
  
_**Held further**_ , that an application for a writ of quo warranto is not
generally granted to quash proceedings in which the petitioner has acquiesced
without raising any objections at the time.  
  
**APPLICATION** for a writ of quo warranto and/or certiorari.  
  
_C. Chellappah,_ for the Petitioner.  
  
_S. Sharvananda,_ with _N. Tiruchelvam_ , for the 1st and 2nd Respondents.  
  
_V. C. Gunatilaka, Crown Counsel_ , for the 3rd Respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 7, 1988. **WEERAMANTRY, J.-  
**  
By this petition the petitioner seeks to challenge the election of the first
respondent as Chairman of the Kokuvil Village Council and the election of the
second respondent as its Vice Chairman.  
  
These two councillors were elected to their respective offices at a meeting
convened by the Assistant Commissioner of Local Government, the third
respondent to this petition, in terms of section 17 (1) of the Village
Communities Ordinance (Cap. 257) as amended by section 7 of the Village
Communities (Amendment) Ordinance, No. 60 of 1961. The journal maintained by
the third respondent in respect of this meeting, which was held on July 13th,
1968, has been produced before us at the instance of the petitioner. It is
common ground that the election of the. first respondent was by open and not
by secret vote.  
  
It would appear that when the name of the first respondent was proposed for
election as Chairman of this Council and duly seconded, a resolution was
proposed by the second respondent that the mode of election should be by open
vote. A contrary motion was moved by another member that the mode of election
should be by secret vote.

**568**

According to the journal produced by the third respondent it would appear
further that after the proposals for open ballot and secret ballot had been
made the member proposing the secret ballot stressed that the decision on this
question should itself be by secret ballot.  
  
There is variation between the journal maintained by the third respondent in
regard to this matter and the contention of the petitioner whose position it
is that in fact the member proposing a secret ballot had not merely stressed
the importance of secret ballot but had in fact proposed that the manner of
election should be decided upon by secret ballot.  
  
It is not necessary to determine this conflict of versions in view of the
decision we have arrived at in regard to the question whether secret ballot
was necessary in law in order to decide whether the actual election should
take place by secret ballot or by open vote. However, it is necessary to point
out that we are not entirely satisfied with the manner in which the third
respondent has maintained his journal and that, as we shall remark later,
there has been no strict compliance with the requirements of law in his
conduct of the meeting.  
  
The first matter of complaint on the part of the petitioner is that the
decision to permit the election to take place by open vote should itself have
been taken by secret ballot, and was not so taken.  
  
Section 19 (2) (b) of the Village Communities Ordinance provides that where
two or more candidates are proposed and seconded for election as Chairman the
mode of election shall be either by open or secret voting according as the
members present may by resolution determine.  
  
There are various averments in the petition suggesting that certain members
had been subjected to some form of undue pressure by the supporters of the
first respondent and had been kept in a group from the date of their election
to office till the date of the meeting and in fact had been brought in a body
to the meeting hall just prior to the commencement of the meeting, so that
they had thus been prevented from exercising a free vote. These averments are
made with a view to indicating that had the question of the manner of voting
been decided by secret ballot these persons who had been thus subjected to
undue pressure may well have voted differently and may in fact have favoured a
secret vote. It should also be observed that the respondents deny these
averments.  
  
Although learned Counsel for the petitioner has been unable to cite any
principle from the law relating to meetings indicating that where an option is
given to a meeting to decide a matter by open or by secret vote such decision
should itself be taken by secret vote, he relies on the circumstances set out
in the preceding paragraph as indicating that in the circumstances of this
case such a procedure should have been resorted to.

**569**

However we find the contention put forward on behalf of the petitioner to be
unsustainable. Before it is decided that the decision on the nature of the
vote should itself be by secret ballot, there would have to be a prior
decision as to how such a decision in its turn ought to be reached, and this
process may well go on ad infinitum. Furthermore where a statute gives a body
of persons the option of deciding whether they shall vote openly or secretly,
the decision in regard to their manner of voting ought presumably be taken in
the normal way, that is by open vote, unless the statute or other rule
applicable otherwise expressly provides. We may also add that the Chairman or
President of a meeting ought ordinarily to be considered as being vested with
a discretion to decide such ordinary matters of procedure as are not expressly
provided for by statute or by rules governing the meeting and we have no
reason to think that the discretion of the presiding officer in regard to the
manner in which the decision on the manner of voting should be reached was
exercised wrongly or mala fide.  
  
In all the circumstances we therefore find ourselves quite unable to uphold
the contention of the petitioner that the decision whether voting should be
open or secret should itself have been taken upon a secret vote.  
  
I pass now ,to the second ground urged on behalf of the petitioner, namely,
that the presiding officer is required in terms of section 19 (2) (c) to take
the votes at the actual election by calling the name of each member present
and asking him how he desires to vote and recording the votes accordingly.  
  
The journal of the third respondent shows that at the election he called upon
those in favour of the candidate contesting the first respondent to vote first
and thereafter called upon those in favour of the first respondent to vote.
This procedure is clearly not in conformity with the imperative requirements
of section 19 (2) (c), for the legislature has quite clearly specified that
the presiding officer shall take the votes by calling the name of each member
present and asking him how he desires to vote. It is not difficult to
visualise cases, particularly in large assemblies, where voters whose minds
are not firmly decided may be swayed by the temper of the house and may well
be dissuaded from voting for a candidate by a total lack of support for him in
the house or be persuaded to vote for him by the fact that he apparently
enjoys an overwhelming majority.  
  
In this connection we must observe that the affidavit filed by the third
respondent though purporting to be in amplification of his journal does in
fact contradict the journal in regard to the manner in which the voting took
place, for in the affidavit he states that the election of the Chairman was
decided by open voting, and that he took the votes of the members present by
calling the name of such member present and asking him how

**570**

he desired to vote. This would seem to be contradicted by his journal wherein
he states that he called upon those in favour of the other candidate to vote
first.  
  
It is very important that public officers conducting statutory duties in this
way should adhere strictly to the requirements of the law in regard to the
manner in which those duties are discharged and further that where a record is
required to be kept in regard to their acts there should be scrupulous
accuracy in the keeping of that record.  
  
We are satisfied that in the present instance there has been a non-compliance
with the requirements of section 19 (2) (c) and the next question we have to
determine is whether this non-compliance by itself merits the interference of
this Court through the extraordinary remedy of a Writ.  
  
The governing principle in regard to such matters would appear to be that the
extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court cannot ordinarily be invoked in order
to set aside election to an office unless the irregularity complained of is
such as may be expected to affect the result in question. It is relevant to
refer at this point to the case of Jayasooria v. de Silva **[** 1(1940) 41 N.
L. R. 510. **]**    where it was held that this Court would not in the absence
of bad faith grant a Writ of Quo Warranto where the irregularity complained of
did not really affect the result of the election. This judgment was given in
reliance of the judgment of Blackburn, J. in Rex v. Ward **[** 2(1873) L. R. 8
Q. B. 210. **]**. So also Halsbury, in reliance on the case of Blackburn v.
Ward **[** 3(1873) L. R. 8 Q. B. 210. **]** states the law in terms that the
Court would refuse to disturb the peace and quiet of a corporation where there
has been an irregularity in election to office which was without any material
result or which could not be shown to have been productive of harm. **[**
4Halsbury, 3rd ed., Vol. II, p. 149. **]**  
  
In the present case there is no basis on which we can say that the non-
compliance with the statutory provision referred to has materially affected
the result. The voting body was small, being sixteen in number, and the
division was such that no member is likely to have been swayed by any
appearance of overwhelming support or lack of it in relation to any particular
candidate. Without any more affirmative material before us we cannot therefore
think that the result would in any way have been affected in this particular
case had the voting been taken strictly as prescribed by statute.  
  
The petitioner further attacks the election of the second respondent on the
basis that such election took place under the chairmanship of the first
respondent and that the first respondent's election being defective the
subsequent election held under his chairmanship was itself bad. Since, for the
reasons we have indicated, we are not inclined to uphold

**571**

the petitioner's contention that the first respondent's election is bad, it
follows that the validity of the second respondent's election remains
unaffected.  
  
We must also advert to the circumstance that the name of the second respondent
was in fact proposed by the petitioner for the office of Vice Chairman and
that the petitioner by his acquiescence in all these proceedings and lack of
objection thereto at the time, has in any event deprived himself of the right
to urge the irregularities he now complains of as a ground of objection to
these elections. In Jayasooria v. de Silva **[** 1(1940) 41 N. L. R. 510.
**]** already referred to, it was pointed out that a voter who has acquiesced
in the procedure adopted and comes forward thereafter " insisting upon the
letter of the law, straining at a gnat so to speak " will not find a Court of
law too ready to exercise in his favour a discretion vested in it.  
  
For the reasons already enumerated the petitioner's application must fail and
is dismissed with costs.  
  
**WIJAYATILAKE, J.-I agree.**

**_Application dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/1.html_  

