[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1983](./) >> **[1983] LKSC 1**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1983+1 or 1983+LKSC+1) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1983+LKSC+1) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Ganeshanantham v. Vivienne Goonewardene and Three Others - SLR - 319, Vol
1 of 1984 [1983] LKSC 1; (1984) 1 Sri LR 319 (21 October 1983)

**319**

**  **

#### GANESHANANTHAM

**v.**

**VIVIENNE GOONEWARDENE AND THREE OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT.

SAMARAKOON, C. J., SHARVANANDA, J., WANASUNDERA, J., WIMALARATNE, J.,  
COLIN THOME', J., RANASINGHE, J. AND RODRIGO, J.

S. C. No 6/83 SPECIAL ‑ S. C APPLICATION No. 20/83.

JANUARY 16, 17, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 AND 31, 1984.



_Per incuriam rule ‑ Revisionary and inherent powers of the Supreme Court to
review its own judgment ‑ Natural Justice ‑ Audi alteram partem ‑ Justice must
be seen to be done ‑ Articles 126 (2) and (4) and 134 (3) of the Constitution
‑ Rule 65 (1) and Rule 65 (4) (ii) of the Supreme Court Rules._



The petitioner‑respondent (Mrs. Vivienne Goonewardena) made an application
(S.C. 20/83) to the Supreme Court alleging that the 1st respondent (Hector
Perera, Officer‑in‑Charge of the Kollupitiya Police Station) had illegally
arrested her and subjected her to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment in
violation of her fundamental rights set out in Article 11 and Article 13 (1)
of the Constitution. She made parties to her application the Inspector‑General
of Police (2nd respondent) and the Attorney‑General (3rd respondent). The 1st
respondent denied the allegations against him. The 2nd respondent filed his
affidavit along with two affidavits one of which was an affidavit by the
present petitioner (V. Ganeshanantham) who averred that it was he who had
arrested the petitioner‑respondent but that his arrest was legal. The
petitioner claimed he arrested the petitioner‑respondent on the pavement of
the Galle Road when she was going in a procession. Neither the
petitioner‑respondent nor any one else in

**  320**



the procession was able to produce a permit to go in the procession. As the
procession was being conducted "without the authority of a lawful permit" it
became the petitioner's duty to prevent the procession.



A Bench of three Judges of the Supreme Court heard the case and held‑



(1)        That the petitioner‑respondent had not established that she had
been subjected to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment by the first
respondent.



(2)        That the petitioner‑respondent had been arrested by the petitioner
and not by the 1st respondent.



(3)        That the said arrest was unlawful and therefore the State was
liable in damages fixed at Rs.2,500.



No order for damages or costs was made against the petitioner.



The petitioner sought relief from the Supreme Court complaining that another
Bench of the Court had, to his detriment, acted per incuriam as set out below
and claiming relief in the exercise of the revisionary and inherent powers of
the Court:



(1)        The Court had made a finding against the petitioner in respect of
an infringement not complained of by the petitioner‑respondent and in fact
disowned by her. Such order was in disregard of Article 126 (2) of the
Constitution read with Rule 65 (1) ( _a_ ) of the Supreme Court Rules.



(2)        The power to grant relief or give directions which the Supreme
Court deems just and equitable under Article 126 (4) was restricted to the
petitioner‑respondent's allegation and complaint to Court under Article 126
(2).



(3)        In any event the Court acted in disregard of‑



(i)         Article 126 (2) read with Rule 65 (1) and Rule 65 (4) (ii) of the
Supreme Court Rules.



(ii)        The rule of natural justice ‑ audi alteram partem.



(iii)       The rule of natural justice that justice must be seen to be done.



On the question of the non‑observance of the rules of natural justice the
petitioner's complaint is that the Court had found him guilty of unlawfully
arresting the petitioner‑respondent and thereby violating her fundamental
rights. These findings were made against him without his being first informed
that his conduct was being inquired into, no opportunity was given to him of
defending himself; and he was not a party to the proceedings nor added as a
party.



# Held‑



(1)        The Supreme Court has no jurisdiction to act in revision of cases
decided by itself. None of the provisions of the Constitution expressly
conferring jurisdiction confer such a jurisdiction on it. Nor has the
Legislature conferred such a jurisdiction by law. The Supreme Court if a Court
of last resort in appeal and there is finality in its judgment whether it is
right or wrong. That is the policy of the law and the purpose of Chapter XV of
the Constitution.

**  321**

** **

(2)        As a superior Court of record the Supreme Court has inherent powers
to correct its errors which are demonstrably and manifestly wrong and where it
is necessary in the interests of justice Decisions made per incuriam can be
corrected. These powers are adjuncts to existing jurisdiction to remedy
injustice ‑ they cannot be made the source of new jurisdictions to revise a
judgment rendered by that court.



(3)        The jurisdiction granted to the Supreme Court by Article 126 of the
Constitution concerns fundamental rights and language rights declared by
Chapters III and IV of the Constitution. In exercising this jurisdiction the
Court, has to make a dual determination, viz: ‑



(i)         that there is an infringement or threatened infringement of a
fundamental right and



(ii)        that such infringement or threat is by executive or administrative
action.



**Held further:** Ranasinghe J. and Rodrigo J. dissenting-



(4)        It may not always be possible for a petitioner to allege in his
petition that the act complained of was that of a particular officer of State.
Even where the infringement of fundamental rights is found to have been
committed by a State Officer other than the one named in the petition the
Court would still have power to act in terms of Article 126. The jurisdiction
of the Court does not depend on the fact that a particular officer is
mentioned by name nor is it confined to the person named. The unlawful act
gives the Court jurisdiction to entertain the petition and to make a
declaration accordingly. The fact that it was committed by an officer of State
empowers the Court to grant a remedy. The provisions of Article 126 (2)
(unlike Article 126 (3)) does not limit inquiry to the person named in the
petition. There has been no disregard of the provisions of Article 126 (2)
read with Rule 65 (2) and (4) (ii).



Per **Samarakoon, C.J. ‑**



"It will be a travesty of justice if, having found as a fact that a
fundamental right has been infringed or is threatened to be infringed, it this
Court) yet dismisses the petition because it is established that the act was
not that of the officer named in the petition but that of another State
Officer, such As a subordinate of his. This Court has been given power to
grant relief as it may deem just and equitable ‑ a power stated in the widest
possible terms. It will neither be Just nor equitab1e to deny relief in such a
case."



(5)        Rule 65 merely states that the petitioner shall name the person who
he alleges has committed the unlawful act. This by no means exhausts the
avenues available to a petitioner It does not provide for a situation where
the petitioner is unable to name the officer of State who commas the act.
Furthermore Rule 65 concerns procedure and like, most rules cannot detract
from the powers of Article 126.



Per **Wanasundera, J. ‑**



"Article 126 of the Constitution shows that in an application that Article the
accusation is made against the State and the State through its principal Law
Office, the Attorney‑General, is required to defend the action. It is a legal
requirement that the Attorney-General should be heard."

#  322



"The Rules cannot derogate from the substantive constitutional provisions and
alter the nature and composition of a proceeding under Article 126 ......... A
proceeding under Article 126 is against the State and the State has to bear
the liability for unlawful executive or administrative action.



(6)        Although the petitioner‑respondent denied she had been arrested by
the petitioner, the arrest by the petitioner is one episode and the Court has
treated it as one transaction in which there was only one arrest ‑ the arrest
by the petitioner. The implication is that the arrest was mistakenly
attributed to the first respondent. That finding cannot now be questioned in
these proceedings. Moreover it was based on facts disclosed by the petitioner
in his affidavit.



(7)        The petitioner's statement that had he been given an opportunity he
would have explained what he meant by permit suggests that when he used that
word it did not have its ordinary English meaning. He has only himself to
blame for this. The Court was entitled to take it to mean what it ordinarily
means in the English language ‑



(8)        The parties to the case were heard by affidavit. Likewise the
petitioner was heard by affidavit and his affidavit was accepted by Court. The
petitioner knew at the time he swore the affidavit that it was being filed to
establish that the only arrest was by him and that it was the legality of his
arrest that would be in issue at the inquiry. The Additional Solicitor‑General
appearing for the 2nd and 3rd respondents addressed Court on the legality of
the arrest. In their written submissions the Inspector‑General of Police (2nd
respondent) and the Attorney‑General (3rd respondent) endorsed the
petitioner's action "as being in accordance with procedures established by
law".



Per **Wanasundera, J. ‑**



"The petitioner had gone out of his way to justify the arrest and sought cover
for his actions in certain legal provisions. This is a matter of law falling
within the province of the judge".



(9)        The petitioner was given such hearing as the Court considered
necessary as provided in Article 134 (3).



(10)      The rule of natural justice audi alteram partem has been observed.
In any event the provisions of Article 134 (3) have been satisfied.



(11)      The petitioner knew all along that it was the arrest by him and its
validity that was in issue in the case. Hence it cannot be said that justice
has not been seen to be done because the petitioner was not told that his
conduct was being impugned in the case.



(12)      No order for damages or costs was made against the petitioner and he
has suffered no prejudice as a result of his not being given an opportunity to
enter into the fray and take part in the argument.



 (13) There is no justification for exercising any of the inherent powers of
the Court in this case.

#  323

** **

# Per Wanasundera, J. ‑



(14)      In the case that was filed by Mrs. Vivienne Goonewardena under
Article 126 of the Constitution for a violation of fundamental rights the
present petitioner came before the court in the capacity of a witness. In the
course of arriving at its finding a court has necessarily to believe and
disbelieve the evidence given by the witnesses for the respective sides.



It is not a requirement of the law of this country that a witness who has
given evidence should be informed prior to the judgment of the proposed
reasons for disbelieving him and be afforded an opportunity of making
representations.



(15)      When a punishment, penalty or liability has to be imposed on a
person, whether he be a party or witness, the law would generally require that
the person concerned be apprised of the charge, allegation or complaint
against him, and he be afforded an opportunity of giving an explanation. The
word "guilty" does not necessarily mean only criminality, it can also mean
culpability, namely, blameworthiness. The use of the word "guilty" in the
passage "Sub‑Inspector Ganeshanantham was guilty of arresting the petitioner
in contravention of the constitutional prohibition" by no means imposes or is
intended to impose any punishment, penalty or liability on the petitioner. It
constituted a necessary step in the process of the judge's reasoning and
without it he could not have come to a proper determination of the case.



# Per Wanasundera, J. ‑



When a Judge passes strictures on a witness in the course of deciding a case
"it is only an episode in a single trial and constitutes part and parcel of
one proceeding, conducted according to the known standards of fairness and
where the principle of natural justice cannot be divided, apportioned and
compartmentalised. If the rule is to be applied in situations like the present
case it would result in trials within trials and the prospect of interminable
litigation. Surely that would be carrying the principle of audi alteram partem
to absurd lengths."



# Cases referred to



  (1)      _Re Exchange Street, Manchester,_ [1956] 3 All E.R. 490, 493. _  
 _

  (2)      _Waterhouse & Co. v. Gilbert, 15 Q . B. D. 569. _  


  (3)      _Lyon v. Morris,_ 19 Q. B. D. 139.  


  (4)      _Mapalathan v. Elayavan_ , (1939) 41 NLR 115. _  
 _

  (5)      _Loku Banda v. Assen,_ (1897) 2 NLR 311. _  
 _

  (6)      _Elo Singho v. Joseph,_ (1948) 49 NLR 312.  


  (7)      _Mohamed v. Annamalai Chettiar,_ (1932) 12 C. L. Rec. 228.



  (8)      _Karuppannan v. Commissioner for Registration of Indian and
Pakistani Residents,_ (1953) 54 NLR 481.  


  (9)      _In Revision, (1921) 23 NLR 475.  
 _

(10)      _Alasupillai v. Yavetpillai,_ (1949) 39 CLW 107.  


(11)      _Ranmenikhamy v. Tissera_ (1962) 65 NLR 214.  


(12)      _King v. Baron Silva,_ (1925) 4 Times of Ceylon Law Reports 3.  


(13)      _The Seistan_ , [1960] 1 All ER 32.  


(14)      _Sheldon v. Bromfield Justices,_ [1964] 2 WLR 1066; [1964] 2 Q .B
573.



#  324



(15)      _Appuhamy v. Regina,_ [1963] 1 All E. R. 762.  


(16)      _Rex v. The Thames Magistrate's Court,_ [1974] 2 All E. R. 1219.  


(17)      _General Council of Medical Education and Registration of the United
Kingdom v. Spackman ‑ _Spackman's case, [1943] 2 All E.R. 337, (1943) A. C.
627.  


(18)      _Mahon v. Air New Zealand Ltd. and Others reported in Newspaper_
(Privy Council) Law Report of October 21, 1983.  


(19)      R. V. Deputy Industrial Injuries Commissioner: ex parte Moore, 1
[1965] 1 Q.B. 456, 488, 490.  


(20)      _Cinnamond v. British Airports Authority,_ [1980] 2 All E.R. 368,
377.  


(21) _      R. v. Woking Justices, ex parte Gossag_e, [ 1973] 2 W.L.R. 529.  


(22)      _R. v. Hopkins, ex parte Harward,_ [1973] 1 W.L.R. 967.  
_  
_(23)      _Maharaj v. The Attorney ‑General of Trinidad and Tobago_ (No. 2),
[1979] A. C. 385, 399.  


(24)      _Re A. Solicitor,_ [1944] 2 All E. R. 432, 434. _  
 _

(25)      _Guardians of Westham Union v. Churchwardens of Bethnal Green_ ,
[1896] A.C. 477.  


(26)      _Sirinivasa Thero v. Thero,_ (1960) 63 NLR 31, 33.  


(27)      _Selvadurai v. Rajah,_ (1940) 41 NLR 423.  


(28)      _Narayan Chetty v. Jusey Silva_ , (1903) 8 NLR 162.  


(29)      _Eswaralingarn v. Sivagnanasunderam,_ (1962) 64 NLR 396, 398.  


(30)      _Andris Appu v. Kolande Asari_ (1916) 19 NLR 225, 229.  


(31)      _Olagappa, Chettiar v. Reith,_ (1941) 43 NLR 91.  


(32)      _Victor de Silva v. Jinadasa de Silva,_ (1964) 68 NLR 45.  


(33)      _Commissioner of Inland Revenue v. Ranaweera_ (1969) 72 NLR 294 296.  


(34)      _Edirisinghe v. District Judge of Matara,_ (1949) 51 NLR 549.  


(35)      _Sinnathamby v. Yokammah_ (1958) 61 NLR 183, 185.  


(36)      _De Costa and Sons v. S. Gunaratne_ (1967) 71 NLR 214. _  
 _

(37)      _Huddersfield Police Authority v. Watson_ [1947] All E. R. 193.



(38)      _Morrelle Ltd. v. Wakeling_ , [1955] 1 All E. R. 708.  


(39)      _Billimoria v. Minister of Lands,_ [1978‑ 79] 1 S. L. R. 10, 12.  


(40)      _Menchinahamy v. Muniweera,_ (1950) 52 NLR 409, 414, 415.  


(41)      _Ex parte Brown, Re Tunstall,_ [1966] 1 N. S. W. R. 770, 775.  


(42)      _Ridge v. Baldwin_ , [1963] 2 All E. R. 66, 80.  


(43)      _Cooper v. The Board of Works for Wandsworth District,_ (1863) 14
C.B. (N.S) 180.  


(44)      _Franklin v. The Minister of Town and Country Planning ‑Stevenage
Case_, [1948] A. C. 87.  


(45)      _Nakkuda Ali v. Jayaratne,_ (1950) 51 NLR 457. _  
 _

(46)      _Board of Education v. Rice_ , [1911]A.C. 179.  


(47)      _Pearlberg v. Varty,_ [1972] 1 WLR 534, 547.  


(48)      _Durayappah v. Fernando,_ (1966) 69 NLR 265.  


(49)      _Wiseman v. Borneman,_ [1971] A. C. 297, 308.  


(50)      _Matlock v. Aberdeen Corporation,_ [1971] 1 WLR 1578, 1599.  


(51)      _John v. Rees,_ [1970] Ch 345, 402. _  
 _

(52)      _R. v. Thames Magistrate's Court, Ex parte Polemis,_ [1974] 2 All
E.R. 1219, [1974] 1 WLR 1371.



#  325

** **

(53)      _R. v. Hendon justices, Exparte Gorchein_ , [1973] 1 WLR 1502. _  
 _

(54)      _Vadamardchy Hindu Educational Society Ltd v. The Minister of
Education_ , (1961) 63 NLR 322.  


(55)      _Kapoor v. Jagmohan,_ (1980) 4 S. C. C. 379. _  
 _

(56)      _R. v. Sussex Justices, ex parte McCarthy,_ [1924] 1 KB 256, 259.



(57)      _De Verteuiel v. Knaggs, [1918]AC 559.  
 _

(58)      _Vasudevan Pillai v. City Council of Singapore,_ [1968] 1 WLR 1278,
1286 (P.C.)  


(59)      _Rose v. Humbles,_ [1972] 1 WLR33, [1972] 1 All ER 314,318.  


(60)      _Mariyadas Rai v. The Attorney ‑General and another_ S. C.
Application No. 130/82: S.C. Minutes of 14. 2. 83.



(61)      _Caldera v. Santiagopillai,_ (1920) 22 NLR 155. _  
 _

(62)      _Juan Perera v. Stephen Fernando,_ (1902) 2 Br. 5.  


(63)      _Thambiraja v. Sinnamma,_ (1935) 36 NLR 442. _  
 _

(64)      _Burford (Corporation of) v. Lenthall_ , 2 Atk. 551; 26 E. R. 731.  


(66)      _Craig v. Kanssen_ , [1943] K. B. 256; [1943] 1 All E R. 108.  


(66)      _Young v. Bristol Aeroplane Co. Ltd,_ [1944] K. B. 718; [1944] 2 All
E.R. 293.



**APPLICATION** in revision and for the exercise of the inherent powers and
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.



_K. N. Choksy, S. A.,_ with _D. H. M. Jayamaha, Ronald Perera, Lakshman
Perera, Miss I R. Rajepakse_ and _Nihal Fernando_ for the petitioner.



_Dr. Colvin R. de Silva_ with _Batty Weerakoon, Miss M. Kanapathipillal_ and
_Miss Saumya de Silva_ for the petitioner‑respondent.



_Sunil de Silva, Additional Solicitor ‑General, _with _Priyantha Perera,
Deputy Solicitor ‑General_ and _Upawansa Yapa, Deputy Solictor ‑General_ for
Attorney‑General.



_Cur. adv. vult._



March 2, 1984.

**SAMARAKOON, C.J.**



The application in this case is a direct consequence of the order made by a
Bench of three Judges of this court in case No. 20 of 1983\. In that case the
petitioner‑respondent filed a petition in terms of Article 126 of the
Constitution (1978) alleging that she had been unlawfully arrested on the 8th
of March, 1983, at the Kollupitiya Police Station by the first respondent who
was at the time the Officer‑in‑Charge of the said station. The
petitioner‑respondent also alleged that she had been subjected to cruel,
inhuman and degrading treatment by the first respondent. Thereby, she alleged,
the first respondent had acted in contravention and in violation of her
fundamental rights set out in

#  326



Article 11 and Article 13 (1) of the Constitution. She made the
inspector‑General of Police and the Attorney‑General parties to the petition
as second and third respondents respectively. The first respondent denied all
allegations made against him. The second respondent appears to have made
independent investigations into these allegations. He filed affidavit
supporting the denial of the first respondent and set out the true state of
facts as found by him. Together with his affidavit was filed an affidavit from
Vinayagam Ganeshanatham, Inspector of Police, Kollupitiya, the petitioner in
this application (hereinafter referred to as petitioner) and an affidavit from
Pallage Ratnaseeli Perera, Reserve Woman Constable, attached to the
Kollupitiya Police Station. The second respondent swore inter alia that he was
"satisfied with the truth of the contents" of the two affidavits
abovementioned. The petitioner in his affidavit stated that it was he who
arrested the petitioner‑respondent and four others and that the arrest was
made by him on 8th March with the assistance of other policemen on the Galle
Road opposite the Police Station. He pleads further facts seeking to justify
the arrest. I will deal with this affidavit in greater detail in the course of
this judgment. The petition was inquired into by my brothers Ratwatte, J.,
Colin‑Thome, J. and Soza J. The unanimous decision of the Court was delivered
by Soza, J. The judgment discloses three salient facts. They are‑



(1)        That the petitioner‑respondent had not established to the
satisfaction of the Court that she had been subjected to cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment by the first respondent.



(2)        That the petitioner‑respondent had been arrested on that day in
question by Inspector Ganeshanantham, petitioner, and not by the first
respondent.



(3)        That the said arrest was unlawful and therefore the State was
liable in damages which was fixed at Rs.2,500 by the Court.



It is relevant to note that the Court made no order as to damages or costs
against the petitioner. The petitioner was in no way prejudiced by the order
of this Court.



The petitioner now complains that the Court had found him guilty of unlawfully
arresting the petitioner-respondent, thereby violating her fundamental rights,
that the findings were made against him without first informing him that his
conduct was being inquired into, that he

#  327

** **

was given no opportunity of defending himself, that he was not a party to the
proceedings nor added as a party and that the Court in making the said finding
acted in contravention of natural justice and _per incuriam._ He asks for
relief from this Court.



Counsel for the petitioner contends that this Court has powers of revision
which enable it to grant the relief prayed for by the petitioner. Counsel for
the petitioner‑respondent states that this Court has no power to revise its
own orders. He points to the caption of the petition which reads‑



"IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION IN REVISION AND FOR THE EXERCISE OF THE
INHERENT POWERS AND JURISDICTION OF THE SUPREME COURT".



He submits that this caption read with prayer ( _a_ ) to the petition invokes
a jurisdiction in revision which this Court does not have. One has to look at
the legislation which created this Court to find an answer to this dispute.
That legislation is to be found in the second Republican Constitution of 1978.
The Supreme Court which existed up to the time of the first Republican
Constitution of 1972 and which continued to exist under that Constitution
ceased to exist when the 1978 Constitution became operative. (Vide Article 105
(2) of the Constitution). Its place was taken by the Court of Appeal (Vide
Article 169 (2) of the 1978 Constitution). A new Supreme Court has been
constituted which is the highest and final Superior Court of Record. (Article
118 of the Constitution). It has jurisdiction in constitutional matters which
are spelled out in Articles 120, 121, 122, 123 and 125 of the Constitution. A
fetter has been placed on this jurisdiction by the provisions of Article 124.
The exact nature and effect of its confines is not a matter that arises for
discussion in this case. This Court has a jurisdiction for the protection of
fundamental rights (Article 118 ( _b_ )). The manner of its exercise is set
out in Article 126 of the Constitution. It has a final appellate jurisdiction
which is referred to in detail in Article 127 of the Constitution. It has a
consultative jurisdiction (Article 118 ( _d_ )) which is referred to in detail
in Article 129 of the Constitution and it has a jurisdiction In election
petitions (Article 118 ( _e_ )) which is referred to in detail in Article 130
of the Constitution. Lastly it has a jurisdiction in respect of any breach of
the privileges of Parliament (Article 118 ( _f_ ) which is referred to in
Article 131 of the Constitution. Other jurisdictions may be vested in it by
laws passed by Parliament. (Article 118 ( _g_ )). None of the provisions
expressly conferring jurisdiction which I have cited above give this

#  328



Court a jurisdiction to revise its own decisions. Nor has the Legislature
acting in terms of Article 118 ( _g_ ) conferred such a jurisdiction by law On
the other hand the language in certain of the Articles indicates to my mind,
not only that it is the Court of last resort in appeal, (Article 118 ( _c_ ))
but also that there is finality in its judgment whether it be right or wrong.
Article 126 (5) stipulates that this Court shall "finally dispose of" the
petition within three months. The use of t he word "finally" indicates to my
mind that the limitation is not confined to the period of time, viz., three
months, but also refers to the effect of the order made. I would take the same
attitude which Harman, J. adopted in a similar situation. "The thing is over".
There is nothing more that can be done. There must be certainty in the law-
_Re Exchange Street, Manchester_ (1). Article 127 states that all judgments
and orders of this Court in its appellate jurisdiction shall be "final and
conclusive" The use of these words primarily means that there can be no
further appeal to a higher court or institution. _Waterhouse & Co., v. Gilbert
_(2) and _Lyon v. Morris_ (3). It might be said that such a phrase is
superfluous because the Supreme Court is the final Appellate Court. This is a
plausible statement. But it appears to me that it was meant to emphasise the
fact that as far as the matters which are the subject of the decision are
concerned it is all over. There is an end to such litigation ‑ as needs must
be with all litigation. _Ut sit finis litium._ That is the policy of the law.
That is the purpose of Chapter XV of the Constitution. A like view was taken
of the Supreme Court that existed up to the time of the Constitution of 1978.
In the case of _Mapolathan v. Elayavan_ (4) an application was made to revise
the earlier decision of the Supreme Court in the same case. That decision was
based on the premise that the Deed of Transfer was signed by two transferors.
It was later pointed out that there were in fact four transferors. It was
alleged that if the original Deed filed of record had been properly
scrutinized this fact would have been discovered and the decision of the Court
would have been in favour of the petitioner. It was held that while the Courts
Ordinance gave the Supreme Court power to deal by way of revision with cases
tried or pending in original courts it had no power to revise cases decided by
the Supreme Court itself. See also _Loku Banda v. Assen_ (5) and _Elo Singho
v. Joseph_ (6). I hold that this Supreme Court has no jurisdiction to act in
revision in cases decided by itself.



Counsel for the petitioner submitted that this Court possessed inherent powers
which were sufficient to enable it to grant the relief



#  329

** **

prayed for by the petitioner. He relied on the provision of Article 105 (3)
which reads as follows:



"(3) The Supreme Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka and the Court of Appeal of
the Republic of Sri Lanka shall each be a superior court of record and shall
have all the powers of such court including the power to punish for contempt
of itself, whether committed in the court itself or elsewhere, with
imprisonment or fine or both as the court may deem fit."



Counsel contended that the powers of a Superior Court of record "included an
inherent jurisdiction to correct its own decisions". As a Superior Court of
record there is no doubt that it has inherent powers to make corrections to
meet the ends of justice. In _Mohamed v. Annamalai Chettiar_ (7) the Court
used its inherent powers to free an insolvent from arrest pending the decision
of his appeal to the Privy Council although there was no statutory authority
for such an Order. Costs have been awarded to a successful party from the
inception of the Supreme Court using its inherent power ‑ _Karuppannan v.
Commissioner for Registration of Indian and Pakistani Residents_ (8). inherent
powers have been used to correct errors which were demonstrably and manifestly
wrong and it was necessary in the interests of justice to put matters right.
Decision s made per incuriam have been corrected. Vide _In Revision_ (9),
_Alasupillai v. Yavetpillai_ (10), _Ranmenikhamy v. Tissera_ (11). In the case
of _King v. Baron Silva_ (12) the Supreme Court upheld the conviction of the
accused in the case on a charge of conspiracy to commit extortion Sometime
later it was brought to the notice of the Supreme Court that such offence of
conspiracy did not exist at the time of the alleged commission. The Court held
that its decision had been made per incuriam and altered the conviction These
powers are adjuncts to existing jurisdiction to remedy injustice‑they cannot
be made the source of new jurisdictions to revise, a judgment rendered by that
Court. Can such powers avail the petitioner in this case?  
  
Counsel for the petitioner formulated two issues for consideration and
decision by this Court. The first issue is as follows:  
  
      A.  The Supreme Court acted per Incuriam in deciding Appeal No. 20/83 for the following reasons: 

#  330



                        (1)        It has made the finding against the Petitioner in respect of an Infringement not complained of to +Court by Mrs. Gunawardena (petitioner‑respondent) and in fact disowned by her. Such Order was in disregard of Article 126 (2) read with rule 65(1)( _a_ ) of the Supreme Court Rules.



(2)        The power to grant relief or give directions which the Supreme
Court deems just and equitable under Article 126 (4) is restricted to the
Petitioner's allegation and complaint to Court under Article 126 (2).



(3)        in any event the Court acted _per incuriam_ in making its finding
in that it disregarded‑



(i)         Article 126 (2) read with Rule 65 (1) and Rule 65 (4)(ii).



(ii)        The rule of natural justice‑ _audi alteram   partem._



(iii)       The rule of natural justice that justice must be seen to be done.



The second issue is as follows:



      B.   The Supreme Court has the jurisdiction to grant the Petitioner (Ganeshanantham) relief in respect of the aforesaid per incuriam finding either in the exercise of its inherent jurisdiction or powers of revision.



The jurisdiction granted to this Court by Article 126 of the Constitution
concerns fundamental rights and language rights declared by Chapters III and
IV of the Constitution. In exercising this jurisdiction the Court has to make
a dual finding, viz.,



     (1)   Whether there is an infringement or threatened infringement of a fundamental right, and



     (2) Whether such infringement or threat is by executive or administrative action.



If the answer to the first is in the negative the second does not arise for
consideration. If the answer to the first is in the affirmative then the
question arises as to whether the act complained of constitutes executive or
administrative action. It may not always be possible for the petitioner to
allege in his petition that the act was that of a particular officer of State.
His name may not be known to the

#  331

** **

petitioner, and he may only be able to identify him by other means. For
example in the course of the inquiry he may be able to establish that it was a
police officer of a named Police Station. This Court would then have
jurisdiction to act in terms of Article 126. On the other hand it may be that
in the course of the inquiry it transpires (as happened in the instant case),
and it is established to the satisfaction of the Court, that the infringement
was by a State Officer other than the one named in the petition. This Court
would still have the power to act in terms of Article 126. The jurisdiction of
this Court does not depend on the fact that a particular officer is mentioned
by name nor is it confined to the person named. The unlawful act gives the
Court jurisdiction to entertain the petition and to make a declaration
accordingly. The fact that it was committed by an Officer of State empowers
the Court to grant a remedy. The provisions of Article 126 (2) do not limit
the inquiry to the person named in the petition. Such a limitation is apparent
in the provisions of Article 126 (3) where the inquiry is confined to the
party named in the application for a writ in respect of whom the Court of
Appeal makes the reference. Article 4 ( _d_ ) of the Constitution enjoins all
organs of Government to respect, secure and advance the fundamental rights
declared and recognized by the Constitution. This Court being a component part
of the judiciary, which is one of the organs of Government, must necessarily
obey such command. It will be a travesty of justice if, having found as a fact
that a fundamental right has been infringed or is threatened to be infringed,
it yet dismisses the petition because it is established that the act was not
that of the Officer of State named in the petition but that of another State
Officer, such as a subordinate of his. The provisions of Article 126 (2)
cannot be confined in that way. This Court has been given power to grant
relief as it may deem just and equitable-a power stated in the widest possible
terms. It will be neither just nor equitable to deny relief in such a case.
Counsel for the Petitioner referred to the provisions of Rule 65 and called in
aid its terms to buttress his argument. Rule 65 merely states that the
Petitioner shall name the person who he alleges has commited the unlawful act.
This by no means exhausts the avenues available to a petitioner. As I have
stated earlier it does not provide for a situation where the petitioner is
unable to name the Officer of State who commits the act. Furthermore Rule 65
concerns procedure and like most rules cannot detract from the powers of
Article 126\. I therefore reject the contention raised in issues A 1 and 2 by
Counsel for the petitioner.

#  332



            I now turn to issue 3 (1) (ii) and (iii). There has been no disregard of the provisions of Article 126 (2) read with Rule 65 (2) and (4) (ii). Before I deal with these issues I desire to dispose of another matter that was raised by Counsel for the petitioner. In para 5 of his affidavit dated 9.5.1983 the petitioner stated that he "questioned the lady at the head of the procession whether they had a permit to go in procession and no permit was produced by the said lady or any other member of the procession". He states that when he became aware that the procession was being conducted "without the authority of a lawful permit" it became his lawful duty to prevent the conduct of the procession. The Court held that no permit or permission was required for the procession. The petitioner now states that had he been given an opportunity to defend himself he would have explained what he meant by the word "permit", suggesting that when he used that word it did not have its ordinary English meaning. If that be so he has only himself to blame. The Court was entitled to take it to mean as the Inspector‑General of Police the 2nd respondent did what it ordinarily means in the English language and it is too late now to state that he used the word in a sense different to its ordinary connotation.



Another submission of Counsel was that the arrest complained of to Court by
the petitioner‑respondent was not the arrest by the petitioner and the Court
therefore had no jurisdiction to inquire into this latter arrest, more so
because the petitioner‑respondent denied this in her counter affidavit. This
arrest by the petitioner was one episode and the Court has treated it as one
transaction in which there was only one arrest and that was by the petitioner.
The implication is that the arrest was mistakenly attributed to the first
respondent. That finding cannot now be questioned in these proceedings.
Moreover it was based on facts disclosed by the petitioner in his affidavit.



Counsel for the petitioner next submitted that the petitioner was not a party
to the proceedings in question and had not been told that his conduct was
being impugned and therefore would be the subject of inquiry by the Court.
Further, that a finding of guilt had been made against his client without
hearing him. This procedure, it is submitted, violated the principle of
natural justice‑ _audi alteram partem._ "Justice must be seen to be done", he
said. "Justice has not been seen to be done". In the result, he states, the
finding that the arrest was made unlawfully by the petitioner was made _per
incuriam_ and must be expunged or declared invalid. When confronted with the
position that

#  333

** **

the Court would be stultifying itself if it made such an order because the
award of damages was based on such finding and therefore could not stand if
such finding was expunged or declared invalid, Counsel went the whole hog and
asked that the entire order be set aside.



Counsel contended that the rule of natural justice ‑ _audi alteram partem_ ‑
applied not only to a party to a case but also to any person against whom
findings are made or strictures passed without either being made a party to
the proceedings or being informed that his conduct is being impugned and would
therefore be inquired into. Counsel has sought to establish this contention
with the aid of some decisions of the English Courts. I will now deal with
these cases cited by him. The first of them is the case of _The Seistan_ (13).
The Motor Vessel Seistan sank on 19th February, 1958, in the Persian Gulf off
Bahrain as a result of an explosion. A Court of formal investigation
consisting of a Wreck Commissioner and three assessors was set up. The Chief
Engineer of the Vessel, Mr. Robertson, was seriously ill and therefore was
unable to give evidence in person but did so by means of three statements
signed by him. The final report was signed by the Commissioner and the three
Assessors. One of the Assessors, Captain Parfitt by name, added a rider in
these words‑



"I concur in the above but in my opinion the advice given by the chief
officer, Mr. Jones, as to flooding the lower hold offered the better chance of
a quicker extinction of the fire. The conduct of the chief engineer in
misinforming the chief officer regarding No. 5 bilge line non-return valve was
reprehensible."



The Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation ordered a re‑hearing restricted
to so much of the case heard at the formal investigation as related to the
conduct of the Chief Engineer. The real object of the re‑hearing was to
inquire into the merits of the censure. The last of questions answered by the
Commissioner and Assessors was‑



"Was the loss of the Motor Vessel Seistan caused or contributed to by the
wrongful act or default of any person or persons.?"



All except Captain Parfitt answered "No". Merriman, J. expressed the opinion
that there was no justification for the censure. He further stated that the
question required the Court to pronounce on the culpability of a person or
persons and the rider implied that the Chief Engineer misinformed the Chief
Officer regarding No. 5 bilge line non‑return valve and thereby caused
retardation of the flooding of the

#  334



hold. It then behoved the Assessor and the Court to give the officer an
opportunity of exculpating himself. This was not done and Merriman, J. stated
that in the circumstances the censure was "wholly irregular". The Court did
not expunge or set aside the rider. It merely stated that there was  "no
justification for censuring George Robertson". During the whole of the inquiry
there does not appear to have been any suggestion that the Chief Engineer had
misinformed the Chief Officer regarding the cause of the explosion. There was
no inkling of such a suggestion nor was such an allegation inquired into. The
Chief Engineer therefore had no occasion to explain or justify any conduct of
his. Such a situation does not arise in the instant case. The next case cited
is the case of _Sheldon v. Bromfield Justices_ (14). The facts are simple. One
Charles Wilfred Marsh, was charged with assaulting his mother‑in‑law, Mary
Elizabeth Sheldon. She and her husband, Thomas William Sheldon, gave evidence
for the prosecution. The charge was dismissed but the justices bound over the
accused and the two Sheldons to keep the peace for a period of 12 months. This
order was set aside as being contrary to natural justice. Lord Parker, the C
J. was of the view that a mere witness who comes to testify against an accused
should at least be told that his conduct was also in question and he must be
given a reasonable opportunity of knowing the nature of the allegation and of
making his answer to it. A similar situation arose in the case of _Appuhamy v.
Regina_ (15). The witness was summarily punished for having given false
evidence. The Commissioner of Assize acted upon a rider to that effect brought
by the jury. This conviction was set aside. It was clearly wrong as the
provisions of section 440 (1) of the Criminal Procedure Code permitted the
Court to convict if in the Court's opinion he had given false evidence in
which event the witness should have been told accordingly and an indication
given of the evidence alleged to be false. The Commissioner had no power to
act summarily on the opinion of the jury that the witness had given false
evidence. This decision was based on a statutory provision. The Privy Council
held that the witness had not been told the "gist and substance" of the
accusation against him. The next case cited is the case of _Rex v. The Thames
Magistrate's Court_ (16). The facts show that the prosecution and the lay
justices were in an inordinate hurry. Summons was served on a Captain of a
Greek Vessel at 10. 30 a.m. on the 17th July returnable at the Magistrate's
Court at 2.00 p.m. that very day. The Greek Captain knew little or no English.
His Solicitors found it impossible to prepare

#  335

** **

the defence before 2.00 p.m. and therefore applied for a postponement. They
were granted an adjournment till 4.00 p.m. it was later taken up that day by a
Stipendiary Magistrate. He heard the case out that very day and found the case
proved. The Captain was fined £  5,000. The Court held that there was a breach
of natural justice. The facts showed clearly that the defendant had not been
given a reasonable chance to prepare his defence. Lord Widgery, C.J. said‑



"To start with, nothing is clearer today than that a breach of the rules of
natural justice is said to occur if a party to proceedings, and more
especially the defendant in a criminal case, is not given a reasonable chance
to present his case. It is so elementary and so basic it hardly needs to be
said. But of the versions of breach of the rules of natural justice with which
in this Court we are dealing constantly, perhaps the most common today is the
allegation that the defence were prejudiced because they were not given a fair
and reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Court, and of course
the opportunity to present a case to the Court is not confined to being given
an opportunity to stand up and say what you want to say; it necessarily
extends to a reasonable opportunity to prepare your case before you are called
on to present it. A mere allocation of Court time is of no value if the party
in question is deprived of the opportunity of getting his tackle in order and
being able to present his case in the fullest sense."



There is no complaint of this kind in the instant case and it is therefore not
applicable. The next case cited is the case of _General Council of Medical
Education and Registration of the United Kingdom v. Spackman_ (17). In this
case Dr. Spackman had been found guilty in the Divorce Court of adultery with
a female patient of his who was suing her husband for divorce. The doctor was
ordered to pay £ 1,000 damages to the husband. He was charged before the
General Medical Council with infamous conduct in a professional respect.
Before the Council the doctor sought to negative the Court's finding of
adultery by tendering evidence which, though available, was not called in the
divorce proceedings. The Council refused to hear such evidence and directed
that the doctor be struck off the Medical Practitioners' Register. This order
was challenged by Writ of Certiorari. The King's Bench Division issued the
Writ which was affirmed by the House of

#  336



Lords in appeal. The decision turned on the construct on "due inquiry" in
section 29 of the Medical Act of 1858. The House of Lords held that it was
incumbent on the Council to hold due inquiry and judge guilt. It cannot rely
upon an inquiry by another Tribunal or a judgment of guilt by another
Tribunal. I cannot see how this decision supports the contention of the
Counsel for the petitioner.



            Mr. Choksy referred us to a decision of the Privy Council in the case of _Mahon v. Air New Zealand Ltd_ (18) reported in a newspaper dated October 21, 1983. It is an abridged version and therefore not reliable. A Law Report containing the judgment is not available here in Sri Lanka. However as Mr. Choksy laid great stress on this decision I propose to refer to it (a photostat copy has been made available to me) mindful of the fact that a reading of the judgment itself later might prove that the editor's summary of the judgment is either wrong or inaccurate. It appears that the Governor‑General of New Zealand had appointed a Royal Commission to inquire into the "cause and circumstances" of the crash of the DC 10 aircraft operated by Air New Zealand on a sight seeing trip of the Antarctic. The 237 passengers and the crew of 20 were killed. The appellant (a Judge) had been appointed Commissioner. In his report he ordered Air New Zealand to pay to the Ministry of Justice a sum of New Zealand $ 150,000 as a contribution to the costs of the inquiry. The reason he gave for this order is quoted as follows:



"But in this case, the palpably false sections of evidence which I heard could
not have been the result of mistake, or faulty recollection. They originated I
am compelled to say, in a pre‑determined plan of deception. They were very
clearly part of an attempt to conceal a series of disastrous administrative
blunders and so, in regard to the particular items of evidence to which I have
referred, I am forced reluctantly to say that I had to listen to an
orchestrated litany of lies."



The parties to the deception and conspiracy were readily identifiable in the
body of the report. Four flight operators also were identified as
conspirators. The report states that the Privy Council disposed of the appeal
on the ground that the Judge had inadvertently failed to apply the applicable
rules of natural justice set out in the case of _R. v Deputy Industrial
Injuries Commissioner: ex parte Moore_ (19). They are‑

#  337

** **

(1)        A finding must be based on evidence of probative value.



(2)        The Judge must listen fairly to the relevant evidence conflicting
with the finding (sic.) the arguments placed by those whose interests are
affected or would have so wished to place had he been _made aware of the risks
of the findings being made._ (The emphasis is mine).



As regards the first proposition it is reported that the Privy Council found
that on the facts it was not conceivable that individual witnesses falsely
disclaimed knowledge of low flying on previous trips in a concerted attempt to
deceive. Nor had there been evidence of probative value to base a finding of
concealment of documents. We are not concerned with the first proposition or
the Privy Council's decision on it in the instant case. As regards the second
proposition the Privy Council is stated to have held that the Judge's finding
of concerted concealment of Air New Zealand's adoption of a new Southerly way
point for Antarctic Sightseeing flights was rightly rejected by the Court of
Appeal because he had failed to hear both sides and the inferences he drew
were based on a logical fallacy. Either reason would have been sufficient to
reject the finding. Here again I must point out that the editor's reporting
may be inaccurate. Assuming that he is correct it means that Air New Zealand
should have been in some way or other made aware that there was a risk of such
a finding. Apparently the airline had no such knowledge up to the time they
were confronted with the finding against them. Once again I must state that
the position of the petitioner in the instant case is different in that he had
knowledge and was aware that his act in arresting the petitioner‑respondent
would be the basis of any finding against the State and that such arrest must
be justified in law. He was more fortunate than the airline because he ran no
risk of being mulcted in damages simply because he was not a party to the
case.



In the instant case the Petitioner tendered to Court an affidavit which was
filed by the head of his Department, the Inspector‑General of Police (2nd
respondent). In his affidavit he stated the fact that he arrested the
petitioner‑respondent on the pavement opposite the Police Station and took her
with others into the Police Station. He was thereby representing to court that
until such time as she was released from custody she was detained under arrest
made by him and not by he 1st respondent. It must have been clear to him and
to all others

#####  338



involved in the case that there could not have been a second arrest in the
Police Station. It would have been equally clear that that was the arrest
which was the subject of inquiry by Court, and therefore had to be justified
in law. The petitioner therefore pleaded as follows: -



"I state that I along with Police Constables 11085, 7634, 12071 and 5224
questioned the lady at the head of the procession whether they had a permit to
go in a procession and no permit was produced by the said lady or any other
members of the procession. I state that when I became aware that the said
procession was being conducted without the authority of a lawful permit and
that the participants were committing offences under section 77 of the Police
Ordinance it became my lawful duty under section 56 of the Police Ordinance to
prevent the conduct of that procession."



Why was he seeking "to justify the arrest in law"? If his purpose was only to
absolve the 1st respondent all he had to state was that he made the arrest in
question and stop there. The fact that he proceeded to justify the arrest
establishes two important facts. Firstly, that he was aware that it was the
arrest by him that was the real issue in the case and secondly, that the
legality of the arrest had to be established. His affidavit was accepted by
Court and we were informed by Counsel at the Bar that Counsel appearing for
the 2nd and 3rd respondents and the defence addressed the Court on the
legality of this arrest. The written submissions tendered on behalf of the
second and third respondents, i.e., the Inspector‑General of Police and the
Attorney‑General respectively, endorsed this action "as being in accordance
with procedures established by law". The petitioner was heard by affidavit as
is normally done in cases of this kind. Oral evidence is rarely led or
permitted. In fact all evidence relevant to the matter was adduced by
affidavit. The petitioner cannot state, as was stated in the case of the
_Seistan,_ that he had no inkling of the fact that the arrest by him was to be
called in question or was in fact in question in the matter. Nor can he plead,
as in the _Sheldon_ case, that he, a witness to another's act, suddenly found
himself being accused and dealt with for an offence. I have no doubt that the
petitioner knew at the time he swore the affidavit that it was filed for the
purpose of establishing that there was only one arrest and that arrest was
made by him and not by anyone else, that it was that very arrest and its
legality that would be in issue in the inquiry and that it was necessary to
justify the arrest in law. His Counsel submitted that had the

#  339

** **

petitioner been heard he would have succeeded where the 2nd and 3rd
respondents failed. The matter that was argued was the legality of the arrest.
It was purely a legal argument based on statutory provisions. The Additional
Solicitor‑General argued for the 2nd and 3rd respondents. The petitioner
thinks he could have done better. He is entitled to his opinion but I do not
think he could have added anything useful to the argument. The parties to the
case were heard by affidavit. Likewise the petitioner was heard by affidavit.
Counsel contends that "justice has not been seen to be done"‑ all because the
petitioner had not been told that his conduct was being impugned in the case.
Appearances are sometimes deceptive and it is so in this case. As I stated
earlier the petitioner knew all along that it was the arrest by him and its
validity that was in issue in the case. He has suffered no prejudice as a
result of not being given an opportunity to enter into the fray and take part
in the legal argument. "No one can complain of not being given an opportunity
to make representations if such an opportunity would have availed him
nothing"‑ per Brandon, L.J. in _Cinnamond v. British Airports Authority_ (20).
There is another matter to be taken into account. Article 134 (1) states that
in an application under Article 126 the Attorney‑General shall be heard and
parties to such proceedings have the right to be heard in person or by an
Attorney‑at‑law. Any other person may be heard at the Court's discretion.
Article 134 (3) reads ‑



"The Supreme Court may in its discretion grant to any other person or his
legal representative such hearing as may appear to the Court to be necessary
in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this Chapter."



The petitioner was given such hearing as the Court considered necessary. It is
not for this Court now to say that such hearing was insufficient. I hold that
that the rule of natural justice ‑ _audi alteram partem ‑ _has been observed.
In any event the provisions of Article 134 (3) have been satisfied. I
therefore reject the contentions raised in issue 3 (ii) and (iii).



The only issue left is issue B. I have already held that that this Court has
no power to revise its own decisions. As for the exercise of inherent powers I
need only state that there is no justification for exercising any of the
inherent powers of this Court.

#  340



            I dismiss the petitioner's application. The petitioner‑respondent will be entitled to costs.



**SHARVANANDA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**WIMALARATNE, J.** ‑ I agree.



**COLIN ‑THOME , J.** ‑ I agree.



**WANASUNDERA, J.**



I am in complete agreement with the judgment of the Chief Justice on all the
matters dealt with by him. But I would like to take this opportunity of adding
my own observations briefly on one or two of the legal issues before us.



The petitioner's complaint is that in the judgment of the Supreme Court in S.
C. Application No. 20/83, this court, without affording the petitioner an
opportunity of being heard, had made "an adverse finding in respect of the
petitioner's conduct as a Police Officer by holding that the petitioner was
guilty of an unlawful arrest in contravention of the Constitutional
prohibition of arrest."



In that case, which was filed by Mrs. Viviene Goonewardena under Article 126
of the Constitution for a violation of fundamental rights, the respondents to
the application were Hector Perera, the Officer‑in‑Charge of the Kollupitiya
Police Station (1st respondent) Rudra Rajasingham, I.G.P. (2nd respondent) and
the Attorney‑General (3rd respondent). The order of the court was that the
State should pay a sum of Rs.2,500 as compensation to the petitioner Mrs.
Viviene Goonewardena. No punishment, fine, penalty or liability has been
imposed on the petitioner or anyone else.



In S. C. Application No. 20/83, the present petitioner came before the court
in the capacity of a witness. In terms of the procedure laid down, a petition
under Article 126 has to be decided on affidavit he evidence. The petitioners
affidavit was submitted to court by the I.G.P., in support of the I.G.P.'s own
case. In disposing of that application and in the course of coming to findings
of fact and law before court, the court made the following observations on the
present petitioner's affidavit‑



"On his own showing Sub‑Inspector Ganeshanantham was guilty of arresting the
petitioner in contravention of the constitutional prohibition of arrest,
except according to the procedure established

**  341**

** **

by law. The arrest constitutes an infringement of a fundamental right.
Sub‑Inspector Ganeshanantham's action no doubt proceeds from a wrong
appreciation of the law, but the infringement remains.



Considering Mr. Choksy's submissions to us, three matters‑all
interconnected‑immediately arise for consideration. They are the following: Is
a court in the course of deciding a case entitled to make an adverse finding
in respect of the conduct and evidence of a witness? Second, is such a witness
then entitled to a further hearing, that is to say an opportunity of
explaining why such a finding should not be made against him. Third, if the
second question is to be answered in the affirmative, should such a hearing be
granted only in certain limited and special circumstances?



The answer to the first question posed by me is decidedly 'yes'. People take
their grievances to the courts for decision. It is the duty of a court in
deciding a case to consider all the evidence placed before it, determine the
several issues of fact and law involved and then make an order in accordance
with the law disposing of the matter. In the course of arriving at its finding
a court has necessarily to believe and disbelieve the evidence given by the
witnesses for the respective sides. A judge has a wide discretion in forming
his judgment and is given a wide latitude in expressing his views. It is quite
legitimate for him to make his comments on the evidence and this can be
expressed in language which he considers suitable though it may reflect
favourably or unfavourably on a witness.



It is not a requirement of the law of this country that a witness who has
given evidence should be informed prior to the judgment of the proposed
reasons for disbelieving him and be afforded an opportunity of making
representations. The principle of audi alteram partem relied on by the
petitioner has become an important legal topic in modern times due to its
relevance in the field of administrative law. As far as the courts are
concerned, our courts are courts of law and justice and are meant to be the
embodiment of justice and fairness. This principle is inherent in the practice
and structure of the courts.



Article 126 of the Constitution shows that in an application under that
Article the accusation is made against the State and the State through its
principal Law Officer, the Attorney‑General is required to defend the action.
It is a legal requirement that the Attorney‑General

#  342



should be heard. There are Rules providing for particulars to be given
regarding the acts and the persons concerned in respect of the alleged,
violation of fundamental rights. Such persons, if disclosed are, no doubt,
given the status of respondents. But the Rules cannot derogate from the
substantive constitutional provisions and alter the nature and composition of
a proceeding under Article 126\. As the Chief Justice has pointed out, a
proceeding under Article 126 is against the State and the State has to bear
the liability for unlawful executive or administrative action.



The case law cited however shows that when a punishment, penalty or liability
has to be imposed on a person, whether he be party or witness, the law would
generally require that that person concerned be apprised of the charge,
allegation or complaint against him, and he be afforded an opportunity of
giving an explanation. Now the question is whether the observations made by
the court in this case can amount to the imposition of a punishment, penalty
or liability. Mr. Choksy pointed to the following passage in the judgment‑



"Sub‑Inspector Ganeshanantham was guilty of arresting the petitioner in
contravention of the constitutional prohibition"



Seizing upon the use of the word "guilty", he submitted that this language
indicates unlawful conduct and a finding of guilt as in the case of an
offence. The word "guilty" does not necessarily mean only criminality, it can
also mean culpability, namely blameworthiness. We find it often used in
ordinary parlance in the latter sense. The observation made by the court in my
opinion by no means imposes or is intended to impose any punishment, penalty
or liability on the petitioner. It constituted a necessary step in the process
of the judge's reasoning and without it he could not have come to a proper
determination of the case.



I have so far been considering the case of a witness who is disbelieved by the
court. That however is not the case here. On the contrary, in the present
case, the petitioner's statements on the factual matters which would be
equivalent to oral evidence in a normal court action, were accepted by the
court in toto. It is in regard to the applicable legal provisions that the
court has chosen to differ from the witness.



The petitioner had gone out of his way to justify the arrest and sought cover
for his actions in certain legal provisions. This is a matter of law falling
within the province of the judge.

#  343

** **

It is a common occurrence in our Courts to find a judge differing from a lay
witness as to what the law is. Witnesses are often mistaken about the law and
their legal rights. When the views of a witness are not acceptable does such a
witness have a right to ask that he be resummoned and be heard on the matter?
This appears to be the real issue in this case. Incidentally the wrong conduct
of a person, especially a public officer under a misapprehension of the law
cannot amount to a finding of moral turpitude unless such action is malicious.
The Air New Zealand case cited by Mr. Choksy to which I shall now turn deals
with this aspect of the matter at some length.



The Air New Zealand case _Mahon v. Air New Zealand Ltd._ (18) of which we have
been furnished only with an abridged newspaper report and the case of _The
Seistan_ (13) both deal with public inquiries held by Commissioners.
Commissions of Inquiry as we know, are generally given broad and vague terms
of reference. It is the duty of a Commission to hold an inquiry and to make
specific findings in respect of the matters referred to it and to identify any
person or persons responsible for any wrongful act and on whom liability
should be imposed. Generally at the inception of the work of the Commission,
all persons summoned before the Commission, come before it as mere witnesses.
When sufficient material is available the Commission may be in a position to
prefer charges against specific persons. From that stage onwards such a person
would be in the position of a party, in contradiction to that of a witness, if
the language and the analogy of Court proceedings can be adopted in that
context. Once the conduct of a person is the subject of the inquiry, he must
be afforded all the rights and privileges of a party.



In the _Air New Zealand_ case Mr. Mahon, a Judge of the High Court, was
appointed to a Royal Commission as the sole Commissioner. The Commission was
required to inquire into an aircraft disaster involving an aircraft of the New
Zealand Air Lines. After inquiry the Commission found that the dominant cause
of the disaster was the act of the New Zealand Air Lines changing the aircraft
computer track without informing the air crew. The Commissioner held that the
air line officials who had prepared the flight had made a mistake and this was
due to the incompetent administrative procedure in existence. The Commission
exonerated the air crew but went on to observe that there had been a concerted
attempt by certain officers of ANZ to conceal a series of disastrous
administrative blunders and this was a

#  344



predetermined plan of deception. These persons could be identified in the
report. They were the senior officers employed in the flight operation
department and the four members of the Navigation, section. The Commissioner
followed this up with an order against ANZ, ordering it to pay to the
Department of Justice as a punishment, a sum of 150,000 New Zealand dollars,
being the public cost of the inquiry.



Naturally ANZ filed papers in the Court of Appeal for quashing the findings.
It would appear, judging from the available report that not only were these
persons not before the Commission at all but the strictures that were passed
were based on a logical fallacy and could not be supported by the material
before the Commission. Here we have a case where a substantial penalty has
been imposed and adverse findings made against persons who apparently took no
part whatsoever in the proceedings. That is very different from the case we
are now considering.



It is somewhat ironical to observe that the Commissioner Mr. Mahon who had
erred on the law appears to have shown an undue sensitiveness to the criticism
of his order by the Court of Appeal. The appeal to the Privy Council seems to
have been taken at his instance. To allay any misconception he may have
entertained on this score the Privy Council went out of its way to make
pronouncement on this matter. These observations are pertinent t the case
before us since here too the petitioner's conduct has bee criticised for his
wrong view of the law. I shall quote the relevant passage in extenso‑



"His Lordship added that to say of a person who holds judicial

office that he had failed to observe a rule of natural justice might sound to
a lay ear as if it were a severe criticism of his conduct which carries with
it a moral overtone.



But that was far from being the case. It was a criticism which might be and in
the instant case was certainly intended by Their Lordships in making it to be
wholly dissociated from any moral overtones.



Earlier their Lordships had set out the two rules of natural justice that
applied  to the appeal.



It was easy enough to slip up over one or other of them in civil  litigation,
particularly when one was subject to pressure of time in preparing a judgment
after hearing masses of evidence in a long an highly complex suit.

#  345

** **

In the case of a judgment in ordinary civil litigation such failure to observe
rules of natural justice was simply one possible ground of appeal among many
others and attracted no particular attention.



All Their Lordships could remember highly respected colleagues who as trial
Judges had appeals against judgments they had delivered allowed on that ground
and no one thought any the worse of them for it.



So Their Lordships recommendation that the appeal ought to be dismissed could
not have any adverse effect upon the reputation of the Judge among those who
understood the legal position and it should not do so with anyone else."



In _Appuhamy v. Regina_ (15) there was a finding against a witness that he had
given false evidence. The Court however did not stop with this pronouncement
but proceeded to try him summarily and punish him. Apart from this course of
action being contrary to certain express statutory provisions that are
applicable, as a matter of principle it was only just and fair that the
witness facing a criminal charge should have been given a fair hearing.



In _Sheldon v. Bromfield Justices_ (14) the prosecution witnesses were bound
over, which is a punishment without prior intimation of the course of action
the Court intended taking. The binding over order was referable to the merits
of the main case. This was held to violate the principle of natural justice.
However in _R. v. Woking Justices, ex parte Gossage_ (21), _Sheldon's_ case
has been explained. In this case an acquitted defendant was bound over to keep
the peace. Here too the defendant had no notice of such proposed action. The
Court however held that this did not constitute a breach of natural justice
because the defendant had every opportunity at the main trial of adverting to
all the relevant matters. Both these cases have been distinguished in _R. v.
Hopkins, ex parte, Harward_ (22). In this case the complainants who were
making counter complaints before the stipendiary Magistrate were immediately
bound over for making a disturbance in Court. They were not given the
opportunity of making representations. The Court was of the view that since
there was an imminent danger of a breach of the peace if the complainants left
the Court premises the order was lawful and certiorari was refused. Widgery,
C.J., said‑



"We must keep in mind all the time that we are dealing with natural justice
and it is not desirable that natural justice should be

#  346



divided up into rigid compartments. It is a matter which in its very essence
requires to be kept fluid and flexible to deal with the justice  of a
particular case."



The rule of audi alteram partem should be applied only in appropriate
circumstances. It should not be used mechanically in every situation when an
order reflecting on or affecting a person has to be made by a court or
tribunal. The Gossage case and the _Hopkins_ case show that when a disturbance
is committed in the face of the Court, the principle of the audi alteram
partem rule will not apply, even though a punishment is imposed. By a parity
of reasoning the principle ought not to apply when a judge passes strictures
on a witness in the Course of deciding a case. It is only an episode in a
single trial and constitutes part and parcel of one proceeding, conducted
according to the known standards of fairness and where the principle of
natural justice cannot be divided, apportioned and compartmentalised. If the
rule is to be applied in situations like the present case it would result in
trials within trials and the prospect of interminable litigation. Surely that
would be carrying the principle of audi alteram partem to absurd lengths.



There remains one final matter, Mr. Choksy stated to us quite frankly that the
present application is being made by the petitioner because he anticipates
that at some future time, a future government may take action prejudicial to
the petitioner on the basis of the judgment in S.C. Application No. 20/83. If
the impugned order properly interpreted can have an adverse effect on the
petitioner, then the petitioner would certainly be running a risk of such
consequences. But on the other hand if the anticipated adverse consequences
were to flow from some action based on a misunderstanding of that order, then
the petitioner must seek relief not against the order but against the person
or persons who perform such wrongful act and move in the matter at the
appropriate time. It was admitted by counsel that the petitioner had been
promoted by the government subsequent to the court order. Hence it is apparent
to everyone that the court order he is now seeking to canvass has not affected
the petitioner as a Police Officer or stood in the way of his promotions in
the police force. In the face of these developments is not the petitioner
trying to blow both hot and cold? He cannot be allowed to say at one and the
same time that the impugned order affects him both adversely and not
adversely. To say the least the petitioner's present application is
misconceived. In any event his present application is premature, contingent
and based on mere speculation.

**  347**

** **

For the above reasons and the reasons given by the Chief Justice, I am of the
view that the court has neither the power to allow this application nor is it
one where we ought to grant relief. I agree to the order made by the Chief
Justice.



**RANASINGHE, J.**



The above named petitioner‑respondent, who is a well‑known figure in the
political life of this Island Republic, filed in this Court, on 8.4.83,
Application bearing No. 20/83, in terms of the provisions of Article 126 (2)
of the Constitution, and the Rules of Court made by this Court under the said
Constitution, against the aforementioned 1st to the 3rd respondents (who were
also the 1st to 3rd respondents respectively in the said application) on the
ground: that, on 8.3.83 ‑ which was the International Women's Day‑when she
went into the Kollupitiya Police Station, she was illegally arrested and
detained therein by the 1st respondent, the Officer‑in‑Charge of the said
Police Station, who did also, within the said Police Station, subject her to
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment: that such conduct on the part of the
1st respondent constituted a violation of the fundamental rights guaranteed to
her by Articles 11 and 13 (1) of the Constitution: that she was, therefore,
entitled to seek relief and redress in terms of the provisions of Article 126
(2) of the Constitution.



The 1st respondent filed an affidavit repudiating the allegations made by the
petitioner‑respondent against him. He denied that he either arrested the
petitioner‑respondent or subjected her to any form of degrading treatment as
alleged by her in her petition and affidavit. The 2nd respondent also filed an
affidavit in which he too repudiated the allegations set out by the
petitioner‑respondent. The proxies of the 2nd and 3rd respondents were both
filed by an officer of the Attorney‑General's Department: and the learned
Additional Solicitor‑General, who appeared for the 2nd and 3rd respondents at
this inquiry before this Court, appeared for both the 2nd and 3rd respondents
at the inquiry into the said Application No. 20/83. In the said earlier
proceedings, an affidavit, dated 9.5.83 and marked 2R1, from the petitioner,
Inspector Ganeshanantham, was tendered to Court by the Attorney‑at‑law
appearing for the 2nd and 3rd respondents. In that affidavit the
petitioner‑Inspector Ganeshanantham ‑ averred that he arrested the
petitioner‑respondent on the Galle Road close to the Kollupitiya Police
Station: that she was, at that time, participating in a procession,

#  348



which was being conducted without the authority of a lawful permit, along
Galle Road from the direction of the Galle Face junction towards the
Kollupitiya junction: that he directed the members of the said, procession to
disperse: that the petitioner‑respondent thereupon pushed him aside and
proceeded with the procession, disobeying his directions and did obstruct him
in the discharge of his duties: that he then, along with several police
constables, arrested the petitioner‑respondent and four others,: that the said
arrest was in accordance with the law, and that they were informed of the
reason for their arrest. A consideration of 2R1 makes it clear that the
petitioner was, in that affidavit, specifically answering the several
averments set out in the petition and affidavit which had been filed by the
petitioner‑respondent, and that the petitioner has expressly denied any
conduct which would amount to a violation of any of the fundamental rights
pleaded by the petitioner‑respondent.



In answer to the aforesaid affidavits of the 1st and 2nd respondents and also
the said affidavit 2R1, the petitioner‑respondent filed her further affidavit,
dated 16.5.83. In the said affidavit the petitioner‑respondent specifically
denied that she was arrested outside the Kollupitiya Police Station and
reiterated her position that she went into the Kollupitiya Police Station of
her own accord and that she was not taken into the said Police Station under
arrest. Thus the petitioner‑respondent, far from accepting any arrest along
the Galle Road, not only categorically repudiated the petitioner's
allegations, but also flatly contradicted the petitioner. It is not as if she
was uncertain in her own mind as to what had happened outside the premises of
the said Police Station with the resulting possibility that the version given
by the petitioner could well have been the true version of what happened at
the time in question. Far from it; for, there was not even a hint of
uncertainty. As far as she was concerned her version was the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth. The position taken up by her was quite
clearly that what was averred not only by the 1st respondent but also by the
petitioner was a tissue of falsehood, unworthy of any consideration whatever.



It was in this state of the evidence that the Court came to make its order at
the conclusion of the said earlier inquiry into the said Application No.
20/83. This Court, by its Order dated 8.6.83, held that the allegation of
degrading treatment, made by the petitioner‑respondent, has not been
established by proof to the high

#  349

** **

degree of probability required: that the petitioner‑respondent has not
affirmatively proved, in the manner required, that she was first arrested by
the 1st respondent inside the Police Station: that, on his own showing,
Sub‑Inspector Ganeshanantham, the petitioner, was guilty of arresting the
petitioner‑respondent in contravention of the Constitutional prohibition of
arrest except according to procedure established by law. The said findings of
the Court make it clear that, although the Court did not accept and act upon
the evidence of the petitioner‑respondent, and that which was led on her
behalf, but accepted the 1st respondent's denial that he committed either of
the wrongful acts alleged by the petitioner‑respondent, yet, the Court has
proceeded to give relief to the petitioner‑respondent upon a basis which was
not only not accepted by the petitioner‑respondent but which had also been
categorically repudiated by her right up to the end of the proceedings. A
perusal of the said judgment also shows that, whilst the Court has considered
the failure on the part of the petitioner to have disclosed in his affidavit
2R1 the reason which he had given the petitioner‑respondent at the time he
arrested her, as a grave lapse, the Court has, however, proceeded to test the
validity of the said arrest on the footing of a reason communicated to court
by learned Counsel who appeared for the respondents at the said inquiry.



The petitioner has now come before this Court complaining of the said Order of
this Court, made on 8.6.83, in the aforementioned Application No. 20/83.
Learned Senior Attorney, appearing for the petitioner, has formulated the
grounds of complaint, and the basis upon which relief is being prayed for as
follows:



A           (1)      That this Court has, in making the said Order, acted per
incuriam for the reasons that:



(i)         it has made a finding against the petitioner, in respect of an
infringement not complained of to Court by the petitioner‑respondent, and
which, in fact, was disowned by her in disregard of Article 126 (2) of the
Constitution read with Rule 65 (1) ( _a_ ) of the Rules of this Court;



(ii)        the power to grant relief or make directions which the Supreme
Court deems just and equitable under Article 126 (4) was restricted to the
petitioner‑respondent's allegations and complaint made to Court under Article
126 (2);

#  350



            (iii)       in making the said finding it disregarded Article 126 (2) read with Rule 65 (1) ( _b_ ) and Rule 65 (4) (ii) of the Rules of this Court.



(2)        That the rule of natural justice, audi alteram partem, has been
violated;



(3)        That the rule of natural justice, that justice must not only be
done but must undoubtedly and manifestly be seen to be done, has been
violated:



B          This Court has jurisdiction to grant the petitioner relief in
respect of the aforesaid per incuriam findings in the            exercise off
either its inherent jurisdiction or the powers of revision.



Chapter 3 of the Constitution sets out the fundamental rights which are
declared and recognised by the Constitution and which have, in terms of
Article 4 ( _d_ ) of the Constitution to be respected, secured and advanced by
all organs of government and shall not be abridged, restricted or denied save
in the manner and to the extent provided by the Constitution itself
thereinafter. Article 17 provides that every person shall be entitled to apply
to the Supreme Court as provided by Article 126 in respect of any infringement
or imminent infringement, by executive or administrative action, of a
fundamental right to which such person is entitled under the provisions of the
said Chapter 3. Article 126 (1) confers upon the Supreme Court sole and
exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine all such infringements of
fundamental rights; and sub‑article (2) of Article 126 requires all
applications for relief and redress in respect of such infringements to be
made within one month of the infringement so alleged in accordance with such
rules of Court as may be in force. Such an application so made can however be
proceeded with only with leave to proceed, first had and obtained from the
Supreme Court. Article 126 (4) empowers this Court to grant such relief or
make such directions as it may deem just and equitable in the circumstances in
respect of a petition presented under Article 126 (1).



Rule 65 of the Rules of the Supreme Court, made under the provisions of
Article 136 of the Constitution, regulates the procedure to be followed by a
person who desires to invoke the aforesaid jurisdiction vested in the Supreme
Court in terms of Article 126 of the Constitution. An applicant so desirous of
obtaining relief or redress has, inter alia.

#  351

** **

(i)         to file a petition setting out‑



( _a_ )        all relevant facts to show what particular fundamental right he
claims,



( _b_ )        all facts to show what infringement of such right has taken
place, and



( _c_ )        details of the executive or administrative action which he
alleges has resulted in the infringement complained of ;



(ii)        lame in his petition the Attorney‑General and any person or
persons, who he alleges have infringed his fundamental right, as respondents ;



(iii)       support his petition by an affidavit and any other documentary
material; and



(iv)       pray for leave of the Court in the first instance; and



(v)        tender the specified number of copies of the petition and of the
written submissions in support of his case.



If the petitioner obtains leave of court, then the Registrar of the Court
shall forthwith serve notice of the said application along with a copy of the
written submissions on each of the respondents who then have the right to file
counter‑affidavits and counter‑ submissions with notice to the petitioner.



The nature of the liability incurred upon an infringement of a fundamental
right by a State officer and the real basis upon which relief or redress is
granted has been set down by Lord Diplock, in the Privy Council, in the case
of _Maharaj v. The Attomey ‑General of Trinidad and Tobago (No. 2)_ (23) as:



"This is not vicarious liability, it is a liability of the State itself. It is
the liability in tort at all, it is the liability in the public law of the
State.............."



This view of the underlying principle has also been hitherto followed by this
Court. Even though the liability arising upon an infringement by executive or
administrative action of a fundamental right guaranteed by the Constitution
has been determined to be principally a liability of the State, yet, before
such liability is brought home to the State, it is necessary for the aggrieved
person to establish that his fundamental

#  352



right has been infringed by an executive or administrative act. Any such act
has to be committed by a State Officer or by any other person who could be
held to be an organ of the State. It is only on account of such an act by such
an individual that the liability cast upon the State would arise. It is in
recognition of this position and of this principle that Rules 65 (1) ( _a_ )
and ( _b_ ) and 65 (4) (ii), in particular, have been framed in the way they
have been framed. Not only the particulars set out in paragraphs ( _a_ ) and (
_b_ ) of sub‑rule (1) of Rule 65, but also the presence of the alleged
wrongdoer himself before Court is regarded as being necessary for the State to
defend itself. Even after the requirements set out in Rule 65 (1) ( _a_ ) and
( _b_ ) have been complied with, the petitioner can proceed further only if
and after he obtains the leave of this Court. Even a cursory examination of
the contents of the said Rule 65 shows the emphasis placed upon the necessity
not only to identify the particular individual against whom the wrongful
conduct is alleged but also to make him a party to the proceedings and give
him notice of the proceedings and also to furnish him with all the information
relating to the petitioner's claim so that not only he but also the State
could have every reasonable opportunity of defending themselves. That this is
the object of the said Rules there is and could be no question.



Although, on a consideration of the provisions of Article 126 (1) and (2) and
also the provisions of Rule 65 of the aforesaid Rules of this Court, it does
seem to me that the submissions A (1) (i), (ii) and (iii) set out above ‑ in
regard to the extent and the scope of the relief which this Court could grant
to a petitioner upon a petition presented under Article 126 of the
Constitution ‑ require serious consideration, yet, having regard to the
peculiar circumstances in which the present application has come to be made to
this Court, I would prefer to found my consideration of the issues arising in
this case on the much broader principles embodied in the learned Senior
Attorney's aforementioned submissions A (2) and (3), on the assumption that
his Court could have, in view of the provisions of Article 126 (4) of the
Constitution, proceeded to consider whether the petitioner‑respondent should
be granted relief on the basis of any act on the part of the petitioner even
though it took the view that the petitioner‑respondent's claim based upon the
1st respondent's own acts must fail.

#  353

** **

# Jurisdiction of this Court



The petitioner's application to this Court has been presented to this Court,
inter alia, "in that most attractive form, an appeal to the inherent
jurisdiction of the Court" ‑ per Humphreys, J. in _Re A Solicitor_ (24). It
has, however, been contended: that the judgment of this Court pronounced on
8.6.83 in Application No. 20 of 1983 is final and cannot now be interfered
with by this Court in any way: that, even if this Court has jurisdiction to
intervene on the basis that an earlier decision of this Court has been made
per incuriam, such interference must be limited only to those cases where
decisions are as a general rule held to have been given per incuriam, viz,
decision given in ignorance or forgetfulness of some inconsistent statutory
provision or of some authority binding on the court concerned: that this Court
constituted as it is under the provisions of the 1978 Constitution has no
powers by way of Revision: that the petitioner, who does not, in his prayer
for relief, expressly pray that the earlier judgment be set aside,
nevertheless makes a subtle attempt to render nugatory the said judgment by
moving that the said finding, which constitutes the very basis of the said
judgment, be expunged.



Article 105 of the Constitution which deals with the establishment of Courts,
provides, in sub‑article (3), that the Supreme Court, and the Court of Appeal
shall each be a superior court of record and shall have all the powers of such
court including the power to punish for contempt. What the powers of a
'Superior Court' are, are not set out in the Constitution or in any other
statutory enactment. What they are will therefore have to be gathered from
earlier decisions, local and foreign.



In England the House of Lords has asserted the right to award costs on the
basis of an inherent jurisdiction vested in it. In 1896, in the case of
_Guardians of Westham Union v. Churchwardens of Bethnal Green_ (25), Lord
Herschell said:

           

"Costs have been awarded for upwards of two centuries. I see no foundation on
which the power to order their payment can rest except the inherent authority
of this Court as the ultimate Court of Appeal; " and



Lord MacNaghten observed that:



"The House of Lords, a the highest Court of Appeal has and necessarily must
have an inherent jurisdiction as regards costs."

**  354**

** **

**             **The Supreme Court of Ceylon established under the now
repealed. Courts Ordinance (Chapter 6) too did not, prior to Act No. 39 of
1953 which on 2.11.1953 introduced Sec. 51 A, possess statutory authority to
award costs; and Gratiaen, J. did, in the case of _Karuppannan v. Commissioner
for Registration of Indian and Pakistani Residents,_ (8) invoke the inherent
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, as " the only superior court of record " in
the country, to make an appropriate order as to costs where there was no
statutory authority to make an order for costs. It must be noted that
Gratiaen, J. did so resort to such inherent jurisdiction "especially as it is
in aid of justice.



Sec. 7 of the said Courts Ordinance No. 1 of 1889 (Chapter 6) established the
Supreme Court of the Island of Ceylon to be "the only superior court of record
". Sec. 839 of the Civil Procedure Code (Chapter 101) ‑ as it stood before
December 1977 and now stands after its revival in December 1977 ‑ which said
section was brought in by Ordinance 42 of 1921, provides that nothing in the
said Code shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect the inherent power of
the court to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or
to prevent abuse of the process of court. The "Court" referred to in the said
section did, in view of the definition of the word "Court" in section 5 of the
self‑same Code, include the Supreme Court as established by Sec. 7 of the
Courts Ordinance ( _supra_ ). During the period the provisions of both the
said Courts Ordinance and the said Civil Procedure Code were in operation at
the same time the courts have by invoking their inherent jurisdiction: undone
a wrong done to a party by an act of the court itself ( _Sirinivasa Thero v.
Sudassi Thero,_ (26)); laid by a case pending the decision of an action in
another court between the same parties ( _Selvadurai v. Rajah_ (27); enforced
obedience by warrant, on a failure to appear without lawful excuse, when
summoned to appear before it ( _Narayan Chetty v. Jusey Silva_ (28),
_Eswaralingam v. Sivagnanasunderam_ (29)); extended the time for the execution
of its own process ( _Andiris Appu v. Kolande Asari_ (30)); directed a case to
be laid by for a period of 3 months to enable the defendants in an action to
obtain a rectification of a deed ( _Olagappa Chettiar v. Reith_ , (31));
issued orders to the fiscal to stay a sale ( _Victor de Silva v. Jinadasa de
Silva,_ (32)); stayed its own process of execution ( _Commissioner of Inland
Revenue v. Ranaweera_ (33)); dealt with obstructions to commissioners of Court
in partition actions instituted under the earlier Partition Ordinance (
_Edirisinghe v. D. J. of Matara_ (34)); stayed proceedings conditionally in
divorce proceedings **  **

**  355**



( _Sinnathamby v. Yokammah,_ (35)); amended the decree (of the Supreme Court)
to bring it into conformity with the judgment ( _De Costa and Sons v. S.
Gunaratne,_ (36)); granted an application of an insolvent for protection from
arrest pending an appeal to the Privy Council in the case of _Mohamed v.
Annamalai Chettiar,_ (7), in which said case Garvin, S. P. J. also observed:



" I should be reluctant to subscribe to the proposition that this Court has no
powers other than those derived from express legislation. Like other courts in
the Empire and in particular Superior Courts, this Court has always been
considered to possess a certain reserve of powers which are generally referred
to as its inherent powers It has been said that these powers are equal to its
desire to order that which it believes to be just. This is perhaps too wide
and somewhat misleading a statement. No court may disregard the law of the
land or purport in any case to ignore its provisions. Where a matter has been
specifically dealt with or provided for by law there can be no question that
the law must prevail, for justice must be done according to law. It is only
when the law is silent that a case for the exercise by a Court of its inherent
powers can arise."



Although a decision per incuriam was said to be one given in ignorance or
forgetfulness of some inconsistent statutory provision or of some authority
binding on the particular court ‑ _Huddersfield Police Authority v. Watson_
(37) ‑ yet, that definition was said to be not necessarily exhaustive but that
cases not strictly within it which can properly be held to have been decided
per incuriam should be of the rarest occurrence ‑ _Morrelle Ltd. v. Wakeling_
(38) After a review of these English cases Samarakoon, C. J. in the case of
_Billimoria v. Minister of Lands_ (39) decided after the 1978 Constitution
came into operation, has taken the view that: where an interim order had been
made by the court after consideration such order was not one made per
incuriam: that a stay order could be made as an interim measure by a court in
the interests of Justice: that while it is competent for one Bench to set
aside an order made per incuriam by another Bench of the same Court, the
practice, however, has been for the parties or their Counsel to bring the
error to the notice of the Judge or Judges who made the error so that he or
they can themselves correct the Order. The Chief Justice was no doubt dealing
with the powers of the Court of Appeal. The powers of the Court of Appeal and
those of the Supreme Court in regard to this matter, should, in view of
Article 105 (3), be identical.

**  356**



            The real basis upon which relief is given and the precise nature of the relief so given by the Supreme Court upon an application made to it for relief against an earlier Order made by the Supreme Court itself was very lucidly and very effectively expressed by Dias S.P.J. way back in the year 1951 in the case of _Menchinahamy v. Muniweera,_ (40). In that case, about six weeks after an appeal to the Supreme Court from an interlocutory decree in the District Court was dismissed by the Supreme Court, an application was made to the Supreme Court, on 23.3.1949, " for revision or in the alternative for _restitutio ‑in‑integrum_" by the heirs of a party defendant, who had died before the interlocutory decree was entered but whose heirs had not been substituted in his place before the interlocutory decree was so entered. It was contended on behalf of the respondents: that there was no merit in the application: that if the relief sought is granted then the Supreme Court would in effect be sitting in judgment on a two‑Judge decision of the Supreme Court which had passed the Seal of the Court that the Supreme Court cannot interfere with the orders of the Supreme Court itself. In rejecting these objections, Dias S.P.J., placed this matter in its proper setting quite convincingly in the following words:



"In giving relief to the petitioner we are not sitting in judgment either on
the interlocutory decree or on the decree in appeal passed by this Court. We
are merely declaring that, so far as the petitioner is concerned, there has
been a violation of the principles of natural justice which makes it incumbent
on this Court, despite technical objections to the contrary, to do justice. "



The fundamental rights jurisdiction vested in this Court by Article 126 of the
Constitution is an original jurisdiction from the exercise of which there is
no appeal to any higher court. The words " finally dispose " appearing in
Article 126 (5) were relied on as showing that an order made by this Court in
the exercise of the fundamental jurisdiction vested in this Court is final and
cannot be vacated, set aside, modified or in any way interfered with
subsequently by this Court. It seems to me that the word " finally " set out
therein is not intended to impress the order with any particular
characteristic, but rather that the matter must be fully and effectively
concluded without anything further left to be done to bring the proceedings to
an end. The finality is in regard to the procedural aspect, and not in regard
to the character of the order that has to be pronounced at the

** ** **357**



conclusion of the proceedings. In any event any acceptance of the position
that an interference at least to a limited extent on the ground of a decision
being made per incuriam would detract from the argument of "untouchability"
sought to be advocated.



On a consideration of the foregoing, I am of opinion that this court has an
inherent jurisdiction to grant, in appropriate circumstances, relief against
or in respect of even previous judgments of this Court itself in order "to do
justice". This Court shall exercise this jurisdiction only in matters for
which no express statutory provision has been made; and, in exercising this
jurisdiction, this Court shall not act in a capricious or arbitrary manner and
shall be careful to see that its decision is in harmony with sound general
legal principles and is not inconsistent with the intention of the Legislature
‑ Selvadurai v. Rajah (supra).



The Supreme Court, as constituted under the 1978 Constitution, is not vested
with the revisionary powers as exercised by the Supreme Court which was
created by the aforesaid Courts Ordinance (Chapter 6). The petitioner, in his
application, seeks relief not only by way of revision but also, as already
stated, in the exercise of the inherent jurisdiction of this Court.



Another technical argument that was advanced may be disposed of at this stage.
It was contended that the petitioner has not, in his prayer to the petition,
prayed expressly that the judgment of this Court, delivered on 8.6.83 in the
aforesaid Application No. 20 of 1983, be set aside, and that, therefore, he
cannot obtain any relief which would have the effect of even indirectly
rendering the said judgment nugatory or inoperative. It, however, seems to me
that the averments of paragraph 31 of the petition read with paragraph ( _c_ )
of the prayer would be sufficient for a court, in an application invoking the
inherent jurisdiction of the court, to grant an aggrieved party, who the court
is of opinion should be granted relief, whatever relief which the court
considers fit and proper to grant. Where the court is of opinion that it
should intervene, technical objections such as these should not stand in the
way of the court doing justice.



For these reasons I am of opinion that this Court has jurisdiction to
entertain and determine the petitioner's application.

**  358**



# Rule of Audi Alteram Partem:



Natural justice has been defined as "the basic of Justice which in any
particular day and age offend the sensibilities of the judges" ‑ _Ex p. Brown,
Re Tunstall_ (41) referred to by _Paul Jackson on Natural Justice (2 edt.),_ ‑
and as "only fair play in action" ‑ per Harman, L. J. in _Ridge v. Baldwin_
(42). The two principles which are pre‑eminently connoted by the phrase
natural justice are embodied in the Latin maxims _audi alteram partem_ **and**
_nemo judex in re sua,_ and have been considered to be "so vital and essential
to the due performance of the office of the judge that without them the judge
is no judge at all" **_(Jackson, p. 7). Of these two rules the rule of audi
alteram partem,_** has been said to be the more tar‑reaching; and it could
embrace almost every question of fair procedure.



Although the literal meaning of this Latin maxim is "hear the other party",
the essence of it is that "no one should be condemned unheard". This rule has
been recognized as an obvious principle of justice sprung from its native
judicial soil, and which the courts have also succeeded in enforcing widely in
cases where legal rights or status of the members of the public are affected
by the exercise of administrative power. Courts of law had taken up the
position several centuries ago on the very broad principle that any person or
body of persons entrusted with legal power should not and could not validly
exercise such power, be it judicial or administrative, without first hearing
the person who was going to suffer by the exercise of such power, and that it
was just as much a canon of good administration as it was of good legal
procedure. ( _Wade ‑ 4 edt ‑ Administrative Law, pp. 421‑2_). It has also been
judicially accepted that it is a principle not limited to judicial
proceedings, and is a rule "of universal application and founded on the
plainest principles of justice" and that, even if there are no express words
in a statute requiring that a party be heard, before a decision affecting him
is made, yet, "the justice of the common law will supply the omission of the
legislature" ‑ _Cooper v. The Board of Works for Wandsworth District_ (43).
This judgment has since been approved, in the year 1964, by the House of Lords
in the case of _Ridge v. Baldwin_ (42), in a judgment, which has been hailed
as a "landmark decision" and which put an end to "judicial backsliding"
arising from a retreat, from the principles of natural justice during a period
of about fifteen years prior to 1963 ‑ during which such cases as the
_Stevenage case, Franklin v. The Minister of Town and Country Planning_ (44),
and _Nakkuda Ali v. Jayaratne_ (45) were decided. The

#  359

** **

duty to comply with the principle of audi alteram partem in making decisions
which affect the rights of others has been epitomised in the words of Lord
Loreburn, that "they must act in good faith and listen fairly to both sides,
for that is a duty lying upon every one who decides anything", in the case of
_Board of Education v. Rice_ (46). Its undeniable importance has been stressed
in the words: " ... . . . . . The body with the power to decide cannot
lawfully proceed to make a decision until it has afforded to the person
affected a proper **opportunity to state his case "‑per Lord Reid in _Ridge v
Baldwin (Supra)._**



Judicial decisions, since _Ridge v. Baldwin (supra),_ have "advanced its
frontiers considerably and natural justice now connotes also 'acting fairly',
'common fairness', 'fairness of procedure', and a 'fair crack of the whip'.
The principles of natural justice have, since 1963, been once again firmly
ensconced both in the established courts of law and in the area of
decision‑making process in the executive and administrative spheres. Lord
Pearson in 1972 stated in the case of _Pearlberg v. Varty_ (47):



"A tribunal to whom judicial or quasi‑judicial functions are entrusted is held
to be required to apply those principles (i.e. the rules     of natural
justice) in performing those functions unless there is     provision to the
contrary."



The rule that no man shall be condemned unless he has been given prior notice
of the allegation against him and a fair opportunity to be heard is now a
cardinal principle of justice.



It has, however, been emphasised that it is not possible to lay down rules as
to when the principles of natural justice are to apply, nor as to their scope
and extent, and that everything depends on the subject‑matter ( _Wade: p. 451_
): and that, outside the well known classes of cases such as dismissal from
office, deprivation of property and expulsion from clubs no general rule can
be laid down as to the application of the principle in addition to the
language of the provision ‑ _Durayappah v. Fernando_ (48): and that the right
to a fair hearing is in no way confined to cases of the taking of property and
cases based on personal conduct ( _Wade : p. 452_ ): that the courts generally
and the House of Lords in particular have rightly advanced the frontiers of
natural justice considerably, but have, at the same time, taken an
increasingly sophisticated view of what it requires in individual cases ‑
(Lord Hailsham, L.C. in _Pearlberg v. Varty (supra)_ ) and that,

#  360



though the Courts have, without objection from Parliament, supplemented
procedure laid down in legislation where they have found that to be necessary,
yet, such unusual kind of power must be exercised only where the statutory
procedure is clearly insufficient to achieve justice and the taking of any
additional steps would not frustrate the apparent purpose of the
legislation‑Lord Reid in _Wiseman v. Bomeman_ (49). Among the interests in
respect of which procedural protection may be accorded, _De Smith: Judicial
Review of Administrative Action ‑ 4 edt ‑ _sets out, at page 177, interests in
preserving one's livelihood and reputation; (vide also _Jackson Natural
Justice_ ‑ p. 211). Smith further states, at page 196 that it is not easy
except at a high level of generality, to state what kinds of interests are
entitled to the protection of the rules of natural justice. Charges of
inefficiency or failing to be diligent or to set a good example **have been
subject to the principle of _audi alteram partem_ ‑ vide** _Durayappah's case
(supra) at page 271, per Lord Upjohn._ The view has also been expressed that
it ought to operate in the case of loss of livelihood, and that, before being
expelled for failure in examinations or for misconduct, students are entitled
to be treated fairly and given a hearing, that in preliminary steps, even
though in themselves they may not involve immediate legal consequences, but
could lead to acts or orders which do so, the protection of fair procedure may
be needed throughout; that even in the making of preliminary investigations
and reports which may lead to serious legal consequences the tendency now is
for the Courts to favour the observance of natural justice. _(Wade (supra) ‑
pages 452, 479, 480‑1). _Statutory provisions cannot be made to cover every
possibility of unfairness being caused to a person who would be affected by an
order made by a decision‑making authority. In order to avoid any such unfair
procedure, any gaps in the statutory procedure would have to be filled by
calling in aid "the justice of the common law."



The Privy Council has stated that, in considering whether the said **principle
of _audi alteram partem_ should be applied or not, the Courts **have to bear
in mind three matters: the first being the nature of the property, the office
held, status enjoyed or services to be performed by the person who complains
of injustice; the second being the circumstances in which or the occasion upon
which the person, claiming to be entitled to exercise the measure of control,
is entitled to intervene; and finally what sanctions in fact the person,
entitled to intervene, is entitled to impose upon the complaint of

#  361

** **

injustice ‑ _Durayappah's case ‑ (supra). _On an application of these
considerations to the facts and circumstances of the case now before this
court it becomes clear; that the petitioner, who now complains to this Court
of injustice, holds a responsible post in the Sri Lanka Police Force; that the
person exercising the measure of control ‑ in this case the Supreme Court
itself ‑ could do so upon it being established that the petitioner had
illegally arrested the petitioner‑respondent and thus violated a fundamental
right which has been guaranteed to her by the Constitution; that the sanction,
which the Court could, upon it being established that the Court can and must
intervene, impose, is "such relief or make such directions as it (the Court)
may deem just and equitable in the circumstances". It is indeed a serious
matter to hold that a citizen of a country has been guilty of such conduct as
would amount to a violation of a fundamental right which the Constitution of
the land has guaranteed to another person within such land. Where, however,
such a finding is against a person, who not only holds an extremely
responsible position in a unit of the executive arm of the state, which is
itself responsible for the maintenance of law and order and the protection of
the citizens against any unlawful invasion of their rights and liberties as
free citizens of an independent country, but who is also a person who is under
an express obligation, imposed by the Constitution itself, to "respect, secure
and advance . . . . . . . and . . . . . . . . . not deny" the very right which
he is found to have violated, it is needless to say that such a finding
becomes even more serious. It becomes still more serious, where such a finding
could also not only entail consequences such as orders for the payment of
damages, but could also put in motion steps which could have serious
repercussions upon his employment as well, if not immediately at some later
point in his career. That the Court has not in a particular case followed up a
finding of guilt with an order decreeing the payment of damages does not
affect the seriousness of the possible consequences. The possibility of the
imposition of an order, which would cause financial loss, and the likelihood
of other consequences are ever present. In any event the mere finding by a
court of law of such wrongful conduct, without more, against an officer of the
State, such as the petitioner, can and must expose him to serious perils which
it would not, under modern principles, formulated and advanced by the Courts
themselves, be "fair" to expose him to without giving him an opportunity to
show that he does not deserve to be so condemned.

#  362



            A contention, which has been very often put forward to meet a plea **of violation of the rule of _audi alteram partem,_ is that a fair hearing** would have made no difference to the result, or that "such hearing could only be a useless formality" ‑ per Lord Simon in _Malloch v. Aberdeen Corporation_ (50) _Jackson (supra)_ at page 137 sets down three justifications for requiring a hearing even where there appears to be no answer to a charge: "First, experience shows that unanswerable charges may, if the opportunity be given, be answered inexplicable conduct be explained: Secondly, the party condemned unheard will feel a sense of injustice. Thirdly, suspicion is inevitable that a body which refuses a hearing before acting does so because of the lack of evidence, not because of its strength". Wade at page 454 states that, in principle, it is vital that the procedure and the merits should be kept strictly apart, since otherwise the merits may be prejudged unfairly. A vivid and extremely effective disposal of the contention, that "the result is obvious from the start", has been made by Megarry, J., in the case of _John v. Rees_ (51) in the words:



"As everybody who has anything to do with the law well knows, the path of the
law is strewn with examples of open and shut cases which, somehow, were not;
of unanswerable charges which, in the event, were completely answered; of
inexplicable conduct which was fully explained; of fixed and unalterable
determination that by discussions suffered a change".



This contention had also appealed to the trial judge in the case of _Ridge v.
Baldwin (supra)_ ; but the House of Lords rejected this reasoning decisively.



Although the argument that a fair hearing would make no difference was
decisively rejected by the House of Lords in _Ridge v. Baldwin_ yet, the
contention in the form that such a fair hearing would in any event be a
'useless formality' has made a reappearance in several later cases. These
deviations have been viewed with disfavour on the basis that it is important
that they should not be allowed to weaken the basic principle that fair
procedure comes first, and that it is only after hearing both sides that the
merits can be properly considered ( _Wade : p. 455_ ); and that such cases
will be rare ( _Jackson: p. 137_ ); or that such decisions could perhaps be
explained on the ground that the relief sought was discretionary _(De Smith:
p. 244)._ _ _

#  363

** **

The contention that in any event when one looks at the matter as a whole that
it is obvious that the applicant has no merit in his case was also strongly
rejected by Lord Widgery, Chief Justice, in the year 1974 in the case of _R.
vs. Thames Magistrate's Court, Ex. parte Polemis_ (52) in the following words:



"I reject the submission. It is basic to our system that justice must not only
be done but must manifestly be seen to be done. If justice was so clearly not
seen to be done . . . . . . . it seems to me that it is no answer to the
applicant to say 'well even if the case had been properly conducted the result
would have been the same'. That is mixing up doing justice with seeing that
justice is done, so I reject that argument".



The right to be heard and defend oneself will be illusory and meaningless
without knowledge of the case to be met, of the charge or the subject matter
of dispute to be decided by the court or tribunal, and also without an
adequate opportunity of placing that which has to be put forward in defence,
either in person or through Counsel of one's own choice.



It has been stated that in this case the petitioner has "on his own showing",
been guilty of illegally arresting the 1st respondent and that, as the Court
has based its findings upon the very facts and circumstances set out in the
Petitioner's affidavit, 2R1, affirmed to of his own accord on behalf of the
2nd respondent, and in which he sought to justify his conduct and which said
conduct was also sought to be vindicated in Court during the hearing by
eminent Counsel appearing on behalf of both the 2nd respondent and the 3rd
respondent who is the Attorney‑General, the requirements of the rule audi
alteram partem have in any event been satisfied in this case, and that,
therefore, there is no room for complaint by the petitioner on this score.



In 2R1 the petitioner's position, as indicated earlier is: that the
petitioner‑respondent, who was the petitioner in the earlier inquiry, was
arrested by him: the petitioner‑respondent was so arrested by him on the Galle
Road itself and then brought by him, under arrest, to the Kollupitiya Police
Station: that, as the petitioner‑respondent was participating in a procession
which was being conducted without the authority of a lawful "permit", she and
the other participants were directed by him to discontinue the said procession
and to disperse:

#  364



that the petitioner‑respondent then pushed the petitioner aside, disobeyed his
directions and obstructed him in the performance of his lawful duty; that
thereupon he, with the assistance of several police constables, arrested the
petitioner‑respondent and four others under the provisions of sec. 32 of the
Criminal Procedure Code 15 of 1979: that the petitioner‑respondent was
arrested in accordance with the procedure established by law: that the
petitioner‑respondent was informed of the reason for her arrest.



Learned Additional Solicitor‑General, who had appeared for the 2nd and 3rd
respondents at the earlier inquiry, in which the present petitioner‑respondent
was the petitioner, informed this Court at this inquiry that the 2nd
respondent had produced the petitioner's affidavit at that inquiry, marked 2R1
as "Counsel for the State proceeded on the basis that Ganeshanantham's arrest
was relevant to meet the charge of an arrest by Inspector Hector Perera (who
was also the 1st respondent in the earlier inquiry) within the station", and
that the "State sought to justify Ganeshanantham's conduct in order to meet
any consequential impact of Hector Perera's conduct. Not on the basis that
Ganeshanantham's conduct was to be the subject‑matter of inquiry for granting
of relief".



Mr. Choksy S. A., appearing for the petitioner contended that, when the
affidavit 2R1 was tendered the petitioner became, on the basis of the said
affidavit a witness at the earlier inquiry: that the petitioner swore the said
affidavit in order to answer expressly the specific case put forward by the
1st respondent, viz., that she had been arrested and harassed by Inspector
Hector Perera within the Kollupitiya Police Station, after she had voluntarily
entered the said Police Station premises along with several others, to find
out what had happened to a press photographer who, she had been informed, had
been taken into the said Police Station by some Police officers: that it was
not meant to be an answer to a charge laid against him of having illegally
arrested the 1st respondent: that, had it been intended to be in answer to a
specific allegation of wrong conduct on his part, the affidavit would have
given far more details, inter alia, in regard to the document referred to as a
"permit", which would have had to be furnished by one, whose own conduct and
culpability was under inquiry, in order to justify the legality of one's own
conduct: that the petitioner, who came before Court only as a witness in
support of Inspector Hector Perera's defence had himself been found guilty of

#  365

** **

the conduct alleged against Inspector Hector Perera himself by the
petitioner‑respondent, without the petitioner being informed that the Court
was inquiring into the legality of the arrest, which he the petitioner himself
has stated was effected by him and without the petitioner being afforded an
opportunity of satisfying the Court that such arrest was legal, even though
the petitioner‑respondent did not only not accept any arrest made by the
petitioner but also expressly and categorically repudiated, right to the end,
the petitioner's assertion of an arrest of her by him outside the Police
Station along the Galle Road.



It is no doubt true to say that a witness, who gives testimony before a Court
‑ either orally or by way of an affidavit ‑ runs the risk of being disbelieved
and of having his evidence rejected by court as being untrue. The disbelief of
a witness is not a circumstance which is not inherent in the process of
deciding whether such evidence is true or not; and an adverse finding in
regard to his credibility, is not, ordinarily an altogether unexpected or
unforeseen turn of events. The position, however, is altogether different
where a witness, who furnishes evidence in writing merely to support a
defendant to repudiate a claim made against the defendant, finds that, whilst
the defendant is exonerated from responsibility in respect of the claim so put
forward against the defendant he himself, without any indication being given
to him, is held to be responsible for the wrong, in respect of which the claim
against the defendant was put forward and that relief is given on that basis.
Such situations, though rare, have occurred even in the regular courts of law.



In the year 1964 in the case of _Sheldon v. Bromfield J.J._ (14), proceedings
were held before the justices against M. on a charge of assaulting the female
appellant. At the end of the proceedings the charge of assault framed against
M. was dismissed; but the justices proceeded to bind over M: and two
prosecution witnesses, one of whom was the female appellant, to keep the
peace. The witnesses had not being warned of the possibility that they might
be bound over. They were not heard in defence. In delivering the order of the
Divisional Court setting aside the binding over order of the appellant on the
ground that the justices had acted contrary to natural justice. Lord Parker
observed:



"It has been argued here on behalf of the justices that provided, as in this
case, the person whom it is proposed to bind over had, in effect, their say by
being examined, cross‑examined and

#  366



re‑examined, there is no need at all that they should know what is passing
through the Court's mind, and indeed that the justices can bind them over
without giving them any advance notice or any opportunity of dealing with it.
I must say that I shudder at any idea that that can be done although it is
said that it is done quite generally. It seems to me to be elementary justice
that, in particular, a mere witness before justices should, at any rate, be
told what is passing through the justices' minds and should have an
opportunity of dealing with it"



This principle was once again upheld in the case of _R. v Hendon Justices, ex
p. Gorchein_ (53) where G who had instituted a private prosecution against P.
was bound over, along with P. who was convicted. G. and P. had both been
asked, at an early stage of the proceedings, by the magistrates whether they
were prepared to be bound over and both had refused. G. successfully claimed
that the binding over order made against him was in violation of the
principles of natural justice. Similar views were also expressed in the case
of _The Seistan,_ (13); and by the Privy Council in the case of _Mahon v. Air
New Zealand Ltd._ (18).



            Even though the material upon which the impugned order has been made is material which has been furnished by the person who complains of the injustice, yet, it is not a justification for the failure too observe the rule of _audi alteram partem._ In _Ridge v. Baldwin (supra)_ it was contended that the material upon which the order was made had been evidence which the chief constable himself had given, and that he had convicted himself out of his own mouth. This contention did not find favour with the House of Lords; and the House of Lords finally decided that the chief constable had not had a proper hearing. The principle that a fair opportunity should be given to a person to correct or contradict any relevant statement to his prejudice even though there existed, as in _Spackman's case_ (17), a judgment of a civil Court holding that the fact has been proved, found favour with Chief Justice (H. N.G.) Fernando in the case of _V. Hindu Educational Society Ltd., v. Minister of Education_ (54). The principle, that information which has been supplied by a person for a particular purpose should not be utilised against him for another purpose without first informing him of such an intention and affording him an opportunity to be heard, has been upheld in the Indian case of _Kapoor v. Jagmohan,_ (55).  


**  367**

** **

In 2R1 the petitioner has not made an unqualified admission of liability on
his part in respect of the claim put forward by the petitioner‑respondent in
her petition to Court. Even in regard to the "lawful permit", referred to in
2R1, learned Senior Attorney for the petitioner submitted certain factual
matters, which, if established, would have been relevant to the consideration
of the legality of the arrest admittedly made by the petitioner. Furthermore:
in the judgment delivered on 8.6.83, the Court has, as earlier indicated,
observed that, although the petitioner in 2R1 states that he informed the
petitioner‑respondent of the reason for her arrest he has not, however,
disclosed therein what the said reason was. The judgment, having thereafter
stated that the omission to mention the reason given at the time of the arrest
is no doubt a grave lapse, then proceeds to consider the legality of the said
arrest on the footing of a reason communicated to Court by learned Counsel for
the respondents as the reason which the petitioner had given to the
petitioner‑respondent. The counsel, who so communicated the reason to Court,
would have been the Additional Solicitor‑General, who appeared before us too
for the 2nd and 3rd respondents. He, it must be noted, held no proxy from the
petitioner‑respondent at any stage of the proceedings. What is more, judging
from the statement made by him from the Bar, it is not even certain whether
either he (the Additional Solicitor‑General) or any other officer of the
Attorney‑General's department would, have appeared for the petitioner had the
petitioner‑respondent's petition to Court based her claim against the 3rd
respondent upon the arrest referred to in 2R1, and the petitioner himself had
been named, instead of Inspector Hector Perera, the 1st respondent to her
application. In any event where a person is entitled to be heard by Counsel it
must be through Counsel of his choice.



The petitioner had averred that the arrest he made was lawful. The legality of
an arrest is not always a pure question of law. It is very often‑as the arrest
referred to in 2R1‑a mixed question of fact and law. Even, if in a particular
case it becomes a pure question of law, yet, the person defending the legality
of such arrest should be heard before a decision is made‑vide _Jackson (supra)
p. 63.  
_

The position accorded to a wrong‑doer named in the petitioner's own
application at the very commencement of the proceedings has already been
discussed earlier. That being so, the position of a person, whose conduct is
picked out, after the proceedings had commenced

**  368**



against the person named by the petitioner as the wrong‑doer, and such conduct
is thereafter probed as a possible basis on which relief could actually be
granted to the petitioner against the State, cannot be any the weaker or less
favoured‑in regard to the requirement of being informed of the inquiry to be
held against him, and also in regard to being afforded a reasonable
opportunity to defend himself if necessary by Counsel of his own choice. There
is no express rule in the aforesaid Rules of this Court in regard to any
service of notice on, and the affording of an opportunity to defend himself to
such a person. Such a lacuna can and must, in my opinion, be filled by the
court by resorting to "the justice of the common law". A person in the
position of the petitioner in this case would not, even though he filed the
affidavit 2R1, have had any reasonable grounds to anticipate that the arrest
referred to by him therein would be made the subject‑matter of granting the
petitioner‑respondent relief against the State without any notice to him.
Leave had been granted by Court to the petitioner‑respondent to proceed with a
complaint of wrongful conduct on the part of the first respondent. The
affidavit 2R1 was filed by him specifically in answer to the averments set out
in the petitioner‑respondent's petition. After he filed his affidavit 2R1 the
petitioner‑respondent even filed a further affidavit repudiating and
contradicting what the petitioner himself had averred in 2R1. There were also
express provisions in the Rules of this Court, referred to earlier, requiring
the service of notice and of certain documents upon the wrong‑doer whose
conduct is sought to be made the basis of the liability of the State. Against
this background. I do not think it reasonable to take the view that, at the
time the petitioner affirmed to the contents of the affidavit 2R1, he had
reasonable grounds to anticipate that the court would, having dismissed the
petitioner‑respondent's own allegations against the 1st respondent, then
initiate a probe into his own conduct as set but by him in his affidavit
2R1‑even though what he averred had subsequently been clearly and
categorically repudiated by the petitioner‑respondent‑and relief given to the
petitioner‑respondent on that basis, without he himself being made aware of
what was passing through the mind of the Court, and without being given an
opportunity to show the court that the court's thinking was not correct.



It cannot now be contended that the failure to hear the petitioner before the
order was made was due to the fact that the Court was pressed for time as the
matter of the petitioner‑respondent's

**  369**

** **

application had to be concluded within the period of two months specified in
Article 126 (5); for, this Court has now held that the said period is only
directory. In any event, if one or the other of the two parties must be
penalised for such a situation being brought about, then it should be the
petitioner‑respondent and not the petitioner‑for failing to bring before court
in time the person, who, in the opinion of the Court, was the real wrong‑doer.



The maxim that "justice should not only be done but should manifestly and
undoubtedly be seen to be done" (per Lord Hewart, C. J. in _R. v. Sussex
Justices, ex p. McCarthy_ (56)), is also a principle which must always be
adhered to. This principle becomes applicable not so much when the court is
concerned with a case of actual injustice as with the appearance of injustice
or possible injustice. Dealing with this principle, Lord Widgery, C.J., in _R.
v. Thames Magistrate's Court case (supra)_ stressed the importance of both
limbs of this principle. The need for the appearance that justice is being
done is as important as the requirement that justice should actually be done.
The requirement that justice must also be seen to be done is also one of the
best ways of winning for the Court public confidence and respect. The
fundamental principle at stake here is that public confidence in the fairness
of adjudication or hearing procedures must not be allowed to be undermined (
_De Smith, p 245_ ).



Having regard to the principles set out above it seems to me that, had the
situation, which arose at the inquiry into the application (bearing No. 20 of
1983) made by the petitioner‑respondent, arisen before a decision making body
in the field of administrative law, there would then have been no question but
that the principle of _audi alteram partem,_ of "fair‑play" and also the maxim
that justice should also be seen to be done (this principle being applicable
both to courts of law and other statutory tribunals‑ _Jackson (supra) pages
87, 91, 92, 96)_ would have rendered it obligatory on such tribunal to have
noticed the petitioner, informed him of what they intended to do, and then to
have given him a reasonable opportunity of stating what, if any, he, the
petitioner, had to state. If that were the obligation cast on a statutory
tribunal, how much greater and how much more solemn would be the duty cast on
a court of law, had such a situation arisen before it.



On a consideration of all that has been stated above, I am of opinion that the
moment the Court took the view that the petitioner‑respondent's version of the
incidents of the day in question

#  370



has not been established, but that the Court should nevertheless ­consider
granting relief to the petitioner‑respondent on the basic of an act, which the
petitioner himself had set out in his affidavit 2R1 , a duty was then cast on
the Court to give the petitioner "a reasonable opportunity of knowing what was
passing through the Court's mind and being able to answer to it".



# The relief to be granted



The question, which now arises for consideration, is the relief which the
petitioner should be granted. I have already indicated earlier that this is an
application in which the appeal has been to the inherent jurisdiction of this
Court and that the exact nature and the form of the relief to be granted to
the petitioner is a matter entirely in the discretion of the Court. The Court
intervenes on the footing that the petitioner has been prejudiced by an act ‑
or, as in this case, an omission ‑ of the Court itself and that it is
necessary for the Court to grant relief in order " to do justice". Technical
objections should not tie the hands of the Court. In any event, as set out
earlier, the averments in paragraph 31 of the petition read with paragraph (
_c_ ) of the prayer thereof would justify the grant of relief which would
affect even the principal relief which has been granted by the judgment. In
doing so no for, injustice would be caused to the petitioner‑respondent
herself she is one who not only never accepted at any stage what the
petitioner averred in 2R1, but also categorically repudiated, right up to the
conclusion of the proceedings, the petitioner's version. The expunging of the
findings set out in the aforesaid judgment would by itself operate to remove
the very foundation of the judgment entered in favour of the
petitioner‑respondent, and thereby bring about a somewhat incongruous
position. The question whether a decision, which has been arrived at in
proceedings in which the principles of natural justice have been violated, is
void or voidable, becomes, in the circumstances of a case such as this where
the aggrieved party himself has come forward to obtain relief, academic.
Having regard to all the circumstances in which the petitioner has come before
this Court, it seems to me that the fairest order to be made in order to
remove the "real sense of grievance" which the petitioner clearly harbours‑and
which would also not, as set out above, cause any injustice to the
petitioner‑respondent herself,- is to set aside the aforesaid judgment and to
grant the petitioner an opportunity of establishing the legality of his act,
and thereafter have judgment

#  371

** **

entered accordingly as he, the petitioner, succeeds or not in defending his
conduct. If authority is necessary to support the order which I propose to
make, it is supplied by _Halsbury (4 edt) Laws of England, Vol. 1, page 97,
paragraph 77,_ where it is stated that the effect of failure to accord an
adequate hearing or opportunity to be heard prior to a decision may be
repaired by rescission or suspension of the original decision followed by a
full and fair hearing or rehearing: and the following decisions are cited: _De
Verteuil v. Knaggs,_ (57); _Ridge v. Baldwin_ (42); _Vasudevan Pillai v. City
Council of Singapore,_ (58); _Rose v. Humbles,_ (59).



therefore, make order:



(i)         setting aside, pro forma, the judgment of this Court pronounced,
on 8.6.83 in Application No. 20 of 1983;



(ii)        that the petitioner be noticed and given an opportunity to
establish the legality of his arrest of the petitioner‑respondent, which he
has, in his affidavit 2R1, averred he did make on 8.3.83;



(iii)       that, if the petitioner succeeds in establishing the legality of
the said arrest, the petitioner‑respondent's said application No. 20 of 1983
shall stand dismissed;



(iv)       that, if the petitioner fails to establish the legality of the said
arrest, then the aforesaid judgment, entered in favour of the
petitioner‑respondent shall stand affirmed;



(v)        that, at the further inquiry to be held in terms of this Order, the
petitioner may, if he so desires, file a further affidavit, and if such
further affidavit is so filed, the petitioner‑respondent is to be permitted to
file, if she so desires, a counter‑affidavit;



(vi)        that the 2nd and 3rd respondents may be heard at such further
inquiry at the discretion of the Court;  


(vii)      that the parties do bear their own costs of this application; and
the costs of the further proceedings are to abide the final decision.



In view of the opinion I have now formed in regard to the issues arising in
this case, it has become necessary to refer to the case of _Mariyadas Raj v.
The Attorney ‑General and another_ (60) where I was a member of the
three‑judge Bench of this Court which decided that case. Even though there are
two significant circumstances which

#  372



distinguish that case from the facts of this case viz, that the specific
arrest, which was said to constitute the infringement in that case, was not in
dispute between the parties, and that there was no counter‑affidavit from the
petitioner in that case expressly contradicting the averments in the affidavit
of the police‑officer, who averred that it was in fact he, and not the officer
named in the petition, who made the arrest testified to by the petitioner‑yet,
if the principles, which I have referred to earlier in this judgment, had then
been placed, as was done at this inquiry, in their proper perspective in
relation to the issues that arise in a matter of this nature the relevant
issues would undoubtedly have appeared to me then as they appear to me now;
and I would even then have certainly taken the same view as I have set out in
this judgment.



I would like to conclude this judgment with the words, which Lord Diplock
himself had, according to the report tendered to us of the Privy Council
decision in the case of _Mahon v. Air New Zealand (supra),_ used on a similar
occasion:



"It was easy enough to slip up over one or the other of them in civil
litigation, particularly when one was subject to pressure of time in preparing
a Judgment after hearing masses of evidence in a long and highly complex suit.



In the case of a judgment in ordinary civil litigation such failure to observe
rules of natural justice was simply one possible ground of appeal among many
others and attracted no particular attention.



All their Lordships could remember highly respected colleagues who, as trial
judges, had appeals against judgments they had delivered allowed on that
ground: and no one thought any the worse of them for it.



So their Lordship's recommendation that the appeal ought to be dismissed could
not have any adverse effect upon the reputation of the judge among those who
understood the legal position and it should not do so with anyone else".



The petitioner is accordingly granted relief as set out above.

#  373

** **

**RODRIGO, J.**



These proceedings relate to an application by an Inspector of Police to this
Court to have us revise or vacate in the exercise of our alleged inherent
Jurisdiction, a finding reached in a judgment delivered by this Court on June
8th, 1983, said by him to concern him and harm him. He was not a
party‑respondent to the application in which that judgment was given or
otherwise noticed. He says this Court violated the _audi alteram partem_ rule
in respect of him.



The judgment mentioned was given in an application to this Court by Mrs.
Vivienne Goonewardene, a veteran Marxist politician and who does not need an
introduction in this country, for relief in respect of an alleged unlawful
arrest, among other complaints, by an Inspector of Police (not the petitioner
in these proceedings) at the Kollupitiya Police Station. Unlawful arrest is a
breach of a fundamental right guaranteed by the Constitution to every person.
A person unlawfully arrested is entitled to petition this Court for relief in
the form of a just and equitable order and directions ‑ Art. 13 (1); and Art
126 (4).



To Mrs. Goonewardene's petition the Inspector of Police in question who was
also the Officer‑in‑Charge (O.I.C.), the Inspector‑General of Police (I.G.P.)
and the Attorney‑General were made respondents. In the course of the
proceedings an affidavit was filed from the present petitioner, Inspector
Ganeshanantham, by the I.G.P. to the effect that it was he who lawfully
arrested Mrs. Goonewardene on the day in question and that too not at the
Kollupitiya Police Station as alleged but on Galle Road between the American
Embassy and the Police Station. This affidavit was intended to contradict Mrs.
Goonewardena and by implication to lend support to the C.I.C. that he did not
arrest Mrs. Goonewardena. It is noteworthy, however, that Mrs. Goonewardena
promptly filed a counter‑affidavit contradicting the affidavit of Inspector
Ganeshanantham and re‑asserted that it was the O.I.C. and no other that
arrested her and that in fact she was not arrested anywhere else before her
arrest at the Police Station. She further affirmed that she voluntarily
reached the Kollupitiya Police Station of her own accord and free will.



            With these affidavits filed, the hearing had commenced before a three‑Judge Bench of this Court. In the course of that hearing it is now said by Counsel appearing for Mrs. Goonewardena in these 

#  374



proceedings (the same Counsel who appeared for her in her application) and not
contradicted by the Deputy Solicitor‑General appearing for the State (who also
appeared at the other hearing) the spotlight was kept focussed for a whole day
on the question of whether the arrest if any by I.P. Ganeshanantham was
lawful.



Eventually judgment was delivered. Relief was granted to Mrs. Goonewardena
holding that she had been unlawfully arrested on the day in question but not
by the O.I.C. as alleged and asserted by Mrs. Goonewardena but by
Sub‑Inspector Ganeshanantham as he then was.



This, Inspector Ganeshanantham says, is unfair. He had filed a limited
affidavit for a limited purpose ‑ the argument runs as I understand it as
follows. Though he said in his affidavit that the arrest made by him was
lawful it was an affirmation made incidental to contradicting an alleged
arrest by the O.I.C. He had not given all the facts and circumstances relating
to the arrest. It was not necessary. It w s not called for. H s conduct was
not in issue. To say in a judgment that he has made an unlawful arrest
adversely affects him in his office as a Police Officer and causes prejudice
to his career and he is entitled to claim relief from such a finding because
he had not been put on notice that the lawfulness of the arrest made by him
was being inquired into, as required by the Constitution and by the common law
as expressed in the _audi alteram partem_ rule.



Objection even to the entertainment of this application by Inspector
Ganeshanantham and still less to the grant of relief to him is taken by
Counsel for Mrs. Goonewardena. Inasmuch as inherent jurisdiction is invoked by
the petitioner, Counsel for Mrs. Goonewardena says, there is no such thing as
inherent jurisdiction of the Court. He continues, we are a creation of a
statute (Constitution) unlike English common law Courts and we must see within
the four corners of the statute for our jurisdiction, and equally we have no
power to revise our own judgments: that once a judgment is given by this
Court, right or wrong, even if it contains slip‑ups or evidence of
forgetfulness or failure to follow leading precedents still this finding,
becomes an act of a final superior Court. Grant of relief is also objected to
in any form even to a limited extent as claimed by Inspector Ganeshanantham
such as expunging the adverse finding only or by simply declaring that the
finding was reached without hearing him, on the ground that such

#  375

** **

a claim if granted would cut the heart out of the matter and indirectly render
the substantial order in the judgment given ineffective and the judgment
itself meaningless.



Counsel for Inspector Ganeshanantham, however, insistently argued that we have
inherent power to look into his complaint. He draws our attention to Art. 118
which enacts that the Supreme Court "shall be the highest and final superior
Court of record in the Republic" and to Art. 105 (3) which gives the Supreme
Court all the powers of a superior Court of record including the power to
punish for contempt of itself. This phrase "Superior Court of Record " is not
defined. It appears, however, in the Courts Ordinance ‑ s. 7 ‑ " The Supreme
Court shall continue to be the only superior Court of Record." Counsel for
Mrs. Goonewardena cited Stroud's Judicial Dictionary to show that this phrase
is not helpful to determine the powers of the Court. However, there are a fair
number of instances when the Supreme Court at the time governed by the Court's
Ordinance before its repeal in 1972 claimed for itself and enforced an
inherent jurisdiction. In _Menchinahamy v. Muniweera_ (40) an interlocutory
decree had been entered in a partition case without the heirs of a
party‑defendant who had died in the meantime being noticed or substituted in
place of the deceased defendant. On an application made by the widow and
children of the deceased defendant after the interlocutory decree had been
upheld by the Supreme Court in the appeal, for _restitutio in integrum,_ Dias,
S.P.J. observed at page 414: ‑



"We now come to the substantial point which has been urged in this case,
namely, that not only are there no merits in the present application of the
petitioner, but also that if we grant her the relief she seeks we will in
effect be sitting in judgment on a two‑Judge decision of this Court in the
earlier appeal and which is now embodied in a decree of the Supreme Court
which has passed the Seal of the Court. It was argued that the Supreme Court
by means of _restitutio in integrum_ cannot vary its own decrees, especially
after they have passed the Seal of the Supreme Court. It is pointed out that
the powers of this Court are not unlimited. It is urged that s. 36of the
Courts Ordinance _(Chapter VI)_ defines the jurisdiction of this Court, while
s. 37 only permits this Court to interfere with the judgments of an original
Court and it cannot interfere with the orders of the Supreme Court. It is
pointed out that s. 776 of the Civil Procedure Code deals with the sealing of
decrees of the Supreme

#  376



Court, and that once a decree has been sealed, such decree, if it is a
judgment of two Judges of this Court, cannot be varied by another Bench of two
Judges."



In the instant case the present Bench is comprised of seven Judges as against
the three Judges who delivered the judgment. Dias, S. P. J. continues: ‑



"It is everyday practice in a case like that (where no service of summons had
been effected‑the interpolation is mine) for this Court to hold that all the
earlier proceedings are abortive and of no effect. If authority is needed this
is supplied by the following cases: ‑ _Caldera v. Santiagopillai_ (61) _Juan
Perera v. Stephen Fernando_ (62) and _Thambiraja v. Sinnamma_ (63) . . . . We
are merely declaring that, so far as the petitioner is concerned, there has
been a violation of the principles of natural justice which makes it incumbent
on this Court, despite technical objections to the contrary to do justice . .
. . . I would go further and say that in view of the irregularity in not
joining Saineris heirs, in my opinion both the interlocutory decree in this
action and the subsequent judgment of this Court in appeal are of no effect,
because by reason of the non‑observance of the steps in procedure no proper
interlocutory decree was, in fact, entered in this case."



This judgment was followed in _Ranmenikhamy v. Tissera_ (11) by T. S.
Fernando, J. wherein an appeal that had been preferred to the Supreme Court
had been rejected on the ground that notice of appeal had not been served but
subsequently it was proved to the Court that notice in fact had been duly
served on the party who was a minor represented by a duly appointed guardian
ad litem. It was conceded that the rejection of the appeal was a mistake. T.
S. Fernando, J. held that:



                        "Inasmuch as the order rejecting the appeal was made per incuriam the Court had inherent jurisdiction to set aside its own order. "  


Then in _Karuppannan v. Commissioner for Registration of Indian and Pakistani
Residents_ (8) the Supreme Court consisting             of Gratiaen,.J. and
Gunasekera, J. awarded costs holding:  


            "Subject to such statutory limitation as may be prescribed in particular instances, the Supreme Court possesses inherent power to award costs when exercising either its _original_ or appellate jurisdiction." 

#  377



            The Court in this case ( _Karuppannan's_ (8)) cited the case of Guardians of _Westham Union v. Churchwardens of Bethnal Green_ (25) where Lord Herschell said:



"Costs have been awarded for upwards of two centuries. I see no foundation on
which the power to order their payment can rest except the inherent authority
of this Court as the ultimate Court of appeal. "



Also Lord Macnaghten is quoted as having observed that,-



"The House of Lords, as the highest Court of Appeal, has and necessarily must
have an inherent jurisdiction as regards costs."



It was observed by Court in _Karuppannan's_ case (8) that,



"The unbroken line of precedents which have been brought to our notice is by
itself sufficient proof that the jurisdiction does exist, and even if it be
'difficult to maintain it upon a nice foundation' we are content to say, as
Lord Hardwicke did in _Burford (Corporation of v. Lenthall_ (64) that we
'ought to be bound by those precedents, _especially as it is in aid of
Justice. ' "_



In _Craig v. Kanssen_ (65) the Court of Appeal upheld an order by the King's
Bench Division which is a superior Court of Record setting aside its own order
in the exercise of its inherent jurisdiction on the ground that the applicant,
not having being served with summons was entitled to have it set aside _ex
debito justitiae._



It is thus seen that this Court has an inherent jurisdiction in situations,‑



(1)        where decisions have been made _per incuriam_



(2)        where the Court has _violated a principle of natural justice._

_ _

(3)        where the Court is required _to act in aid of justice._

_ _

(4)        where a claim is made _for costs_ and,



(5)        where a party is entitled to move the Court _ex debito justitiae._



Counsel for Inspector Ganeshanantham submits that the decision in question had
been made per incuriam. The categories of decisions per incuriam have been
stated in a decision of this Court by the Chief Justice in the case of
_Billimoria v. Minister of Lands_ (39) as follows: ‑



" In _Young v. Bristol Aeroplane Co. Ltd._ (66) Greene M.R. pointed
particularly to the classes of decisions per incuriam: ‑

#  378



 (i) a decision in ignorance of a previous decision of its own Court or of a
Court of co‑ordinate jurisdiction covering the case, and,



                        (ii) a decision in ignorance of a decision of a higher Court covering the case which binds the lower Court.



Lord Denning, M. R. was inclined to add another category of decisions‑one
where a long standing rule of the common law has been disregarded because the
Court did not have the benefit of a full argument before it rejected the
common law."



Then again in _Morrelle Ltd v. Wakeling_ (38) the Court observed: -



"As a general rule the only cases in which decisions should be held to have
been given per incuriam are those of decisions given in ignorance or
forgetfulness of some inconsistent statutory provision or of some authority
binding on the Court concerned; so that in such cases some part of the
decision or some step in the reasoning on which it is based is found, on that
account, to be demonstrably wrong. This definition is not necessarily
exhaustive ...............".



I am not too sure whether grievance complained of in the instant case can
strictly fall within the definition of decisions per incuriam mentioned above,
unless this grievance could be brought within the category given by Lord
Denning, M. R. as stated earlier. The grievance here would appear to be, if at
all, more in line with the Privy Council judgment in _Mahon v. Air New Zealand
Ltd._ (18). In that case a New Zealand judge holding an inquiry in his
capacity as a Royal Commissioner into the causes of a crash of an airliner
operated by Air New Zealand Ltd. observed:



"No judicial officer ever wishes to be compelled to say that he has listened
to evidence which is false. He always prefers to say as ...........hundreds of
judgments which I have written illustrate that he cannot accept the relevant
explanation or that he prefers a contrary version set out in the evidence. But
in this case, the palpably false sections of evidence which I heard could not
have been the result of a mistake or faulty recollection. They originated, I
am compelled to say, in a pre‑determined plan of deception."



Lord Diplock delivering the Privy Council judgment said:



"The parties to the plan of deception and conspiracy to commit perjury there
referred to were readily identifiable in the body of the record. They were
Security Officers employed in the Flight

#  379

** **

Operations Department of Air New Zealand. The report also identifies as
conspirators all four members of the Navigation Section of Flight Operations."



Lord Diplock held that this Commissioner failed to adhere to the two rules of
natural justice that a finding has to be based on material which tended
logically to reveal the facts to be determined and _that any person
represented at the inquiry who would be adversely affected by a finding should
be made aware of the risk of that finding being made._ Lord Diplock continues:



" The relevant rules of natural justice referred to in _R. v. Deputy
Industrial Injuries Commissioner_ (19) which dealt with the exercise of
_investigative_ jurisdiction were (1) a person making a finding had to base
his decision on evidence that has some probative value, (2) he had to listen
fairly to any relevant evidence conflicting with the finding and to any
rational argument against the finding that a person represented at the inquiry
whose interests might be adversely affected by it might wish to place before
it or _would have so wished, had he been made aware of the risks of the
finding being made. "_



The case of _The Seistan_ (13), also has a close resemblance to the complaint
of the petitioner in the instant case. There a motor vessel carrying a crew of
sixty‑six with two supernumeraries sank off Bahrain in the Persian Gulf as a
result of an explosion with the loss of fifty seven lives. A Court of formal
investigation consisting of a Wreck Commissioner and three assessors held an
inquiry into the circumstances attending the sinking of the vessel. One of the
assessors added a rider to the finding of the Court that the loss of the motor
vessel was not the result of the wrongful act or default of any person. The
rider was as follows: ‑



" I concur in the above ......... but, in my opinion, the advice given by the
chief officer, Mr. Jones, as to the flooding of the lower hold offered a
better chance of a quicker extinction of the fire. The conduct of the chief
engineer in misinforming the chief officer regarding No. 5 bilge line
non‑return valve was reprehensible".



The Chief Engineer appealed to the Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation
against the finding in the rider and, on a re‑hearing being ordered, Lord
Merriman, P. observed with regard to the passage quoted in the rider as
follows: ‑

#  380



            "Having regard to the absence of any charge against the chief engineer, and the consequent lack of any opportunity to meet any such charge, this expression of censure by one assessor in the rider was wholly irregular _whatever view may be taken of the merits. "_



In considering the approach to the determination of this matter one has to
bear in mind that this Court is exercising an original jurisdiction when
disposing of complaints of breaches of fundamental rights. The inquiry is
investigative and more in the nature of an inquest than a lis inter partes ‑
see _R. v. Deputy Industrial Injuries Commissioner_ (above). This Court is
given powers "to grant _to any other person_ or his legal representative such
hearing as may appear to the Court to be necessary in the exercise of his
jurisdiction under this Chapter."‑ Art. 134 (3). The inquiry required is
whether the alleged infringment of a fundamental right is by executive or
administrative action. It would thus appear to me to be not restricted to
ascertaining whether it is the State Officer against whom the specific
allegation made in the petition in terms of the Rules of the Court that
committed the infiringment. If that were so whether the inquiry is regarded as
a lis inter partes or as an inquest, I think any witness as in the case of
_Mahon v. Air New Zealand_ (above) who would be adversely affected by a
finding should be made aware of the risk of that finding being made against
him.



The problem here is that the Deputy Solicitor‑General had made submissions on
behalf of the State and the I.G.P. on the basis of Inspector Ganeshanantham's
affidavit. It is now submitted that this application is therefore without
merit. But in the case of _Menchinahamy v. Muniweera_ (supra) Dias S.P.J. was
also confronted with the submissions that the application before him for
_restitutio in integrum_ was not sustainable on its merits. Likewise in the
case of _The Seistan_ (supra) Lord Merriman, P. observed that the " expression
of censure by one assessor in the rider was wholly irregular whatever view may
be taken on the merits. "



Dias, S.P.J. was not prepared to look into the application on its merits. He
said at page 415:

  
"In so far as the petitioner is concerned there has been a violation of the
principles of natural justice which makes it incumbent on this Court, despite
technical objections to the contrary, to do justice."



As I have already said the affidavit filed by the petitioner was not intended
to disclose facts justifying the alleged arrest by him of Mrs. Goonewardene
Though arguments had been advanced by the Deputy

#  381

** **

Solicitor‑General, it must necessarily have been against the background of the
counter affidavit of Mrs. Goonewardena categorically contradicting Inspector
Ganeshanantham on the matter of the arrest. He was drawn in as a witness (on
an affidavit) and not as an accused. He was not present in Court. Having
tendered his affidavit he had no further personal interest in the proceedings.
It must have been farthest from his mind that the focus of prosecution had
turned on him.



On a consideration therefore of both principle and authority I reach the view
that the petitioner is at least entitled to a declaration as in the case of
the judgment referred to by Dias, S.P.J. that there has been a violation of
the principles of natural justice in so far as the petitioner is concerned.
But it is not fair by the State to leave our determination in the air with a
mere declaration that the finding in the judgment that the present petitioner
is guilty of unlawful arrest is contrary to the _audi alteram partem_ rule.
This vice will affect the order itself granting relief in the judgment as it
is umbilically connected to this finding of guilt. I therefore, as Dias,
S.P.J. did in the case cited above, would go further and say that in view of
this irregularity in violating the _audi alteram partem_ rule the petitioner
is entitled to move this Court _ex debito Justitiae_ and, that in my opinion,
both the order granting relief to Mrs. Goonewardena and the finding of guilt
against the petitioner in the judgment in question are of no effect.



_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/1.html_  

