##  The Ceylon Brewery Limited. v. Jax Fernando, Proprietor, Maradana Wine
Stores - SLR - 270, Vol 1 of 2001 [1999] LKSC 12; (2001) 1 Sri LR 270 (18
October 1999)

**270**

**THE CEYLON BREWERY LIMITED  
v.  
JAX FERNANDO, PROPRIETOR, MARADANA WINE STORES**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
WEERASEKERA, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 21/98  
CA REVISION NO. 659/97  
DC COLOMBO NO. 17168/MR  
18TH OCTOBER, 1999  
  
Civil Procedure Code - Application to vacate a default decree against the
defendant - Section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code - Whether the period
prescribed by section 86(2) is directory or mandatory.  
  
_**Held :  
  
**Section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code confers jurisdiction on the
District Court to set aside a default decree. Hence the period of 14 days
provided by that section to make an application to set aside a default decree
is mandatory.  
  
_Per_ Fernando, J.  
  
"It is settled law that provisions which go to jurisdiction must be strictly
complied with"  
  
**Case referred to :  
  
**1\. _Sri Lanka General Workers Union v. Samaranayake_ (1996)2 Sri L R 265 at
273-274  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgement of the Court of Appeal reported in (1999) 2 Sri
L R 61  
  
_S.L. Gunasekera_ with _Kushan de Alwis_ for plaintiff - respondent -
appellant  
  
_Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ for defendant - petitioner - respondent

_Cur. adv. vult.  
  
_**271**

October 10, 1999.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
The only question of law which arises in this appeal is whether the period of
14 days provided in section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code for an
application to set aside a default decree is mandatory or directory.  
  
The plaintiff obtained a default decree. The defendant filed his application
to set aside that decree on the 15th day.  
  
The Court of Appeal held that section 86(2) was directory, and that
accordingly the application made on the 15th day should be entertained.  
  
We are of the view that Section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code is the
provision which confers jurisdiction on the District Court to set aside a
default decree. That jurisdiction depends on two conditions being satisfied.
One condition is that the application should be made within 14 days of the
service of the default decree on the defendant.  
  
It is settled law that provisions which go to jurisdiction must be strictly
complied with. See Sri Lanka General Workers Union us. Samaranayake,"'  
  
I therefore set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal on that point.  
  
However, the learned District Judge entertained the application to set aside
the dafault decree after the period of 14 days had expired, on the ground that
intervening holidays had to be excluded. The Court of Appeal held, correctly,
that the learned District Judge was in error, because intervening holidays
cannot be excluded in computing a period exceeding six days.

**272**

Accordingly, the order of the District Court dated 4.7.97 is set aside, and
the ex-paste decree previously entered is armed.  
  
There will be no costs.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**WEERASEKERA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed; ex parte decree affirmed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/12.html_  

