##  Abn Amro Bank, N V v. Conmix [Pvt] Ltd. and Others - SLR - 8, Vol 1 of
1996 [1995] LKSC 13; (1996) 1 Sri LR 8 (11 September 1995)

**8**

**ABN-AMRO BANK N. V.  
v.  
CONMIX (PRIVATE) LIMITED AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO, J.  
KULATUNGA, J.  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
PERERA, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 1/95.  
C.A. REVISION APPLICATION NO. 602/92.  
D.C. COLOMBO NO. 15740/L.  
JULY 28, 1995.  
  
_Civil Procedure Code-Civil Procedure Code, sections 84, 86 (2), 90 and
91A­-Default- Fixing for ex parte trial-Natural justice - audi alteram partem
rule._

**9**

Section 84 (Civil Procedure Code) applies after the audi alteram partem rule
has been complied with-i.e. after the defendant has been given due notice and
an adequate opportunity of stating his case.  
  
If there has been no due service of summons (or due notice) but the Court
nevertheless mistakenly orders an ex parte trial then for breach of natural
justice section 86 (2) provides a remedy: a defendant's default can be excused
if it is established that there were reasonable grounds for such default and
one such ground would be the failure to serve summons. The consequence of non-
compliance with natural justice is not that non-appearance ceases to be a
default, only that, although the lapse is a "default", yet it is a default for
which there are reasonable grounds, and which therefore can be excused. The
need to comply with natural justice and "default" are therefore two distinct
matters. While the audi alteram partem rule does not modify or restrict the
meaning of "default", breach of that rule affords an excuse for "default".  
  
Default cannot be confined to a wilful or deliberate failure or refusal.  
  
The date for ex parte trial may be fixed by the Court on the day of the
default or on another day. Although section 84 provides that the Court shall
proceed to hear the case ex parte, this is not imperative. Despite default
section 91A em­powers the Court to grant further time to a defendant who has
failed to file answer, and this is so even if the plaintiff objects: and
section 90 seems to permit the Court to refrain from proceeding with ex parte
trial against one defendant, if there is another defendant against whom inter
partes proceedings are necessary.  
  
While in appropriate circumstances it is open to a trial judge to give time,
even if it is not sought (e.g. following a practice of granting time for
answer on the summons returnable date, or where a defendant is not
represented) yet it can­not be argued that the non-exercise of that discretion
is always wrongful.  
  
Section 84 does not require proof of intentional default as a condition
precedent to an ex parte trial. The failure to file the answer on that day or
to apply for an extension of time to file answer was per se a default within
the meaning of section 84.  
  
**Cases referred to:**  
  
1\. _Ameen v. Raji_ (S.C. 88/94-S.C. Minutes of 3.11.94)  
  
2\. _Silva v. Silva_ (1957) 60 N. L. R. 272, 275.  
  
3\. _Sameen v. Abeywickrema_ (1960) 61 N.L.R. 442.  
  
4\. _Rajapakse v. Senanayake_ (1987) 1 CALR 146.  
  
_5\. Millingdon London Borough Council v. Cutler_ (1968) 1QB 124, 135. _Ameen
v. Raji_ (S.C. 88/94-S.C. Minutes of 3.11.94 overruled)

**10**

  **APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
Romesh de Silva, PC. with Palitha Kumarasinghe, Mrs. Saumya Amarasekere and
Hiran de Alwis for Defendant - Petitioner-  Appellants.  
  
Faisz Mustapha PC. with Ikram Mohamed, M. S. M. Suhaid and H. Vithanachchi and
A. Panditharatne for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 11, 1995.  
**  
FERNANDO, J.**  
  
I have had the advantage of seeing the judgment, in draft, of my brother
Kulatunga, and while I am in agreement with his conclusion and order I wish to
deal at greater length with the Appellant's submissions as to the
interpretation and application of section 84 of the Civil Procedure Code.  
  
The submissions of Mr. Romesh de Silva, PC , for the Appellant may be summed
up as follows:  
  
1\. "Default" in section 84 refers to a deliberate, wilful or contumacious
refusal to participate in the proceedings (by not filing answer or
appear­ing), and does not include an inadvertent omission; in this case there
was, if at all, only an inadvertent omission by the Appellant to file answer.  
  
2\. Even if "default" does include an inadvertent omission, and assum­ing that
the Appellant was in default, yet-  
  
(a) an order for ex parte trial could only have been made if the
Plaintiff­Respondent ("the Respondent") had appeared on the occasion of the
Ap­pellant's default on 5.3.92, and had moved for an order for ex parte trial:
the journal entry of that day does not show that the Respondent appeared on
that day, or moved for such an order; and  
  
(b) in respect of the default on 5.3.92, the Court could have made such an
order only on the same day, and not on any subsequent date-this being one of
the grounds on which His Lordship the Chief Justice had expressly rested his
judgment in Ameen v. Raji,(1) it is the duty of the Court to fix the case for
ex parte hearing by an order made on the very day of the default, and if it
does not, there is no statutory bar to the Court accepting the answer on a
subsequent date.

**11**

3\. In fact, however, the Appellant was not in default on 5.3.92, because
(although the journal entry did not record this) the Appellant's instructing
Attorney had asked for, and had been granted, time till 11.3.92 to file
answer. Reliance was placed on that Attorney's affidavit dated 24.9.92, filed
in the Court of Appeal, in which he also states that on 11.3.92 he made a
statement from the Bar to that effect.  
  
4\. When it was pointed out to Mr. de Silva, that on 11.3.92 (whatever the
position might have been on 5.3.92) the Appellant had not only failed to file
answer but had also neglected to ask for further time, and that the Respondent
had moved for ex parte trial on that day, Mr. de Silva submit­ted that the
learned trial Judge and the Court of Appeal had proceeded solely on the basis
of the Appellant's default on 5.3.92, and that therefore the order for ex
parte trial made by the learned trial Judge could not now be supported or
justified by reference to the admitted default on 11.3.92.  
  
5\. In any event, section 84 is not imperative, and the Court has a
dis­cretion, after considering all the circumstances, to refrain from making
an order for ex parte trial. Here the Appellant had manifested an intention to
contest the Respondent's claim, and had even reserved, in its statement of
objections filed on 11.3.92, the right to file answer "after the Court has
dealt with the question of interim orders". Hence the trial Judge should not
have ordered ex parte trial.  
  
**NATURAL JUSTICE**  
  
Mr. de Silva commenced with a general submission that the policy of the law,
consistently with natural justice, was that Courts hear cases inter partes and
that a Court would depart from that principle only if a person voluntarily
refused to participate in the proceedings. Accordingly, he ar­gued, the audi
alteram partem principle required that section 84, and par­ticularly
"default", be liberally construed so as to permit ex parte trial only against
a defendant who refused to participate in the proceedings. This is
misconceived. Section 84 applies after the audi alteram partem rule has been
complied with - i.e. after the defendant has been given due notice and an
adequate opportunity of stating his case. The question that we are faced with
relates to a subsequent failure by the defendant to make use of the
opportunity given to him: whether that failure justifies proceedings without
his participation.

**12**

If there has been no due service of summons (or due notice), but the Court
nevertheless mistakenly orders an ex parte trial, then for that breach of
natural justice, section 86 (2) provides a remedy: a defendant's default can
be excused if it is established that there were reasonable grounds for such
default, and one such ground would be the failure to serve sum­mons. The
consequence of non-compliance with natural justice is not that non-appearance
ceases to be a "default", only that, although that lapse is a "default", yet
it is a default for which there are reasonable grounds, and which therefore
can be excused. I am therefore of the view that the need to comply with
natural justice and "default" are two distinct matters; that while the audi
alteram partem rule does not modify or restrict the meaning of "default",
breach of that rule affords an excuse for "default".  
  
**" DEFAULT"**  
  
Mr. de Silva contended that the ordinary meaning of "default" is wilful
refusal, and did not include an inadvertent omission; he claimed that the
corresponding Sinhala word also had the same meaning. He was unable, however,
to support these assertions with either dictionary definitions or judicial
precedents. The ordinary meaning of "default" and " is the failure to be
present or to act in the required manner. In section 84 "default" refers to
the two "failures" previously mentioned: namely, "failure" to file answer, and
"failure" to appear, and it is not in­tended to introduce a different concept,
such as wilful refusal or deliberate omission. The word "such" puts this
beyond doubt, since it confirms an intention to refer, compendiously, to
something previously mentioned, namely "failure". The Sinhala text is even
clearer, since the same word " (and its variations) is used throughout.
"Default", therefore, cannot be confined to a wilful or deliberate failure or
refusal. This view is reinforced by a consideration of Chapter XI I of which
section 84 is a part. Thus, section 86 (2) refers to "default" in the same
sense; and section 87 uses "non-appearance" as being equivalent to "default in
the appearing".  
  
If reliance is placed only on the journal entry of 5.3.92, the Appellant was
in default.  
  
**IMMEDIATE ORDER FOR EX PARTE TRIAL  
**  
Although the journal entry of 5.3.92 does not record any appearance

**13**

by or on behalf of the Respondent on that day, the written submissions
tendered by the Appellant in the District Court, and the Appellant's
in­structing Attorney's affidavit dated 24.9.92, show that the Respondent was
in fact represented. While usually an order for ex parte trial would be made
upon the plaintiff's application, section 84 casts a duty on the Court "to
proceed to hear the case . . . . . . . ", and accordingly even if the
plaintiff does not ask for it, the Court has the power to order ex pane trial.  
  
Mr. de Silva strenuously contended that, either on the plaintiff's
appli­cation or ex mero motu, the Court could not make such an order on any
subsequent date. This was part of the ratio decidendi in Ameen v. Raji(1) and
was relied on in the Appellant's written submissions. It would thus seem that
this appeal was referred to this bench of five Judges to recon­sider that
decision.  
  
Superficially, the word "forthwith" tends to suggest that the Court must make
an order immediately. However, section 84 requires the Court "to hear the case
ex parte forthwith, or on such other day as the Court may fix". Obviously, a
decision to hear the case on same day, must be taken the same day. But a
decision to hear the case on some other day is not required to be taken the
same day; the phrase "as the Court may fix" is not qualified by "forthwith" or
other similar words. Accordingly, I am of the view that the date for ex parte
trial may be fixed by the Court either on the day of the default, or on
another day; and with respect, that Ameen v. Raji must be overruled on that
point.  
  
There are practical considerations which confirm this interpretation. On the
summons returnable date it may not be known- for good reasons, such as illness
or absence abroad, when the plaintiff, his Counsel or an essensial witness
would be available, and the Court may therefore fix a calling date. Again,
Ameen v. Raji shows that a case may come up in the roll Court and, upon the
defendant's default, be sent immediately to the appropriate Court dealing with
trials of that kind, to enable a trial date to be fixed; and it may happen
that when the record reaches that Court, it has already adjourned for the day.
Similar problems may arise when there is an impending change in the
territorial jurisdiction of a Court, or a re-allocation of its work; or when a
Judge is on leave or is due to go on transfer soon; or when on the day of the
defendant's default, the matter comes up before a Judge who does not wish to
deal with it for personal reasons.

**14**

Thus the language of the section as well as practical considerations compel an
interpretation which does not require an immediate order for ex parte trial-
although, undoubtedly, in the normal course such an order will be made the
same day.  
  
Mr. de Silva also argued that the Respondent's conduct on 5.3.92 re­sulted in
an estoppel or a waiver, which would preclude the making of a subsequent order
for ex parte trial. In view of the foregoing, this contention is unsustainable
both on the facts and the law.  
  
**CONTRADICTING THE JOURNAL ENTRIES**  
  
The Court of Appeal held that the question of default had to be deter­mined by
reference only to the case record and the journal entries, and that the record
could not be supplemented by means of affidavits.  
  
While this is the general rule, it is settled law that in exceptional
circum­stances journal entries can be contradicted:  
  
"A journal has been maintained in this action and the Court is entitled to
presume that it was regularly kept . . . . . . . omnia praesumuntur rite et
solemniter esse acta. This presumption is of course rebuttable, but the
Respondent, on whom is the burden, has not placed before the Court sufficient
material to rebut it." (Silva v. Silva,(2) Sameen v. Abeyawickrema,(3) )  
  
Mr. de Silva relied on the Appellant's instructing Attorney's affidavit dated
24.9.92 to contradict the journal entry of 5.3.92. It is not permissible to
attack the order of the learned trial Judge, made on 22.7.92, on the basis of
facts which could have, and should have been placed before him for
consideration before he made his order. Further even the Appellant's written
submissions filed in the District Court on 25.3.92 do not make any reference
to a statement from the Bar said to have been made on 11.3.92. Indeed, that
affidavit was not tendered promptly even to the Court of Appeal, for it was
filed only six weeks after the petition dated 7.8.92 for revision. Mr. de
Silva ventured to explain away that delay by suggesting that the Attorney-at-
Law had been abroad, but this was untenable because we found that the petition
dated 7.8.92 had been signed by him, so that obvi­ously he could also have
submitted his affidavit at the same time.

**15**

In these circumstances I am of the view that the Appellant had failed to rebut
the presumption that the journal entries are correct, and I hold that the
Appellant was in default on 5.3.92.  
  
**DEFAULT ON 11.3.92**  
  
Mr. de Silva was thus forced to concede that, even on its own version, the
Appellant was in default on 11.3.92. He was unable to explain why on that day,
even after the Respondent had moved for ex parte trial, no appli­cation was
made for further time for answer in terms of section 91 A, which empowers the
Court to grant further time even after the expiration of the time originally
allowed.  
  
Mr. de Silva sought to get over this difficulty by arguing that the order for
ex parte trial which the learned trial Judge thereafter made, was based on the
default on 5.3.92, and not on the default on 11.3.92. However, the journal
entry of 11.3.92 records that the Respondent moved for ex parte trial because
the Appellant had failed to obtain or apply for time to file answer, and makes
no reference to a specific date of default; this seems referable to a default
on 11.3.92, or even to a continuing default, rather than to a default only on
5.3.92.  
  
I hold that the Appellant was in default on 5.3.92 and on 11.3.92. The order
for ex parte trial was correct. Insofar as it was based on the default on
5.3.92, it was correct because the learned trial Judge had power to make that
order on a subsequent day; and in any event, it was made consequent upon an
application referable to the admitted default on 11.3.92, and the failure to
refer to that default would not vitiate that order.  
  
**DISCRETIONARY POWER TO ORDER EX PARTE TRIAL**  
  
Although section 84 provides that "the Court shall proceed to hear the case ex
parte . . . . . . I agree with Mr. de Silva that this is not imperative.
Despite default, section 91 A empowers the Court to grant further time to a
defendant who has failed to file answer, and this is so even if the plain­tiff
objects; and section 90 seems to permit the Court to refrain from proceeding
with ex parte trial against one defendant, if there is another defendant
against whom inter partes proceedings are necessary.

**16**

The question is, however, whether the learned trial Judge erred in failing to
grant further time, ex mero motu, where the Appellant's lawyers had failed to
ask for time- even after the Respondent had moved for ex parte trial. While in
appropriate circumstances it is open to a trial Judge to grant time, even if
not sought (e.g. following a practice of granting time for answer on the
summons returnable date, or where a defendant is not represented), yet it
cannot be argued that the non-exercise of that dis­cretion in favour of the
Appellant, in the circumstances of this case, was wrongful. In coming to this
conclusion, I take into consideration the fact that section 86 (2) will allow
the Appellant an opportunity, if a default decree is entered, to satisfy the
trial Judge that he had reasonable grounds for that default. I am not
impressed by the argument that the Appellant had manifested an intention of
contesting the claim, and had purported to reserve the right to file answer.
Section 84 requires a Judge to con­sider only the default, and the intention
of the defaulter; and a defendant cannot give himself the right to file answer
after the time allowed by law unless he first obtains the permission of the
Court.  
  
For these reasons, I agree that the appeal must be dismissed with costs in a
sum of Rs. 5,000/- payable by the Appellant to the Respondent.  
  
**KULATUNGA, J.**  
  
This is an appeal by the 1st defendant in the above action who had
unsuccessfully applied to the Court of Appeal to set aside, by way of
revision, an order made by the District Judge, fixing the case for ex parte
trial and issuing an interim injunction pending the final determination of the
case. His Lordship the Chief Justice has directed that this matter be heard by
a Bench of five Judges.  
  
The plaintiff and the 1st and 2nd defendants are companies incorpo­rated under
the Companies Act. The plaintiff sued the said defendants and another inter
alia, for a declaration that the plaintiff is the owner of a por­tion of the
land which had been ordered to be sold in execution of the decree in D.C.
Colombo case No.15626/MB. The 1st defendant was the plaintiff in that action.
He was the mortgagee of an extent of 51A.3R.20P. which had been mortgaged to
him by the 2nd defendant. The plaintiff in this action claims to be the owner
of a divided extent of 1A.OR.25P. out of the said mortgaged property and seeks
to have the said extent excluded from the sale in execution of the decree in
the aforesaid mortgage action.

**17**

The plaintiff also prayed for an interim injunction/enjoining order, to stay
the sale.  
  
On 20.02.92 the Court issued an enjoining order and notice of the application
for interim injunction together with summons returnable on 05.03.92. The
record shows that on 05.03.92 the registered Attorney for the 1st defendant
filed proxy and obtained a date for objections, which was 11.03.92. The
enjoining order was extended upto that date. No an­swer was filed on 05.03.92.
Nor is there any record of an application for an extension of the date for
filing answer, made on that day.  
  
On 11.03.92 objections of the 1st Defendant were filed; and of consent, the
enjoining order which had been issued in respect of the entire land was
restricted to 1A.OR.25R, which was the extent claimed by the plaintiff. At
that stage, an application was made on behalf of the plaintiff, to fix the
case for ex parte trial on the ground that the 1st defendant had failed to
file answer or to obtain or apply for a date to file answer. This was objected
to by Counsel for the 1st defendant; whereupon, the Court directed the
par­ties to file written submissions on 25.03.92. According to the record, no
application for further time to file the 1st defendant's answer had been made,
even on 11.03.92.  
  
On 25.03.92 written submissions were filed. The 1st Defendant's posi­tion was
that on 05.03.92 the registered Attornery for the 1st defendant moved for a
date for objections and answer, even though there is no record of the fact
that he asked for a date for answer. Secondly, no application had been on
05.03.92 on behalf of the plaintiff to fix the case for ex parte trial. Hence,
the Court should permit the 1st defendant to file answer. On behalf of the
plaintiff, it was contended that in view of the 1st defendant's default on
05.03.92, the plaintiff was entitled to move the Court to proceed to ex parte
trial even on a later day. Rajapakse v. Senanayake.(4)  
  
By his order dated 22.07.92, the District Judge fixed the case for ex parte
trial. He also granted an interim injunction on the same terms as were
contained in the enjoining order which was in force. The 1st defend­ant's
application to the Court of Appeal to set aside that order was dis­missed on
the ground that in view of his default on 05.03.92, the District Court had no
option but to fix the case for ex parte trial, in view of the imperative
provisions of section.84 of the Civil Procedure Code.

**18**

Section 84 of the Code reads as follows :-  
  
"If the defendant fails to file his answer on or before the date fixed for the
filing of the answer, or on or before the day fixed for the subsequent filing
of the answer or having filed his answer, if he fails to appear on the day
fixed for the subsequent filing of answer, or on the day fixed for the hearing
of the action, and if the Court is satisfied that the defendant has been duly
served with summons, or has received due notice of the day fixed for the
hearing of the action , as the case may be, and if, on the occasion of such
default of the defendant, the plaintiff appears, then the Court shall proceed
to hear the case ex parte forthwith, or on such other day as the Court may
fix".  
  
In terms of the provisions of section 91A(1) of the Code, the defendant may by
motion obtain an extension of time to file the answer. The question for
decision is whether in the circumstances of this case, the District Judge was
empowered to fix the case for ex parte trial on a day subse­quent to the
summons returnable date.  
  
Section 84 of the Code is different from the corresponding section 85 of the
former Code which did not require the Court to proceed to ex parte trial
forthwith, which is the present requirement. "Forthwith" Harman L.J. has said
"is not a precise time and provided no harm is done, 'forthwith' means any
reasonable time thereafter....................It may involve action within
days; it may not involve action for years". Hillingdon London Borough Council
v. Cutler(5). See also Maxwell 12th Edt. p. 311\. Hence, where the defendant
is in default, the Court may proceed to hear the case ex parte immediately or
"on such other day as the Court may fix". The question is whether the Court is
enjoined to fix "such other day" on the summons returnable date itself. I am
of the view that although such day would ordinarily be fixed on the summons
returnable date itself, the law does not require such procedure to be
imperative; for there can arise situations in which it may not be possible for
the Court to promptly fix another day for the ex parte trial.  
  
I am also of the view that there can be a case in which, having regard to the
totality of the facts and circumstances, the Court may permit a defendant to
file the answer notwithstanding his failure to file it on the summons
returnable date e.g. where the default is inadvertent and sa­vours of a mere
technicality.

**19**

Thus in Ameen v. Raji (1) on the date for objections to the interim
in­junction and answer namely, 16.02.94, defendants' proxy was filed together
with objections. Apart from paragraphs admitting or denying the several
averments in the plaint and a statement of the facts upon which the defendants
relied for their defence, there was a prayer in the statement of objections
for the dismissal of the action. This Court observed: "though in form it was
not an answer, in substance it was". No answer as such was filed; nor did the
record disclose the making of an application on 16.02.94 for time to file the
answer. However, on 23.02.94, the answer was tendered but the Court rejected
it and fixed the case for ex parte trial, on the application of the plaintiff.
The Court of Appeal affirmed that order. This Court observed that in the
particular facts and circum­stances of the case, at most there was an
inadvertent omission on the part of the Attorney-at-Law to move for time to
file answer; on 16.02.94 the Court had not fixed the case for ex parte trial;
hence there was no statutory bar to the Court accepting the answer on
23.02.94. The Court held that it was a proper matter for the intervention of
the Court of Appeal by way of revision. Accordingly, the Court set aside the
order of the District Judge and directed him to allow the defendants an
opportunity to file answer.  
  
In Raji's case (which was decided by a Bench of which I myself was a member),
the Court said "in terms of the section it was the duty of the Court to have
fixed the case for ex parte hearing on 16.02.94". This state­ment is obiter
dicta; and after further consideration, I am now of the view that it is not an
accurate statement of the law, though the decision itself was otherwise
correct, on the facts and circumstances of that case.  
  
In Rajapakse v. Senanayake(4) (supra) notice of injunction together with the
summons were served on the defendant on 22.02.86. The summons returnable date
was 26.02.86 on which date the defendant's proxy had been filed and 26.03.86
obtained as the date to file objections. However, no answer had been filed nor
a date for answer obtained. On 18.03.86, the plaintiff moved for ex parte
trial. Further proceedings were held up as two Judges declined to hear the
case for personal reasons. In the mean­time, by 26.05.86 an answer which was
insufficiently stamped had been tendered. A duly stamped answer was tendered
only on 20.06.86. On 25.08.86 the Attorney-at-Law for the plaintiff once again
moved that the case be fixed for ex parte trial, which was allowed. The Court
of Appeal

**20**

dismissed an application to set aside the order of the District Judge, by way
of revision. The Court held that the defendant was in default by failing to
file answer on the due date or to apply for an extension of time to file
answer under section 91 A (1) of the Code, even after the original date
appointed therefor had lapsed.  
  
In the instant case, Mr. Romesh de Silva P.C. for the 1st defendant submitted
that the 1st defendant was not in default, in that in view of an affidavit
filed by his registered Attornery-at-Law stating that he had ap­plied for a
date for objections and answer on 05.03.92, no intentional default has been
made out. But, section 84 does not require proof of intentional default as a
condition precedent to an ex parte trial. The failure to file the answer on
that day or to apply for an extension of time to file the answer, was per se
"default" within the meaning of section 84. In any event, even on the next
date namely, 11.03.92, no answer was tendered; nor was any application made
for a date for filing the answer, even when the plaintiff's Attorney-at-Law
moved to have the case fixed for ex parte trial. The defendant was, therefore,
in continuous default. Hence the Court of Appeal was right in refusing to
interfere with the order of the District Court, by way of revision.  
  
Mr. de Silva strenuously submitted that both the District Judge and the Court
of Appeal rested the decision on the alleged default of the defendant on
05.03.92. As such, it would not be proper for this Court to take into account
the defendant's conduct subsequent to that date. I cannot agree. The remedy
sought being by way of revision, this Court is competent to consider the
entirety of the defendant's conduct in determining whether we may vary the
decision of the Court of Appeal. The facts show that the defendant was in
default on 05.03.92 and even thereafter. There is thus no valid ground for
setting aside the order for ex parte trial.  
  
Mr. de Silva also submitted that on 05.03.92 the plaintiff was absent and
unrepresented; hence no application for ex parte trial could have been made on
a later date. I am of the view that in the particular facts and circumstances
of this case such absence cannot per se bar the right of the plaintiff to have
moved the Court to proceed to ex parte trial, on a later day.  
  
Mr. de Silva argued that even if the order fixing the case for ex parte trial
is valid, yet the granting of an interim injunction without considering

**21**

the objections already filed by the 1st respondent, was bad. I am of the view
that in the context of the order for an ex parte trial, there is no legal
defect in the order issuing the interim injunction, for maintaining the status
quo, pending the final decision of the case.  
  
For the foregoing reasons, I dismiss the appeal and affirm the judgment of the
Court of Appeal. The 1st defendant-appellant is directed to pay the plaintiff-
respondent costs in a sum of Rs. 5000/= (Rupees Five Thou­sand).  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
**  
I have had the advantage of reading, in draft, the judgments of my broth­ers
Fernando, J. and Kulatunga, J. and I am in respectful agreement with their
conclusions and orders.  
  
**WIJETUNGA. J.**  
  
I have had the advantage of reading, in draft, the judgments of my broth­ers'
Fernando, J. and Kulatunga, J. and I am in respectful agreement with their
conclusions and orders.  
  
**P. R. P. PERARA, J.**  
  
I have read, in draft , the judgments of my brothers Fernando, J. and
Kulatunga, J.. I agree that this appeal should be dismissed with costs in a
sum of Rs.5000/-.  
  
I also agree that the opinion expressed in Ameen v. Raji that the Court must
fix the ex parte hearing on the summons returnable date itself is not an
accurate statement of the law. But, that decision (which was otherwise
correct) turned on the particular facts and circumstances of that case. The
decision in the present case rests on the ground of the continued default of
the appellant, which would disentitle him to revisionary relief. Hence, the
necessity for overruling Raji's case does not strictly arise, particularly for
the reason that learned President's Counsel for the respond­ent himself said
Raji's case "can be distinguished".  
  
_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/13.html_  

