##  De Silva and Others v. L. B. Finance Ltd. - SLR - 371, Vol 1 of 1993
[1992] LKSC 13; (1993) 1 Sri LR 371 (1 December 1992)

**371**

**DE SILVA AND OTHERS** **  
v.** **  
L B. FINANCE LTD.,**

SUPREME COURT.  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J,

RAMANATHAN, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 61/92.  
S.C. SPECIAL (LA) NO. 109/92.  
C.A./L.A. NO. 155/91.  
D.C. COLOMBO NO. 95404/MHP.  
DECEMBER 1st, 1992 AND MARCH 12th, 1993.

_     Affidavit - Validity - Jurat - Failure to include the words ' affirmed
thereto' in jurat - Meaning of the word 'affirmant' - Description of the
deponents as 'affirmants' - Civil Procedure Code Section 438 - Form 75 -
Section 439._

1\. Where the affidavit stated that deponents ' affirm ' and in the body of
the affidavit the deponents described themselves as ' affirmants and in the
jurat there was a statement that the affidavit was read over and explained to
the " within - named affirmants " there was a sufficient compliance with
Section 438 CPC and the affidavit was valid despite the fact that the jurat
did not contain the fact of affirmation.

2\. There was no reference to Form 75 in section 438 of the Civil Procedure
Code. Only the marginal note in Form 75 makes reference to section 438.
Compliance with Form 75 is not essential.

3\. The word' affirmant " is not infrequently found in affidavits filed in the
courts. Its meaning is well known and accepted in this country even though it
does not find a place in the Oxford Dictionary. It means ' one who affirms '
and it is so defined in Chambers Dictionary (1983 Ed.) Webster's Collegiate
411 Dictionary (3rd Ed.) and Odhams Dictionary.

**Cases referred to**

_1\. King v. Ponnasamy Pillai, 28 N.L.R. 156.  
_  
_2\. Simon Singho v. Government Agent W.P., 47 N.L.R. 545._  
_  
3\. Meeruppe Sumanatissa Terunnanse v Warakapitiya Sangananda Terunnanse 66
N.L.R. 333:_

372

_4\. Kanagasabai v. Kirupamoorthy 62 N.L.R. 54, 58._  
_  
5\. Sivagurunathan v. Doresamy, 52 N.L.R. 207._  
_  
6\. De Silva v. Seenathumma, 41 N.L.R. 241._  
_  
7\. Kandiah v. Abeykoon Sriskantha's Law Reports, Vol. IV 96._

**APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.

_Manohara de Silva_ for defendant - appellants.  
_  
Harsha Soza_ for plaintiff - respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 29, 1993.  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C. J.**

The plaintiff instituted action against the defendants on a hire purchase
agreement. At the commencement of the trial, issus1-6 were raised on behalf of
the plaintiff and issues 7-16 on behalf of the defendants. On an objection
taken by Counsel for the plaintiff, the District Judge made order rejecting
all the issues raised by the defendants, except issue No. 8. Thereupon the
defendants moved the Court of Appeal by way of an application for leave to
appeal against the order of the District Court. When the application for leave
to appeal came up for hearing before the Court of Appeal, Counsel for the
plaintiff raised a preliminary objection which was upheld by the Court of
Appeal and the application for leave to appeal was dismissed. The defendants
have now preferred an appeal to this court from the judgment of the Court of
Appeal dismissing the application for leave to appeal filed in terms of
section 754 (2) read with section 756(2) of the Civil Procedure Code.

The preliminary objection raised before the Court of Appeal related to the
validity of the affidavit filed in support of the petition as required by
section 756 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code. The short point raised was that
the affidavit was invalid for the reason that the jurat did not contain the
fact of affirmation. At the hearing before us Mr. Harsha Soza for the
plaintiff-respondent strenuously contended that strict compliance with the
provisions of section 438 of the Civil Procedure Code was essential; that the
wording in section 438 of the Civil Procedure Code brings in Form 75 in the
first Schedule

373

to the Civil Procedure Code.; that the affidavit must be in accord with Form
75; that the affidavit filed by the defendants-appellants was invalid for the
reason that the jurat does not expressly state that the defendants who have
declared themselves to be Buddhists have " affirmed thereto ".

The affidavit in question commences with the words - " We .... being Buddhists
do hereby solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm as follows : " It
is also to be noted that Paragraph (1) reads thus: We are the petitioners
above-named and the affirmants hereto. The jurat is as follows : " The
foregoing affidavit was duly read over and explained by me to the within-named
affirmants who having understood the nature and contents signed same in my
presence at Colombo on this 16th day of August 1991 ". (The emphasis is mine)

On a consideration of the averments in the affidavit set out above and the
wording of the jurat it seems to me that the provisions of s. 438 of the Civil
Procedure Code have been complied with. The jurat expressly sets out the place
and date on which the affidavit was signed. This is an essential requirement
of an affidavit. There is no dispute that the affidavit was signed before a
Justice of the Peace. There is specific reference in the jurat that the
affidavit was " duly read over and explained..... to the within-named
affirmants .......". The submission that the affidavit is invalid was really
based on the absence of the word " affirmed " before the words " duly read
over " in the jurat. It seems to me, however, that a meaning has to be given
to the expression " within-named affirmants " in the context of the other
averments in the affidavit referred to above. Reading the affidavit as a
whole, the fair meaning that could be given to these words is that the
deponents have affirmed to the contents of the affidavit before the Justice of
the Peace.

As submitted by Mr. Manohara de Silva for the defendants-appellants, s. 438 of
the Civil Procedure Code makes no express reference to Form 75 of the Civil
Procedure Code. On the other hand, there are sections in the Civil Procedure
Code, as rightly pointed out by Mr. de Silva, where there is specific mention
of a particular " form " set out in the Schedule - vide sections 793, 974,
797, 757, 703, 651, 516 and 529 (2). It is only the marginal note in Form 75
which makes reference to section 438. I hold that section 438 of the

374

Civil Procedure Code does not require that the fact of affirmation should be
expressly stated in the jurat of the affidavit.

There is a further matter to which I must refer. Mr. Soza submitted that there
is no such word as " affirmant " in the English language; it is a word which
is not found in the Oxford Dictionary. However, it does find a place in the
Chambers Dictionary (1983 Edition) in Webster's Collegiate Dictionary (3rd
Edition) and Odhams Dictionary. The meaning as given in these dictionaries is
" one who affirms ". Moreover, it is an expression which is not infrequently
found in affidavits filed in our courts. Its meaning is well known and
accepted in this country, even though it does not find a place in the Oxford
Dictionary.

Mr. _Soza cited the case of King vs. Ponnasamy Pillai_ (1), in support of his
submissions. But that was a case where the accused was charged under ss. 196
and 190 of the Penal Code and the affidavit constituted the foundation of the
charge. Further, the court was concerned with the question whether the
affidavit complied with the provisions of s. 439 of the Civil Procedure Code
and not of s. 438 of the Civil Procedure Code. It seems to me that this case
is of little assistance in the appeal before us. Reliance was also placed on
_Simon Singho vs. Government Agent W.P_.,(2). This too was a case where the
court was concerned with s. 439 of the Civil Procedure Code which expressly
enacts that, " in the event of the declarant being ........ not able to
understand writing in the English Language, the affidavit shall at the same
time be read over or interpreted to him in his own language, and the jurat
shall express that it was read over or interpreted to him in the presence
of...... the Justice of the Peace ........ and that he appeared to understand
the contents.....'. (The emphasis is mine) The affidavit in question in that
case contained no such jurat and Dias J. held that such an affidavit is
valueless. Mr. Soza also cited the case of Meeruppe Sumanatissa _Terunnanse
vs. Warakapitiya Sangananda Terunnanse_ (3), which again was a case concerned
with the provisions of s. 439 of the Civil Procedure Code.

Mr. Soza also referred us to the following observations of _Basnayake C.J. in
Kanagasabai vs. Kirupamoorthy_ (4):" Before I part with this judgment I wish
to point out that the respondent's affidavit is undated. It is the duty of the
Justice of the Peace before whom an affidavit

375

is sworn to see that the jurat is properly made ". Apart from the fact that
this statement is obiter, the appeal before us is not concerned with an
undated affidavit or one where the place it was affirmed to is left blank
Counsel further relied on the case of _Sivagurunathan vs. Doresamy_ (5), where
Basnayake J. took the view that notice of tendering security required by s.
756 of the Civil Procedure Code must be in Form 126 of the First Schedule to
the Code, following the decision of the Full _Bench in de Silva vs.
Seenathumma_ (6).The Court observed " the omission to mention the 7th
respondent in the notice appears to be not accidental but deliberate.
Therefore there has been no intention to give her the prescribed notice". It
seems to me that this case too is of little assistance on the question before
us in the instant appeal.

There remains for me to consider _Kandiah vs. Abeykoon_ (7) (Sriskantha's Law
Reports, Vol. IV 96) which was also relied on by Mr. Soza. That was a case
which dealt with proceedings taken under the State Lands (Recovery of
Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979 as amended. Section 5(2) of the Act itself
required that the affidavit has to be in Form C set out in the Schedule.
However, the jurat was not in terms of Form C and, what is more, there was no
indication of the " place of deposition ". It was further noticed that " both
according to the body of the affidavit and the jurat one does not know whether
the deponent took an oath or made an affirmation ...... (at page 99) The
defects in the affidavit were considered in the context of the special
jurisdiction conferred on the Magistrate's court, a jurisdiction which has far
reaching consequences. The court concluded, " there can be no doubt that the
operation of the Act and its provisions could well have a serious impact upon
proprietory rights ". It appears to me that this case is of minimal assistance
in deciding the appeal before us.

On a fair reading of the entirety of the impugned affidavit it seems to me
that the preliminary objection taken was of a technical nature and the Court
of Appeal was in error in upholding it. I accordingly allow the appeal, set
aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and direct the Registrar to return
the record to the Court of Appeal so that the application for leave to appeal
may now be heard on its merits.

376

In all the circumstances, I make no order for costs.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.

  
**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._  
_Case sent back for_  
_hearing on merits._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/13.html_  

