##  Selenchina v. Mohamed Marikar and Others - SLR - 100, Vol 3 of 2000 [2000]
LKSC 13; (2000) 3 Sri LR 100 (24 July 2000)

**100**

**SELENCHINA  
v.  
MOHAMED MARIKAR AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
S.N. SILVA, CJ.  
PERERA, J. AND  
WEERASEKERA, J.  
SC APPEAL 71/99  
SPL. LA NO. 52/98  
CA NO. 480/86(F)  
DC KEGALLE NO. 18225 (P)  
24TH JULY, 2000  
  
Civil Procedure Code - Notice of appeal - Computation of time - Section
754(4) of the Code.  
_  
Section 754(4) of the Civil Procedure Code provides that the notice of appeal
shall be presented to the court of first instance within a period of fourteen
days from the date when the decree or order appealed against was pronounced,
exclusive of the day of that date itself and of the day when the petition is
presented and of Sundays and Public Holidays.  
  
**Held :  
**  
Per S.N. Silva, CJ.  
  
". . . the notice of appeal was presented on 20. 10. 1986. If that day is
excluded, the period of 14 days excluding the date of judgment pronounced (i.
e. 30\. 09. 1986) and intervening Sundays and public holidays would end on 17.
10. 86 which was a public holiday. The next day on which the notice should
have been presented was the 18th, being a Saturday, on which the office of the
court was closed. The next day, the 19th was a Sunday which too had to be
excluded in terms of the section. In the circumstances the notice filed on 20.
10. 1986 was within the period of 14 days as provided for in section 754(4) of
the Civil Procedure Code"  
  
**Case referred to :  
**  
_1\. Charlet Nona v. Babun Singho SC Appeal 81/98 SC Minutes of 08. 09. 98_

**101**

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_Rohan Sahabandu with Athula Perera, Ms. Menaka Haputhanthri and Ms. Subhani
Keerthiratne_ for 5th defendant - appellant.  
  
_D.M.G. Dissanayake_ for 2nd Plaintiff - Respondent.  
  
_Sathya Hettige, DSG with N. Pulle, SC_ for A.G. as Amicus.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**Editor's Note :**  
  
Contra Sri Lanka State Trading (Consolidated Exports) Corporation v.
Dharmadasa (1987) 2 Sri LR 235  
  
July 24, 2000.  
  
**S.N. SILVA, C.J.  
**  
This is an appeal from the judgment dated 03. 03. 1998. By that judgment, the
Court of Appeal has rejected the appeal of the 5th defendant - appellant from
the judgment of the District Court of Kegalle dated 30. 09. 1986.  
  
The Court of Appeal rejected the notice of appeal on the basis that it has not
been filed within the period specified in section 754(4) of the Civil
Procedure Code which reads thus  
  
"The notice of appeal shall be presented to the Court of first instance for
this purpose by the party appellant or his registered attorney within a period
of fourteen days from the date when the decree or order appealed against was
pronounced, exclusive of the day of that date itself and of the day when the
petition is presented and of Sundays and public holidays . . ."  
  
In terms of the section, the days set out below have to be excluded in
computing the period of 14 days in which the notice should be presented.  
  
1\. the day the judgment from which the appeal is taken is pronounced.  
  
2\. intervening Sundays and public holidays.

**102**

3\. the day the notice of appeal is presented to the Court.  
  
In this case the notice of appeal was presented on 20. 10. 1986. If that day
is excluded, the period of 14 days excluding the date of judgment pronounced
(i. e. 30\. 09. 1986) and intervening Sundays and Public holidays would end on
17. 10. 86 which was a public holiday. The next day on which a the notice
should have been presented was the 18th, being a Saturday, on which the office
of the Court was closed. The next day the 191 was a Sunday which too had to be
excluded in terms of the section. In the circumstances, the notice filed on
20. 10. 1986 was within a period of 14 days as provided for in section 754(4)
of the Civil Procedure Code.  
  
The Court of Appeal appears to have based its decision on the premise that in
view of the word "within" appearing in section 754(4) the date on which the
notice of appeal is filed in Court should be taken into account in computing
the period of 14 days. Such an interpretation may have been tenable if there
was no specific provision to the contrary in section 754(4). In the face of
the unambiguous provision in section 754(4) that the day the notice is
presented should be excluded from the period of 14 days it would not be open
to interpret the word "within" appearing in the provision to include such date
in the computation of the period. This court has decided the issue on the same
lines in the case of Charlet Nona v. Babun Singho(1).  
  
The appeal is accordingly allowed and we set aside the judgment dated 03. 03.
1998 of the Court of Appeal and refer the matter to the Court of Appeal to
hear and determine the appeal. We direct that the appeal be given priority
since it has been filed in 1986. We make no order as to costs.  
  
**PERERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WEERASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/13.html_  

