##  Asilin Nona and Another v. Wilbert Silva - SLR - 176, Vol 1 of 1997 [1996]
LKSC 15; (1997) 1 Sri LR 176 (26 February 1996)

176

ASILIN NONA AND ANOTHER

 v.  
WILBERT SILVA



SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA,

C. J., KULATUNGA, J.

AND RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 87/95

CALA NO. 48/95

D. C. KALUTARA NO. 4109/L

FEBRUARY 20, 1996.



Civil Procedure Code - Discretion of Court to call witnesses who are not
listed - Sections 121 and 175 of the Code._

_ _

Although Section 121(2) of the Civil Procedure Code requires every party to
file the list of witnesses "not less than 15 days before the date of trial",
parties specifically agreed to file the same one week before the date of
trial. However, the defendants filed their list only after the plaintiff
closed his case. The District Judge upheld the plaintiff's objection to the
defendants' application to call witnesses.



**Held:**

** **

Section 175(1) of the Code imposes a bar against calling of witnesses who are
not listed in terms of Section 121. The 1st proviso to Section 175(1) confers
on the Court a discretion to permit a witness not so listed to be called "if
special circumstances appear to it to render such a course advisable in the
interest of

**177**



justice". The burden of satisfying the Court as to the existence of special
circumstances is on the party seeking to call such witnesses. There were no
special circumstances as contemplated by the 1st proviso to Section 175(1).

** **

**_Cases referred to:_**



1. _Girantha v. Maria_ 50 N.L.R. 519, 520,522  


2. _Hatton National Bank Ltd., v Warawitage_ 1992 1 Sri L.R. 358.



**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_Manohara R. de Silva_ for defendants-appellants.



_N. R. M. Daluwatta, P.C., with Champaka Laduwahetty._ for plaintiff-
respondent.

_ _

_Cur. adv. vult._

  
February 26, 1996.  


**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.**



The plaintiff instituted these proceedings seeking a declaration of title to,
and ejectment of the defendants from, the land described in the schedule to
the plaint. The defendants resisted the plaintiff's claim on the plea of
acquisition by title by prescription.



When the case was called on 27.9.93 the parties specifically agreed that they
will file their list of witnesses one week before the date of trial. Although
section 121(2) of the Civil Procedure Code required every party to an action
to file the list of witnesses "not less than 15 days" before the date of
trial, in the present case the agreement was that if a list is to be filed, it
has to be done one week before the date fixed for trial. The case was fixed
for trial on 9.12.93 and 13.12.93. The plaintiff closed his case on 13.12.93.
The defendant filed his list of witnesses only on 17.12.93. On the next date
of trial (31.1.94) the defendants' application to call the witnesses was
objected to by counsel for the plaintiff. The District Judge upheld the
objection. Against this order of the District Judge the defendants made an
application for leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal
dismissed the application and the defendants have now preferred an appeal to
this Court.

**178**



Relying strongly on the' decisions in Girantha v. Maria(1); and Hatton
National Bank Ltd., v. Warawitage (2), Mr. Manohara de Silva for the
defendants-appellants strenuously contended that the District Judge was in
error when he refused the application made on behalf of the defendants to call
the witnesses listed on 17.12.93. Mr. de Silva submitted (i) that there was a
long period of time between 17.12.93 and the date when the application was
made to call witnesses on behalf of the defendants; (ii) that the District
Judge had wrongly exercise the discretion vested in him under the first
proviso to section 175 of the Civil Procedure Code; (iii) that the refusal of
the defendants' application resulted in a miscarriage of justice; (iv) that
there was no element of "surprise" for the reason that the plaintiff had more
than adequate notice of the witnesses that the defendants intended to call.



Section 175(1) of the Civil Procedure Code in its enacting part imposes a bar
on a party calling witnesses unless such witnesses were included in the list
previously filed as provided by section 121. The first proviso to section
175(1) confers on the court a discretion to permit a witness not so listed to
be called **" if special circumstances **appear to it to render such a course
advisable **in the interests of justice ". **The burden was on the defendants
to satisfy the court in regard to the existence of such special circumstances.
The finding of the District Judge, however, was that no explanation was given
for the default of the defendants. This finding was not challenged before us.
In my opinion, this clearly is an important circumstance which tells heavily
against the defendants, particularly in view of the agreement between the
parties that the list of witnesses will be filed one week before the date of
trial. Admittedly, the defendants were in breach of the agreement. As rightly
submitted by Mr. Daluwatte, Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent, it would
certainly not be in the interests of justice to permit the defendants to act
in breach of the agreement to which they were parties.



On the other hand, in the case of Girantha v Maria (Supra) cited by Mr.
Manohara de Silva there were special circumstances which required the court to
permit the defendant to call the witness, Police Inspector Sivasambo, who was
listed only after the plaintiff's case was closed. This too was a case where
the plaintiffs sought a

**179**



declaration of title against the defendant and one of the issues was "the
prescriptive rights of parties". This is a case that is often cited in the
District Courts and it is best that the relevant facts are fully set out.
Gratiaen, J. in the course of his judgment stated:



"While the 1st plaintiff was giving evidence she was cross examined with
regard to petition (marked DI) which she had submitted in 1940 to the
Magistrate's Court of Dandegamuwa complaining that the defendants were
forcibly resisting her claim to enter the land in dispute. It is common ground
that this petition had been forwarded to Police Inspector Sivasambo for
investigation, and that at the official inquiry held by that officer the 1st
plaintiff had made a statement to him in connection with the dispute. The
proctor for the defendants, who had been briefed with a certified copy of the
Inspector's report to Court following the inquiry, **suggested to the 1st
plaintiff that she had on that occasion told the Inspector "that she had not
been in possession of this land for the last ten years." **The 1st plaintiff
denied having made any such statement to Inspector Sivasambo. There can be no
doubt that such an admission, if made in 1940, at an official investigation
held by a Police Officer, would have very important bearing on the issue of
prescription raised at the present trial. In view of the plaintiff's denial,
however, the certified copy of this report could not be considered at the
trial unless Inspector Sivasambo was called as a witness". (at P 520) ... "In
this case Inspector Sivasambo is admittedly a person whose evidence, if
accepted by the trial Judge, would be of the greatest importance in deciding
the issue of prescription. The nature of the testimony which the defendants
anticipate he would give was expressly put to the 1st plaintiff when she gave
evidence. The element of surprise does not arise because the plaintiffs had
several months' notice of the defendants decision to call him on the adjourned
date of hearing. In these circumstances it seems to me that the objection
raised by the plaintiffs to Inspector Sivasambo being called as a witness as
highly technical and without merit. It was 'in the interests of justice' that
this material witness should have been examined. (at P. 522) (The emphasis is
mine).



It is thus seen that the facts clearly establish that Inspector Sivasambo was
a vital witness whose testimony had a **direct bearing  
 **

**180**



**on the issue of prescription.** Therefore it was undoubtedly in the
interests of justice to permit him to be called as a witness. This case is of
hardly any assistance to the appellants in the appeal before us.



Hatton National Bank Ltd., v. Warawitage (Supra) is also a case of little
assistance to the appellant in the present appeal. That was a case where the
Bank instituted proceedings for the recovery of a loan granted to the 1st
defendant; the 2nd and 3rd defendants had signed as guarantors. Judgment was
entered of consent against the 1st defendant. At the trial against the 2nd and
3rd defendants, Counsel for the Bank moved to call an officer of the Bank
"conversant with the facts". Counsel for the defendants objected on the ground
the witness was not "listed". Wijeratne J., while taking the view that the
"officer of the Bank" is not a "party" to the action within the meaning of the
2nd proviso to section 175(1) of the Civil Procedure Code, held that the
District Judge should have exercised his discretion in terms of the 1st
proviso to section 175(1) and permitted the witness to give evidence. On a
consideration of the facts it is clear that the objection was of a technical
nature and devoid of merit.



In the appeal before us, it is manifest that there are no "special
circumstances" as contemplated by the 1st proviso to section 175(1) of the
Civil Procedure Code. The "special circumstances" must be of such nature as to
further the ends of justice. I therefore hold that the District Judge had
fairly and properly exercised the discretion vested in him when he disallowed
the application made on behalf of the defendants.



For these reasons the appeal fails and is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs.
500/-.'



**KULATUNGA, J.** \- I agree.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.



_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/15.html_  

