##  Ghouse v. Mercantile Credit Limited. - SLR - 127, Vol 2 of 1997 [1995]
LKSC 15; (1997) 2 Sri LR 127 (7 July 1995)

127

GHOUSE  

**v.  **

**MERCANTILE CREDIT LIMITED  **

** **

SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

DHEERARATNE, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 108/94.

C.A. REVISION NO. 870/91.

D.C. COLOMBO NO. 93243/M.

JUNE 23, 1995.



Civil Procedure Code - Money Decree - Writ of Execution - Seizure of exempt
property - Claim by Judgment Debtor - Court having jurisdiction to investigate
claim - Civil Procedure Code sections 218, 244, 245, 343 and 344.

_ _

The fiscal executing a decree of the District Court of Colombo seized certain
premises situated at Yatiyantota within the local limits of the jurisdiction
of the District Court of Avissawella. The judgment-debtor, relying on the
proviso to section 241 of the Civil Procedure Code, claimed before the
District Court of Avissawella that the premises seized was his actual
residence and it was not liable to seizure.



**Held:**

** **

The judgment-debtor was not entitled to prefer the claim in terms of section
241 of the Code and that the District Court of Avissawella has no jurisdiction
to hold an inquiry and order the release of the property seized.



**Case referred to:**

** **

1\. Karuppan Chetty v. Anthonayake Hamine, 5 N.L.R. 300.

_ _

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of appeal.

_ _

_E. S. Edirisinghe_ with _Luxman Amarasinghe_ for claimant-respondent.

_ _

_Geoffrey Alagaratnam_ with _Nazli Buhary_ for plaintiff-respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult.  
 _

**128**



July 7, 1995.  


**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

** **

The respondent instituted proceedings in the District Court of Colombo against
the claimant for the recovery of certain sums of money and for the return of
the vehicle in terms of the hire purchase agreement entered into between the
respondent and the claimant. The claimant consented to judgment and agreed to
make payment by instalments. He, however, failed to make the due payments as
agreed upon, and the respondent took out writ of execution and seized certain
premises at Yatiyantota, which according to the claimant, was his actual
residence. These premises were situated within the local limits of the
jurisdiction of the District Court of Avissawella.



The claimant filed a petition in the District Court of Avissawella seeking the
release of the property from seizure on the ground that it was his actual
residence, and therefore exempt from seizure under the provisions of section
218(n) of the Civil Procedure Code. The claimant purported to prefer his claim
to the property seized under section 241 of the Civil Procedure Code. The
District Court of Avissawella, after inquiry, held in favour of the claimant
and released the property from seizure. Thereupon the respondent moved the
Court of Appeal by way of revision and the Court of Appeal set aside the order
of the District Court of Avissawella dated 6.9.91 releasing the property from
seizure. Dissatisfied with the judgment of the Court of Appeal, the claimant
has now preferred an appeal to this court.



The short point that arises for decision in this appeal is whether the
claimant, who was himself the judgment-debtor, is entitled to prefer a claim
to the property seized in terms of section 241 of the Civil Procedure Code. It
was the contention of Mr. Edirisinghe for the claimant that the District Court
of Avissawella had jurisdiction to investigate the claim in terms of the first
proviso to section 241 of the Civil Procedure Code. On the other hand, Mr.
Alagaratnam for the respondent submitted that the District Court of
Avissawella had no jurisdiction to hold the inquiry as the judgment debtor is
not a person

**129**



contemplated by the provisions of section 241 as one entitled to prefer a
claim to property seized by the Fiscal.



Sections 227 to 240 of the Civil Procedure Code deal with the modes of seizure
and matters connected with seizure. The seizure of particular property is the
first overt act which would signify that a particular property would in due
course be sold to satisfy the judgment debt. Section 218 enacts that the
judgment-creditor has the power to "to seize, and to sell or realise in money
by the hands of the Fiscal ... all saleable property ... belonging to the
judgment-debtor, or over which or the profits of which or the profits of which
the judgment-debtor has a disposing power, which he may exercise for his own
benefit, and whether the same may be held by or in the name of the judgment-
debtor or by another person in trust for him or on his behalf." Thus it is
seen that it is necessary to safeguard the rights of a **third party** who
owns the property or claims an interest in the property seized. It is section
241 which sets out the procedure for a third party to prefer a claim to the
property and for the court to investigate such claim. As submitted by Mr.
Alagaratnam the words "in section 241 ... and the Court shall thereupon
proceed in a summary manner to investigate such claim or objection with the
like power as regards the examination of the claimant or objector, and in all
other respects, **as if he were a party to the action**...... are indicative
of the fact that the judgment-debtor is not a person contemplated by the
section. The powers of the court upon an investigation of a claim preferred in
terms of section 241 are set out in sections 244 and 245 of the Civil
Procedure Code; these provisions lend further support to the view that a
judgment-debtor is not entitled to have recourse to section 241. Mr.
Alagaratnam also referred us to the case of Karuppan Chetty v. Anthonayake
Hamine, wherein Bonser C.J, made the observation that the judgment-debtor is
not a necessary party to an inquiry under section 241.



On a consideration of the matters set out above, I hold that the judgment-
debtor is not a person who is entitled to prefer a claim to the property
seized under the provisions of section 241. of the Civil Procedure Code.
Consequently, the District Court of Avissawella had no jurisdiction to hold an
inquiry and order the release of the prop seized. It is the District Court of
Colombo which passed the decree

**130**



that has jurisdiction in this matter-vide sections 343 and 344 of the Civil
Procedure Code. The language of section 344 is i enough to include a claim by
the judgment-debtor that the property is exempt from seizure.



In the result, the judgment of the Court of Appeal is affirmed and the appeal
is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs. 750/-.



**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.



_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/15.html_  

