##  Karunadasa v. Wijesinghe - SLR - 358, Vol 1 of 1986 [1985] LKSC 1; (1986)
1 Sri LR 358 (10 December 1985)

**

358

KARUNADASA _  
v.  
_WIJESINGHE

**

SUPREME COURT.  
WANASUNDERA, J., RANASINGHE, AND L. H. DE. ALWIS, J.  
S.C. APPEAL 61/85.  
D.C. NEGOMBO 2750/L.  
NOVEMBER 14, 1985.

_

Appeals - S. 184, s. 754 and s. 765 of Civil Procedure Code as amended by Laws
Nos. 19 and 20 of 1977 - Orders and Judgments - Petition of Appeal
notwithstanding lapse of time - Provisos.

_

Where the question was whether the provisions of s. 765 of the Civil Procedure
Code as amended by Laws Nos. 19 and 20 of 1977 relating to the powers of the
Court of Appeal to admit and entertain Petitions of appeal notwithstanding
lapse of time apply only to appeals preferred in terms of subsection (1) of s.
754 (Judgments) of the said Code or whether they apply also to appeals
preferred in terms of the provisions of subsection (2) of s. 754 (Orders).

**359**

**

Held -

**

(1) Upon a reading of the provisions of both the main enactment of s.765
(Civil Procedure Code) and of the two provisos, in particular the second of
the provisos, together the intention of the Legislature was to grant the
relief, set out in the provisions of s. 765 of the Code, not only to
"judgments" falling within the provisions of s. 184 of the said Code but also
to "Judgments" and "Orders" as defined in subsection 5 of s. 754 of the said
Code.

(2) The general rule in regard to the construction of provisos is that they
are not to be taken absolutely in their strict literal sense but are of
necessity limited in their operation to the ambit of the section which they
qualify. If however the language makes it plain that they were intended to
have an operation more extensive than that of tile provision which they
immediately follow, they must be given that effect. If **** a proviso cannot
really be construed otherwise than as contradicting the main enactment then
the proviso will prevail on the principle that it speaks the last intention of
the maker.

**

Case referred to:

** _

Vithane v. Weerasinghe and Another [1981] 1 SLR 52.

_ **

APPEAL** from order of Court of Appeal.

_

Lalanath de Silva_ for plaintiff-respondent-appellant.

_

R.K.W. Goonesekera_ with _Ranjan Mendis_ for defendant- appellant- respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

December 10, 1985. **  
RANASINGHE, J.**

The question which arises for determination in this appeal is:

Whether the provisions of sec. 765 of the Civil Procedure Code (Chap. 101), as
amended by Laws Nos. 19 and 20 of 1977, (referred to hereinafter as "the
Code") relating to the powers of the Court of Appeal to admit and entertain
petitions of appeal notwithstanding lapse of time, apply only to appeals
preferred in terms of the provisions of subsection (1) of section 754 of the
said Code, or whether they apply also to appeals preferred in terms of the
provisions of subsection (2) of the said section 754.

**360**

The provisions of the said sec. 765 are as follows:

"It shall be competent to the Supreme Court to admit and entertain a petition
of appeal from a decree of any original court, although the provisions of
section 754 and 756 have not been observed:

Provided that the Supreme Court is satisfied that the petitioner was prevented
by causes not within his control from complying with those provisions ; and

Provided also that it appears to the Supreme Court that the petitioner has a
good ground of appeal, and that nothing has occurred since the date when the
decree or order which is appealed from was passed to render it inequitable to
the judgment-creditor that the decree or order appealed from should be
disturbed"

The main submission made in support of the contention that the provisions of
sec. 765 cannot be called in aid of appeals filed under the provisions of sub-
sec (2) of sec. 754 is that the provisions of sec. 765 speak only of a
petition of appeal from "a decree" of an original court. The references made
in the 2nd proviso of sec. 765 and in section 766 to a "judgment creditor",
the requirement, as set out in sec, 767, that applications made under sec. 765
be upon summary procedure, are relied upon as __ circumstances indicative of
the intention of the legislature to confine the relief contemplated by sec.
765 only to petitions of appeal from decrees of original courts. It has also
been contended that the provisos cannot control the provisions of the main
enactment.

The relief given by the main enactment-sec. 765 - which deals with appeals
notwithstanding lapse of time, is extended to the petitions of appeal referred
to therein because of their failure to observe the provisions of secs. 754 and
756.

**361**

Secs. 754 and 756 both appear in Chapter 58 which deals with both Appeals and
Revisions. Sec. 754 sets out the mode of preferring an appeal. Whilst in
subsection (1) the said section 754 provides for an appeal from a "judgment"
pronounced by an original court, it provides, in subsection (2), for appeals
from "orders" made by original courts. Subsection (4) refers to both decrees
and "orders". Subsection (5) defines, for the purposes of the said chapter,
the terms "judgment" and "order". sec. 756 sets out the procedure in respect
of appeals and applications for leave to appeal. Whilst subsec. (1) of sec 756
relates to a petition of appeal, all the subsequent subsections, (2) to (7),
deal with an application for leave to appeal against an order of a District
Court. The provisions of secs. 754 and 756 deal not only with appeals filed as
of right against a "judgment" of a District Court, but also with applications
for leave to appeal against an "order" made by a District Court.

The term "decree" has been defined in sec. 5 of the Code; and, in accordance
with such definition, the decree of a District Court would be the formal
expression of an adjudication by such court upon any right claimed or defence
set up in such court when such adjudication decides, as far as such court is
concerned, the action in such court. Sec. 188 of the Code requires a formal
decree, either in Form 41 of the First Schedule or to the like effect, to be
drawn up as soon as may be after a judgment is pronounced specifying in
precise words the order which is made out by the said judgment. The word
"judgment" appearing in this Chapter XX will only have the meaning set out in
the interpretation section 5. It will not attract to itself the special
meaning assigned to it by sub-paragraph (5) of sec. 754, which said meaning,
as already stated, is so given only for the purposes of the chapter (viz.
Chapter LVIII) in which sections 754 and 756 both appear. Hence a decree will
relate only to a judgment, as defined in sec. 5. An "order having the effect
of a final judgment", included in the definition of a "judgment" set out in
sub-section (5) of sec. 754, will not, therefore, be covered by a decree.

The reference in sec. 765 to not only a decree, but also to sections 754 and
756, both of which relate not only to judgment but also to orders as defined
in that chapter, raises a question as to the reach and scope of the said
section-whether only judgments, as defined in sec. 5, are intended, or whether
relief was intended to be given also to appeals against "orders" which are
also referred to in both sections 754 and 756.

**362**

It has been contended that relief, in the form of permitting an appeal
notwithstanding the fact that it is out of time, has not been extended to
Orders, which have to be appealed against only with the leave of the Court of
Appeal, because there would **** still be another opportunity of raising any
grievances against such Orders ; namely, at the stage of an appeal against the
judgment, to be pronounced in the case in terms of sec. 184 of the Code. Even
if that be so in regard to such Orders made before judgment, yet such an
opportunity would not be available to such Orders as are often made after the
judgment is pronounced. Furthermore, such an opportunity will also not be
available to orders "having the effect of a final judgment" as such orders,
whether made before or after the judgment in the case is pronounced, do not
have the benefit of a decree set out in sec. 188 of the Code.

The provisions of the aforesaid sec. 765 of the Code, as amended and revived
by Laws Nos. 19 and 20 of 1977, and the provisions of the corresponding
section, also numbered 765, in the Civil Procedure Code, as it stood prior to
its repeal, in 1976, by the provisions of Law No. 25 of 1975 (which said Code
will be referred to as "the earlier Code"), are identical.

The procedure for the institution of appeals from the District Court set out
in the earlier Code was also contained in sections 754 and 756 of the said
earlier Code. The requirement that an appeal should be initiated by the
tendering of a notice of appeal within 14 days and that a petition of appeal
should thereafter be filed within a period of sixty days from the date of the
judgment appealed against was not known to the said earlier Code. What was
then required was the filing of a petition of appeal within a period of 14
days, the perfection thereafter, also within a specified time, of __ the
security for the costs of appeal of the respondents, and the issuance of,
after the acceptance of such security, notice of appeal, along with a copy of
the petition of appeal, on the respondents. Even though two forms of appeal -
one as of right and the other with leave of the appellate court - were also
unknown to the earlier Code, yet, two categories of appeals, known as Final
and Interlocutory Appeals, were recognized and available under the earlier
Code too. The procedure to be followed to lodge and perfect appeals failing
into each of the two categories was one and the same - the procedure laid down
by sections 754 to 756 of the said earlier Code. Under the said earlier Code
the relief set out in section **** 765 thereof was available to such
Interlocutory appeals also.

**363**

The procedures set out in regard to appeals under the earlier Code and the
Code now in force were compared and contrasted in the case of _Vithane v.
Weerasinghe and Another_ where the Supreme Court considered the question
whether the relief set out in sec. 765 of the Code could be available where
the petition of appeal, which had to be presented within sixty days from the
date of the judgment or decree appealed against, had been filed one day late.
Wanasundera, J., writing the judgment of the Court, took the view: that the
process of appealing now set out in the Code involves, as was the position
under the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 73, "two stages" : that the
time limits set out in sections 754 and 756 of the Code are in respect firstly
of the lodging of an appeal by giving notice of appeal and secondly of the
filing of an application for leave to appeal : that the case under
consideration was an instance of the "second stage" in the appellate
procedure: that the provisions of sec. 765 are limited to the "first stage":
that, although sec. 755(2) of the Code also contains a time limit, there is no
reference to that section in sec. 765: that, therefore, no relief by way of
sec. 765 could be granted.

Sec. 765 also contains two provisos, the second of which sets out the subject-
matter, in respect of which the relief intended to be granted by the main
enacting provision is to apply, as being appeals not only from decrees but
also from "orders". The contents of the proviso leave no room for doubt that
the relief so set out could be invoked in respect of appeals both from decrees
entered, and orders made by the District Court. How far this proviso could
influence the construction of the provisions of the main enactment is the
question which would now arise for consideration.

The general rule in regard to the construction of provisos is that they are
not to be taken "absolutely in their strict literal sense :" a proviso "is of
necessity ........... limited in its operation to the ambit of the section
which it qualifies": that if, however, the language makes it plain that it was
intended to have an operation more extensive than that of the provision which
it immediately follows it must be given such wider effect : that if a proviso
cannot really be construed otherwise

**364**

than as contradicting the main enactment, then the proviso will prevail, on
the principle that "it speaks the last intention of the makers" -
(Maxwell-12th Ed.-pp. 189-191) : "the terms of an intelligible proviso may
throw considerable light on the ambiguous import of the statutory words" : a
proviso may be a useful guide in the selection of one or other of two possible
constructions of words in the enactment or to show the scope of the latter in
a doubtful case (Craies - 7th Ed. - p. 218) : that, if the main provision is
not clear, the proviso cannot be deemed to be a surplusage and can be properly
looked into for ascertaining the meaning and the scope of the main provision,
and, if the language is susceptible to the interpretation which is consistent
with the proviso, the latter may be called in aid: that the proviso must be
construed harmoniously with the main enactment - (Bindra - 6th Ed. -pp.
65-68).

Upon a reading of the provisions of both the main enactment of sec. 765 and of
the two provisos, in particular the second of the two provisos, together on
the basis of the principles referred to above, it seems to me that the
intention of the Legislature was to grant the relief, set out in the
provisions of sec. 765 of the said Code, not only to a judgment falling within
the provision of sec. 184 of the said Code, but also to both "Judgments" and
"Orders" as defined in sub-sec. (5)of sec. 754 of the said Code.

It also seems to me that, in construing provisions dealing with the right of
appeal, ** _**_ a court ought to place such a broad construction as would
operate to preserve to a party aggrieved such a right.

For these reasons, the Order of the Court of Appeal, dated 28.9.84, is
affirmed; and the appeal of the plaintiff-respondent-appellant is dismissed.
Costs of this appeal are to abide the final decision; but the plaintiff-
respondent-appellant will not be entitled to the costs of this appeal to this
Court in any event.

**

WANASUNDERA, J.** \- I agree.

**L. H. DE ALWIS, J.** \- I agree. _  
  
Appeal dismissed.

Order Of Court of Appeal affirmed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1985/1.html_  

