##  Kurukkal v. Kurukkal - SLR - 562, Vol 2 of 1982 [1982] LKSC 15; (1982) 2
Sri LR 562 (8 July 1982)

#  562

##  KURUKKAL

**v.**

## KURUKKAL

SUPREME COURT

SAMARAKOON, C. J., WANASUNDERA, J., AND SOZA, J.

S.C.74/81; C.A. (LA) 16/81; C.A. (APPEAL No. 23/78); D.C. MALLAKAM

No. 3968\.

JULY 8, 1982.

**  **

_     Trust ‑ Scheme of Management of Kovil ‑ Regulation by Court ‑ Sections
101, and 102 of Trusts Ordinance ‑ Sections 217, 334 of Civil Procedure
Code._



**563**



Action No. 3968 D.C. Jaffna was instituted for settling disputes between two
parties for the management rights of Kolankalady Veerakathy Pillayar Kovil at
Maviddapuram. On 10.3.55 the District Judge approved a scheme of management
which was filed by the partner. But this order was not a formal decree.



Somewhere in 1977 disputes regarding management arose again and the appellant
filed two petitions in the District Court. The District Judge dismissed the
first application on the ground that a separate action should have been filed
f6r the reliefs claimed there but allowed the second on the grounds that it
only sought to enforce rights under a scheme of management as these could be
effected under Section 344 of Civil Procedure Code.



On Appeal to the Court of Appeal the appeal was allowed dismissing the
application. The Court of Appeal granted leave to appeal to the Supreme Court.
.The ground was whether the second application of 25.2.78 could be maintained
under Section 101(2) or Section 102 of the Trusts Ordinance or whether a fresh
action should have been instituted.



# Held ‑



(1)        Under Section 101(2) of Trusts Ordinance a trustee was entitled to
sue either by regular action or by Way of summary procedure or petition and
affidavit or by petition only or by affidavit only.



(2)        The Court had power under Section 101 to make any order that it may
deem equitable for the regulation of the succession of trustees by changing
the mode of succession.



(3)        That even though there was no formal decree in Case No. 3968 D.C.
Jaffna, what was passed was an order in terms of Section 217 of the Civil
Procedure Code and for the execution of such order any of the provisions of
Chapter XXII was available.



**Case referred to:**



(1) _Karthigesu Ambalavanar v. Subramaniam Kathiravelu (1924) 27 NLR 15, 21._



#### **APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal



_K. Thevarajah_ with _S. Navaratnam_ for respondent‑appellant.

_  
V. Arulambalam_ with _S.A. Parathalingam_ for appellant‑respondent.



July 26, 1982.



**SAMARAKOON, C. J.**



This dispute relates to the management of Kollankaladdy Veerakathy Pillayar
Kovil at Maviddapuram which is a charitable Trust. The history of this matter
is briefly as follows: On the 30th October, 1947, one Ambalavanar Thesigar
Ponniah Thesigar instituted action No. 3968 in the District Court of Jaffna
for a declaration that he is the hereditary manager, Trustee and, Chief Priest
of the Temple, and that he is entitled to the offerings made during the High
Festivals.



# 564



He prayed that he be "placed in possession of the income and office" of the
Temple. The 1st to 6th defendants (the 1st defendant being the respondent‑
appellant in this appeal hereinafter referred to as the appellant) filed
answer stating that their father Vaithilingam, who was a brother of the
plaintiff, owned a 1/2 share of the pooja rights. They therefore claimed these
1/2 shares and damages for being kept out of the benefit of the offerings.
After trial the District Judge held that the plaintiff was entitled to a 1/2
share of the management rights and to a half share of the pooja rights and the
defendants were entitled to the other half share of the management and pooja
rights that Vythilingam would have been entitled to. He also awarded damages
to the defendants. In answer to issue 9, raised at the trial, he stated that a
scheme of management was necessary for the temple. He added "as regards the
scheme of management let this ‑case be called in Court as early as possible,
but after the appealable period is over, and if, there is no appeal, let the
parties move Court to have a proper scheme of management regarding the temple
drawn up and approved by Court to be adhered to by the parties". No formal
decree has been entered of record. The plaintiff filed an appeal which was
dismissed by the Supreme Court. A scheme of management was thereafter filed
and it was approved by Court on 10th March, 1955. The plaintiff died in 1959
leaving a son Ambalavanar Thesiger and 2 daughters. Ambalavanar Thesiger died
on 2.12.1976 leaving no issue. Until his death the scheme of management
appears to have been followed without dispute. But for his death he would have
entered into the management of the temple commencing 14.4 .1977. Shortly after
his death disputes seem to have arisen regarding rights of management. On
2.8.1977 the appellant‑respondent (hereinafter referred to as respondent)
obtained an injunction from the High Court valid for a period of 6 months to
enable him to vindicate his rights in an action. The appellant moved the
Supreme Court in revision but when the application came up for hearing on
2.2.78 no order was made as the period of 6 months had elapsed.



Thereafter the appellant has filed two petitions in the same case. The first
petition was filed on 17.2.78 together with an affidavit. The caption stated
that it was an application under the provisions of section 101(2) of the Trust
Ordinance (Cap.87). In it he claimed to be the sole Trustee and Manager of the
temple after the death of Ambalavaner Thesiger. Accordingly lie prayed for an
amendment of the scheme of management, for an injunction, and for damages. The
respondent filed objections to this application on 10.4.78. The second



**565**

**  **

petition was filed together with an affidavit on 2.5.78 claiming that he was
entitled to the pooja rights from 14.4.78 in terms of clauses 5 and 6 of the
scheme of management. Objections were filed by the, respondent on 25.5.78.
Both applications were taken up for hearing together by the District Judge of
Mallakam. He dismissed the first application as he was of the view that a
separate action should have been filed for the reliefs claimed therein. He
allowed the second application on the ground that it only sought to enforce
the rights ensured by the scheme of management which could be effected in
terms of the provisions of section 344 of the Civil Procedure Code.
Accordingly he ordered that the appellant be placed in possession of the
temple so that he may enjoy the rights of management and pooja for 1 year from
the date of his order. He also restrained the respondent from disturbing these
rights. The respondent appealed to the Court of Appeal, and the Court of
Appeal allowed the appeal and dismissed the appellant's application.



The Court of Appeal has granted leave to appeal on the following questions of
law:



1.         Whether upon the facts set out in the judgment of this court dated 6.3.1981 the decree entered in case No.3968 of the District Court of Mallakam can be construed to embody the scheme of management approved by the District Court on 19.3.1955.



2.         Whether the 2nd application dated 2.5.1978 made by the respondent (Vaithilingam Kumarasamy Kurukkal) in the District Court Case can in law be maintained under Sec. 101(2) or Sec.102 of the Trusts Ordinance Chapter 87, Vol.III, L.E.C.) or whether the respondent should have instituted a fresh action for a proper adjudication of the matters involved in that application."



The first point of law refers to a decree entered, in the case. There is no
such decree in the record. The provisions of Sec. 344 of the Civil Procedure
Code, do not therefore apply. Counsel for the appellant stated that he is not
making any submissions on this point of law and therefore this Court is not
required to answer the question.



The second question raises the query as to whether the second application of
2.5.78 can "in law be maintained under Sec. 101(2) or Sec. 102 of the Trust
Ordinance Chapter 87", or whether a fresh action should have been instituted.
The Court of Appeal was of Opinion that this action No. 3968 was not one filed
under Sec. 102



# 566



of the Trust Ordinance. The court of Appeal was right in its conclusion. It is
neither one under Sec. 102 nor one under Sec. 101(1) of the Trust Ordinance.
It is a regular action filed in terms of the Civil Procedure Code to obtain a
declaration of status as Trustee and for consequential remedies. But in that
same action a scheme of management has been approved and imposed upon this
temple. That was in pursuance of an answer to issue 9 which has been affirmed
by the Supreme Court. That scheme was followed until these disputes started.
We do not need to, and indeed we cannot, now question the propriety of that
scheme or even research into its legal validity. I might however state that if
I was dispose to delve into it I would most probably come to the conclusion
that it was legally and validly imposed for reasons that will presently
manifest themselves. I however do not need to decide this question and I
proceed on the basis that the scheme of management exist in law and its legal
validity cannot now be questioned for the purpose of this decision.



This application purports to be one made under the provisions of Sec. 101(2)
of the Trust Ordinance which reads as follows:



"101(2) Nothing contained in this or the next succeeding section shall be
deemed to preclude the trustee or author of any charitable trust from applying
to the court by action or otherwise for such direction or relief as he may be
entitled to obtain under the general provisions of this Ordinance, or for the
purpose of invoking the assistance of the court for the better securing of the
objects of the, trust, or for regulating is administration or the succession
to the trusteeship, and upon any such application the court may make such
order as it ma deem equitable."



The ingredients of this subsection are as follows:



1.         The application may be made by the Trustee or Author of the Trust. 



2.         The application may be by means of action or _otherwise_ (the emphasis is mine).



3.         The object of such application is ‑



(a)        to obtain such direction or relief as he may be entitle to obtain
under the general provisions of this Ordinance, or



(b)        for the purpose of invoking the assistance of the Court for better
securing the object of the Trust, or



**567**

**  **

(c)        for regulating its administration or the succession to the
Trusteeship.



4.         Upon any such application the Court is empowered to make such _Order as it may deem equitable_ (the emphasis is mine).



Sec. 101(1) deals with all kinds of charitable trusts and empowers persons
having an interest in the Trust to institute an action in Court with the prior
permission of the Attorney‑General. Section 102 deals with religious  Trusts
and empowers two persons interested in the Trust to institute an action in
Court provided they first obtain the necessary certificate from the Government
Agent in terms of Sec. 102(3). But for these provisions the two categories of
persons mentioned in these sections would not have the legal status and right
to institute such actions. Furthermore they have no right or power to
institute actions as and when they please. They must first obtain the approval
of the Government Officers mentioned. The action referred to in .Sec. 101(2)
has no such fetters because the Trustee has a legal right and status to bring
an action. Fetters that are binding under Sec. 101(1) and Sec.102 do not bind
a Trustee for the simple reason that his is a legal right arising from his
status as Trustee of a Charitable Trust. His legal personality is recognised
in law. This is an action available "to any Trustee". per Bertram, C.J.
_Karthigasu Ambalavanar vs. Subramaniar Kathiravelu_ (1).



The next matter to be considered is the form of the action. This action was
originated by petition and affidavit. The section permits a Trustee to apply
to a Court "by action or otherwise". There are therefore many options open to
a Trustee. He can bring an "action". Thus he can institute an action adopting
either "regular" , procedure or "summary" procedure. (Sec.7 Civil. Procedure
Code). If he adopts the former he must file plaint and conform to the
provisions of Chapters III to VII of the Civil Procedure Code and summons will
issue under. Chapter VIII. If he adopts the latter course, he must file a
petition and affidavit and conform to the same provisions, but the order that
would be made would be either an order nisi in terms of Sec.377(a) Civil
Procedure Code or an interlocutory order in terms of Sec.377(b) Civil
Procedure Code. These are procedures available to an ordinary litigant. But
the Trustee referred to in Sec 101(2) is in a more advantageous position., He
has the liberty of adopting Other modes known to the law. He can thus
institute proceedings by petition or by affidavit alone or by petition and
affidavit without resorting to summary procedure or by mere application. These
would



#  568



all be covered by the word "otherwise" in the subsection and still be an
action within the meaning of Sec. of the Civil Procedure Code. The Appellant
has resorted to a petition and affidavit and has not asked for any order in
terms of Sec.377 Civil Procedure Code in the first instance. The Court has
issued notice and the Respondent has filed objections. In view of the special
privilege granted to Trustees by this section I hold that the action has been
properly constituted and heard to a conclusion by the District Judge.



The last matter to be considered is whether the dispute is one that is
contemplated by the provisions of this section. I have mentioned' earlier that
one of the ingredients of this section is the right to ask for "such direction
or relief for the purpose of regulating.........the

succession to the Trusteeship". The District Judge was called on in this
action to decide a dispute between two claimants to a Trusteeship where one of
them asked _inter alia_ for an order altering the succession set out in the
scheme of management. The Court was thereby asked to regulate the succession
by changing the mode of succession. This" the Court could do under subsection
101(2).



In the course of the argument Counsel for the Respondent contended that the
Appellant should have instituted a separate action for the reliefs claimed and
that he had no right to intervene in this action (No.3968) as this was not a
Trust Action. In the alternative he stated, that if the Appellant had the
right to intervene in this action he should first have substituted parties for
the deceased parties. As I have already stated this action which commenced as
a private dispute ended as a Trust Case with the Court entering of record
scheme of management, and if any alteration or change is to b made to such
scheme, it must be in the case in which that scheme was made and exists. As
for substituting parties. I need only say the, this scheme of management was
for the temple and its management and not for particular parties. It endures
until the temple exists, if not revoked earlier. Trustees who take office in
the future do so in terms of such scheme and therefore they have every right
to ask for further orders in the same case in respect of the same scheme is
not correct to look at this case in the light of a dispute between, private
parties. It concerns a temple and its temporalities which a Charitable Trust.
The District Court is the guardian of and in control of all Charitable Trusts
and for exercising its functions, the section gives the Court the power to
make any order it deems equitable. It can make any order that is fair and just
in the circumstances. The power is set out in the widest possible manner,

**  **

**569**



The object of this section is to ensure speedy action and thereby to ensure
the proper administration of a Charitable Trust. It was also contended that no
decree capable of execution can be entered in such a case. It is correct that
a formal decree known to the Civil Procedure Code is not entered of record but
this is an "order" within the meaning of Sec.217 of the Civil Procedure Code
and such of the provisions of Chapter XII of that Code as are applicable to
such orders can be utilised. For the above reasons I would set aside the order
of the Court of Appeal. There is however another matter to be considered. The
Appellant has been kept out of his rights these many years and an equitable
order is required in recompense. The District Judge is therefore directed to
cause the Appellant to be placed in possession of the temple and the pooja
rights. The Appellant will then be entitled to continue as such Managing
Trustee for a period of 3 years from the date he is so placed in possession.
The period of 1 year granted to Trustees in rotation under the scheme of
management will commence after the expiration of the said period of 3 years.



The Appellant will be entitled to costs of appeal in this Court and the Court
of Appeal and also to the costs of proceedings in the District Court.



**WANASUNDERA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**SOZA, J**. ‑ I agree.



Appeal allowed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/15.html_  

