##  Punchihewa v. Abeywardena - SLR - 67, Vol 1 of 1999 [1998] LKSC 1; (1999)
1 Sri LR 67 (13 July 1998)

**67**

**PUNCHIHEWA  
v.  
ABEYWARDENA**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 152/97  
C.A. NO. 216/87 (F)  
D.C. COLOMBO NO. 14126/L  
JUNE 12, 1998  
JULY 13, 1998

_Vindicatory suit - Abatement of previous action on the same cause without
notice to plaintiff - Plea of res judicata - Sustainability of the plea._

The original plaintiff filed an action in 1980 against the original defendant
seeking a declaration of title to the land in dispute, for ejectment and
damages. The defendant pleaded that the plaintiff could not have maintained
the action in as much as the order of abatement dated 9. 1. 76 entered in case
No. 296 ED in the Magistrate's Court of Colombo instituted under the
Administration of Justice Law between the same parties and on the same cause
of action operated as res judicata.

**Held:**

The purported order of abatement entered in case No. 296 ED had been made by
Court ex more motu without any notice to the plaintiff or his registered
Attorney on record. As such that order is a nullity and the plea of res
judicata fails.

**Cases referred to:**

1. _Fernando v. Peiris_ (1897) 3 NLR 77.  
_  
_2. _Cave & Co. v. Erskine _(1902) 6 NLR 338.  
_  
_3. _Allahakoon v. Wickramasinghe_ (1908) Appeal Court Reports 8. _  
  
_4. _Lorensu Appuhamy v. Paaris_ (1908) 11 NLR 202. _  
_

5. _Suppramaniam v. Symons_ (1915) 18 NLR 229.  
_  
_6. _Muttucumarasmy v. Sathasivam_ (1951) 53 NLR 97. _  
  
_7. _Bank of Ceylon v. Liverpool Marine & General Insurance Co., Ltd. _(1962)
66 NLR 472.  
_  
_8. _Nagappan v. Lankabarana Estate Ltd._ (1971) 75 NLR 488.

**68**

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_Faiz Musthapha PC_ for appellant.

_Bimal Rajapakse_ with _Ms. Damayanthi de Silva_ for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

July 30, 1998.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J.**

The original plaintiff filed this action on 22nd January, 1980, against the
original defendant, seeking a declaration of title for the land called lot CG
in Plan No. 4082 made by H. W. Fernando, Licensed Surveyor, bearing assessment
No. 4/40, Polhengoda Road, Colombo, in extent 10.02 perches and for damages.
If I may give some more particulars of the plaint at this stage, no value of
the land was mentioned although a declaration of title was asked for; the
quantum of damages mentioned was Rs. 38,000; and the action was valued at Rs.
38,000. The original defendant, resisted the action inter alia on the basis
that the original plaintiff could not have had and maintained the action,
inasmuch as the order of abatement entered in case No. 296 ED in the
Magistrate's Court of Colombo, between the same parties, and on the same cause
of action, operated as res judicata.

The learned District Judge held against the defendant on the plea of res
judicata on the basis that the action filed in the Magistrate's Court was a
nullity, as the Magistrate's Court had no jurisdiction to hear that case and
that "that Court had jurisdiction only if the value of the land was below Rs.
1,500". The Court of Appeal affirmed that judgment for a different reason; it
held that in the earlier action "presumably" no relief had been sought for
declaration of title and ejectment, but only for damages in a sum of Rs. 300
and therefore the plea failed. The only matter for determination before us in
this appeal is whether the plea of res judicata should have been upheld.

I shall now turn to the previous case No. 296 ED. The plaint in that case
dated 28. 2. 75, was filed in the Magistrate's Court of

69

Colombo on 5th March 1975. At that time the Administration of Justice Law
(AJL) No. 44 of 1973 was fully in operation, section 52 of that law having
come into operation on 15. 11. 73 by virtue of the order published in the
Gazette No. 85/7 of 16. 11. 73, and other sections of the law having come into
operation on 1. 1. 74 by virtue of the order published in the Gazette No.
94/11 of 28. 12\. 73. By section 30 of that law, the Magistrate's court was
granted exclusive original jurisdiction to hear and determine all actions,
proceedings or matters in which the debt, damage, demand or claim, or the
value of the movable or immovable property or the particular share, right or
interest in dispute or the land to be partitioned or sold does not exceed one
thousand five hundred rupees. No new civil procedure was introduced by that
law. Therefore when the plaint was filed in the case No. 296 ED in the
Magistrate's court, it had to conform to requisites specified in the Civil
Procedure Code.

It was in those circumstances that a plaint in the nature of a regular action
(as opposed to summary) was filed. Para 2 of that plaint averred how the
plaintiff became the owner of the property. The schedule to the plaint
described the land in the identical manner in which it was described in the
present action. No value of the land was mentioned like in the present action
too. The prayer to the plaint in para (a) specifically asked for that the
plaintiff be declared owner of the land; para (b) for the ejectment of the
defendant, his servants and those holding under her; and para (c) for damages
at the rate of Rs. 100 from 5. 12. 74 until the defendant was ejected. Thus it
is quite manifest that the cause of action impleaded in each case is
identical.

According to the Journal Entry of that case dated 21. 11. 75, summons had been
served on the defendant; her attorney filed a proxy on her behalf and the
court fixed 9. 1. 76 as the date to file her answer. Meanwhlile, the AJL
(Amendment) Law No. 25 of 1975 was passed, the date of operation of which by
Gazette No. 129/5 dated 29. 12. 75 was fixed as 1. 1. 76. By this law the
Civil Procedure Code was repealed and in terms of section 363 (2) of that law
"every action instituted in the Magistrate's court shall commence and proceed
by way of summary procedure".

70

The Journal Entry of 9. 1. 76 reads that: "The plaintiffs attorney-at-law was
informed that he should take necessary steps in terms of sections 673 and 564
of the AJL 25/74". Section 673 is a reference to the necessity for the pending
cases to conform to the new procedure laid down in the AJL; and section 564 is
a reference to summary procedure. The next Journal Entry in case No. 296 ED is
undated according to the certified copy of that filed of record and that
states: "Although six months have elapsed after the last order was made, the
plaintiff has failed to take necessary steps; therefore I quash the case".

In Sinhala, the last part of that entry reads "naduwa ahosi karami". The
appropriate Sinhala terminology should have been "nadu kruthiya nathara
karami". Whatever the Sinhala words used in that connection were, I shall
proceed to determine this case, on the basis that the order made by the
Learned Magistrate in that case, purported to be one of "abatement" and that
order was referable of sections 575 and 576 (1) of the AJL (Amendment) Law No.
25 of 1975.

Those sections read as follows :

575 - If a period exceeding six months elapses after the date of the last
entry of an order or proceeding in the record without the plaintiff taking any
step to prosecute the action where any such step is necessary, the court may
pass an order that the action shall abate.

576 (1) - Where an action abates or is dismissed no fresh action shall be
brought on the same cause of action.

Sections 575 and 576 (1) of the AJL correspond to sections 402 and 403 of the
CPC respectively. Thus the consequences of entering orders of abatement are so
serious that courts should make such orders with extreme circumspection. There
is no doubt that Judges owe a duty to expeditiously dispose of matters pending
before them, but, equally they owe a duty not to lightly deprive parties of
their right to have access to courts without first giving them adequate prior
notice of such prospective deprivation. In the instant case the order of
abatement appears to have been made by court ex mero motu without any notice
to the plaintiff or his registered attorney on record.

71

If I may now turn to some of the reported decisions of the Supreme Court, it
was thought at one time, that the consequences of an order of abatement are so
serious, a court should never excercise the power to make an order of
abatement ex mero motu, but only upon an application made by the defendant
with due notice to the plaintiff. See _Fernando v. Peiris_ (1); _Cave & Co. v.
Erskine_(2) and _Allahakoon v. Wickramasinghe_ (3). The correctness of that
proposition was however doubted later (obiter) in _Lorensu Appuhamy v. Paaris_
(4). The reason for such doubt was the absence of any language in section 402
of the CPC itself, expressly or impliedly, imposing any such fetter on the
court. In _Suppramaniam v. Symons_ (5) it was held that although the court had
the power to made an order of abatement ex mero motu it was desirable that a
court, before making such order, should notice the parties, as far as it
conveniently can, to give them an opportunity of showing cause against the
order. This last decision was cited with approval in the two majority
judgments (Jayatileke, CJ. and Pulle, J.) in _Muttucumarasamy v. Sathasivam_
(6) in the case of _Bank of Ceylon v. Liverpool Marine & General Insurance
Co., Ltd_.(7) and in the case of _Nagappan v. Lankabarana Estates Ltd_.(8)

For the above reasons I hold that the purported order of abatement entered in
case No. 296 ED, without notice to the plaintiff, is a nullity and the plea of
res judicata fails. In view of the conclusion I have reached that the
purported order of abatement is a nullity, I need not consider the further
question whether the original plaintiff or the substituted plaintiff should
have, in terms of either section 576 (2) of the AJL or section 403 of the CPC,
moved the Magistrate's court within reasonable time to get the purported order
vacated. The Appeal is dismissed with costs of this court fixed at Rs. 5,000.
In view of the long time taken to conclude these proceedings, I make order
that writ of ejectment shall not be issued against the substituted defendant
till 31. 10. 98 and the plaintiff will be entitled to take out writ thereafter
without notice.

**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.  

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/1.html_  

