##  Gunaratne v. Abdul Gaffoor - SLR - 719, Vol 2 of 1982 [1982] LKSC 1;
(1982) 2 Sri LR 719 (4 November 1982)

#  719

**  GUNARATNE**

**v.**

**GAFFOOR**

SUPREME COURT

WEERARATNE, J., SHARVANANDA, J., WANASUNDERA, J.,

RATWATTE J., AND SOZA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 47/81 ‑ S.C. SPL. L/A NO. 33/81, C.A. NO.763/75 (F), D.C.
AVISSAWELLA 13736,

SEPTEMBER 23 AND OCTOBER 13, 1982.



    Lease of business ‑ Jurisdiction of Court of Appeal under 1978 Constitution to set aside judgment of Supreme Court under the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973. ‑ Civil Procedure Code, section 769 (2)



One Siyadoris Appuhamy was the tenant of No. 18, Yatiyantota Road, Avissawella
where he commenced a Hotel business in 1966. After running it for three or
four months he leased the business to one Rauff by Agreement dated 28.8.66.
The lease was to end on 17.10.71. The monthly payment to Siyadoris was



# 720



Rs. 77/40. In 1968 Siyadoris became an employee of Rauff and remained so till
Rauff gave up the business in 1971. After Rauff handed over the business,
Siyadoris entered into another lease with the defendant for one year from
7.1.72. On the expiration of one year the defendant refused to hand over
possession.



Siyadoris instituted action and the District Judge held in his favour on the
ground that what was leased was the business and not the premises.



The defendant gave notice of appeal under Section 318 of the Administration of
Justice Law (AJL). When the appeal came up for hearing on 26.7.78 the
appellant was absent and unrepresented. The Supreme Court established under
the AJL dismissed the appeal acting under Section 769 (2) of the Civil
Procedure Code.



On 12.7.79 defendant filed a motion for relisting, unsuccessfully. Another
motion was filed on 24.8.79 and the Court of Appeal in the absence of
objection listed the appeal. The Court of Appeal set aside the judgment of the
District Judge.



An application for special leave was made. One of the grounds was that the
Court of Appeal under the 1978 Constitution had no jurisdiction to set aside a
judgment of the Supreme Court established under the AJL.



# Held ‑



1\. The Court of Appeal had jurisdiction to set aside the judgment of the
Supreme Court and order relisting.  


2\. What was leased to the defendant respondent was the business and not the
premises.



**Cases referred to:**



(1) _Walker Sons and Co. (U. K.) Ltd. v. W.P. Gunatillake and others S.C. Ref.
1/1979; C.A. Application 365/76; S.C. Minutes of 28.11.1979_



(2) _M. Z. Salith v. Asgar Kadibhoy S. C. Appeal 34/80; S. C. Miunutes of
30.10.1980_



(3) _Pathirana v. de Silva (1978) 79 N.L.R. II 265_



(4) _Nisam v. Mustaffa (1981) 1 S.L.R. (S.C) 59_



(5) _Abeypala v. Abeykirthi (1981) 1 S.L.R. (S.C) 87_



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_J.W. Subasinghe, S.A._ with _W. P. Gunatilake_ and _D.J.C. Nilanduwa_ for
substituted plaintiff‑appellant.

_  _

_H. L. de Silva, S.A_. with _Miss P. Seneviratne_ and _Nirmal Fernando_ for
respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._



#  721



November 4, 1982.



**RATWATTE, J.**



The original plaintiff Siyadoris Appuhamy (referred to hereinafter as
Siyadoris Appuhamy) instituted this action on 31.08.1973 for the ejectment of
the defendant‑respondent (referred to hereinafter as the defendant) from the
business and business premises No. 18, Yatiyantota Road, Avissawella and for
the recovery of arrears of monthly payments as per the Lease Agreement
referred to in the Plaint till 7.1.1973 amounting to Rs.970/‑ and for damages.
Siyadoris Appuhamy averred that: _(a)_ He was the owner of the Hotel business,
its name, goodwill and the fittings therein, carried on under trade licences
issued by the Urban Council of Avissawella at premises No. 18, Yatiyantota
Road, Avissawella. _(b)_ He had by Lease Agreement No. 11399 dated 7.1.1972
attested by D. Ranawaka, Notary Public, produced marked P14, leased the said
business, its name, goodwill and the fittings and other articles referred to
in the schedule to P14, to the defendant for a period of one year commencing
from 7.1.1972 subject to the terms and conditions laid down in P14. _(c)_
Although the lease period specified in P14 expired on 7.1.1973 the defendant
in spite of Siyadoris Appuhamy's objections and in violation of the conditions
of P14 continued to carry on the said business. _(d)_ The defendant had not
paid the monthly payments in respect of the business according to P14 as from
April 1972.



Siyadoris further pleaded that he had on several occasions requested the
defendant to hand over the business to him but the defendant refused to do so.
Siyadoris Appuhamy accordingly averred that a cause of action had accrued to
him to sue the defendant for the reliefs claimed in paragraph 7 of the plaint.



The defendant in his answer denied that Siyadoris Appuhamy was the owner of
the hotel business and the articles therein referred to in the plaint. He
admitted the bare execution of the Lease Agreement P14, but pleaded that the
Agreement is void and of no avail in law as it was executed to circumvent the
Rent Acts. The defendant further pleaded that on an application made by him to
the Rent Board of Avissawella the Board issued a Certificate of Tenancy and
determined the authorised rent at Rs. 8/96 per month. The defendant claimed to
be the owner of the hotel business tarried on in the premises under the name
of Muslim Hotels. He also pleaded that he was the tenant of Siyadoris Appuhamy
and was entitled to the



#  722



protection of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972. The defendant made a claim in
reconvention for the sum of Rs.6,500/‑ which he stated was excess rents paid
to Siyadoris Appuhamy.



After trial the learned District Judge entered judgment in favour of Siyadoris
Appuhamy as follows: For the ejectment of the defendant, for the sum of Rs.
970/‑ as arrears of lease money till 7.1.1973 and for damages at Rs. 100/‑ per
month from 7.1.1973 till the business Siyadoris Appuhamy was also is restored
to Siyadoris Appuhamy awarded the costs of the action.



The defendant by notice dated 8.12.1975 gave notice of appeal against the
judgment in terms of Section 318 of the Administration of Justice Law No. 44
of 1973 (referred to hereinafter as the A.J.L.). The defendant did not lodge
written submissions as he was required to do under the provisions of Section
330 (1) of the A.J.L. In terms of Section 330 (3) if an appellant fails
without reasonable cause to lodge his written submissions within the
prescribed period "the appeal shall be deemed to have abated." But the Civil
Courts Procedure (Special Provisions) Law No. 19 of 1977 came into operation
on 15.12.1977. In terms of Section 3 of that Law, Chapter IV of the A.J.L.
which dealt with Appeals Procedure, was repealed, and in terms of Section 4
the Civil Procedure Code was deemed to have been in operation as if the same
had not been repealed and the said Code was to continue to be the law
governing procedure and practice in. all Civil Courts. The defendant's appeal
came up for hearing on 26.07.1978 before a Bench of three Judges of the
Supreme Court established under the A.J.L. On that date the defendant was
absent and unrepresented. The Court acting under Section .769 (2) of the Civil
Procedure Code, considered the appeal and made order dismissing the appeal
with costs. Thereafter the decree was entered and sealed and the record was
returned to the District Court. On 21.12.1978 Siyadoris Appuhamy died leaving
a Last Will appointing Jayasiri Gunaratne the present substituted plaintiff as
the sole heir and executor. On 12.07.1979 the Attorney‑at‑Law for the
defendant had filed a motion moving that the appeal be relisted. This motion
had been put up for an order to the President of the Court of Appeal who was
also the Judge who presided when the appeal was disposed of on 26.07.1978. He
made order refusing the application to relist the appeal. This order was
signed only by the President of the Court ­of Appeal as the other two judges
who heard the appeal, were no longer in office. Thereafter on 24.08.1979
another motion was filed



# 723

**  **

by Counsel for the defendant Mr. H.W. Jayewardene, Q.C., moving that the
Appeal be re‑listed for the reasons stated in the motion. On this motion,
order had been made by the Court of Appeal to call for the record from the
District Court. On that date the Court made Order substituting Jayasiri
Gunaratne in the room of the deceased plaintiff, Siyadoris Appuhamy. As
regards the motion filed by Mr. Jayewardene, Q.C., as the Counsel for the
substituted plaintiff objected to the re‑listing of the appeal. Order was made
to list the matter for argument in due course. On 10.10.1980 the matter was
taken up and Counsel for both the appellant and the respondent were present.
The Court made the following Order:



"As there is no objection to the re‑listing of this appeal, Court makes Order
allowing the application to re‑list. Let this appeal be listed for argument on
7.11.1980 which is a date convenient to both Counsel before any Bench."



The appeal ultimately was taken up for hearing on 2.3.1981. After hearing
arguments the Court of Appeal delivered its judgment on 30.3.1981 setting
aside the judgment of the learned District Judge and dismissing the plaintiffs
action with costs. The claim in reconvention of the defendant was also
dismissed. The substituted plaintiff's application for Leave to Appeal to the
Supreme Court was refused by the Court of Appeal. An application to this Court
for Special Leave to appeal was allowed.



One of the grounds of appeal urged by the substituted plaintiff is that the
judgment of the Court of Appeal is not a valid judgment as the Court of Appeal
constituted under the 1978 Constitution had no jurisdiction to set aside a
judgment of the Supreme Court established by the A.J.L. (Vide paragraphs 19
_(f)_ and _(g)_ of the Application for Special Leave to Appeal). When this
appeal was taken up for hearing on 23.09.1982 by this Court we heard both
Counsel for the substituted plaintiff and the defendant on the ground referred
to above. At the close of their argument s on that question we rejected the
said ground of appeal and informed Counsel for the substituted plaintiff that
we would hear arguments on the merits of the appeal. We also informed Counsel
that we would be giving our reasons for rejecting the said ground of appeal in
our final judgment.



I shall now give our reasons.



Learned Counsel for the substituted plaintiff, Mr. Subasinghe based his
argument chiefly on the provisions of Article 169 (5) of the 1978



#  724



Constitution which reads as follows:



"No appeal shall lie from any judgment, order or decree of the Supreme Court
established under the Administration of Justice Law No. 44 of 1973, to the
Supreme Court created and established under the Constitution but such
judgment, order or decree, as the case may be, shall be final as between the
parties to the action, application or other proceeding in which such judgment,
order or decree was made:



The proviso to paragraph (5) has no relevance to the question in issue. Mr.
Subasinghe submitted that in view of the imperative Constitutional provisions
of Article 169 (5) a judgment of the old Supreme Court is not amenable to any
further judicial proceedings and cannot therefore be set aside. He argued that
the Supreme Court established under the A.J.L. was at the apex of the judicial
structure at that time and that its judgments are binding on the Court of
Appeal established by the 1978 Constitution. He cited in support of his
arguments the case of _Walker Sons and Co. (U.K.) Ltd. vs. W.P. Gunatilleke
and others_ (1). That too was a reference made to the Supreme Court by the
Court of Appeal in terms of Article 125 (1) of the Constitution. The matter
was heard by a Divisional Bench of five Judges. The matter arose in this way:
There were two similar decisions of the Supreme Court constituted under the
A.J.L. dealing with the question at issue before the Court of Appeal in that
Application No. 365/76. The question arose whether the Court of Appeal was
bound by the two decisions of the old Supreme Court. The Court of Appeal
referred the question to the Supreme Court. The majority of the Court (four
Judges) decided that the, ratio decidendi of the two cases decided by the old
Supreme Court is binding on the Court of Appeal. Mr. Subasinghe's contention
therefore was that t he Court of Appeal had no jurisdiction to set aside the
judgment of the old Supreme Court dated 26.06.1978 and to order a relisting of
the Appeal. Accordingly he contended that the judgment of the Court of Appeal
dated 30.03.1981 is a nullity. I am of the view that the judgment in
_Walker's_ case (referred to above) has no application to the question at
issue before us in the instant case.



The application to re‑list the appeal was made on 24.08.1979. That application
was supported and allowed on 10.10.1980 and the provision of law under which
that was done is the proviso to Section 769 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code.
The 1978 Constitution came into operation on 07.09.1978. The question that
arises is when an application is made to the Court of Appeal subsequent to
07.09.1978 regarding



#  725

**  **

a judgment delivered by the old Supreme Court, is the Court of Appeal
competent to deal with it? Learned Counsel for the defendant, H.L. de Silva
contended that the answer is in the affirmative. He submitted that the Court
of Appeal derives its jurisdiction by reason of the second limb of article 169
(2) of the Constitution, which states that: "Unless otherwise provided in the
Constitution, every reference in any existing written law to the Supreme Court
shall be deemed to be a reference to the Court of Appeal." In view of this
provision therefore the reference to the Supreme Court' in the proviso to
Section 769 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code is deemed to be a reference to the
Court of Appeal. Then there are the provisions of paragraph 3 of Article 169,
which states that all appellate proceedings etc. pending in the Supreme Court
established under the A.J.L. on the day preceding the commencement of the
Constitution shall stand removed to the Court of Appeal and the Court of
Appeal shall have jurisdiction to take cognizance of and to hear and determine
the same. An appellate proceeding would ordinarily include a re‑listing
application. I am of the view that on a reading of paragraphs (2) and (3) of
Article 169 of the Constitution it is clear that the Court of Appeal had the
jurisdiction to vacate the judgment of the old Supreme Court dated 26.07.1978
and to order the re‑listing of the Appeal. This question arose earlier before
this Court in the case of _M.Z. Salith vs. Asgar Kadibhoy_ (2). In that case
judgment had been entered against the defendant by the District Court. The
defendant gave notice of appeal in terms of the provisions of the A.J.L. That
appeal came up for hearing before the then Supreme Court on 30.06.1978. The
defendant‑appellant was absent and unrepresented at the hearing and the appeal
was dismissed with costs. The decree had been entered and sealed and the
record sent back to the lower court, which issued writ of possession and writ
of execution. The writ was partly executed. Thereafter the defendant on
06.09.1978 filed an application under Section 769 (2) of the Civil Procedure
Code to have the appeal re‑instated. That application came up for hearing on
28.02.1979 after the promulgation of the 1978 Constitution. The Court of
Appeal by its Order of 15.03.1979 vacated the Order of the Supreme Court and
re‑instated the appeal. The appeal was subsequently taken up for hearing and
the Court of Appeal by its judgment dated 13.03.1980 allowed the defendant's
appeal and dismissed the plaintiffs action. The plaintiff appealed to the
Supreme Court. Wanasundera, J., in the course of his judgment with the other
two



#  726



judges agreeing stated as follows:



"At the hearing of the appeal before us, Counsel for the plaintiff‑appellant
submitted that the Court of Appeal had no jurisdiction in law to set aside the
judgment dated 30.06.1978 after decree was entered and sealed. In my view this
contention is not tenable. I agree with the judgment of the Court of Appeal
dated 15th March 1979 holding that the entering of a decree and sealing
thereof does not per se debar the Court from acting under section 769 (2) of
the Civil Procedure Code, and further that the provisions of Article 169 (5)
of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka do not
shut out the application. I hold that in the circumstances the Court of Appeal
was competent to entertain the application and was justified in vacating the
exparte judgment and decree dated 30th June 1978 and directing the
re‑instatement of the appeal. "



We are in agreement with the judgment of Wanasundera, J. For these reasons we
reject the argument that the Court of Appeal had no jurisdiction to set aside
the judgment of the old Supreme Court and to order a re‑listing of the appeal.



I shall now proceed to consider the appeal on its merits. The question that
arose for determination in this case was whether the Lease Agreement P14 was a
lease of a, business or whether it was only a blind to cover the letting of
the premises. Siyadoris Appuhamy's case was as follows: He had been the tenant
of promises No. 18, Yatiyantota Road, Avissawella from the year 1940 under the
owner Pedoris Appuhamy. He was running a boutique in the premises., In the
years 1961 and 1962 he renovated the premises and added a room to provide
additional space for his boutique. For this purpose he employed a mason called
Juwa who gave evidence in this case for the plaintiff. In 1966 he commenced a
hotel business in the premises and ran it for about 3 or 4 months and
thereafter he handed over the business to Mohamed Ismail Rauf. On 28.08.1966
he obtained from the Urban Council, Licence No. 5/66 which has been produced
marked P3 to run the hotel business. On the same day on the Informal Agreement
P4, he handed over the business to Mohamed Ismail Rauf who was to run the
business for one year. Rauf was to pay Siyadoris Appuhamy a sum of Rs. 77/50
per month from the profits of the Hotel. According to P4, Siyadoris Appuhamy
also gave over to Rauf the furniture and fittings of the Hotel, which are set
out in the Agreement. Thereafter Siyadoris Appuhamy obtained in



#  727



his name Hotel Licenses P6, P8, P12 and P13 for the years 1967, 1968, 1969,
1970, and 1971 respectively and in respect of those‑five years he entered into
the Lease Agreements P5, P7, P9 and P11. These Agreements were each for a
period of 1 year and were similar to the first Agreement P4. The last
Agreement P11 was to end on 17.10.1971. The defendant became an employee in
the hotel business under Rauf in February 1968 and continued as an employee
under Rauf till about the middle of 1971 when Rauf expressed a desire to give
up running the hotel business. Siyadoris Appuhamy then entered into the Lease
Agreement P14 with the defendant on 07.01.1972 and handed over the business to
the defendant along with the furniture and fittings, which are set out in the
Schedule to P14. The Hotel Licence P15 dated 05.05.1972 was obtained by
Siyadoris Appuhamy in his name. P14 was for a period of one year from
07.01.1982. On the expiry of that period of one year the defendant refused to
hand over the hotel business and premises to Siyadoris and continued to run
the hotel himself. The plaintiff therefore instituted this action on
31.08.1973.



In support of his case Siyadoris Appuhamy called as his witness Juwa the mason
and Rauf. He also called a Revenue Inspector from the Urban Council to produce
the Hotel Licenses referred to above.



The defendant did not give evidence in this case. He only called one witness,
an employee of his in the hotel business named Caliph. Caliph produced certain
documents. In April 1972 the defendant made the Application D2 to the Rent
Board, Avissawella in Proceedings No. 35/72 claiming that he was a sub‑tenant
of Siyadoris Appuhamy. He prayed for a Certificate of Tenancy and for a
determination of the authorized rent of the premises. The respondents to this
Application were the owner of the premises D.S.D. Wijesinghe and Siyadoris
Appuhamy. After inquiry the Rent Board made its Order on 25.05.1972. By its
order the Rent Board decided to issue a Certificate of Tenancy and determined
the authorized rent at Rs. 8/94 per month. Siyadoris Appuhamy appealed against
this Order to the Rent Board of Review, which by its Order dated 10.09.1974,
D4, dismissed Siydoris Appuhamy's appeal subject to the variation that the
determination of the Rent Board regarding the authorized rent was set aside
and the Board was directed to hear evidence on that point and thereafter give
the basis on which the authorized rent was computed. The defendant took up the
position at the trial that the Order of the Rent Board of Review, was final
and conclusive by virtue of Section 40 (11) of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972.



# 728



I think it is opportune at this stage to mention that both the District Court
and the Court of Appeal have considered this case on the basis that a
Certificate of Tenancy had been issued to the defendant. It transpired in the
course of the arguments before us that no such Certificate had been produced
in this case. The entirety of the proceedings before the Rent Board and the
Board of Review were produced at the trial. There is nothing in these
proceedings to indicate that a Certificate of Tenancy had in fact been issued.
According to the Order of the Rent Board, D6, only a decision had been made to
issue a Certificate.



The learned District Judge after considering the oral and documentary evidence
in this case and the judgments in two reported cases referred to in his
judgment, came to the conclusion that what was leased to the defendant was the
business of the Hotel only and not the premises. He also rejected the
contention of the defendant regarding the effect of the Order of the Rent
Board of Review.



As I have stated earlier the main question that arises for determination in
this case is whether the document P14 was a lease of a business or the letting
of a premises. There are several decided cases in our Law Reports regarding
this question. I need refer only to the three most recent cases on this
subject. They are _Pathirana v. de Silva_ (3), _Nisam vs. Mustaffa_ 4) and
_Abeypala v. Abeyakirthi_ (5). In all these three cases the facts were similar
to the facts of the instant case. Previous decisions of the Supreme Court were
considered in these three judgments. The ratio decidendi that emerges from a
consideration of these cases is that in order to determine this question one
has, as stated by Ismail, J. in _Abeypala vs. Abeyakirthi_ (5) at page 89:



"to examine the documents by which possession has beep handed over in order to
determine whether there has been a letting or sub‑letting of premises or
whether the lessee was merely permitted to occupy the premises as a licencee
for the sole purpose of carrying on the business until the business was handed
back to the lessor."



With these principles in view I shall now examine the document P14. The
document is in Sinhala. It bears the heading "Lease of Movable Property ‑ Rs.
1,100/‑". The operative part of it states that the hotel business carried on
under Licence No.52/71 (i.e.P13) belonging to Siyadoris Appuhamy at the
premises in question and its name, firm and goodwill and the movable effects
used for the conduct of the business as described in the schedule, are leased
as from 01.01. 1972



# 729



for a lease rent of Rs. 1,100/‑ for one year, subject to the terms and
conditions set out. There are 9 conditions. They are briefly as follows: the
lessee at his own expense had to repair the building in which the business was
being carried on during the first six months; the lessee had to pay Rs. 35/‑
per month as lease money during the first six months; during the latter six
months he had to pay Rs. 150/- ­per month; the lessee had to pay the
electricity bills and hand over the receipts to the lessor; the lessor was not
to be held responsible for any debts incurred in the conduct of the business;
the movable properties and effects described in the schedule had to be
carefully used by the lessee during the lease and handed over to the lessor at
the expiry of the lease term: the lessee had to re‑imburse the lessor for any
damages caused to such movable property; the lessee had to pay the fees in
respect of the Licence to the Urban Council and finally on the expiration of
the lease period the lessee had to hand over the business and the movable
effects to the lessor and vacate therefrom. There is no reference at all in
P14 to any letting or sub‑letting of premises. In my view this document
contains all the elements necessary for a lease of a hotel business. And for
the sole purpose of running the business Siyadoris Appuhamy had to give
possession of the premises to the defendant. The possession of the premises
was merely ancillary to the running of the business.



The oral and documentary evidence in this case is in my view almost one way.
There is the uncontradicted evidence of Siyadoris Appuhamy that he commenced
the hotel business in 1966, ran it for 3 or 4 months and gave it over to Rauf
in August 1966 on the Agreement P4 and that thereafter Rauf ran the business
up to about the middle of 1971 on annual agreements. Rauf has corroborated
Siyadoris Appuhamy on all these matters. All the hotel licences during this
period was obtained by Siyadoris Appuhamy in his name. Siyadoris Appuhamy's
evidence that the defendant was employed under Rauf from 1968 was also
supported by Rauf. The witness Juwa also supported Siyadoris Appuhamy. He
stated that the defendant was the tea maker in the Hotel under Rauf. The
defendant did not give evidence in the case and deny any of these matters. He
only called as a witness Caliph, an employee of his. Even he admitted that
Rauf at one time ran a business in these premises. Caliph in his evidence
stated that it ‑was he who introduced the defendant to Siyadoris Appuhamy in
1967 and obtained the lease of the business for the defendant. This was not
put to Siyadoris Appuhamy when he was cross‑examined. It was suggested by the
defence to Siyadoris



#  730





Appuhamy and Rauf that the five informal lease agreements in Rauf's name were
drawn up and signed on one day for the purpose of this case. This was denied
by both Siyadoris Appuhamy and Rauf. The learned District Judge has carefully
examined the relevant documents and rejected the allegation and he has given
convincing reasons for doing so.



The trial judge has closely considered Caliph's evidence and the documents
produced by him. He has come to the conclusion that Caliph's evidence does not
help the defendant. As regards the documents the learned Judge has held that
none of them support the defendant's case that he ran the hotel business.
prior to 1972 and or that he was really a sub‑tenant of the premises under
Siyadoris Appuhamy. So the position is that there is not a single document to
support the defendant's case.



The Court of Appeal in its Judgment had not given any reasons for setting
aside the findings of facts of the learned trial Judge. The Court of Appeal
has further misdirected itself on a number of points. It is stated in the
judgment that Siyadoris Appuhamy admitted that the defendant was carrying on
the business with Rauf and that in 1972 he gave the lease to the defendant.
There was no such admission by Siyadoris Appuhamy. The uncontradicted evidence
of Siyadoris Appuhamy which was supported by both Juwa and Rauf, was that the
defendant was employed in the Hotel under Rauf. The Court of Appeal further
states that it is clear from the evidence of Siyadoris Appuhamy that he did,
not run this business though he stated that he had done so for about 3 or 4
months. This finding is in the teeth­ of Siyadoris Appuhamy's uncontradicted
evidence. No reasons have been given for rejecting that evidence. Again it is
stated that according to Siyadoris Appuhamy's evidence the defendant had been
in occupation of the premises from the beginning of 1968. What Siyadoris
Appuhamy stated was that the defendant was employed by Rauf in the Hotel from
1968. The Court of Appeal has placed much importance in coming to this finding
on a statement made by Siyadoris Appuhamy in the affidavit D1 filed by him in
the proceedings before the Rent Board. In paragraph 4 of the affidavit
Siyadoris Appuhamy has stated that prior to the execution of P14 he had let
the business of the tea kiosk to the defendant and that lie has attached
marked R10 the Agreement dated 01.11.1969 by which he let the business to the
defendant. The so called Agreement R10 does not form part of the proceedings
of the Rent Board, which has been produced in this



# 731



case, nor has it been produced in the instant case. Subsequently when
Siyadoris Appuhamy gave evidence before the Rent Board he stated‑that in 1966
he gave the business to Rauf and that after Rauf gave up the business in 1972
he gave the business to defendant and further that prior to that the defendant
was an employee of the Hotel. That evidence is consistent with the evidence he
gave at the trial in this case. The Court of Appeal states that the so called
document R10 referred to in the affidavit D1 shows that P9, the Agreement with
Rauf dated 05.10.1969 and the Hotel Licence P10 dated 17.10.1970 were sham
documents, as the defendant had been in occupation from 1968. But this is not
so. The evidence which has been accepted by the learned Trial Judge is that
the defendant was an employee in the Hotel since 1968. The Court of Appeal has
finally come to the conclusion that "on an examination of the terms and
conditions in all these management agreements and the lease, they appear to be
documents to cover up an actual sub‑letting of "the premises." There is no
evidence to support this finding. As I stated earlier the defendant did not
give evidence. The Court of Appeal has not even referred to the fact that the
defendant did not give evidence and subject himself to cross‑examination. As
regards the Rent Board proceedings and the order of the Board of Review the
Court of Appeal went on the footing that a Certificate of Tenancy had been.
issued. The judgment states that in terms of Section 35 of the Rent Act, the
Certificate is prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein. As I have
stated earlier no Certificate of Tenancy has been produced ‑nor is there
anything to show that it had been issued. The Court of Appeal further goes on
to state that as Siyadoris Appuhamy took up before the Rent Board the
identical position that he had taken up in this case, i.e. that he let the
business and not the premises, the finding of the Board of Review D4 is final
and conclusive in regard to the matters in dispute. As there is no Certificate
of Tenancy I do not think that the order D4 can have that effect. Mr. H.L. de
Silva for the defendant conceded that in the absence of a Certificate of
Tenancy he is unable to claim for the defendant the benefit of. section 35 of
the Rent Act.



For these reasons I set aside the Judgment of the Court of Appeal and restore
the Judgment of the learned District Judge. The appeal is accordingly allowed
With costs. The substituted plaintiff is also entitled to his costs in the
Court of Appeal.



#  732



**WEERARATNE, J**. ‑ I agree,.

**  **

**SHARVANANDA, J.** \- I agree.

**  **

**WANASUNDERA, J**.  I agree.



**SOZA, J.** ‑ I agree.



Appeal allowed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/1.html_  

