##  Colgate Palmolive Company Vs Hemas (Drugs) Limited and Another - SLR -
309, Vol 1 of 2005 [2005] LKSC 1; (2005) 1 Sri LR 309 (9 February 2005)

**309**

**COLGATE PALMOLIVE COMPANY  
vs  
HEMAS (DRUGS) LIMITED AND ANOTHER**

  
SUPREME COURT,  
 S. N. SILVA, CJ,  
WEERASURIYA.J AND  
UDALAGAMA, J,  
S. C (CHC) APPEAL No. 6/98  
(H. C. CIVIL) CASE NO. 21/96(3),  
D. C. COLOMBO CASE NO. 4569/SPL  
25TH OCTOBER, 2004  
  
_Civil Procedure - Refusal of postponement of trial - Code of Intellectual
Property Act - Action for nullity of registration of trade mark -
Circumstances justifying postponement of trial._  
  
In the above action which was filed by the plaintiff-appellant on 29.09.1997,
the trial was fixed for 10th, 11th and 12th of December, 1997 before the High
Court in terms of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act,
No. 10 of 1996.  
  
On 5th December 1997 a motion was filed applying for a postponement of the
trial due to concerns expressed by 5th witness, a foreigner that he was unable
to attend court due to the security situation in the country in view of a bomb
blast which had occurred on 15.10.1997. The 5th witness has so informed the
registered attorney-at-law. There was no affidavit filed in the matter. In all
there were 20 witnesses. The High Court Judge refused the postponement with
liberty to the plaintiff to call the other witnesses.  
  
Later on in an affifavit dated 29.01.98, the 5th witness stated that he had no
invitation to attend the trial on the date fixed or at any other time. It was
not claimed that the witness was ill.  
  
**Held:**

> 1\. There was no defect of law or fact in the order of the High Court Judge.
> The judge has exercised his discretion according to law and justice of the
> case.  
>  
>  2\. The plaintiff's appeal was without merit.

**310**

**Cases referred to :  
**  
1. _Meiyappan Thevar v Arumugam Chettiar and Others_ 57 CLW 69  
  
2\. _Weerakoon v Hewa Mailika_ (1978-79) 2 Sri LR 97  
  
3\. _Gardner v Jay_ 29 _Chancery Division_ 50  
  
4\. _Maxwell v. Kenn_ (1928) 1KB 645, at 653  
  
5\. Dick v Pillar(1934)(1)AER627  
  
_K. Kang Iswaran, P . C._ with _N. Bartholameus_ for plaintiff-appellant  
  
_Romesh de Silva, P. C._ with _N. R. Sivendran_ for defendant-respondents

_Cur.adv.vult_

February 09, 2005  
  
**UDALAGAMA,J.  
**  
This appeal arises from the impugned order of the learned High Court Judge of
Colombo in H. C. case No. 21/96(3) which case had been filed by the plaintiff-
appellant under the provisions of section 130 of the Code of Intellectual
Property Act, No. 52 of 1979 seeking inter alia a declaration that the
purported registration in the name of the respondent of certain trade marks
morefully, described in the plaint are null and void. The plaintiff- appellant
having filed the action originally in the District Court, the action stood
transferred to the High Court (Civil) Colombo by virtue of the provisions of
section 2 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 10
of 1996.  
  
Admittedly on the 29th of July 1997 the action was specially fixed for trial
for 3 consecutive dates, namely the 10th, 11th and 12th of December, 1997
probably to accommodate the 20 witnesses listed by the plaintiff-appellant
including the alleged foreign witness to testify on behalf of the plaintiff-
appellant. However, by a motion dated 5th December just 5 days before the
scheduled 1st date of trial the attorney-at-law appearing for the plaintiff-
appellant moved for a postponement which motion appears to have been supported
on the aforesaid 1st trial date which had been as stated above, fixed as far
back as 29th of July 1997. The basis of the application appears to be the
concern expressed by the alleged principal foreign witness, (No. 5 on the list
filed on 15.07.1997) for his personal safety in Colombo following a bomb blast
admittedly which had occurred on 15th of October, 1997. The learned High Court
Judge, however, does not appear

**311**

to have been satisfied with the reasons for an adjournment and by his impugned
order had subsequent to offering an opportunity to the counsel for the
plaintiff-appellant to lead the evidence of any other witness in the absence
of the purported principal witness and the offer not been heeded to, proceeded
inter alia to refuse an adjournment.  
  
Significantly when the issues were settled and the case specially fixed for
trial, it is observed that in addition to the list of witnesses filed on
15.07.1997, listing therein 13 witnesses of which the purported principal
witness was the 5th witness, a second list appears to have been filed on
10.02.1997 listing therein 4 witnesses altogether totaling 20 witnesses.  
  
It is also observed vide paragraph 12 of the written submissions of the
plaintiff-appellant that on or about 02.12.1997 the purported principal
witness informed the registered attorney-at-law by telephone that the former
would not be attending the trial of the action set for either 10th, 11th and
12th of December in view of the unsatisfactory security situation prevalent in
Colombo subsequent to a bomb blast which admittedly happened as stated above
on or about 15.10.1997. There appears to be no intimation to court until less
than a week before the trial date that the said witness was unable to attend
court due to the aforesaid reason nor had he given any reason as to why he was
unable to intimate to court well in time of his inability to attend court on
the date the case was specially fixed for trial. There is also no evidence
forthcoming even by way of an affidavit of the fact that the witness was
forewarned not to attend court in order to justify and support his
apprehension not to attend court on the dates fixed for trial. There is no
evidence of any incident of a security lapse after the 15th of October up to
the trial date.  
  
Apart from the fact that the application for a postponement on the basis of
the absence of one witness was belated considering in addition the failure on
the part of the plaintiff-appellant to be ready for trial and considering also
the failure on the part of the counsel for the plaintiff-appellant to call
even some of the other remaining 19 witnesses as required by the learned High
Court Judge, I am inclined to hold that in all the aforesaid facts and
circumstances of the application, the trial judge exercised his discretion
judicially and properly and refused a postponement.  
  
I would also agree with the learned High Court Judge as adverted to by him in
his impugned order that calling of witnesses is entirely a matter for

**312**

the plaintiff or his counsel conducting the case. I would also hold that by
the failure to lead any other witness out of the list of 20 witnesses so
listed to testify on behalf of the plaintiff-appellant, that the trial judge
having considered all the attendant circumstances correctly exercised his
discretion to disallow an application for a postponement of the trial.  
  
Importantly this court needs also to consider the averments in paragraph 4 of
the affidavit filed by the absent witness dated 29.01.1998 subsequent to the
impugned order which adverts to the fact that the witness never had an
intention to testify in this action on the 10th, 11th and 12th of December
1997 or any other time, (emphasis mine)  
  
The submission made on behalf of the appellant that the aforesaid words "or
any other time" was a typographical error was not established even by a
subsequent affidavit. In the respondent's written submissions vide paragraph
39, the latter specifically refuses to admit that the said words could have
been typographical error.  
  
The assertion of the learned President's Counsel for the plaintiff-appellant
vide his written submission that the counsel for the defendant did not at the
trial court object to a postponement is also resisted and in fact vehemently
denied by the President's Counsel for the respondent as per paragraph 13 of
the respondent's written submission filed on 17.04.1998. In any event the
granting of postponements is within the discretion of the trial court judge
and considering the facts and circumstances of the application I would
reiterate that the learned High Court Judge exercised his discretion within
reason and according to law.  
  
The learned President's Counsel for the appellant has referred this court to
the case of Meiyappan Thevar vs. Arunasalam Chettiar and Others(1) wherein
Basnayaka, C. J. had stated, that

> "this court does not interfere in appeal in a case where a court of first
> instance had exercised its discretion unless it is shown that some error had
> been made in exercising the discretion. A person invoking the appellate
> jurisdiction must satisfy that the court of first instance had committed an
> error in fact or law."

Although in that case the judge of the court of first instance was held to ,
have been mistaken in thinking that he was bound to refuse an application for
adjournment when opposed and resisted, in the instant case the learned

**313**

High Court Judge does not even refer to any objection to the application for .
a postponement but in fact proceeded to dismiss the application inter alia on
the basis that the application for a postponement was not to suit the
convenience of a party but a mere witness. The learned High Court Judge
further reasoned out the insufficient cause shown to consider the application
on behalf of a witness said to be resident in India.  
  
The learned President's Counsel for the plaintiff-appellant has also referred
to this court the case of Weerakoon vs. Hewa Mallika, (2) wherein the learned
Counsel submitted that Soza, J. in that case following Gardner vs. Jay(3) and
Maxwel vs. Kenn(4) held that the exercise of discretion by a trial judge must
be on relevant considerations and according to law and justice of the case. It
is my considered view that the learned High Court Judge in the instant
application did in fact consider relevant facts according to law and justice
of the case. An order fixing the date of trial or refusing a grant of an
adjournment is a typical exercise of purely a discretionary power and would be
interfered with by a court sitting in appeal only in exceptional circumstances
and I see no exceptional circumstances to interfere with the order of the
learned High Court Judge.  
  
Judicial discretion is the exercise of judgment by a judge of a case based on
what is fair under the circumstances and guided by the rules of principles of
law.  
  
In another English case of Dick vs. Pillar,(5) also cited by the learned
President's Counsel for the plaintiff-appellant, Scott L. J. did pose the
question that "if an important witness - a fortiori if he is a party (emphasis
mine) is prevented by illness from attending the court for an adjourned
hearing at which his evidence is directly and seriously material what is the
legal duty of the judge when an adjournment is asked for ?  
  
Scott L J. proceeded to answer the question as follows  
  
"In my view if the judge is satisfied of the medical fact and that the
evidence is relevant and important it is his duty to give and adjournment - it
may be on terms but he ought to give it unless on the other hand he is
satisfied that an injustice would thereby be done to the other side which
cannot be reduced by costs."

**314**

The facts in that case show the refusal to grant an adjournment being due
inter alia to the absence of an affidavit to establish the inability of the
party to attend court due to illness. However the facts in the instant case
before this court significantly differ in as much as the postponement was
sought on the basis of the non presence of a witness and not a party which
fact the learned High Court Judge also reiterates in his impugned order.
Besides the belatedness of the application without even an explanation and
importantly the additional evidence before this court by way of the averments
in paragraph 4 of the affidavit of the absent witness dated 29.01.1998 where
in no uncertain terms the witness had stated that he had "no intention to come
and give evidence on the 10th, 11th or 12th December 1997 or any other time"
which averment by itself would render the submission on behalf of the
appellant, that the refusal for an adjournment and the subsequent dismissal of
the action resulted in injustice, to be clearly untenable.  
  
Then again it is apparent that the learned High Court Judge was not satisfied
with the excuse put forward by the aforesaid witness, to support the latter's
absence, was a true one leading to the conclusion that this court ought not to
interfere with the decision of the learned High Court Judge which was
undoubtedly one based purely on facts and it cannot be an authority for the
proposition that an appeal will lie from the decision of a court of first
instance on a question of fact and would not justify this court in ignoring a
statutory limitation upon its powers which it is an elementary duty to
observe.  
  
For the aforesaid reasons I am of the view that the only order which this
court in the circumstances could pronounce is that the appeal should be
dismissed.  
  
The appeal is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs. 5,000.  
  
**S.N.SILVA, C.J**.    \- I     agree  
  
**WEERASURIYA,** J.     \- I     agree  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2005/1.html_  

