
Civil Procedure Code - Section 396, Section 760 - Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972 -
Pending appeal defendant tenant dies - Abatement - Three years iater the wife
makes application for substitution and set aside order of abatement - Legality
- Court of Appeal abating in the absence of an application for substitution,
Article- 126-Constitution - Court of Appeal Rules - Rule 38.  
The 1 st defendant tenant lodged an appeal against the judgment of the
District court which held in favour of the plaintiff landlord. Whilst the
appeal was pending the defendant tenant died on 30.01.2000. On 29.01.2002 the
plaintiff fifed a motion bringing this matter to the notice of Court and
sought an abatement. The Court issued notice on the registered Attorney on
record. On being satisfied that the notices were served - the Court of Appeal
allowed the motion of the plaintiff-respondent. The appeal was abated, and
Writ was executed.

On 13.05.2003, more than 3 years after the death of the defendant -appellant
tenant, his spouse made an application to get the abatement order set aside
and for substitution of herself in the room of the deceased defendant-
appellant. The Court of Appeal set aside the order of abatement and
substitution was allowed and the case relisted.

On special leave being granted,

**HELD:**

(1) The consequence of abatement of a case is because the case record has
become defective on account of the death of a party

**413**

and those parties who are materially interested in the case not taking
necessary steps. No cogent or explicit reasons are given for the cause of
delay.

Per Shirani Thiiakawardane. J.

"The Petitioner could not after more than 3 years and 3 months of the death of
the 1st defendant-appellant, and one year after the order of abatement seek to
remedy this situation".

(2) The proxy of the Registered Attorney had been revoked. It was incumbent
upon the 1st defendant-appellant even prior to his death to have taken steps
to have his registered Attorney-at-Law enter proxy and file the required
papers. In failing to give such instructions, the appellant had even prior to
his death failed to exercise due diligence in the prosecution of his appeal.

**Held further:**

(3) The Court of Appeal must in such applications made on the death a party
require such applicant or the petitioner or appellant or as the case may be to
place before Court sufficient material to establish who is the proper person
to be substituted \- Court of appeal Rule 38, Section 760 Civil Procedure
Code.

Per Shirani Tilakawardana, J.

"With the death of the 1st defendant-appellant tenant the contract of tenancy
came to an end and in the circumstances his surviving spouse admittedly not in
occupation of this premises would not be a fit and proper person to be
substituted in the room of the 1 st defendant-appellant tenant. The only
manner in which the surviving spouse of the 1st defendant-appellant could
continue would be as a statutory tenant under Section 36(2) but clearly as she
is not resident in the premises, she could not plead same".

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal reported in 2004 3 Sri LR
123.

**414**

**Cases referred to :**

1\. Simon Silva vs. Sivasupramaniam - 55 NLR 562

2\. Suppramaniam et al vs. Symons et al - 18 NLR 229.

LC Seneviratne PC with Riza Muzni for plaintiff-appellant-respondent-
petitioner

Sanjeewa Jayawardane with Priyanthi Gunaratne for petitioner-

September7, 2005

**SHfRANEE TILAKAWARDANE, J.**

The Plaintiff instituted action in the District Court of Mt. Lavinia for the
ejectment of his tenant (now Deceased) the 1st Defendant-Appellant for the
wrongful subletting of the premises in suit, namely 393, Gaile Road, Colombo
4, to the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th Defendant-Respondents, without the prior
sanction of the Landlord. It was common ground that the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972
governed the said premises. The District Judge of Mt. Lavinia by Judgment
dated 28/08/1997 held in favour of the Plaintiff (A5).

Only the 1st Defendant lodged an appeal, but while it was pending the 1st
Defendant-Appellant died on the 30/01/2000, a fact proved by the death
certificate marked A7.

On 29.01.2002, almost two years later, the Plaintiff-Respondent filed a motion
bringing this matter to the notice of court. The Court issued notice on the
registered Attomey-at-Law on record. On 7.5 2003 after ascertaining the fact
that notice was not returned and thereby being satisfied that the notices had
been served, the Court of Appeal allowing the application of the said
Plaintiff-Respondent made an Order for abatement of the Appeal.

On the 13.05.2003, more than three years after the death of the 1 st
DefendantAppellant, his spouse, the Petitioner Respondent, filed an
application by way of a petition in the Court of Appeal. The District Court
referred to in the caption is the District Court of Moratuwa, though this case
was a case instituted in the District Court of Mt. Lavinia. Be

**415**

that as it may, it is important to note that the Petitioner-respondent filed
the application only after the writ of execution was issued in the District
Court of Mt. Lavinia, after the Appeal was abated. This emanates from the
facts adverted to in the prayer of the petition filed by the Petitioner
respondent in the Court of Appeal.

The Petitioner-respondent by this Petition made an application to set aside
the said Order of Abatement made by the Court of Appeal dated 07.05.2003, for
substitution of herself in the room of the deceased 1 st Defendant-Appellant,
and for a re-listing of the Appeal. She claimed therein that she had a
daughter who was a co-heir to the estate of the deceased 1st Defendant-
Appellant. Her daughter has filed no affidavit consenting to the substitution
nor was she noticed of the application for substitution.

This application was allowed by the Court of Appeal by its order of 12.12.2003
in which the objections of the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent were overruled,
the Order of Abatement was set aside the substitution was allowed and the case
was re-listed.

On 24/02/2004 this Court granted special leave to appeal on the following
question of law.

(1) Can the Petitioner-respondent make this application for substitution after
more than 3 years of the death of the 1st defendant-Appellant?

(2) Was the Court of Appeal justified in the circumstances of this case, in
particular in the absence of any application for substitution to have abated
the said appeal?

(3) Without prejudice to the aforesaid questions of law is the Petitioner-
respondent eligible to seek substitution in place of her deceased husband the
1 st Defendant-Appellant in view of the provisions of Section 36 of the Rent
Act No. 7 of 1972 as amended.

In the aforesaid Order of 12.12.2003, the Court of Appeal reference was made
that the Petitioner-respondent's spouse, who was the 1 st Defendant-Appellant
in the Appeal, had died on 30/01/2001. This

**416**

appears to be a factual error, as according to the death certificate, which
has been produced marked A7 and pleaded by the Plaintiff-Respondent-
Respondent-Petitioner his death had occurred a year earlier, on 30.01.2000.

Indeed, according to the Court of Appeal it is dear that the only application
that was made before the Court was by the Plaintiff-respondent in the Court of
Appeal who had informed the Court that the 1 st Defendant-Appellant was dead
and produced A7. The Court had according to law thereupon noticed the
registered Attorney-at-Law. The notice was issued on 08/02/2002 and according
to the journal entry dated 05/03/2002 the said notice has not been returned
undelivered. Thereupon, on application made on 07/05/2002 appeal was abated.

The consequence of abatement of a case is because the case record has become
defective on account of the death of a party and those parties materially
interested in the case not taking the necessary steps.

The Petitioners could not after more than almost 3 years and 3 months after
the death of the 1 st Defendant-Appellant and one year after the order of
abatement by the Court of Appeal, seek to remedy the situation.

In the case of Simeon Silva vs. Sivasupramaniam1'1 where after the death of
the plaintiff, his legal representative delayed for nearly 18 months to have
themselves substituted, it was held that the order of abatement of the action
should be entered under Section 396 of the Civil Procedure Code,

In considering all the facts relating to the case therefore the order of
abatement of the action had legitimately been made because the Petitioner who
seeks to substitute herself in place of the 1 st Defendant-Appellant had
failed to take steps rendered necessary by law.

This Court has also considered that in any event the Petitioner had not come
within a reasonable time to have the order of abatement set aside. Furthermore
no cogent or explicit reasons were given for the cause of the delay except to
say that it was "for reasons beyond her

**417**

control". In other words she has not proffered any rational explanation, which
could legitimately be considered as a valid reason for the delay.

In this respect it is also important to consider whether there has been a
defect or error made by the Court of Appeal, in the delivery of notice on the
Petitioner. This arises in the circumstances that at the time of the service
of this notice, according to the pleadings of the Petitioner, the Registered
Attorney's proxy had been revoked and a new registered Attorney-at-Law had
been appointed.

The proxy of the registered Attorney-at-Law had been revoked. The Petitioner-
Respondent admitted that she knew this fact as far back as 22.09.1998.
According to the affidavit of the Petitioner dated 21/05/2003 paragraph 2(b),
"the Petitioner was aware that prior to the death of the 1 st Respondent", and
he had taken steps to revoke the proxy of the registered Attorney-at-Law on
22/09/1998". It is noteworthy that at this time the Appeal was pending, having
been lodged in the Court of Appeal on 17/10/1997. So it was incumbent upon the
1st Defendant-Appellant, even prior to his death, to have taken steps to have
his new registered Attorney-at-Law enter proxy and file the required papers in
the Court of Appeal. In failing to give such instructions the 1 st Defendant-
Appellant had even prior to his death failed to exercise due diligence in the
prosecution of his Appeal.

It was such failure and lack of diligence on the part of the 1st Defendant-
Appellant, which facilitated and/or caused the notice sent by the Court of
Appeal on 07/05/2002, to be sent to a registered Attorney-at-Law on record
whose proxy by then had been revoked. It is required by law that the Court
before making an order of abatement should notice the parties only as far as
it conveniently can, to give them an opportunity of showing cause against the
order. But even though the Court had followed such procedure it was solely due
to the inept failure of the 1st Defendant-Appellant, even prior to his death,
to exercise due diligence in his case and failure to give adequate but
necessary instructions for the filing of fresh proxy in the Court of Appeal
that no papers had been filed by the 1 st Defendant-Appellant's spouse. The
consequences of such failure must be borne by the party.

**418**

It is important when cases are pending before courts to prevent any of the
aggrieved parties from being unduly barred from achieving the legitimate
result of their litigation by intervening factors. In (his context, Wood
Renton C.J. and Ennis J. in Suppramaniam et al Vs. Symons et all2) said (hat
"People may do what they like with their disputes so long as they do not
invoke the assistance of the courts of law. But whenever that step has been
taken they are bound to proceed with all possible and reasonable expedition,
and it is the duty of their legal advisers and of the Courts themselves lo see
that this is done. The work of the Courts must be conducted on ordinary
business principles, and no Judge is obliged, or is entitled, to allow the
accumulation upon his Court list of a mass of inanimate or semi-animate
actions".

The only ground urged by the Petitioner in (he Petition for the order of
abatement to be set aside, was that no proper notice had been issued on the
Petitioner and the bald statement that the said order of abatement had been
made "due to reasons beyond the control of the Petitioner". No details or
material has been placed before the Court as to what "reasons were beyond the
control of the Petitioner". In other words she has failed to explain the delay
in taking steps according to law on the death of a party. Furthermore on the
facts referred to above it is clear that the Applicant-Petitioner-Respondent
had not acted diligently and with the required level of due vigilance to
remedy the defect in the record on the death of (fie 1 st Defendant-
Respondent. The order of abatement is the reasonable and expected outcome of
such failure.

After the 1 st Defendant had lodged an appeal in the Court of Appeal, the
record of the Court of Appeal became defective by the reason of the death of
the 1 st Defendant on 30/01/2000. The procedure according to law to rectify
the defect and seek substitution has been explicitly described in the Code of
Civil Procedure.

In terms of Section 760A of the Civil Procedure Code," in the manner provided
in the rules made by the Supreme Court for that purpose, the Court could
determine, who, in the opinion of the Court is a proper person to be
substituted or entered on the record in place of or in addition to the party
who had died or undergone a change of status

**419**

and upon such order of the Court the person shall thereupon be deemed to have
been substituted or entered of record".

The relevant Rule 38 of the Court of Appeal Rule reads as follows :

"Where at any time after the lodging of an application for special leave to
appeal, or an application under Article 126, or a notice of appeal, or the
grant of special leave to Appeal, or the grant of leave to appeal by the Court
of Appeal, the record becomes defective by reason of the death or change of
status of a party to the proceedings, the Supreme Court may, on an application
in that behalf made by any person interested, or ex mero motu, require such
applicant or the petitioner or appellant, as the case may be, to place before
the court sufficient material to establish who is the proper person lo be
substituted or entered on the record in place of, or addition to, the party
who has died or undergone change of status.........."

The Court of Appeal must therefore in such applications made on the death of a
party, "require such applicant or the petitioner or appellant, as the case may
be, to place before the Court sufficient material to estabtish who is the
proper person to be substituted."

It is neither an automatic Order but a considered Order that is envisaged. All
the more so if there is more than one heir. In this case the Petitioner has
explicitly pleaded that both she and her daughter were lawful heirs in
paragraph 15 of her petition dated 13.05.2003.

In this context, it is relevant to note that admittedly on her own affidavit
dated 13/05/2003 filed in the District Court of Mt. Lavinia she had not stated
as to how the rights of the 1 st Defendant-Appellant, even if such were
available, would devolve upon her. Especially in view of the fact that this
was a rent and ejectment matter and it appears that admittedly she was not
residing in the premises, which was the subject matter of the action.
Furthermore, even though she has claimed to be the legal wife no material has
been placed before the Court to determine whether she is the lawful wife of
the 1 st Defendant-Appellant nor that she is a fit and proper person to be
substituted in the room of the 1st Defendant-Appellant.

**420**

In any event, with the death of the 1st Defendant-Appellant the contract of
tenancy came to an end and in the circumstances that the surviving spouse of
the 1st Defendant-Appellant was not, admittedly, in possession of the premises
and was not a registered member of the partnership she would not be the fit
and proper person to be substituted in the room of the 1 st Defendant-
Appellant.

The only manner in which the surviving spouse of the 1 st Defendant-Appellant
could continue would be as a statutory tenant under section 36{2) but clearly
as she is not resident on the premises, she could not plead the same.

Accordingly, the order of the Court of Appeal dated 12/12/2003 setting aside
the order of abatement and allowing substitution is set aside and the appeal
is abated and the order dated 07/05/2003 made by the Court of Appeal abating
the appeal is upheld and the application for substitution in the room of the
1st Defendant-Appellant is refused.

**S. N. SILVA, C. J. -** I agree.

**AMARATUNGA, J.** \- I agree

_Judgment of the Court of Appeal set aside. Order of abatement to stand._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2005/10.html_  

