##  Patrick Lowe&Sons and Others v. Commercial Bank of Ceylon Ltd. - SLR -
280, Vol 1 of 2001 [2001] LKSC 10; (2001) 1 Sri LR 280 (4 April 2001)

**280**

**PATRICK LOWE & SONS AND OTHERS  
v.  
COMMERCIAL BANK OF CEYLON LTD**

SUPREME COURT  
S.N. SILVA, C. J.  
P.R.P. PERERA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
SC (CHC) APPEAL NO. 6/2000  
H.C. (CIVIL) 62/98(1)  
15TH JANUARY, 2001  
  
_Civil Procedure Code - Writ of execution - Stay of sale of immovable property
\- Charges and fees recoverable by the auctioneer - Sections 256 and 258 of
the Civil Procedure Code.  
  
_The respondent company ("the plaintiff") instituted action in the High Court
of Colombo ("Commercial High Court") against the appellants and obtained
judgement for the recovery of money due on a banking facility amounting to Rs.
3 million. The money advanced was secured by a primary mortgage of an
agricultural property. The appellants sought leave to appeal against the
judgement, decree and proceedings for execution of the decree. During the
pendancy of that application the dispute was settled and consequently, the
execution of the decree was stayed. and leave to appeal was granted only on
the question of fees recoverable by the auctioneer. In the circumstances, the
auctioneer was noticed and was a party to the hearing of the appeal.  
  
**Held :  
  
**The expenses, charges and fees that could be recovered by an autioneer are
only those permitted by sections 256 and 258 of the Civil Procedure Code, What
is not permitted by those provisions would be struck down by court as being in
excess of authority.  
  
_Per_ S.N. Silva, CJ.  
  
It has to be borne in mind that the seizure of property, sale and connected
measures that are taken in execution of proceedings are highly invasive of the
rights of the person who is entitled to such property. The rights assured to
an owner at Common Law are those specifically limited by the provisions with
regard to seizure and sale contained in the overall statutory scheme of the
Civil Procedure Code for execution of a decree."

**281**

**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. _Ashbury Railway Carriage_ and _Iron Co. Ltd v. Hector Riche_ (1875) LR
653  
  
2\. _Attorney - General v. The Great Eastern Railway_ (1880) 5 AY 473.  
  
3\. _Liyanage_ and _Others v. Gampaha Urban Council_ and _Others_ (1991) 1 Sri
LR 1  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgement of the High Court  
  
_Mohan Peiris_ for appellants.  
  
_Faisz Musthapha, P.C_. with _C. Weerasooriya_ and _D.D.T. Dassanayake_ for
the party noticed.  
  
_A. Coorey_ with _C. Ladduwahetty_ for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

April 04, 2001.  
  
**S.N. SILVA,  C.J.  
  
**The Respondent Bank instituted proceedings against the Defendants Appellants
in the High Court of the Western Province sitting at Colombo (Commercial High
Court) for the recovery of money due on a banking facility that extends to Rs.
3 million. The money advanced on this facility was secured by a primary
mortgage of an agricultural property of about 24 acres.  
  
The causes of action are in respect of 3 Bills of Exchange on which money was
due from the Appellants. Decree was entered against the Appellants as prayed
for, by the High Court. The Appellants sought leave to appeal in respect of
the decree of the High Court and proceedings taken in execution of the decree.
The execution of the decree was stayed and when the application for leave to
appeal was considered, parties submitted that a settlement had been arrived at
as to the

**282**

amount due and the instalment payments. The only outstanding issue was with
regard to the fees claimed by the auctioneer in execution proceedings, which
had been paid by the Respondent Bank after the execution was stayed by the
High Court. Since the other issues were resolved, leave to appeal was granted
only on the question of the fees recoverable by the auctioneer. In the
circumstances the auctioneer was noticed and was a party to the hearing of the
appeal. Written submissions have been filed by the Appellants and the
auctioneer.  
  
The several items contained in the bill submitted by the auctioneer are as
follows

i.  fees for the publication in the gazette | Rs. | 2445.40  
---|---|---  
ii. fees for the publication of notice in the "Lankadeepa" | Rs. | 13751.29  
iii. fees for the publication of notice in the "Island" | Rs. | 13225.14  
iv for posters, banners and hand bills | Rs. | 18000.00  
v for the preparation of conditions of auction | Rs. | 1000.00  
vi stamp fees | Rs. | 200.00  
vii. travelling expenses | Rs. | 4000.00  
viii. valuation fees for Rs.13682812 at 0.5% | Rs. | 68414.06  
ix. commission for Rs.13682812 at 21/2% | Rs. | 34070.30  
  |   |  \--------------------  
  
Total | Rs. | 463,106.19  
  |   |  \--------------------  
  
Learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that the expenses, charges and
fees that could be recovered by an auctioneer are only those permitted by
sections 256 and 258 of the Civil Procedure Code. It was submitted that since
the sale itself was stayed, the amount recoverable as fees would be
specifically governed by the provisions of section 258. Learned President's
Counsel for the party noticed, the auctioneer, submitted that the process of
effecting a sale is based on a commission issued to the auctioneer by Court.
Pursuant to which the auctioneer tenders to court a valuation report and

**283**

an estimate of his charges. This includes his commission. It was submitted
that subsequent action, is taken in relation to the sale on the approval
granted by Court of the charges and commission, included in the estimate. On
this basis it was submitted that section 258 of the Civil Procedure Code has
no application and that the auctioneer is entitled to recover the full amount
of his charges and commission, in respect of which prior approval was granted
by Court. It was also submitted that the sale was stayed on an agreement
arrived at between the parties and the High Court in its order dated 10.4.2000
made on the agreement of parties specifically stated that the expenses already
incurred by the auctioneer and the commission fees would be payable as a pre-
condition for such stay. On 27.4.2000, the auctioneer submitted his claim for
expenses and fees and the Court made order directing that the bill be taxed
and the amount so taxed. should be paid by the Plaintiff. On this basis it was
contended that the payment that was made is on an order of Court which in turn
derived its authority from the settlement entered into by the parties pursuant
to which the sale was stayed.  
  
The submissions of learned Counsel involve an important question of law
relating to the application of the relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure
Code with regard to the sale of immovable property and the expenditure and/or
fees that may be lawfully recovered by an officer carrying out such sale.  
  
It has to be borne in mind that the seizure of property, sale and connected
measures that are taken in execution proceedings are highly invasive of the
rights of the person who is entitled to such property. The rights assured to
an owner at common law are thus specifically limited by the provisions with
regard to seizure and sale contained in the overall statutory scheme of the
Civil Procedure Code for execution of a decree. In this statutory scheme the
execution of the decree is at all times done under the authority of Court. The
property that is liable to

**284**

be seized, the manner of effecting seizure and the sale for the recovery of
the sum decreed, are all laid down in the Civil Procedure Code. The authority
of the Court is here exercised by the Fiscal or other person duly authorized
by writing under his hand. At present there is no Fiscal, but the Registrar of
the particular Court is designated Deputy Fiscal for the purpose of carrying
out the functions that lie on the Fiscal in terms of the law. Section 5 of the
Civil Procedure Code provides that the Fiscal includes a Deputy Fiscal. Thus
the order for sale made by the Court is given effect to by the Registrar in
his capacity as Deputy Fiscal, by authorizing an auctioneer to carry out the
necessary functions. The auctioneer would himself thereupon be vested with the
authority that flows from the respective provisions of the Civil Procedure
Code.  
  
It is a fundamental principle of law that a person who functions in terms of
statutory power vested in him is subject to an implied limitation that he
cannot exceed such power or authority. The ultra vires doctrine, now
recognized universally, evolved in England on this premise (vide Ashbury)
_Railway Carriage & Iron Co. Ltd., vs. Hector Riche_(1) and the _Attorney
General vs. The Great Eastern Railway._ (2) It follows that what Is not
permitted by the provisions of the enabling statute should be taken as
forbidden and struck down by Court as being in excess of authority.  
  
In earlier times the enabling statutory provisions were strictly interpreted
in delineating the limits of the power or authority that was vested. The later
judgments have adopted a less rigorous approach in applying the doctrine and
any action which could be reasonably considered as being incidental to or
consequential upon that which is permitted, is not to be considered as ultra
vires, provided such action is taken to promote the general legislative
.purpose in the conferment of power on that particular person or authority
(vide _Liyanage_ and _others vs. Gampaha Urban Council_ and _others_ (3))

**285**

When the foregoing principles are applied to the instant case it would be seen
that the auctioneer has to act in terms of the power or authority vested in
him by the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code that relate to the sale of
the property seized and the recovery of charges and fees for the work done by
him. The submission of learned President's Counsel that the relevant
provisions of the Civil Procedure Code with regard to charges and fees that
are recoverable are not applicable, is therefore wholly untenable. The
auctioneer cannot exercise the highly invasive power with regard to property
of the judgment debtor in terms of the Civil Procedure Code and at the same
time claim that he is not bound by the limits imposed by that provision itself
on the matter of recovering his charges and fees. Similarly, it cannot be
contended that the Court could vest authority in the auctioneer by accepting
his estimate of charges and fees to recover amounts in excess of what is
permitted. Even the court is bound by the relevant provisions of the Civil
Procedure Code in this matter. Further, even assuming that there was an
implied consent by the parties, that too would not permit the auctioneer to
recover any amount in excess of what is permitted. For, such a process of
permitting a party to pay a higher amount would negate the very purpose of the
amount recoverable being fixed in the law itself.  
  
The relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Code with regard to the sale of
immovable property are contained in Sections 256, 258 and 259 of the Civil
Procedure Code. Section 256 provides that where the value of the property
seized exceeds Rs. 5000/- in addition to other notice that is required to be
given by section 255, the sale itself should be advertised in a local
newspaper or in such other manner as "the court may direct having regard to
the valuation of the property and other relevant circumstances." The
provisions contain the time period within which such advertisement and
publication of the sale should take place. The costs and charges with regard
to such advertisements are payable in advance, as provided.

**286**

Section 259(1) empowers the Court, on the application of the judgment debtor
to postpone the sale and make such order as to the payment of fees and charges
due to the Fiscal. Section 258 specifies the fees recoverable by the Fiscal or
the auctioneer authorized by him.  
  
It reads thus :  
  
"258\. Every sale shall be held by an officer of the Fiscal, or some other
person duly authorized by the Fiscal by writing under his hand.  
  
When the proceeds do not exceed the sum of seven thousand five hundred rupees,
the Fiscal shall recover a fee of three per centum on the proceeds actually
recovered on return thereof made to the court in respect of every sale and
resale of movable property, and two per centum on the proceeds of sale of
immovable property belonging to the debtor.  
When the proceeds, whether of movable or immovable property, exceed that sum,
the Fiscal shall recover a fee of one hundred and fifty rupees and of five
rupees for every thousand rupees of the proceeds over and above the said sum
of seven thousand five hundred rupees.  
  
And in every case after the seizure of property and publication of sale
thereof, in which the sale shall be postponed or stayed at the request or with
the concurrence of the party suing out the writ, the Fiscal shall recover half
of the above fees on the estimated value of such property from the party at
whose instance the writ shall be stayed, and in default of immediate payment
thereof the Fiscal shall certify the amount of such fees to the court whence
the execution issued:  
  
Provided, however, that such fee shall never exceed fifty rupees or the actual
expenditure already incurred by the

**287**

Fiscal towards carrying out the sale, whichever sum shall be the larger. The
fees recovered under this section shall be brought to account and appropriated
in such manner as the Secretary to the Treasury shall from time to time
direct."  
  
It is seen that the fee that is recoverable is limited in relation to three
distinct situations.  
  
The first situation is where the proceeds of the sale do not exceed a sum of
Rs. 7500/-; the fee is fixed at 3% of the sum actually recoverable in relation
to the movable property and 2% in relation to immovable property. This would
be in addition to the costs of advertisements payable under Section 256.  
  
The second situation is where the proceeds exceed the sum of Rs. 7500/-; the
fee recoverable would be Rs. 150/- for every Rs. 1000/- of the proceeds over
and above Rs. 7500/-. This would be in addition to the costs of advertisement
as stated above.  
  
The third situation is where the sale is postponed or stayed. The amount
recoverable as fees would be half the amount that may be due in relation to
the first and second situations on the basis of the estimated value of the
property. However in this instance the fee recoverable is specifically limited
by the proviso at the end of section 258 which states "that such fee shall
never exceed fifty rupees or the actual expenditure already incurred by the
Fiscal towards carrying out the sale whichever sum shall be the larger."  
  
The present case comes within the third situation and would be governed by the
proviso with the specific limitation referred to above. In the result the
amount that is recoverable would be the actual expenditure incurred towards
carrying out the sale since that amount is obviously more than the sum of Rs.
50/-.  
  
If the bill submitted by the auctioneer is examined in the light of the
foregoing it would be noted that items i to vii, would

**288**

come within the description of the actual expenditure already incurred towards
carrying out the sale.  
  
Item viii relates to valuation fees, in respect of which the auctioneer is
seeking to recover a sum of Rs. 68, 414.06 being an amount computed at 0.5% of
the value. It appears that such valuation is done prior to the stage of the
sale. Section 256 referred to above empowers the Court to direct that the sale
be advertised "having regard to the value of the property **. . . . . . . .**
." It is a concomitant of this provision that the Court could require a
valuation to be done of the property to be sold. Such a valuation should be
paid for and its cost would be an expenditure incurred towards carrying out
the sale. Therefore I hold that item viii being the valuation fee is also
recoverable by the auctioneer.  
  
Item ix being the largest component of the bill is a "commission" claimed by
the auctioneer of 2 1/2% of the value of the property. The amount claimed is
Rs. 342,070.30. The auctioneer Is not empowered to claim a commission based on
the value of the property in terms of section 258 or any other provision. The
right to make such a claim cannot even be remotely implied from any of the
provisions. What is recoverable is a fee on the proceeds of the sale to be
computed in the manner set out in the first and second situations referred
above and where the sale is stayed half of that amount subject to the
limitations in the proviso to section 258. As noted above in the instant case
the amount recoverable as a fee would be the actual expenditure that was
incurred. Since that is incorporated in items I to vii, I hold that no
additional amount is recoverable as a fee or commission by the auctioneer. In
the circumstances the claim of the auctioneer for the payment of a commission
of Rs. 342,070.30 is disallowed. The auctioneer is directed to refund the said
amount if it has been paid. Since the parties have arrived at a settlement as
to the amount payable and the instalments, the decree could be accordingly
amended by the High Court.

**289**

Subject to the foregoing the appeal is pro forma dismissed. No costs.  
  
**PERERA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed pro forma subject to amendment of auctioneer's charges._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/10.html_  

