##  Thalawatugoda Siriratna Thero v. Veherewatte Ariyawansa Thero - SLR - 139,
Vol 2 of 1995 [1995] LKSC 1; (1995) 2 Sri LR 139 (14 June 1995)

**139**

**THALAWATUGODA SIRIRATNA THERO  
v.  
VEHEREWATTE ARIYAWANSA THERO **

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ,  
KULATUNGA, J.  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 2/91  
C.A. 84181 (F)  
D.C. HORANA 665/L  
MAY 23 AND 29, 1995.

_Succession - Viharadhipathi - Sisyanu Sisya Paramparawa - Abandonment of
Rights - First Pupil - Second Pupil - Defacto and dejure Viharadhipathi._

Plaintiff instituted these proceedings seeking a declaration that he is the
Viharadhipathi of the Pokunuwita Temple. His position was that Rewatha Thero
was the Viharadhipathi of this temple and upon his death he was succeeded by
his Senior Pupil Indrajothi Thero. Indrajothi Thero gave up Robes in 1907 and
he was succeeded by his Senior Pupil - Saranatissa Thero who in turn appointed
his third pupil, the Plaintiff by Deed.

The Defendant whilst denying the Plaintiff's claim, stated that, Kondanna
Thero was the original Viharadhipathi and was succeeded by his junior pupil
Rewatha Thero, Rewata Thero appointed his Senior Pupil Indrajothi Thero as the
Viharadhipathi and thereafter Indrajothi Thero and his successor Saranatissa
Thero abandoned their Rights to the temple, each of them functioned as
Viharadhipathi of Kumbuka Temple and that on the death of Rewatha Thero, his
second pupil Sonuththara Thero succeeded him as Viharadhipathi of the
Pokunuwita Temple, and that Sonuththara Thero was succeeded by his junior
pupil Attadasi Thero, who was succeeded by the Defendant. He further alleged
that he was appointed by the 'Sangha Sabha' in 1970 and that the Plaintiff and
Saranatissa Thero were present and acquiesced in the appointment, and the
Plaintiff is therefore now estopped from denying the defendant's rights as
Viharadhipathi.

The District Court dismissed the Plaintiff's action; the Plaintiff however was
successful in the Court of Appeal.

**Held:**

(i) In terms of the Sisyanu Sisya Paramparawa Rule, upon the death of the
Viharadhipathi, his senior pupil succeeds him; but the Senior pupil may be
excluded from succession if his tutor were to appoint a particular pupil in

140

preference to the senior pupil. Such appointment may be by deed, by Will or by
informal writing.

(ii) As regards an oral appointment, there should be cogent and clear
evidence.

(iii) Although documentary evidence indicated that, Sonuththara Thero has been
described as the Viharadhipathi, the facts and circumstances of this case
indicate only the defacto position, namely that Sonuththara Thero was resident
at that temple and that he was in charge of the affairs of the temple.

(iv) The documentary evidence in this case does not displace the line of
lawful succession to the Viharadhipathiship in accordance with the Sisyanu
Sisya Paramparawa Rule.

(v) A plea of abandonment cannot be raised for the first time in appeal; the
office of Viharadhipathi is not one that can be abandoned by mere residence in
another place. "There is nothing in the Vinaya or the decisions of this court
which requires a Viharadhipathi to reside in the temple of which he is the
Viharadhipathi."

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Dhammajothi v Sobita \- 16 NLR 408._  
_2\. Gunananda v. Deepalankara - 32 NLR 241._  
_3\. Piyatissa Terunnance v Saranapala Therunnanse 40 NLR 262._  
_4.Pandita Watugedera Amaraseeha Thero v. Tittagalle Sasanatilake Thero - 59
NLR 289 at 290._  
_5\. Jinaratna Thero v. Dharmaratna Thero-57 NLR 372._

**APPEAL** from the Judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_A. C. Gooneratne, Q. C. with C. Ladduwahetty and P. K. Rajapakse for
Substituted Defendant-Appellant._  
_No appearance for the Substituted-Plaintiff-Respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

June 14, 1995.  
**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

The plaintiff instituted these proceedings seeking a declaration that he is
the lawful Viharadhipathi of the Pokunuwita Sri Kondannaramaya Raja Maha
Viharaya (hereinafter referred to as the Pokunuwita temple) and an order
ejecting the defendant from the temple. The plaintiffs' case was that:

141

(1) Warakagoda Rewatha Thero was the Viharadhipathi of this temple and that
upon his death he was succeeded by his senior pupil Weragoda Indrajothi Thero;

(ii) Weragoda Indrajothi Thero gave up robes in 1907 and he was succeeded by
his senior pupil Raigama Saranatissa Thero who in turn appointed his third
pupil the plaintiff as Viharadhipathi by Deed No. 14948 of 1973 (P10).

The defendant, however, denied the plaintiff's claim and took up the position
(a) that Ratanagoda Kondanna Thero was the original Viharadhipathi; (b) that
Ratanagoda Kondanna Thero was succeeded by his junior pupil Warakagoda Rewatha
Thero; (c) that Rewatha Thero during his life time appointed his **senior
pupil** Weragoda Indrajothi Thero as the Viharadhipathi **of another temple
at** **Kumbuke** founded by Rewatha Thero; (d) that thereafter Indrajothi
Thero and his successor Saranatissa thero **abandoned their rights to the
Pokunuwita temple** and each of them functioned as Viharadhipathi of the
Kumbuke temple; (e) that on the death of Rewatha Thero in 1903, his **second
pupil** Okanduwe Sonuththara Thero succeeded him as Viharadhipathi of the
Pokunuwita temple; (f) that Sonuththara Thero was succeeded by his junior
pupil Attadassi Thero and Attadassi Thero was in turn succeeded by the
defendant; (g) that the defendant was appointed Viharadhipathi by the "Sangha
Sabha" in 1970 and that the plaintiff and Saranatissa Thero were present and
acquiesced in the appointment; the plaintiff is now estopped from denying the
defendant's rights as Viharadhipathi of the temple.

After trial, the District Court held in favour of the defendant and dismissed
the plaintiff's action. The plaintiff preferred an appeal to the Court of
Appeal. The plaintiff's appeal was successful in so far as he was declared the
lawful Viharadhipathi of the Pokunuwita temple, but he was denied an order for
ejectment of the defendant from the temple as prayed for in the plaint. The
defendant has now appealed to this court against the judgment of the Court of
Appeal.

The main question that arises for decision on this appeal is whether the
admitted Viharadhipathi Warakagoda Rewatha Thero

**142**

was succeeded by his **senior pupil** Weragoda Indrajothi Thero as contended
for by the plaintiff or by his **second pupil** Okanduwe Sonuththara Thero as
claimed by the defendant. In considering this question it is very relevant to
bear in mind in the first place that admittedly the rule of succession
applicable to the temple in dispute is the Sisyanu Sisya Paramparawa rule.
Secondly, it is not disputed that Weragoda Indrajothi Thero was the senior
pupil of Warakagoda Rewatha Thero and that Saranatissa Thero was the senior
pupil of Indrajothi Thero. It is well settled that in terms of the Sisyanu
Sisya Paramparawa rule, upon the death of the Viharadhipathi his senior pupil
succeeds him; but the senior pupil may be excluded from succession if his
tutor were to appoint a particular pupil in preference to the senior pupil.
Such an appointment may be made by deed, or by will or even by an informal
writing. ( _Dhammajothi v. Sobita_ ,(1) _Gunananda v. Deepalankara_ (2),
_Piyatissa Terunnanse v. Saranapala Terunnanse_ (3). )

What needs to be stressed is that there is nothing in the evidence in this
case to show that Rewatha Thero appointed in writing his second pupil
Sonuththara Thero as the Viharadhipathi of the Pokunuwita temple. Mr.
Gooneratne for the defendant-appellant submitted that an oral appointment
would suffice; but in such a case there must be clear and cogent evidence of
an oral appointment. There is no such evidence on record. The position then is
that there is no evidence of an appointment either in writing or orally to
support, the defendant's case that Sonuththara Thero succeeded Rewatha Thero
as the Viharadhipathi.

At the hearing before us Mr. Gooneratne placed strong reliance on a number of
documents marked in evidence to prove that Sonuththara Thero had dealt with
the lands belonging to the Pokunuwita temple. It is correct that in each of
these documents Sonuththara Thero has been described as the Viharadhipathi of
the Pokunuwita temple. The defendant had also produced declarations made under
the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance where Sonuththara Thero was described as
the Viharadhipathi of the temple in dispute. It seems to me that, in the facts
and circumstances of this case, these documents are indicative only of the de
facto position, namely, that Sonuththara There was resident at that temple and
that

143

he was in charge of the affairs of the temple. On this point, the finding of
the Court of Appeal is expressed in the following terms: "In the instant case
with the death of the Viharadhipathi Warakagoda Rewatha in 1903, his senior
pupil Weragoda Indrajothi should succeed and Okanduwe Sonuththara ... in
following the concept of Sisyanu Sisya Paramparawa could not have succeeded in
(sic) the Viharadhipathiship. His (i.e. Sonuththara) residence and carrying
(sic) the duties and obligations to the betterment of the Vihara in no way
confers a de jure Viharadhipathiship. Weragoda Indrajothi residing in ...
Kumbuke and the performance of the duties by Sonuththara at the Raja Maha
Vihara does not have the effect of making him Viharadhipathi ... there being
no particular duties, spiritual or temporal which a Viharadhipathi need
perform for the purpose of keeping alive his rights; such rights cannot be
said to be lost because Sonuththara was actually residing in the temple,
managing its affairs, and preventing the temple from falling into decay. He
was only a de facto guardian."

I am in entire agreement with the aforesaid finding of the Court of Appeal. In
the words of Basnayake C.J., in _Panditha Watugedera Amaraseeha Thero v.
Tittagalle Sasanatilake Thero_ (4) "The fact that a Bhikku takes an active
interest in the religious and other activities of a temple gives him no right
to be Viharadhipathi even if his activities extend over a long period of time
... a de jure Viharadhipathi does not lose his rights merely because he has
expressly or impliedly permitted another to occupy his temple and take an
active interest in its maintenance and improvement." I accordingly hold that
the documentary evidence relied on by the defendant does not displace the line
of lawful succession to the Viharadhipathiship in accordance with the Sisyanu
Sisya Paramparawa rule.

Finally, it was urged that Indrajothi Thero and his successor Saranatissa
thero **abandoned** their rights to the Pokunuwita temple. The plea of
abandonment is, in my view, untenable; it was neither pleaded nor put in issue
at the trial. It cannot be raised for the first time in appeal. In any event,
as found by the Court of Appeal, there is no evidence to support the plea of
abandonment. The mortgage bond P17 and the lease bond P18 negative the claim
of the defendant that Saranatissa Thero had abandoned his rights as the

144

lawful Viharadhipathi of the Pokunuwita temple. As observed by Basnayake C.J.,
in _Jinaratana Thero v. Dharmaratana Thero_ (5) . "The office of
Viharadhipathi is not one that can be abandoned by mere residence in another
place. There is nothing in the Vinaya or the decisions of this court which
requires a Viharadhipathi to reside in the temple of which he is the
Viharadhipathi" (at page 374).

For these reasons, the judgment of the Court of Appeal is affirmed and the
appeal is dismissed but without costs.

**KULATUNGA, J. -** I agree.

**RAMANATHAN, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/1.html_  

