##  Kuruppuarachchi v. Andreas - SLR - 11, Vol 2 of 1996 [1996] LKSC 11;
(1996) 2 Sri LR 11 (1 January 1996)

**11**

**KURUPPUARACHCHI  
v.  
****ANDREAS**

SUPREME COURT  
G.P.S DE SILVA, C.J.  
KULATUNGA, J.  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. 82/94  
C.A.LA.230/93  
D.C. Mt. LAVINIA No 93/91 (3)  
JANUARY 09,1995.

_Civil procedure - S.93(2) amended by Act No.9 of 1991 ‑ Divorce ‑ Malicious ‑
Desertion Amendment of Answer ‑ New Cause of Action ‑ Laches._

The Plaintiff sued the Defendant for a Divorce on the ground of Malicious
Desertion. The defendant‑appellant in her answer denied the several averments
in the plaint and sought the dismissal of the action. After the second date of
Trial, the Defendant‑Appellant moved to amend the Answer, by the amended
answer the Defendant‑Appellant pleaded a new cause of Action on the ground of
Adultery with the 2nd Defendant who was to be added.

The District Judge rejected the Defendant's application to amend, the leave to
appeal application made to the Court of Appeal was dismissed, on appeal.

**Held:**

1\. The amendment introduced by Act No. 9 of 199 ‑S. 93 (2) ‑was clearly
intended to prevent undue postponement of trials by placing a significant
restriction on the power of the Court to permit amendment of pleadings' on or
after the day first fixed for Trial'.

2\. It is clear that the Defendant‑Appellant was well aware of the fact that
the Plaintiff was living in adultery at the time the answer was filed, but has
chosen not to rely on that ground in her answer.

3\. While the Court earlier 'discouraged' amendment of pleadings on the date
of trial, now the Court is precluded from allowing such amendments save on the
ground postulated in the sub‑section.

**AN APPEAL** from the Judgment of the Court of Appeal.

**12**

**case referred to:**

1. _Daryanani v. Eastern Silk Emporium Ltd._ 64 NLR 529 at 534.

_D. R. P Gunatillake  _ with _S. A. D. S. Suraweera_ for Defendant‑Appellant.

_S.S. Sahabandu_ for the Plaintiff‑Respondent.

_Cur. Adv. vult._

February 10, 1995

**G.P.S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

The Plaintiff sued the Defendant for a divorce on the ground that the
Defendant had maliciously deserted him. The Defendant in her answer filed on
17.6. 92 denied the several averments in the answer and sought the dismissal
of the action. The case was first fixed for trial on 30.10.92 and the second
date on which the case was fixed for trial was 15.1.93 . It was after the
second date on which the case was fixed for trial that the Defendant moved to
amend her answer. The amended answer is dated 10.6.93 By **** the amended
answer the Defendant pleaded a new cause of action on the ground of adultery
with the 2nd Defendant who was to be added as a party to the action. The point
that needs to be stressed is that in paragraph 7 (c) of the amended answer the
Defend­ant averred that the Plaintiff had been living in adultery with the
party sought to be added for the past several years.

The District Judge rejected the Defendant's application to amend her answer.
The Defendant moved the Court of Appeal for leave to appeal against the order
of the District Judge. Having regard to the provisions of section 93 (2) of
the Civil Procedure Code as amended by Act No. 9 of 1991, the Court of Appeal
affirmed the order of the District Judge. The Defendant has now preferred an
appeal to this court.

Section 93 (2) as amended reads thus:‑

On or after the day first fixed for the trial of the action and before final
judgment, no application for the amendment of any pleading shall be allowed
unless the court is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded by the court, that
grave and irremediable injustice will be caused if such amendment is not
permitted, and on no other ground, and that the party so applying has not been
guilty of laches.

**13**

The amendment introduced by Act No. 9 of 1991 was clearly intended to prevent
the undue postponement of trials by placing a significant restriction on the
power of the court to permit amendment of pleadings on or after the day first
fixed for the trial of the action. An amendment of pleadings on the date of
trial, more often than not, results in the postponement of the trial. In this
connection it would not be inappropriate to refer to the observations of
Sansoni, J. (as he then was) in _Daryanani v Eastern Silk Emporium Ltd.,_ (1)
__ I have also always understood the rule to be that an amendment should be
applied for as early as possible and as soon as it becomes apparent that it
would be necessary. Only in this way can unnecessary delays be avoided.
Applications for amendment at the trial have always been discouraged, because
the other party has been put to the expense and trouble of getting ready for
trial. In the same case, in a separate judgment, L. B. de Silva, J., made
similar observations ............. convenience and the interests of justice
demand that an amendment of pleadings should be made as early as possible
............... .It has been the normal practice of our courts to allow such
amendments before the hearing. (at page 538). The learned Judges were dealing
with section 93 prior to its amendment, and these observations were made in
the context of the submission of counsel that an amendment of pleadings is not
permitted prior to the hearing of the action. The relevance of those
observations for present purposes is that they indicate the rationale
underlying the amendment introduced by Act No. 9 of 1991. While the Court
earlier discouraged amendment of pleadings on the date of trial. Now the court
is precluded from allowing such amendments save on the ground postulated in
the subsection.

Turning now to the averments in the amended answer, it is clear that the
defendant was well aware of the fact that the plaintiff was living in adultery
at the time the answer was filed, but she has chosen not to rely on that
ground in her answer. After the second date of trial, she is seeking to amend
the answer by including a cause of action based on adultery. In these
circumstances, the conclusion of the Court of Appeal, that the defendant is
guilty of laches and that the amended answer has to be rejected in terms of
section 93 (2) (as amended) must be affirmed.

**14**

Mr. D. R. P. Gunatilake for the Defendant‑Appellant strenuously contended that
the Defendant refrained from pleading adultery in the answer as her intention
was to save the marriage in the interest of the children. Her intentions were
no doubt laudable and deserving of sympathy, but if such a plea is __
admissible the purpose of the amendment would, to a great extent, be defeated.

For these reasons, the appeal fails and is dismissed, but without costs.

**KULATUNGA, J. ‑ **I agree.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/11.html_  

