##  Science House (Ceylon) Limited. v. I. P. A. Laboratories Private Limited.
- SLR - 155, Vol 1 of 1989 [1989] LKSC 11; (1989) 1 Sri LR 155 (20 January
1989)

**

155

SCIENCE HOUSE (CEYLON) LIMITED  
v.  
I. P. C. A. LABORATORIES PRIVATE LIMITED

**

SUPREME COURT.  
TAMBIAH J.. SENEVIRATNE J. & FERNANDO J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO: 4/87;  
CA/LA NO: 147/82.  
D. C. COLOMBO NO: 32689/S.  
NOVEMBER 21. 1988,  
DECEMBER 01. 08 and 09,1988.

_

Civil Procedure - Summary procedure (on liquid claims) under Chapter L Ill of
the Civil Procedure Code_ \- _Ss. 25,703,704,705 and 706 (1) CPC_ \- _Attorney
-Recognised Agent_ \- _Companies Ordinance S. 34 (1/_ \- _Security.

_

In a suit by way of summary procedure under Chapter LIII of the Civil
Procedure Code for recovery of monies due on two Bills of Exchange on a sale
of drugs, the plaintiff a company incorporated in India filed plaint through
its Attorney in Sri Lanka who held a power of attorney from it. To the plaint
was annexed an affidavit from the said Attorney stating, inter alia, that the
sums claimed in the plaint were justly and truly due to the plaintiff.

The defendant-company asked for unconditional leave to appear and defend the
action on the ground that part of the drugs were of poor quality and had
deteriorated and had to be destroyed and the plaintiff had failed to
contribute towards the remuneration and expenses of two medical
representatives. Further there had been delay in presentment for payment and
the monies were therefore not recoverable. At the hearing the defendant-
company took up the position that as the. plaintiff was a company it could not
avail itself of the summary procedure on liquid claims provided by Chapter
Llll of the Civil Procedure Code in that it could not make an affidavit as.
required by S. 705 (1) of the Code. The District Judge held that S. 34 (1) of
the Companies-Ordinance permitted any document requiring authentication by a
company to be signed by "a Director, Secretary or other officer of the Company
and therefore the affidavit filed along with the plaint fulfilled the
requirements of S. 705 (1) of the C. P: C. In the correspondence between the
parties the defendant company had not complained that any quantity of the
drugs had to be destroyed owing to poor quality or deterioration or that the
plaintiff had failed to contribute towards the expenses and disbursements on
account ot Medical Representatives and the District Judge concluded the
defence was not prima facie sustainable and he had reasonable doubt as to its
good faith. He ordered the defendant-company to deposit Rs. 400,000/- as
security. In appeal, the Court of Appeal held with the District Judge.

**

156

Held

**

  1. The District Judge's conclusions that the defence was not prima facie sustainable and that he had reasonable doubt as to its good faith are justifiable and should be upheld.  


  2. A Corporation or a Company can avail itself of the special procedure in Chapter Llll of the Civil Procedure Code and it can make an affidavit as required by S. 705 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code through one of its principal officers.  


  3. The Plaintiff-Company's Attorney in Colombo was a "recognised agent" within the meaning of S. 25 (b) of the Code and his affidavit was sufficient and satisfied the requirements of S. 7O5( 1) of the Code.  


  4. Section 34(1) of the Companies Ordinance permits juristic persons to file affidavits in proceedings under Chapter Llll of the CPC.  


  5. Sections 704 and 706 of the CPC stipulate that only the sum mentioned in the summons could be ordered as security. The security of Rs. 400,000/- is in excess of the amount that could be ordered. No more than the amount mentioned in the summons can be ordered as security.

**

Cases referred to:- **.

_

  1. The Bank of Madras v. Ponnesamy -_ 9 SCC 169.
_

  2. The Bank of Montreal v. Cameron_ \- LR2QBD536.
_

  3. Royal Crown Derby Porcelain Co. Ltd. v. Russell_ [1949] 1 All ER 749.
_

  4. Martin Perera v. Madadombe_ \- 73 NLR 25, 34.
_

  5. Collettes Ltd. v. Bank of Ceylon_ [1984] - 2 SRI LR - 243, 314.

8\. _H. L Bolton (Engineering) Co. Ltd. v. T. J. Graham & Sons Ltd _[1956] - 3
ALL ER 624, 630.

_

(The Bank of Madras v. Ponnesamy (supra) not followed)

_**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

P. Nagendran P.C._ with S. _Mithrakrishnan_ and _J. Salwatura_ for Defendant-
Appellant.

_

K. N. Choksy P. C._ with _S. A. Parathalingam. Mrs. C. D. Amerasinghe_ and
_Mrs. D.

Wimaladharma _for the Plaintiff-Respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult

_

**157**

January 20, 1989

**

TAMBIAH, J,

**

The plaintiff-respondent (hereinafter called the plaintiff-company) on or
about 19.3.1982 instituted action under Chapter Llll of the Civil Procedure
Code in the District Court of Colombo against the defendant-appellant
(hereinafter called the defendant-company) for the recovery of Rs. 122,967/42
due on a Bill of Exchange marked "A" filed with the plaint, and another sum of
Rs. 195,030/17 due on a second Bill of Exchange marked "B" filed with the
plaint. The plaintiff-company also claimed interest at 1 5% per-annum from
10.1.1 979 on the first Bill of Exchange and from 5.1.1979 on the second Bill
of Exchange. The plaintiff-company, which was a Company incorporated under the
Laws of India, annexed to its plaint an affidavit by its attorney in Sri Lanka
under a Power of Attorney stating, inter alia, that the sums claimed in the
plaint were justly and truly due to the plaintiff-company.

Upon service of summons, the defendant-company, filed an affidavit of one of
its Directors and requested that the defendant-company be granted
unconditional leave to appear and defend the action. In this affidavit, it was
stated on behalf of the defendant-company, that part of the drugs purchased
from the plaintiff-company to the value of Indian Rupees 34,861 /- had to be
destroyed because of deterioration and poor quality, and that another Rs.
5,000/-(lndian Rupees) worth of stock was also of poor quality and had
deteriorated; that although the plaintiff-company had agreed to contribute
towards the remuneration and expenses of two medical representatives in Sri
Lanka to popularise their products, it had failed to do so and there was due
and owing to the defendant-company Rs. 57,000/- (Indian Rupees) from the
plaintiff-company; that the defendant-company was entitled to set off these
sums of Rs. 34,861/-, Rs. 5.000/-and R5, 57,000/- (Indian Rupees) which in Sri
Lankan Rupees amounted to Rs. 215,032/53. It was also the defendant-company's
position that the two Bills of Exchange were payable on sight but there had
been a delay in presentment for payment and had been presented only on
4.4.1981, and hence the

**158**

plaintiff-company cannot recover' the monies on the said two Bills of
Exchange.

However, when the application for unconditional leave to appear and defend
came up for hearing, it was submitted on behalf of the defendant-company that
the plaintiff-company being a Company, it could not avail itself of the
summary procedure on liquid claims provided by Chapter Llll of the Civil
Procedure Code, in that, it could not make an affidavit as required by s. 705
(.1) of the Code.

The learned District Judge by his order dated 24.9.1982 took the view that s.
34 (1) of the Companies Ordinance permitted, any document requiring
authentication by a Company to be signed by a Director, Secretary, or other
officer of the Company concerned. As the affidavit in the case has been made
by the Company's attorney, in Sri Lanka, the learned District Judge held that
the plaintiff-company had filed a good and valid affidavit as required by s.
705 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code.

The correspondence, between the parties does not bear out the defendant-
company's claim that the goods were of poor quality and were destroyed because
of its deterioration and poor quality; nor does it bear out the claim of the
defendant-company with regard to expenses and disbursements on account of
Medical Representatives. The correspondence further establishes that the
defendant-company throughout accepted liability in the amount claimed by the
plaintiff-company. Having examined the correspondence, the learned District
Judge concluded that the defence was not prima facie sustainable and that he
had reasonable doubt as to its good faith, and ordered the defendant-company
to deposit a sum of Rs. 400,000/- as security in the case.

On appeal, the Court of Appeal by its judgment dated 18.12.1986 affirmed the
judgment of the learned District Judge and dismissed the appeal with costs,
but granted leave to the defendant-company to appeal to this Court on the
following questions of law:.

**159**

  1. Whether a Corporation or a Company is precluded by the terms of Chapter 53 of the Civil Procedure Code from utilizing the provisions of that Chapter relating to summary procedure on liquid claims as that Chapter does not specifically provide for such- a Company or Corporation making an affidavit.
  2. Whether the provisions for the institution of proceedings by way of summary procedure under  
Chapter 53 of the Civil Procedure Code- permit an affidavit authenticated in
terms of Section 34 (1) of the Companies Ordinance being admitted as
fulfilling the requirements of Section 705 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code.

In the District Court and the Court of Appeal and also before this Court,
learned President's Counsel for the defendant-company relied strongly oh the
decision in _The Bank of Madras v. Ponnesamy_ 0). In this case, which was
decided on 30th June, 1891, the plaintiffs, a banking corporation constituted
and regulated under the Indian Presidency Bank Act, 1876, sued the defendant
as endorser to them of twenty-two promissory notes. The plaintiffs proceeded
summarily under Chapter Llll of the Civil Procedure Code and in terms of s.
705 (1) filed an affidavit from the Colombo Manager of the Bank-and obtained
summons on the defendant. It was contended for the defence that such an
affidavit does not satisfy the requirements of s. 705 (1) which reads:

"The plaintiff who so sues and obtains such summons as aforesaid must on
presenting the plaint produce to the Court the instrument on which he sues,
and he must make affidavit **** that the sum which he claims is justly due to
him from the defendant thereon." (emphasis is mine)

**160**

and s. 655 makes this special provision for corporation plaintiffs and others
- that 'when the action is brought by a corporation, board, public body, or
company, then any principal officer of such corporation, board, public body or
company may be allowed by the court to make an affidavit in these matters
instead of the plaintiff. There is no similar provision in Chapter III. I see
no alternative but to conclude that the legislature has not extended to
corporations the summary procedure under Chapter LIIl. I certainly arrive at
this conclusion with regret and not without surprise. The corporate banks
which carry on business in Ceylon are probably the largest holders of the
class of instruments for which this summary procedure is designed, and one can
conceive of no possible reason why they should be precluded from so
proceeding. We have however no option open to us, and must, to borrow Lord
Bramwell's words, let the oversight, if it be one, be set right by the proper
authority' - i.e., in this case, the legislature."

and Dias, J. said (p. 172):

"The judgment in favour of the plaintiffs was passed under s. 705 of the Civil
Procedure Code. To entitle plaintiff to a judgment under this section, he, the
plaintiff 'must make affidavit that the sum which he claims is justly due to
him from the defendant,' and according to the plain meaning of this sentence
the affidavit must be made by the plaintiff personally and not by agent, and
there is nothing in s. 705 or in any part of Chapter LIU which would justify
the inference, that the plaintiff could do by proxy what he could

**161**

do himself. S. 705 gives the plaintiff an advantage over the, defendant, who
can only defend the action under the circumstances set forth in sections 706,
and we are bound to strictly construe s. 705. the plaintiffs in this case are
a banking company and the affidavit was sworn by the local, manager, and I
very much regret to be obliged to hold that the plaintiffs cannot avail
themselves of the summary procedure laid down in the 53rd Chapter of the Code.
I do not believe the legislature had any intention to exclude corporations
from the benefit of the Code-it is a mere oversight - but it can only be
rectified by the legislature."

Both learned Judges were greatly influenced by the decision in the English
case of _The Bank of Montreal v. Cameron_ (2). In that case, the Judges had to
construe rule 1 under Order 14 of the rules under the Judicature Act. The
words of the rule are: "where the defendant appears on a writ of, summons
specially endorsed under Order 3, rule 6, the plaintiff may, on affidavit
verifying the cause of action and swearing that in his belief there is no
defence to the action, call on the defendant" etc. The plaintiffs were a
banking corporation and the affidavit was sworn by the secretary of the
company and the Judges held that the special procedure was not open to a
corporation because a corporation cannot be a plaintiff capable of swearing to
his belief.

I find that the submission made by learned Counsel for the plaintiffs in the
_Bank of Madras_ case that s. 24 of the Civil Procedure Code enables a
recognised agent of a party to make or do any appearance, application, or act
required to be made or done by a party himself and that the plaintiffs'
manager in Colombo was the Bank's recognised agent and therefore his affidavit
was sufficient, was not considered at all by either of the two learned Judges.

Learned President's Counsel for the defendant-company went on to submit that
It was this judgment which led the Legislature to amend the Civil Procedure
Code by Ordinance No. 12 of 1895, and, by s. 11 of the said Ordinance, to
enact s. 829A (3) which stated that "the, provisions of s. 655 in respect of
the

**162**

affidavit of the plaintiff required by sections 650 and 653 shall extend to
affidavits required by s. 705 in actions instituted under Chapter of this
Ordinance to District Courts and Courts of Requests"; that Chapter LXVI of the
Civil Procedure Code, in which s. 829A(3) was found, was repealed by s, 124 of
the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Law, No. 20 of 1977, and thus there is
now no provision similar to s. 829A(3) in the Civil Procedure Code which was
reintroduced to the Statute Book in 1977. He, therefore, submitted that we are
now back in the same position as in 1891 and the judgment in the _Bank of
Madras_ case is applicable. He cited a passage from Bindra's "Interpretation
of Statutes" (6th Edn. p. 1 97):

"There is a presumption that the Legislature, when it repeats in substance in
a later Act an earlier enactment, that has obtained a settled meaning by
judicial construction, intends the words to mean what they meant before."

Learned President's Counsel also referred us to the Report of the Committee
appointed by the Minister of Justice on the "Law and Practice relating to Debt
Recovery" published in 1 985. The Committee in its Report observed that one of
the main reasons for the reluctance of creditors to invoke the procedure under
Chapter I III "is the lacuna in the law which precludes a Company or an
unincorporated association from coming into Court under this Chapter" and
recommended the "inclusion of a provision for the plaintiffs affidavit where
the plaintiff is not an individual as required by s. 705 (1) as well as for
the defendant's affidavit as required by s. 706."

Learned President's Counsel -for the plaintiff-company submitted that the
decision in the _Bank of Madras_ case was wrong and that there is no lacuna in
the law, that the learned Judges who-decided that case did not consider the
provisions of s. 703 which is the governing section and which empowered a
Company or other Corporate Body to institute an action under Chapter 53 of the
Civil Procedure Code; that s. 705 must be read with s. 703; nor did they
consider the other relevant provisions of the Code; that our legal system
contemplates both a natural and a legal person being either a plaintiff or a

**163**

defendant in a civil proceeding; that a Company or other Corporate Body can
apply to Court for relief by way of summary procedure and support its
application with written evidence, that is, an affidavit sworn to or affirmed
by its principal officers.

I am inclined to agree with the submissions of learned President's Counsel for
the plaintiff-company. In my view the decision in the _Bank of Madras_ case
was erroneous.

It is a well settled rule of construction that when a Statute is repealed and
re-enacted and words in the repealed Statute are reproduced in the new
Statute, they should be interpreted in the sense which had been judicially put
on them in the repealed Act,because the Legislature is presumed to be
acquainted with the construction which the Courts have put upon the words, and
when they repeat the same words, they must be taken to have accepted the
interpretation put on them by the Court as correctly reflecting the
legislative mind. This opinion was discussed by the Court of Appeal in _Royal
Crown Derby Porcelain Co. Ltd. v. Russell_ (3) where it was argued that
certain words contained in s. 5(1.) of the increase of Rent and Mortgage
Interest (Restrictions) Act 1920, and re-enacted in the amending Act of 1933
having been judicially construed by the Divisional Court in 1 925, must bear
that construction in the 1 933 Act. The Court of Appeal decided that the
construction placed upon the words by the Divisional Court was erroneous and
Denning L. J. said (p. 755): .

"I do not believe that whenever Parliament re-enacts a provision of a Statute
it. thereby gives statutory authority to every erroneous interpretation which
has been put upon it.

The true view is that the Court will be slow to overrule a previous decision
when it has been long acted on and it will be more than usually slow to do so
when Parliament has, since the decision, re-enacted a Statute in the same
terms, but if a decision is in fact shown to be erroneous, there is no rule of
law which prevents it being overruled."

Maxwell too in his "Interpretation of Statutes" (12th Edn, pp. 71, 72) points
out:

**164**

"This is not a canon of absolute obligation, but merely a presumption that
Parliament intended that the Language used by it in the subsequent Statute
should be given the meaning which meantime has been judicially attributed to
it. The Court may find that the previous judicial construction was erroneous,
and in any event that construction is not conclusive, but is merely one factor
to be taken into consideration."

In _Martin Perera v. Madadombe_ (4) H. N. G. Fernando, C. J. pointed out the
circumstances in which a Court will be reluctant to overrule a previous
judicial interpretation of a Statute- (1) where the interpretation affects
property and disagreeing with it "would thereby be shaking rights and titles
which have been founded through so many years upon the conviction that that
interpretation is the legal and proper one, and is one which will not be
departed from." (2) "a decision of long standing on the basis of which many
persons will in course of time have arranged their affairs."

It can hardly be said that debtors or borrowers, have acquired rights and
titles, or would have arranged their affairs on the basis that a corporate
plaintiff was not entitled to institute an action under Chapter LI 11 of the
Civil Procedure Code.

**165**

Corporation or a Company, for the principal officer of such Corporation or
Company to make an affidavit instead of the plaintiff, and that Chapter till
contained no similar provision. Here too it must be noted that s. 650 which
deals with the arrest of the defendant before judgment, and s. 653 which deals
with sequestration of property before judgment, contain the words "plaintiff
on petition supported **by his own affidavit"** (emphasis is mine). The word
"own" is used in these two sections because they deal with extreme and severe
remedies of arrest and sequestration of property before judgment. Before a
Court grants either of these remedies, it must have material before it that a
debtor is about to quit the Island under circumstances rendering it improbable
that the debt would be paid or that the defendant is alienating his property
to avoid plaintiffs claim, s. 655 (b) merely requires that such material by
way of affidavit, shall be made by a responsible person like the principal
officer of the' Corporation or Company because of the extreme nature of the
remedy. The words "his own affidavit" are not found in s. 705 (1) of the Code.

S. 11 of the Civil Procedure Code states that "all persons may be joined as
plaintiffs in whom the right to any relief claimed is alleged to exist,
whether jointly, severally, or in the alternative, in respect of the same
cause of action." s. 2(e) of the Interpretation Ordinance defines a "person"
to include any body of persons corporate or incorporate. The word "persons" in
the opening sentence of s. 11 of the Code; read with s. 2 (f) of the
Interpretation Ordinance would therefore include a natural person or a
Corporate Body. Similarly, under s. 14 of the Code, a natural person or a
Corporate Body can be defendant.

S. 470 of the Code provides generally that in actions by or against
corporations, the plaint or answer may be subscribed on behalf of the
corporation by any member, director, secretary, manager or other principal
officer who is able to depose to the facts of the case. S. 703 empowers a
Corporate Body, in case it desires to proceed under Chapter UN of the Code, to
institute action by presenting a plaint. S. 7 states that the procedure in an
action may be either "regular' or "summary" and summary

**166**

procedure is explained in the illustration thus: "In actions of which the
procedure is summary, the applicant simultaneously with preferring his
application supports with proper evidence the statement of fact made therein."

The question arises, how does a Company or other Corporate Body furnish the
evidence to support its application? S. 705 (1) of the Code requires the
plaintiff to make affidavit that the sum which he claims is justly due to him.
In _Collettes Ltd. v. Bank of Ceylon_ (5) Sharvananda, J. (as he then was)
quoted with approval what Denning, L. J., said in _H. L. Bolton (Engineering)
Co. Ltd. v. T. J. Graham & Sons Ltd. _(6)

"A Company may in many ways be likened to a human body. They have a brain and
nerve centre which controls what they do. They also have hands which hold the
tools and act in accordance with directions from the centre. Some of the
people in the Company are mere servants and agents who are nothing more than
hands to do the work and cannot be said to represent the mind or will. Others
are directors and managers who represent the directing mind and will of the
company, and control what they do. The state, of mind of these managers is the
state of mind of the company and is treated by law as such."

Sharvananda, J. (at p. 285) also quoted with approval a passage from _At/yah_
in his "Vicarious liability in the Law of Torts":

"However in the case of companies and other corporations, knowledge of-
directors and managers and other 'responsible officials' is normally treated,
in accordance with modern principles of company law, as knowledge of the
company itself."

So, it seems to me that a Company or other Corporate Body can support its
plaint by written evidence on oath or affirmation, that is, an affidavit
through its principal officers like a Managing Director, Director, Secretary
or a responsible officer, and when they do. so, it becomes an affidavit of the
Company or other Corporate Body itself.

**167**

Learned President's Counsel for the defendant-company conceded that a Company
or other Corporate Body can be a plaintiff in an action by summary procedure
on liquid claims in terms of s. 703 of the Code; but maintained that it cannot
make affidavit because s. 705 (1) plainly and expressly says "he must make
affidavit"; he contended that the use of the pronoun "he" permits only a
natural person to make affidavit and excludes, a juristic person,

S. 705 (1) opens with the words "The plaintiff" and goes on to say "he must
make affidavit", that is, "he" the plaintiff. I find that the pronoun "he" is
used three times in s. 705 (1), and the pronoun "him" once. As was correctly
pointed out by learned President's Counsel for the plaintiff-company, the
draftsman instead of indulging in monotonous repetition of the word
"plaintiff" used the pronoun "he". Otherwise, the word "plaintiff" would have
had to be used three times over again, wherever the pronoun "he" is used.

Under s, 704 of the, Code, the defendant can be a Corporate Body, in this
section too, after the use of the word "defendant", the pronoun "he" had been
used. This method and style of draftsmanship appears throughout the Civil
Procedure Code. For example, "in sections 11, 34 (2), 50, .51 and 52, every
one of which is applicable to a Company or other Corporate Body, after the
initial use of the word "plaintiff", thereafter the pronoun "he" is used."

If as contended for the defendant-company, a Company cannot make affidavit,
there are provisions in the Companies Act, No. 1 7 of 1982, which cannot be
worked and given effect to, S. 68(1) contemplates an application by the
Company to the District Court for an order confirming the reduction of share
capital. S. 441(1) sets out the procedure that the application shall be by way
of petition and affidavit. Sections 210 and 211 contemplate an application to
the District Court against the Company for the prevention of oppression and
mismanagement. S. 213 contemplates an application for ex-parte interim orders
against the Company, and s. 213 (3) states that the application by the

**168**

Company for the revocation or variation of the exparte interim order shall be
by petition supported by affidavit. The legislature is proceeding on the basis
that a Company can make affidavit and how does it do so except through its
principal officers who are natural persons?

The answer to the first question of law on which leave to appeal to this Court
was granted is that a Corporation or a Company could avail itself of the
special procedure in Chapter I-111 of the Civil Procedure Code, and it could
make an affidavit as required by s. 705 (1) of the Code through one of its
principal officers.

In the present case, the attorney of the plaintiff-company, on oath has stated
that he can depose to the facts of the case from his personal knowledge and
from the particulars acquired from the papers and correspondence in his
possession; on oath, he has also deposed to the fact that the monies are
justly and truly owing from the defendant to the plaintiff. He holds a Power
of Attorney from the plaintiff-company which is incorporated in India. The
term "Power of Attorney" is not defined in the Civil Procedure Code.

"Broadly speaking, it is a formal instrument by which authority is conferred
on an agent. Such" an instrument

should be construed strictly and. as giving only such authority as it confers
expressly or by necessary

implication."

("Code of Civil Procedure" by _Chitaley & Rao, 3rd Edn. Vol.2. p. 1398)

_

The Stamps Ordinance in s. 94 defines "Power of Attorney: "Power of Attorney
includes an instrument empowering a specified person to act for and in the
name of the person executing it." In short, a person holding a Power of
Attorney is an **agent** appointed under a writing by a Principal to act for
him. As such he cannot be considered a **principal officer** of the Company
and put in the same class or category as the Directors, Managers and other
responsible officers of a Company or other Corporate Body, (emphasis is mine).

**169**

Does S. 25 (b) of the Civil Procedure Code enable an attorney, under a power
of attorney, to make an affidavit on behalf of the plaintiff-company, for
satisfying the requirements of S. 705(1)? S. 24 of the Code enacts that an
appearance, application or act m or to any Court may be done by a party in
person or by his recognised agent etc. A person- holding a general power of
attorney is a recognised agent in terms of S. 25 (b).

Learned President's Counsel for the defendant-company, however, contended that
S. 24 of the Code be read with Forms No. 6 and No. 7 contained in the First
Schedule to the Civil Procedure Code and that the Forms which set out a
summary of ?ne acts that can be done by a recognised agent exclude the making
of an affidavit on behalf of a party to an action. I cannot agree.

The words in S. 24 of the Code are "any appearance, application or act in or
to any Court". In case the plaintiff desires to proceed under Chapter Llll, he
applies to Court for relief by way of summary procedure by presenting to Court
a plaint supported by an affidavit. It is an "application to Court" which can
be made by the party to an action or by his recognised agent. Where an
"application" to Court is required to be made by plaint and affidavit (and not
by plaint alone), the word "application" in S. 24 comprises both such plaint
and affidavit. The plaintiff-company's attorney in Colombo was a "recognised
agent" within the meaning of S. 25 (b) of the Code and his affidavit was
sufficient and satisfied the requirements of S. 705 (1) of the Code.

The second question that arises for consideration is whether S. 34 (1) of the
Companies Ordinance permitted juristic persons to file affidavits in
proceedings under Chapter Llll of the Civil Procedure Code. S. 34 (1) reads:
"A document or proceeding requiring authentication by a Company may be signed
by a director, secretary, or other authorised officer of the Company,

and need. not be under common seal."

Learned President's Counsel for the defendant-company contended that the term
"authenticate" in S, 34 (1) means

**170**

nothing more than this - that one holds out that the document is genuine but
not that what is stated in the document is true; while in the case of an
affidavit, the person who swears or affirms an affidavit not only states the
facts, but also states that the facts are true to his personal knowledge.

Learned President's Counsel for the plaintiff-company referred us to the
meaning given to "authenticate" in the Dictionaries. He referred us to Black's
"Law Dictionary" (4th Edn.) which defines the term "authentic" as "genuine,
true, reliable, trustworthy, credible, reliable as evidence", and submitted
that when one signs an affidavit, one holds out that an affidavit is reliable
evidence.

Learned President's Counsel also referred us to the Oxford English Dictionary
(Vol. 1, 1933) wherein "authenticate" is defined, as, inter alia, "to
establish the title to credibility and acceptance of a statement", "to
establish the genuineness of"; "authenticated" is defined as "invested with
correctness, truth, genuineness"; "authenticator" is defined as "he who
guarantees a thing as valid, true or reliable", "the quality of being entitled
to acceptance", and "as being in accordance with fact, as being true in
substance."

Applying these definitions, learned President's Counsel submitted that when
one signs an affidavit and presents it to Court, he asks Court to accept it as
being in accordance with fact.

S. 34 (1) of the Companies Ordinance contains the word "proceeding". Learned
President's Counsel also submitted that when a plaintiff files an action by
way of summary procedure, it is a proceeding. He must present the plaint and
the instrument sued upon to Court, and also make affidavit that the sum which
he claims is justly due to him from the defendant. The plaintiff authenticates
the proceeding by filing an affidavit.

On this matter, the learned District Judge stated that S. 34 (1) permits any
document requiring authentication by a Company to be signed by a Director,
Secretary or other authorised officer of

**171**

the Company concerned; that the affidavit in this-case has been subscribed on
its behalf by its attorney in Sri Lanka and the plaintiff, therefore, has
filed a good and valid affidavit as required by S. 705(1) of the. Code.

The plaintiff-company's attorney in Sri Lanka cannot be classed as an "other
authorised officer" **** of the Company.

The Court of Appeal stated that "authenticated" according to the Oxford
Dictionary means "to establish the truth of, or make valid, or prove to be
genuine, prove beyond doubt the origin or authorship by oath"; that it is
reduced to writing, signed and sworn; that an affidavit is also a written
statement, signed, and confirmed by oath. They both mean the same thing".

The definition in the Dictionary does not go to the extent of saying that
authenticate means to establish the truth of etc. "by oath".

I am inclined to agree with the submission of learned President's Counsel for
the defendant-company persons would be by law required to be in writing, have
to be made under the common seal of the Company, and where the law requires a
writing signed by the parties, the contract can be made by a person authorised
by the Company by merely signing. Parol contracts neither need the seal of the
Company nor the signature of the person authorised to make such contract (S.
30). In the case of deeds executed abroad, the attorney executing the deed
must be empowered to do so by a writing under the common seal in order to bind
the Company (S. 32). So also, a document or a proceeding requiring
authentication by a Company need not be under the common seal of the Company
and can be signed by the principal officers mentioned in S. 34(1).

**172**

Affidavit means a solemn assurance of a fact known to the person who states it
and sworn to as his statement before some person in authority such as a
Justice _o\_ the PBSIC6. A, person acquainted with the facts must make the
affidavit and the contents must be read over to the deponent and vouched by
him to be correct. I do not think that the Legislature had in mind an
affidavit when it enacted S. 34 (1) of the Companies Ordinance.

The Companies Ordinance by S. 118 required that a Company entered in the
Minute Book, the proceedings of general meetings and meetings of its
Directors. An extract from the Minute Book of the proceeding of a particular
meeting signed by a Director or the Secretary of a Company will be a
"document" authenticated by him; it may also be considered a "proceeding" of a
meeting, authenticated by him. Suppose, such a document is signed and produced
in a Court of Law years later by a present Director or Secretary, who was not
a Director or Secretary when the meeting was in fact held. The utmost he can
do is to sign and certify that the extract is a true copy from the Minute
Book, and it may be evidence of the proceedings, but, he cannot hold out that
what is stated therein is true to his personal knowledge. The answer to the
second question of law on which leave to appeal to this Court was granted, is
in the negative.

The learned District Judge ordered the defendant-company to deposit a sum of
Rs. 400,000/- as security. The Court of Appeal has affirmed this Order.
Sections 704 and 706 of the Civil Procedure Code stipulate that only the sum
mentioned in the summons could be ordered as security. Learned President's
Counsel for the defendant-company stated that the learned District Judge has
ordered a sum in excess of the amount stated in the summons. This is not
disputed by learned President's Counsel for the plaintiff-company. This Court
made order calling for the Record in order to ascertain the sum stated in the
summons and has been informed that the Record is missing and is being traced.
I. therefore, have no alternative but to make order reducing the amount of the
security to the sum mentioned in the summons. .

**173**

Subject to this variation, the appeal is dismissed with costs.

**

seneviratne, j.** \- I agree.

**

FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree.

_

Security varied_ \- _subject to this Appeal dismissed_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/11.html_  

