##  Udeshi and Others v. Mather - SLR - 12, Vol 1 of 1988 [1987] LKSC 11;
(1988) 1 Sri LR 12 (30 September 1987)

**

12

UDESHI AND OTHERS  
V.  
MATHER

**

SUPREME COURT  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., ATUKORALE, J. AND L. H: DE ALWIS, J.  
S.C. APPEAL Nos. 6787 AND .7/87,  
CA (L.A.) No. 71/86 WITH C.A. No. 622/86(R)  
DC MOUNT LAVINIA No. 1707/RE  
MAY 7 8. 25 and 26, 1987.

_

Civil Procedure Code - Power of Attorney - Special and general powers of
attorney - Recognized agents - 'Sections 5, 24, 25 (b) and 27 of the Civil
Procedure Code - Rectification - Ratification - Supreme Court Rules, 1978,
Rule 50 - Stay orders by a single Judge \- Inherent jurisdiction.

_

(1) Recognised agent is defined in s. 5 of the Code as including the persons
designated under that name in s.25 and no others. No person other than those
designated as recognised agents in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of s. 25 can
be recognised agent of a party. Subsection (b) designates one class of
recognised agents namely, those. holding general powers of attorney, from
parties not resident within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the court
where the application is made or act done, authorising them to make such
appearances and applications and do such acts on their behalf. A proctor duly
appointed by a recognised agent of a party may, inter alia, make an
application to court.

(2) Where an objection is raised relating to the validity of a power of
attorney on the basis of the residence of the grantor for the first time in
appeal, the appellants' request to adduce adduce evidence to non establish
their non date should have been granted on the basis of established procedure
and the rule of audi alteram partem which is ingrained in our legal system.

(3) The burden was on the respondent to establish that the appellants were
resident in Sri Lanka on the material date. This burden the respondent cannot
discharge by merely relying on the addresses given in the captions and proxies
when the applications and proxies had been accepted by the court and thus
bringing into operation the maxim omnia praesumuntur rite et solemniter esse
acta.

(4) A defective proxy can be rectified and the acts done thereon ratified by
the principal where the defects are curable. The question is whether the
proctor had in fact the authority of his client to do what was done on his
behalf although in pursuance of a defective appointment. If in fact he had his
clients' authority to do so, then the defect is one which in the absence of
any positive legal bar, could be cured. On the contrary if in fact he did not
have such authority the acts done and the appearances made on his behalf by
the attorney-at-law would be void and of no legal effect.

(5) 'Failure to file the powers of attorney of certified copies thereof in
court in compliance with s. 25(b) of the Civil Procedure Code is only an
irregularity which can be cured later by tendering them to Court.

**13**

(6) Any notary can certify a copy of a power of attorney as a true copy for
the purposes of s. 25(b) of the Civil Procedure Code and not only the notary
who attested it.

(7) Article 132(2) of the Constitution does not prevent a single Supreme Court
Judge in the exercise of inherent jurisdiction from issuing a stay order,
where an application for special leave is pending, operative until
determination of the application. If leave is granted any. further stay order
must be by a Supreme Court bench of three judges.

(8) Where a power of attorney is given in respect of a business enterprise but
mentions only one particular place of its business and not the other places of
its business, still it is a general power of attorney and not a special power.

**

Cases referred to :

** (1) _Wijesinghe v. The Incorporated Council of Legal Education_ (1963) 65
NLR 364

(2) _Tillekeratne v. Wijesinghe_ (1908) 11 NLR 270.

(3) _Arumugam Chetty v. Silva_ (1923) 25 NLR 31.

(4) _Kadiramadas v. Suppiah_ (1953) 56 NLR 172 .

(5) _Nelson de Silva v. Casinathan_ (1953) 55 NLR 121,

(6) _Alia Markar .. Muttu and lsa Natchiya_ (1900)2 Br. Rep. 64

(7) _Segu Mohamadu v. Govindan Kangany_ 2 Leader Rep. 61.

(8) _William Silva. v. M. D. Sirisena_ (1965) 68 NLR 2055.

(9) _Aitken, Spence & Co. v. Fernando _ (1900) 4 NLR 35.

**

APPEALS** from order of the Court of Appeal.

_

H. L. de Silva, P.C. with K. Nadarajah, K. Thevarajah, L. N. de Silva and
Chamal de Silva_ for the applicants.

_

Miss Marueen Seneviratne P. C. with Faiz Mustapha and R.S. Jogendra _ for the
respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 30, 1987

**

ATUKORALE, J.

**

There are two appeals before us, both arising out of the same order made by
the Court of Appeal in respect of two applications before it-one being for'
leave to appeal from and the other in revision of the order of the District
Judge allowing the respondent's application for the execution of the amended
decree pending appeal. After trial judgment was entered by the District Judge
in favor of the respondent for the ejectment of the appellants (the tenants)
from the premises in suit and for the recovery of arrears of rent and damages
in a sum of Rs. 820,000/-. The premises in respect of which the action was
filed comprised the ground floor portion of the upstairs building originally
bearing assessment No. 247, Galle Road, Bambalapitiya. The appellants have
lodged an appeal against this judgment and it is still pending in the Court of
Appeal. After inquiring into the

**14**

respondent's application for execution of the amended decree pending appeal,
the learned District Judge on 2.6.5. 1986 ordered both writs, for ejectment as
well as for the recovery of the sum decreed, to issue. On the same day the
Fiscal ejected the appellants from the premises in suit and handed over
possession of the same to the respondent's agent. On 3.6.1986 the appellants
filed these two applications in the Court of Appeal praying that the order of
the learned Judge be set aside, that both writs be recalled, that they be
restored to possession and also, in the revision application, for an order
staying the execution of writ for the recovery of the sum decreed pending the
final determination of that application. The Court of Appeal granted a stay
order and thereafter, having taken up both applications for hearing. together,
dismissed them upholding a preliminary objection raised on behalf of the
respondent and revoked the stay order. It is from this order that the
appellants have appealed to this court.

In the Court of Appeal the respondent in his written objections dated24.7.1986
set out two preliminary objections to the maintainability of the applications
They are briefly as follows:

(i) that the appellants were not properly before court and had no legal status
or locus standi to make the applications to the Court of Appeal or to obtain
the stay order inasmuch as the powers of attorney authorising the institution
of proceedings had not been filed in court as required by s.25(b) of the Civil
Procedure Code and

(ii) that there had been no compliance with rules 46 and 50 of the Supreme
Court Rules, 1978, in that only true and not certified copies of documents had
been filed along with the applications and that the additional papers tendered
to court subsequently had not been filed with the leave of court. This
objection, however, does not appear to have been pursued at the hearing before
the Court of Appeal.

The circumstance in the background of which the first objection was raised may
now beset down. Admittedly the proxy filed on behalf of the appellants in each
of the applications was signed by the attorneys of the 1st, 3rd, 4th, 6th,
8th, 9th, 11th and 11th appellants (hereinafter referred to s the
8-appellants) and by the other appellants personally. But neither at the time
of filing of the applications nor at the

**15**

time of obtaining the stay' order in the revision application had the powers
of attorney-or certified copies- there of been filed in court, This omission
was remedied only on 22.8.1986 (i.e. after the respondent  \- filed his
written objections) on which date the appellants' attorney-at-law, by way of a
motion, tendered certified copies of the respective powers of attorney and
moved that they be accepted. A copy of this motion, without copies' of the
powers being annexed thereto, was served on the respondent's attorney-at-law.
No leave was obtained from court prior to the filing of the motion.

At the hearing before the Court of Appeal learned counsel for the appellants
in reply to the first objection maintained that even though the powers of
attorney or certified copies thereof had not been filed in court along with
the applications, none the less certified copies had subsequently been filed,
that the failure to file them in the first instance was a mere defect which
was curable and had been regularised and that the appellants were, therefore,
'properly before court. However at the hearing before the Court of Appeal
learned counsel for the respondent advanced a further and new objection (not
set out in the written objections) namely, that the grantors of the powers
(the 8 appellants) were all persons resident the island and that as such the
grantees (the attorneys) were not their recognised agents wit, ill the meaning
of s. 25(b) of the Code. They had therefore no authority to appoint a proctor
on behalf of the 8 appellants. It was thus sought to be contended that the
registered attorney of the appellants had power to institute the applications
and that the appellants were not properly before court, In reply to this
objection learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the question
whether a party was or was not resident within the island involved a question
of fact and as this objection had not been pleaded in the written objections,
the appellants should be afforded an opportunity of placing evidence before
court to show that they were not on the material date, namely 3.6.1986,
resident within Sri Lanka. He also contended that there was no material to
establish that the 8 appellants were resident in Sri Lanka.

After hearing submissions the Court of Appeal dismissed both applications and
revoked the stay order. It found as a. fact that there was material to show
that the 8 appellants were resident in Sri Lanka on or about the material date
and as such upheld the objection that the attorneys were not the recognized
agents of their principals and

**16**

were incompetent to sign the proxy on their behalf. There were thus no,
properly constituted applications before court. For this reason it ruled that
the applications could not be sustained. In view of this finding it refrained
from deciding the other questions that were argued before it.

The material upon which the Court of Appeal drew the inference that the 8
appellants were resident in Sri Lanka was the addresses given in the captions
to the two applications and in the proxies which described them as being all
of 150/3, Ward Place, Colombo 7\.

At the hearing before us learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the
address given in the caption to a pleading in the Court of Appeal or in a
proxy is ambiguous from which it is unsafe for a court to arrive at an
inference upon a disputed question relating to a party's residence within or
outside Sri: Lanka, that this objection was not one set out in the written
statement of objections of the respondent and that involving as it did a
question of fact the appellants ought not to have been denied the- opportunity
they sought of adducing evidence to satisfy the court of their non-residence
in Sri Lanka on or about -the material time. He submitted further that, in any
event, even if the proxies were for this reason detective, it was open to the
appellants to rectify the defect and to ratify the acts done and the
appearances made on their behalf by their registered attorney-at-law. He
further contended that the burden of proving that the 8 appellants were
resident in Sri Lanka on or about the material date was on the respondent who
had failed to discharge the same.

Recognised agent' is defined in s.5 of the Code as including the persons
designated under that name in s.25.and no others. It is thus clear that no
person other than those designated as recognised agents in subsections (a),
(b) and (c) of s.25 can be a recognise agent of a parry. Subsection (b), which
is the one relevant for our purposes designates one class of recognised
agents, namely, those holding general powers of attorney from parties not
resident within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the court within which
limits the appearance or application is made or act done authorising them to
make such appearances and applications and do such acts on their behalf. S.24
stipulates, inter alia, that any application to any court required or
authorised by law to be made by a party to an action or appeal in such court
may, subject to certain exceptions, be made by the party in person or his
recognised agent or by a proctor duty appointed by the

**17**

party or such agent to act on behalf of such party. Hence a. proctor duly
appointed by a recognised agent of a party may, inter alia, make an
application to court. The view taken by the Court of Appeal being that the
attorneys were not the recognised agents of the 8 appellants as the latter
were themselves resident, on or about the material date, within the island the
issues that arise for our determination are whether the Court of Appeal was
right in having proceeded to decide the question of their residence without
having given them an opportunity of adducing material to show that they were
not so resident; whether on the material available to the Court of Appeal it
was correct in concluding that they were resident in Sri Lanka and whether, in
any event, it was open to the appellants to cure the defect in the appointment
of their proctor and to, ratify the acts already done by him on their behalf.

On the first issue I am of the opinion that the Court of Appeal should have
in, the circumstances of, this case, granted the appellants, request to adduce
evidence to establish their non-residence in Sri Lanka on or about the
material date, namely, the date of institution of the applications. As- set
out above, the respondent in his written objections made no challenge to the
validity of The appointment of the appellants attorney-at-law on the ground
that the 8 appellants were resident in Sri Lanka at the time. True, no doubt,
as pointed out by learned counsel for the respondent, the powers nor copies
thereof had been filed in Court at the time tie written objections were flied.
But the respondent 'could have without much difficulty secured their
production in court for his perusal before tendering his objections. Or he
could have, after they were tendered to court, moved to amend the same or to
file additional objections in terms of rule 54 of the Supreme Court Rules,
1978. Preliminary objections of this nature involving as they do disputed
questions of fact upon the basis-of which a court is invited to reject an
application in limine without proceeding to an adjudication on the merits
should never be permitted to be sprung on the opposing party at the hearing
without any prior notice as it would place the latter in a position of
distinct disadvantage. Such a course, if permitted, will defeat the very
purpose of the salutary rule requiring a respondent to file his written
objections which ensures that the petitioner receives adequate notice of the
nature and content of the objections - eliminating thereby the element of
surprise. The course adopted by the Court of Appeal in the instant case
appears to me to be contrary not only to the prescribed procedure but also to
the rule of

**18**

audi alteram partern which is so deeply ingrained in our legal system. It has
effectively and completely denied the appellants of the opportunity, which
they asked for, of placing before court the evidence upon which they proposed
to rely for the purpose of refuting the preliminary objection. I also do not
subscribe to the view that this preliminary objection could not have been
formulated in the first instance without a perusal of the powers of attorney.
The respondent became aware from the beginning that the 8 appellants were
appearing through their attorneys. Their- addresses as given in the captions
to the applications and in the proxies, which were already filed of record and
upon which the respondent placed so much reliance to establish their
'residence in Sri Lanka, would have made it manifest to the respondent long
before the written objections were tendered that they had been described
therein as being all of 150/3, Ward Place, Colombo 7. A little diligence on
his part would have alerted him to this fact at the earliest stage of the
proceedings. There would thus have been no real necessity to wait until the
powers were filed in court to incorporate this preliminary objection in the
written statement

The second issue is whether the Court of Appeal was justified in inferring
that the 8 appellants were resident within Sri` Lanka. As stated earlier this
inference was drawn solely upon the addresses given in the captions to the
applications and in the proxies. Our attention has not been drawn to any legal
provision requiring the place of residence of a party to be specified in the
caption or the body of an application for revision or for leave to appeal or
in the proxy filed in the court of appeal. On the material before us (which
was also before the Court of Appeal) the first reference to the address.
150/3, Ward Place, Colombo 7, appears in the affidavit dated 4.9.1985 tendered
to the District Court by the 2nd, 3rd. 4th, 6th and the 10th appellants on
their own behalf and on behalf of the other appellants who are stated to he
out of the island. This affidavit is in response to the 219 notice - vide
exhibit B, p.189. The caption in exhibit C indicates that the appellants
business of Siedles Cine Radio was being carried on at this address. Further
in paragraph 34 of the respondent's written statement of objections of
24.7.1986, the appellants are stated to have 3 sales centres for the sale of
their electrical goods and appliances, one being at the above address. A
scrutiny of these documents coupled with the fact that it seems so unrealistic
that all the appellants should be resident atone and the same place appears

**19**

to me to vitiate the. conclusion arrived at by the Court of Appeal that the
appellants were resident at the above address. As pointed out by learned
counsel for the appellants, this seems to be a business - address of the
appellants, presumably for the purpose of receiving communications addressed
to them. The burden of establishing the fact that the 8 appellants were
resident in Sri Lanka lay on the respondent. The-applications together with
the accompanying proxies were accepted by court and registered. They were
then-listed for an order of court and the court after consideration ordered
notice to issue on the respondent. Hence the proxies were accepted and acted
upon by the Court of Appeal: If did so because apparently no, defect appeared
on the face of them. If thereafter the respondent desired the court to revoke
the steps already taken by, it, the burden was on him to show that such action
was wrong.' As pointed out by Sansoni J: in the course of his judgment in
Wijesinghe v. The Incorporated Council of Legal Education (1) this rule is
based on the principle omnia praesumuntur rite et solemniter esse acta . The
respondent has, in my view, failed to discharge the burden of establishing
that the 8 appellants were resident in-Sri Lanka on the material date.

The next issue which arises but which, in view of my findings aforesaid would
really not be necessary to decide is whether a proxy which is defective for
the reason urged by the respondent could subsequently be rectified and the
acts done and the steps taken thereon be ratified. In support of the
proposition that such rectification and ratification are permissible in law
learned counsel- for the appellants relied on several decisions of the Supreme
Court. Instances of such a course being approved and adopted by court are to
be found in Tillekeratne v. Wijesinghe (2), Arumugam Chetty v. Silva (3) and
Kadirgamadas v- Suppiah (4). The objections taken up in these cases were,
respectively, that the proxy had not been signed,. that the proxy which had
been executed abroad was not properly stamped in accordance with the
provisions of our Stamp Ordinance and that the proctor had no authority to
sign the petition of appeal on behalf of some of the appellants from whom he
held no proxy at the time. In all these cases the objections. were overruled,
the irregularity in the appointment was held, in the absence of a legal bar,
to be curable and the acts already done capable of being ratified. The
provisions of s:27 of the Code were construed to be directory and not
mandatory. There was, in all these cases, no legal impediment to the defect in
the proxy being rectified and the acts done thereon being ratified. There was

**20**

thus no room for the application of the rule that a principal cannot by
subsequent ratification give validity to an act which was at its inception
unlawful or void - vide Nelson de Silva v. Casinathan (5). Learned -Counsel
also draw our attention to other decisions which have more specifically
considered the analogous position arising out of a proxy  being granted by an
agent holding a general power of attorney which was held to be-defective for
the reason that the party was himself resident within the local limits of the
jurisdiction of the court. In Alia Markar v. Pathu Muttu and Natchiya (6) a
preliminary objection was taken in appeal that the appellant, a Mohamedan
woman, was not properly before court since the proxy signed by her two
attorneys was bad for the reason that she and both her attorneys were resident
Within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the court and as such the
attorneys were not the recognised agents of the appellant and had no authority
to sign the proxy. The validity of this objection was upheld but since it was
not taken in the court below the appellant was granted an opportunity of
signing a fresh proxy and of ratifying the acts' purported to be done in her
name- In Segu Mohamadu v. Govinden Kangany (7) the power of attorney granted
by the plaintiff to his attorney was, in terms, one subsisting only during his
absence from the island. But at the time the attorney signed the proxy the
plaintiff, admittedly, was resident in the island. The proxy was held to be
bad but as the objection had not been taken in the lower court it was held to
be no ground for reversing the decree since the defect did not -tie he test
the the jurisdiction court in appeal was therefore dismissed. In William Silva
v. M. D. Sirisena (8) a preliminary objection was: takers in the lower court
that the plaintiff was not properly before court. At the time the action was
instituted by the proctor upon a proxy signed by the attorney, the plaintiff
was resident within the limits of the jurisdiction of the court. Shortly after
its institution the plaintiff died without taking part at the trial. The
attorney then applied for probate of the last will of the deceased plaintiff
and moved to have himself substituted as the legal representative of the
deceased plaintiff which was allowed. In appeal the court upheld the finding
of the learned District Judge that the plaintiff was not properly before
court. In overruling the finding of the learned District Judge that the
substituted plaintiff had ratified the steps taken since the institution of
the action, the court held that as the original plaintiff had died without
ratifying the action commenced on the proxy given by the attorney there was no
valid action pending and as such there can be no substitution. The court seems
to have taken the view that as the

**21**

original plaintiff did not bring the action and. as he died without ratifying
the action brought on his behalf there could not be a valid substitution or
ratification. In short there was no valid action brought or pending in court.
The action was therefore dismissed.

The principle underlying the decisions in the cases of. Alia Markar v. Pathu
Muttu and Natchiya and Segu Mohamadu v. Govindian Kangany (supra) appears to
me to be that although a party is not properly before court for the reason
that the appointment of the proctor on his behalf by the attorney is bad, yet
the defect in the appointment is one that can be cured and the acts purported
to be done thereon by the proctor, are capable of being ratified by such
party. Such a defect would not: ipso facto render the appearance made or acts
done by the proctor on behalf of the party nullity. If the legal consequence
of such a defect is to vitiate ab initio the appearances and acts of the
proctor there would, in law, have been no decree or order to be sustained in
Appeal !n those cases. The court in refusing to disturb the decree or order of
the lower court on this ground impliedly held that such defects did not per se
vitiate the proceedings already had, The opportunity afforded by the Court of
Appeal of regularising the defect and of ratifying the acts already done is a
clear indication that the defect is only an irregularity and not an
illegality. As pointed out by learned counsel for the appellants, in matters
of this nature the question appears to be whether the proctor had in-fart the
authority of his client to do what was done on his behalf although in
pursuance of a defective appointment. If in fact he had his client's authority
to do so, then. the defect is one which, in the absence of any positive legal
bar, could be cured. On the contrary if in fact he did not have such authority
of his client, the acts done and. the appearances made on his behalf by the
proctor would be void and of no legal effect. This commends itself to me as
the better view. Accordingly I hold that in the circumstances of this case it
was open to the 8 appellants to cure the defect, if there was any, in the
proxies by tendering fresh proxies ratifying the steps already taken on their
behalf by their attorney-at-law. I am therefore of the opinion that the Court
of Appeal erred in upholding the preliminary objection urged on behalf of the
respondent.

The next matter urged by learned counsel for the respondent is that there has
been non-compliance with the provisions of s.25 (b) of the Civil Procedure
Code in that the powers of attorney or certified copies

**22**

thereof were not filed along with the applications and that there has been
non-compliance with rule 50 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1978, in that when
certified copies were tendered to court on 22.8.1986 no leave of court had
been obtained and no copies of the powers were served on the respondent. It is
now settled lave that the failure to file the powers or certified copies
thereof in court as stipulated in s.25 (b) is only an irregularity Which can
be cured later by tendering them to court  Aitken, Spence & Co. v. Fernando
(9). In the instant case this omission has been cured by certified copies
being filed with the motion dated 22.8. 1986. The motion asked that the court
be pleased to accept the certified copies. A copy of this motion was sent to-
the respondent's attorney-at-taw but he did not object to their acceptance by
court. Nor is there anything to indicate their non-acceptance by court. There
has thus been substantial compliance with rule 50 although it appears to me
that this rule would not apply to this situation. Rule 50 read with rule 5 1
seems to refer to pleadings and documents material to the case, the tendering
of which is required to be supported in court. It' is desirable that copies of
the powers of attorney should have been served on the respondent's attorney-
at-law but This objection is a very technical one which can cause no prejudice
to the respondent.

It was also submitted to us by learned counsel for the respondent that one
power of attorney was a special and not a general one. She referred us to the
e power oil attorney granted by the 6th appellant dated 11.6.1979 and stressed
that although it was a general power in so far as the business of Siedles Cine
Radio carried on at premises No. 9 and 10, Consistory Building, Front Street,
Colombo I were concerned, it did not cover the business carried on at the
Bambalapitiya premises in this context she maintained that it was a special
power. I cannot agree. The power of attorney contains two recitals namely,
that the 6th appellant is a partner of the business carried on in partnership
in the name, style and firm; of Siedles Cine Radio at Nos. 9 and 10.
Consistory Building and that she is-desirous of appointing a fit and proper
person 'to manage and transact: the said business and affairs in Sri Lanka' on
her behalf. These latter words cannot, in my view, reasonably be construed as
limiting the power of the agent to the business carried on at premises Nos. 9
and 10, Consistory Building. They must be taken to comprehend the entire
business of Siedles Cine Radio in Sri Lanka, irrespective of the place or
places in which it is carried on. The Consistory Building premises

**23**

seems to have been the principal place of this business until it was destroyed
in July 1983, long after the execution of this power of attorney. The power
creates a general agency in respect of the business of Siedles Cine Radio of
which the 6th appellant is a partner. It is not restricted to any specific
matter-or specific purpose arising out of the business. Nor .is it confined to
the managing and transacting of the business: at one particular place.. It
authorises her attorney to manage and transact the business of Siedles Cine
Radio in anyplace in Sri Lanka on her behalf. The connotation of the word
'general" in this context is that the power must be: general with regard to
the subject matter and not with regard to the powers conferred in respect of
the subject matter. I am therefore of the opinion that this power of attorney
is a general one comprehending the business of Siedles Cine Radio carried on
at the Bambalapitiya premises. Learned counsel for the respondent further
contended that only the notary who attests the power and who therefore has the
legal custody, thereof can certify a copy to be a true copy for the purposes
of s.25 (b). I am unable to subscribe to this view. The words used in the
subsection are "certified by a proctor or notary: The construction sought to
be placed by learned counsel on this words offends the plain meaning of the
language contained in the subsection. Any proctor or notary (whether he
attested the power or not) is competent to certify a copy as a true copy. The
original power of attorney should normally be in the custody of the attorney
himself as he requires the same for the purpose of transacting business with
third persons. One way off his objective is for the proctor before whom it is
produced for purposes of litigation to certify a copy thereof as a true copy
and to file the same in court. The original could then be retained with the
attorney.

Finally it was submitted by learned counsel for the respondent that rules 44
and 45 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1978, which authorise a single Judge of the
Supreme Court, on the application of an applicant or appellant, to order a
stay of execution of a" judgment in respect of which an application-for
special leave or an appeal has been lodged in the Supreme Court, are
inconsistent with the provisions of Article 132(2) of the Constitution and are
therefore ultra vices.

Articles 132(2) of the Constitution stipulates:

''The jurisdiction of the Supreme. Court may be exercised in different matters
at the same time by the several Judges of that.. Court sitting apart

**24**

Provided that its jurisdiction shall, subject to the provisions of the
Constitution, be ordinarily exercised at all times by not less than three
Judges of the Court sitting together as the Supreme Court."

In view of this provision it was submitted that every application to the
Supreme Court for the exercise of its powers (including the issue of a stay
order of the nature contemplated in the above rules) must be dealt with by a
Bench of three judges or more but not less. Article 118 of the Constitution
enumerates the general jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, one being its final
appellate jurisdiction. Article 127 spells out this final appellate
jurisdiction. It extends, inter alia, to the correction of all errors in fact
or in law. which shall be committed by the Court of Appeal or any Court of
First Instance, tribunal or other institution. In the exercise of this
jurisdiction the Supreme Court may affirm, reverse or vary any order,
judgment, decree or sentence of the Court of Appeal. The stay order envisaged
in the rules does not fall within the ambit of the orders that may be made by
the Supreme Court in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction. A stay order
contemplated under the rules is an order in the nature of an incidental or
ancillary order which the Supreme Court; no doubt, may make in the exercise of
its inherent jurisdiction so as to prevent the final order that may ultimately
make in the appeal from being rendered nugatory or futile, in the event of the
appellant succeeding. Such an order being one which is purely incidental to
the exercise of the substantive jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is one
which, in my view is not governed by the proviso of Article 132(2) I am
therefore of the view that it is competent for a single judge of this court to
make a stay order. The two rules are; in my opinion, not inconsistent with
Article 132(2). According to the rules, however, a single Judge can grant a
stay order (where an application for special leave is pending) only till its
determination. After such leave is granted by court, any further order to stay
execution has to be made, not to a single judge, but to a Court comprising of
not less than three Judges. Thus the stay order granted in this case by my
Lord the Chief Justice pending the hearing of the application for special
leave is valid and was effective till such time as special leave was granted
and no further. On the day that special leave was granted by this court,
learned counsel appearing for the parties agreed to an extension of the stay
order until the final disposal of the appeals.

**25**

For the above reasons I make order allowing both appeals. I set aside the
order of the Court of Appeal dated 24.10.1986 and direct it to hear and
determine the two applications for leave to appeal and in revision-on their
merits. In the circumstances of this case I would also direct the stay order
issued by the Court of Appeal in the first instance to continue to be
operative until both-applications are finally disposed of in that court. The
respondent will pay the appellants' the costs of the abortive hearing in the
Court of Appeal and also of this court.

**

SHARVANANDA, CJ** \- I agree.

**

L. H. de ALWIS, J**. - I agree.

_Appeal allowed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1987/11.html_  

