##  Paul Coir (Pvt) Ltd. v. Waas - SLR - 13, Vol 1 of 2002 [2001] LKSC 11;
(2002) 1 Sri LR 13 (21 September 2001)

**13**

**PAUL COIR (PVT) LTD  
v.  
WAAS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
WIGNESWARAN, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 68/2000  
CA NO. 535/96 (REV.)  
DC NEGOMBO CASE NO. 7723/M  
30 APRIL AND 14 MAY, 2001  
  
_Civil Procedure Code - Appointment of a registered attorney - Proxy - Section
27 of the Civil Procedure Code - Section 34 (1) (a) of the Companies Act, No.
17 of 1982 - Rectification of a defective appointment - Ratification.  
_  
The plaintiff filed action on 24. 12. 1992 to recover Rs. 400,000/- plus
interest and costs from the defendant company (the defendant). On 15. 12.
1994, the date of trial, objection was taken for the first time by the
plaintiff's counsel that the proxy of the defendant was defective. The counsel
moved that the proxy and the answer filed by the defendant be rejected and the
action be fixed for trial ex parte. Both parties filed written submissions on
this application, and the same attorney-at-law for the defendant filed a fresh
proxy in his favour, along with his written submissions. The fresh proxy
ratified and confirmed that the same attorney-at-law had earlier acted on
behalf of the defendant with his authority, consent, concurrence and approval.  
  
While the first proxy was signed by one Director with his rubber stamp affixed
but not bearing the common seal of the company, the fresh proxy bore the
common seal of the company with signatures of two Directors as required by
section 34 (1) (a) of the Companies Act, No. 17 of 1982 and Article 110 (1) of
the Articles of Association of the Company.  
  
**Held:  
  
**(1) If according to the intention of parties the attorney-at-law had in fact
the authority of his client to do what was done on his behalf although in
pursuance of a defective appointment, in the absence of a legal bar, the
defect could be cured. The provisions of section 34 (1) (a) of the Companies
Act, though specific, are similar to the general provisions

**14**

of section 27 of the Code. So are the provisions of Article 110 (1) of the
defendant's Articles of Association. Such provisions are directory and not
mandatory.  
  
(2) The fresh appointment (proxy) filed in this case cured any defect arising
out of alleged non-compliance with section 34 (1) (a) of the Companies Act and
Article 110 (1) of the Articles of Association of the defendant Company.  
  
_Per_ Wigneswaran, J.  
  
"The only difference between natural persons and a company might be the fact
that a company is a legal entity not blessed with bones, marrow and flesh.
But, a company has to work through human beings. The intention of such human
beings could no doubt be ascertained. In fact, the subsequent proxy filed
ratifying the earlier acts of the attorney-at-law on record was evidence of
intention of the company."  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
1\. _Udeshi and Others v. Mather -_ (1988) 1 Sri LR 12 (SC).  
  
2\. _Tillekeratne v. Wijesinghe -_ (1908) 11 NLR 271.  
  
3\. _K. Kadiragamadas v. K. Suppiah_ \- (1953) 56 NLR 172.  
  
4\. _L J. Peiris Co., Ltd. v. L. C. H. Peiris_ \- (1970) 74 NLR 261.  
  
5\. _MC Foy v. United Africa Coy Ltd -_ (1961) 3 ALL E.R. 1169.  
  
6\. _Craig v. Kanseen -_ (1943) 1 ALL E.R. 108.  
  
7\. _Oriental Bank Corporation v. Ottilia Louisa Sophia Corbet_ \- (1881) 4
Supreme Court Circular 158.  
  
8\. _Silva v. Cumaratunga_ \- (1938) 40 NLR 139.  
  
9\. _Regina v. Jayasundera -_ (1917) 4 CWR 390.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal reported in (2000) 2 Sri
LR 167.  
  
_S. F. A. Cooray_ with _C. Liyanage_ for defendant-appellant.  
  
_J. W. Subasinghe, PC_ with _J. A. J. Udawatta_ for the plaintiff-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**15**

September 21, 2001  
  
**WIGNESWARAN, J.  
**  
The plaintiff-respondent-respondent (hereinafter referred to as "the
plaintiff") filed action in the District Court of Negombo on 24. 12. 1992 to
recover Rs. 400,000/- plus interest and costs from the defendant-petitioner-
appellant (hereinafter referred to as "the defendant"). Summons was issued and
reissued and finally the Negombo Fiscal reported to Court that the Managing
Director of the defendant Company had been served with summons on 20. 07.
1993. Proxy was filed on behalf of the defendant Company on 28. 09. 1993 and
Court accepted same and gave 10. 12. 1993 as the date for answer. Further,
dates were obtained and answer was filed ultimately on 26. 04. 1994 and the
case was fixed for trial on 11. 08. 1994.  
  
On 05. 08. 1994 the plaintiff's list of witnesses and documents was filed by
his attorney-at-law with notice to the defendant's attorney-at-law. Summons
was allowed on the appropriate witnesses (vide J.E. 8). So too on 11. 08. 1994
the attorney-at-law for the defendant with notice to the attorney-at-law for
the plaintiff filed his list of documents and witnesses (vide J.E. 9). On 11.
08\. 1994 the trial was postponed for 15. 12. 1994. On 30. 09. 1994 an
additional list of witnesses and documents was filed by the attorney-at-law
for the plaintiff with notice to the defendant's attorney-at-law. (vide J.E.
10).  
  
On 15. 12. 1994 an objection was taken for the first time by the counsel for
the plaintiff that the proxy filed on behalf of the defendant was defective,
marking the Memorandum and Articles of Association of the defendant Company as
P1 and P2 and the proxy as "X". The counsel moved that the proxy and the
answer filed by the defendant be rejected and the action be fixed for trial ex
parte. Written subÂ­missions were called for and filed by both parties. The
same attorney-at-law for the defendant also filed a fresh proxy in his favour
along with his written submissions. The fresh proxy ratified and confirmed

**16**

that the same attorney-at-law had eariler acted on behalf of the defendant
with its authority, consent, concurrence and approval. While the first proxy
was signed by one Director of the defendant Company with his rubber stamp
affixed but not bearing the common seal of the Company, the second proxy bore
the common seal of the defendant Company with signatures of two Directors of
the Company with Directors' rubber stamp affixed.  
  
The District Judge made order on 31. 07. 1996 that "there was no valid proxy
on record" and there was thus no appearances on behalf of the defendant, and
therefore fixed the case for ex parte trial for 22. 08. 1996.  
  
This order was the subject of Appeal (CALA No. 197/96) and revision (CA No.
535/96) to the Court of Appeal, which by order dated 17\. 02. 2002 confirmed
the order of the District Judge and dismissed both applications with costs.
This Court granted special leave to appeal on 04. 12. 2002.  
  
The matters in respect of which special leave to appeal was granted are as
follows :  
  
"(a) did the Court of Appeal err in law by holding that the principle [laid
down in Tillakaratne v. Wijesinghe 11 NLR 270, Kadirgamadas v. Suppiah 56 NLR
172, and Udeshi v. Mather (1988) 1 SLR 12] that the requirement that the
appointment of an attorney-at-law under s. 37 of the Civil Procedure Code
shall be in writing and signed by the party is only directory and not
mandatory, and that a party can subsequently ratify what had previously been
done by the attorney-at-law on his behalf, applies only to natural persons and
not to a Company registered under the Companies Act, in view of the provisions
of s. 34 (1) of that Act;

**17**

(c) did the Court of Appeal err in law in holding that Peiris v. Peiris 74 NLR
261 was wrongly decided and that an appointment of an attorney-at-law by a
registered Company must be in terms of section 34 (1) (a) of the Companies
Act."  
  
The fundamental question that arises for consideration in respect of the above
two matters is whether proxy "X" filed on 28. 09. 1993 and accepted by Court,
was void.  
  
There is no doubt that the Court initially accepted the said proxy as evidence
of the fact that the attorney-at-law mentioned in the proxy was in fact acting
for and on behalf of the defendant. So did the plaintiff and his registered
attorney-at-law. In fact, lists of witnesses and documents were served on him
as representing his client.  
  
There is no dispute as to the state of the law with regard to defective
appointments of registered attorneys-at-law, in that the Courts have held that
such defects can be cured and the acts purported to have been done on the
strength of such defective appointments are capable of being ratified by the
party concerned. In fact, in this case too, a new proxy, ratifying the acts
done by the same attorney-at-law earlier in the case, has indeed been filed.  
  
Again there cannot be any controversy as to the fact that Courts have
consistently held in matters of this nature, that the question that had to be
considered was whether the Proctor (registered attorney-at-law now), had in
fact the authority of his client to do what was so done on his behalf,
although in pursuance of a defective appointment. It has been held that if in
fact he had his client's authority to do so then the defect is one which in
the absence of any positive legal bar could be cured. On the contrary if in
fact he did not have such authority of his client, the acts done and the
appearances made on his behalf by the Proctor would be void and of no legal
effect, (vide Justice Athukorala in Udeshi and Others v. Maine (1) at page
21).

**18**

The reasons that appear to have prompted the Court of Appeal to hold that the
proxy was void in the instant case were :  
  
(1) that the law relating to curability of defective appointments hitherto
recognised by Courts in Tillakaratne v. Wijesinghd, Kadirgamadas v. Suppiah
(3) and Udeshi v. Mather (supra) applied only to natural persons and not to
juristic persons, such as Companies registered under the Companies Act.  
  
(2) Under the provisions of section 34 (1) (a) of the Companies Act a contract
may be made on behalf of the Company in writing under the common seal, and in
the absence of the common seal of the Company on the proxy no written contract
of agency was established between the defendant Company and its registered
attorney-at-law.  
  
(3) The "proxy" filed of record was void, and since there was no proxy the
question of curability did not arise.  
  
(4) Peiris v. Peirist (4) was wrongly decided. n supporting this finding of
the Court of Appeal learned President's Counsel appearing for the plaintiff
has submitted as follows :  
  
(i) An attorney-at-law must be duly appointed by a party, (section 24 of the
Civil Procedure Code).  
  
(ii) A proxy has to be in writing under the common seal of the Company when
the client who signs the proxy is a Company (section 27 of the Civil Procedure
Code read with section 34 (1) (a) of the Companies Act, No. 17 of 1982).  
  
(iii) A proxy constitutes a written contract of agency. When the common seal
of the Company is not affixed to the proxy there is no written contract of
agency. The act is, therefore, old and thereby a nullity. (Me Foy v. United
Africa Coy Ltd.(5) and Craig v. Kanseeii (6).  
  
(iv) While sections 24 and 27 of the Civil Procedure Code are general
provisions, section 34 (1) (a) of the Companies Act is a special provision.
(Generalia specialibus non derogant). The general provisions cannot supersede,
oust nor override the special provisions.  
  
(v) None of the cases such as Tillekeratne v. Wijesinghe(2), K. Kadirgamadas
v. K. Suppiah (3), Udeshi and Others v. Mather L J. Peiris and Co., Ltd. v. L
C. H. Perns(4) mentioned by the counsel for the defendant had considered any
specific provisions such as section 34 (1) (a) of the Companies Act in coming
to their conclusions.  
  
(vi) Section 34 (1) (a) of the Companies Act was a positive legal bar. Taken
together with Article 110 (1) of the Articles of Association of the defendant
Company, the absence of compliance with the said Article made the proxy a
nullity which cannot be rectified.  
  
 (vii) In Oriental Bank Corporation v. Ottilia Louisa Sophia Corbet (7) cited
by the counsel for the defendant it was the agent who appointed the Proctor.
Therefore, the question of the common seal of the Corporation being affixed
did not arise in that case.  
  
The conclusion of the Court of Appeal and the supporting submissions above-
mentioned would now be examined.  
  
In Tillekeratne v. Wijesinghe (supra) the plaintiff granted proxy to a Proctor
which, by an oversight, was not signed by the plaintiff. The Proctor acted on
the proxy without any objection in the lower Court. When the case was taken up
in appeal, the defendant's counsel

**20**

objected to the status of the Proctor in the case. The counsel for the
defendant-respondent contended that the requirement of section 27 of the Civil
Procedure Code was imperative and that an authority (proxy) not signed by the
client was void. Chief Justice Hutchinson stated as follows :  
  
"In my opinion that is only directory. If a plaintiff appearing throughout the
action by a proctor, whom he has instructed to act for him, but whose proxy he
had forgotten to sign, were to recover judgment, and if the omission to sign
were then discovered and the proxy signed, the Court could not, in my opinion,
hold that the whole of the proceedings on the part of the plaintiff up to and
including the judgment were void because of the non-signature of the proxy;
or, if the plaintiff failed in the action and it was dismissed with costs, the
Court could not hold that the decree under such circumstances was of no effect
against the plaintiff. No doubt the enactment means, though it does not in
terms say so, that the appointment is to be signed and filed before the
proctor does anything in the action. But, if the omission to sign is not
because the proctor has not in fact any authority, and if the client
afterwards ratifies what has been done in his name by signing the authority,
in my opinion that satisfies the requirements of the enactment."  
  
In K. Kadirgamadas et al v. K. Suppiah (supra) when the petition of appeal was
filed, the Proctor who presented it had not been appointed in writing as
required by section 27 of the Civil Procedure Code to act for some of the
defendant-appellants. He was so appointed after the appealable time had
expired. He had, however, without objection from any of the parties
represented all the defendants at various stages of the proceedings earlier.  
  
Justice E. H. T. Gunasekera with Justice Pulle concurring held: ". . . in our
opinion the irregularity in the appointment was cured by the subsequent filing
of a written proxy."

**21**

I have referred to Justice Athukorala's' dictum in Udeshi and Others v. Mather
earlier.  
  
What these three cases held was that even though specific proÂ­visions of the
law directed that an act had to be performed in a certain manner, the mere
fact that such an act was not so performed, would not vitiate the proceedings
so long as the parties who should have performed the act together had the
intention to so perform the act. In other words the intention of parties was
held to be as important as the expression of such intention by a physical act.
If the intention was suspect or illogical as in a case where there was an
earlier proxy of another attorney-at-law on record, then the acts of the
usurping attorney-at-law were frowned upon. Justice Maartensz held in Silva v.
Cumaratunga (8) that "... Court cannot recognise two proctors appearing for
the same party in the same case".  
  
Thus, despite an attorney-at-law being not duly appointed by a party in terms
of section 27 of the Civil Procedure Code, Courts have granted relief if the
intention to duly appoint that attorney-at-law on the part of the client at
the relevant time was perceivable.  
  
The only difference between natural persons and a Company might be the fact
that a Company is a legal entity not blessed with bones, marrow and flesh.
But, a Company has to work through human beings. The intention of such human
beings could no doubt be ascertained. In fact, the subsequent proxy filed
ratifying the earlier acts of the attorney-at-law on record in this case was
evidence of the "intention" of the Company. What is important to remember in
respect of the ratio decidendi of the cases above-mentioned is that an
argument was before Courts that an unsigned proxy was void. In other words the
nexus between the lawyer and the client being not visible on record, there
could not be any relationship contractual or otherwise between them and
therefore the authority even if granted was void. Despite such an argument,
Courts have consistently held that what was relevant was whether the authority
of the client to the attorney-at-law

**22**

in question to do what was done on behalf of the client, had in fact been
granted. If it had in fact been granted at the relevant time then the physical
evidence of such grant could be subsequently made available. As between a
Director of a Company signing under his personal seal on behalf of the Company
instead of affixing the Company Seal and a natural person not signing a proxy,
certainly the latter is a far more serious lapse. Still the Courts have held
that if the intention to sign the proxy was there at the relevant time and no
legal bar to such signing was existent as between the client and the lawyer,
then such defective appointment was curable. If at all, the question of
nullity could only relate to the document of appointment in terms of the
relevant sections. But, if the Courts have held that despite irregularities in
the document the intention of parties is to take precÂ­edence, there are good
reasons for such a conclusion. Such reasons were set out by Chief Justice
Hutchinson in Tillekeratne v. Wijesinghe  (supra) with which I am in
respectful agreement with.  
  
General provisions in section 27 of the Civil Procedure Code and/ or specific
provisions in section 34 (1) (a) of the Companies Act only set out the
physical acts expected of parties. As stated earlier Courts have granted
relief even if such physical acts were lacking or not forthcoming, so long as
the intentions of parties were definite and perceivable, despite the visible
non conformation with the provisions of the above said sections. Whether there
was agency visible between the lawyer and the client on the basis of the
documents filed was not what the Courts looked for. It was the real intention
of parties at the relevant time which the Courts examined. They held that such
intention could be established subsequently by ratification and confirmation.
But, certain legal bars were recognised. For example, despite intention of
parties, Courts would not recognise two registered attorneys-at-law appearing
for the same party in the same case. But, such legal bars to ratification
cannot be held to include provisions of section 34 (1) (a) of the Companies
Act. Those provisions, though specific, are similar to the general provisions
in section 27 of the Civil Procedure Code. So too the provisions of Article
110 (1) of the Articles

**23**

of Association of the defendant-appellant-Company. Courts have held such
provisions directory and not mandatory. But, Courts have given recognition to
a proxy in the record on behalf of one lawyer, at time when steps were taken
by another lawyer without a proxy, [vide Reginahamy v. Jayasundera (9) and
Silva v. Cumaratunga (supra). Another matter that might be recognised by
Courts as a bar would be the resulting conflict of interests between a client
and his lawyer purporting to act on his behalf. There would be a bar to the
same lawyer appearing for both sides, for example. There could be other such
bars. In other words what the Courts will examine is whether, despite
defective appointments the lawyer concerned in the normal course could have
appeared for the client. If he could have and no legal bars stood in his way,
then despite the defective appointments Courts have granted him the right of
appearance provided his previous acts had been ratified and a proper
appointment was filed, though belatedly. Such an appointment (proxy) had been
filed in this case on 13. 02. 1996. Thus, any defect arising out of the
alleged non- compliance with an article in the Articles of Association too was
cured when the defendant Company ratified what registered attorney-at-law Mr.
Rodrigo had done for and on behalf of the defendant Company until such new
proxy was filed.  
  
In this connection the decision in L J. Peiris and Co., Ltd. v. L. C. H.
Peiris (supra) is relevant and notable. Justice Thamotheram with Chief Justice
H. N. G. Fernando concurring said at page 262  
  
_" The learned District Judge was right when he said: 'The relationship of a
Proctor and client may well be a contract of agency, but there is no law
requiring that the contract should be in writing. A proxy is a writing given
by a suitor to Court authorising the Proctor to act on his behalf. It does not
contain the terms of the contract between the suitor and the Proctor. That
contract is a distinct one and has nothing to do with the proxy which is an
authority granted by virtue of that contract' ..."_

**24**

"The real question to my mind is . . . had the Proctor the authority of his
client, i.e. the Company, to institute the action and otherwise do what
section 27 of the Civil Procedure Code enables a person having such authority
to do? The question is not who can act on behalf of the Company, but has the
Company given the required authority in writing".  
  
At page 23 -  
  
"Section 27 of the Civil Procedure Code reads: 'the appointment of a Proctor
to make any appearance or application or do any act as aforesaid shall be in
writing signed by the client, and shall be filed in Court'. This is a
procedural requirement which must be satisfied to enable a Proctor to act on
behalf of his client. This is not a provision of law that requires a contract
of agency between a Proctor and his client to be in writing."  
  
". . . The Court in this connection is not concerned with the validity of the
appointment of the Proctor as the Company's agent but with certainty that the
Proctor had the authority of his client to do what he is permitted to do under
section 27 of the Civil Procedure Code." ,  
  
This was a case in which the original proxy filed on behalf of a Company
incorporated under the Companies Ordinance bore the Seal of the Company and
the signature of one Director only instead of two Directors, which defect was
corrected in a fresh proxy.  
  
I am in respectful agreement with Justice Thamotheram's decision above-
mentioned and find no reasons to agree with the decision of the Court of
Appeal nor with the submissions of the learned President's Counsel appearing
for the plaintiff that the said case L J. Peiris & Co., Ltd. v. L C. H. Peiris
(supra) was wrongly decided. A proxy does not constitute the contract of
agency between the client and the attorney-at-Iaw and is not required to
contain the terms of

**25**

that contract. The defective proxy filed in this case was not void, and was
capable of ratification.  
  
I thus find that the subsequent proxy filed in this case gave authority
ratifying previous acts of the attorney-at-law. Such ratification confirms the
"intention" of the defendant Company at the time the defective proxy was
handed over to the attorney-at-law. Whatever shortcomings that were existent
in such earlier proxy were erased as soon as the ratifying and confirming new
proxy was filed and the intention of the Directorate of the Company at the
time of handing over the original proxy, subsequently became evident.  
  
Clearly, the Court of Appeal and the District Court have erred in their
respective conclusions. The questions on which leave was granted are answered
in the affirmative. I set aside the order of the Court of Appeal dated 17. 02.
2000 and also the order of the District Judge dated 31. 07. 1996 and make
order that the answer of the defendant be accepted and the original Court do
proceed with the case according to law. Taxed costs will be payable by the
plaintiff to the defendant in all three Courts in respect of the  matter in
appeal.  
  
**FERNANDO, J. -** I agree.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/11.html_  

