##  Hatton National Bank Limited. v. Sellers Sports(Pvt) Ltd. and Others - SLR
- 326, Vol 3 of 2000 [2000] LKSC 11; (2000) 3 Sri LR 326 (12 September 2000)

**326**

**HATTON NATIONAL BANK LIMITED  
V.  
SELLERS SPORTS (PVT) LTD AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA, CJ.  
P. R P. PERERA, J. AND  
WEERASEKERA, J.  
SC APPEAL (CHC) NO. 6/97(F)  
CHC NO. 92/96(1)  
JANUARY 24TH, 2000  
  
_Civil Procedure Code - Cause of action - Section 5 of the Code - Bank
facilities secured by a mortgage by the principal debtor and guaranteed by an
agreement of sureties - Prescription of action - Sections 5, 6 and 7 of the
Prescription Ordinance.  
_  
The plaintiff Bank is the successor to the Emirates International Bank Ltd.,
whose rights were assigned to the plaintiff Bank by Deed of Assignment No. 603
dated 17. 09. 92.  
  
The plaintiff instituted an action against the defendants on 21. 05. 96
jointly and severally to recover the sum of Rs. 12,413,814/46 being the total
liability of the 1st defendant company as at 08. 01. 96 on credit facilities
provided by the plaintiffs predecessor Bank byway of overdraft, time loan,
packing credit and pledge loans. This was the total amount due on 30. 09. 89
plus interest thereafter. Byway of security for the due re-payment of the
accommodation granted to the 1$' defendant by the Bank, the 1st defendant
executed a Mortgage Bond dated 04. 09. 86 pledging the machinery, movables and
book debts described in the agreement.  
  
A statement of accounts was filed with the plaint. The Mortgage Bond was filed
with the plaint and paragraph 6 of the plaint stated that it is pleaded part
and parcel of the plaint and that the action is filed to enforce the
obligation created thereby. The 2nd to the 5th defendants had entered into a
Guarantee Agreement with the Bank, dated 22. 08. 86 to pay the Bank the money
due from the 19' defendant upto a limit of Rs. 11,200,000/- By Clause 2 of the
Guarantee they agreed to pay the Bank in Colombo, the money therein mentioned
10 days after demand in writing is made. Such demand was made by writing dated
26. 04. 96.  
  
**Held :  
**  
In the light of the definition of "cause of action" contained in section 5 of
the Civil Procedure Code and the averments in the plaint, the action

**327**

against the 1st defendant was not one for the recovery of money lent without
written security or money lent "upon account stated" where the period of
prescription is 3 years in terms of section 7 of the Prescription Ordinance
which period has to be computed from the date of the default namely, 30. 09.
89. The action was filed to enforce the obligation created by the Mortgage
Bond. The applicable section would be section 5 of the Prescription Ordinance
which relates to instances where the action is for the recovery of any sum due
upon any mortgage of property or upon any bond conditioned for the payment of
money. The action was not prescribed as it was filed within 10 years from the
date of the mortgage as provided by that section.  
  
2\. As regards the Guarantee of the 2nd to 5th defendants, the applicable
section is section 6 of the Prescription Ordinance which relates to amounts
due on a written promise or other written security and the period of
prescription is 6 years. That period should be computed not from the date of
the default on the principal obligation namely, 30. 09. 89 but from the date
on which the payment upon the Guarantee became due namely, 10 days after
demand in writing was made, as stated in clause 2 of the agreement. The demand
for payment was made on 26. 04\. 96; and the breach took place upon the
failure to make payment 10 days after that demand. As such, the action which
was filed on 21. 05. 96 against the 2nd to 5th defendants was not prescribed
in terms of section 6 of the Prescription Ordinance.  
  
**Case referred to :  
**  
_Croos v. Goonewardena Hamine 5 NLR 259 at 261  
_  
**APPEAL** from the Judgment of the Commercial High Court Colombo.  
  
_Romesh de Silva P.C. with Palitha Kumarasinghe_ for the appellant.  
  
_S .A. Parathalingarn P.C. with Faizer Musthapha_ for the 1st, 2nd, and 5th
defendants-respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 12, 2000.  
  
**S. N. SILVA, C.J.  
**  
This is an appeal from the judgment of the High Court dated 24. 04. 97. By
that Judgment the High Court dismissed the action of the Plaintiff on the
ground that it was prescribed.  
  
The Plaintiff being a licensed commercial bank instituted the action against
the Defendants jointly and severally to

**328**

recover a sum of Rs. 12,413,814.46. The principal cause of action is against
the 1st Defendant being a private company. The other Defendants are sued on
the basis of a guarantee given by them in respect of the liability of the V
Defendant.  
  
The 1st Defendant was a constituent of the Union Bank of Middle East Ltd.,
which was later renamed as the Emirates International Bank Ltd. The liability
in respect of the action has been filed was contracted with the said Bank. The
rights of this Bank were thereafter assigned to the Plaintiff Bank by Deed of
Assignment No. 603 dated 17. 09. 92 filed with the plaint.  
  
According to the statement of Accounts (filed with the Plaint) the 1st
Defendant availed of the credit facilities of the predecessor Bank by way of
an overdraft, time loan, packing credit and pledge loans. The amount stated
above in respect of which the action has been filed is the total liability on
the aforesaid lines of credit as at 08. 01. 1996.  
  
The 1st Defendant entered into an Agreement in writing dated 04. 09. 96 with
the predecessor Bank in the form of a Mortgage, placing as security the
machinery, movables and books debts described in the Agreement for the due
repayment of the accommodation granted to the 1st Defendant by the Bank, under
a drawing limit of Rs. 7,500,000/- This Mortgage has been registered under the
Registration of Documents Ordinance and has been filed with the Plaint. The
2nd to 5th Respondents entered into a Guarantee Agreement with the Bank, dated
22. 08. 86 to pay the Bank the money due from the 1st Defendant upto a limit
of Rs. 11,200,000/-.  
  
The execution of the Mortgage and the Guarantee referred to above are not
denied. According to the answer, the. Defendants appear to dispute the
statement of accounts. But, this matter has not been gone into. The action has
been dismissed as stated above on the preliminary issue of prescription.

**329**

The High Court has accepted the submission of the Defendants that the action
has not been filed to enforce the Mortgage and as such it should be taken as
being one for the recovery of money lent without written security. It is the
finding of the Court that the money is due "upon an account stated" where the
period of prescription is 3 years in terms of section 7 of the Prescription
Ordinance. The court has held that this period of 3 years should be computed
from the date of default being 30. 09. 89, according to the statement of
accounts. Therefore it was held that the cause of action against the 1st
Defendant is prescribed.  
  
As regards the Guarantee of the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th Defendants, the Court
held that the liability arises on the written Guarantee and that the
applicable period of prescription would be 6 years in terms of section 6 of
the Prescription Ordinance, which should be computed from the date of the
default of the principal obligation, namely 30. 09. 89 (as stated above) and
not from the date of demand as contended by the Plaintiff.  
  
On the said basis it was held that the action filed on the 21. 05. 96 is
prescribed in relation to the liability of all the Defendants and should be
dismissed.  
  
The submission of Counsel for the Plaintiff Appellant is that the Court has
erred in not taking into account the Mortgage Bond and failing to consider
section 5 of the Prescription Ordinance as the applicable section. In terms of
this section the period of prescription is 10 years. It was contended that
since the Mortgage Bond dated 04. 09. 86 the action filed on 21. 05. 96 is
within the period of 10 years. As regards the Guarantee on which the other
Defendants have been sued it was contended that the breach of the Guarantee
took place only upon the failure of the Defendant to pay the money that was
demanded by the Bank on the Guarantee. On that basis it was contended that the
period of prescription should be computed from 26. 04. 96 being the date of
the letter

**330**

of demand sent to the Defendants by the Bank. Counsel for the Defendant
supported the judgment on the grounds stated therein as outlined above.  
  
Upon a consideration of the several averments of the Plaint and the documents
that have been filed with the plaint it is clear that the action against the
1st Defendant has been filed to recover the amount outstanding on the
accommodation granted by the Bank by way of an overdraft and other lines of
credit. The High Court has not stated any specific reason for the rejection of
the Mortgage Bond which has been produced as being the basis of the action
against the 151 Defendant. It appears that since the statement of accounts has
been produced annexed to the plaint, the High Court has considered that to be
the sole basis of liability. In this respect the court has erred in failing to
take into account the nature of the obligation of the 1st Defendant in respect
of which the action has been filed. The Court has totally ignored the cause of
action as pleaded in the plaint and has looked into only the document which
sets out the quantum of the liability.  
  
Section 5 of the Civil Procedure Code defines a cause of action "as being the
wrong for the prevention or redress of which an action may be brought and
includes the denial of a right, the refusal to fulfill an obligation, the
neglect to perform duty and the infliction of an affirmative injury."  
  
The present action is based on a wrong which relates to the refusal to fulfill
an obligation. The obligation is primarily of the 1st Defendant who was
granted accommodation by the Bank in the form of an overdraft and other lines
of credit as stated above. In the case of Croos v. Goonewardena Hamine(1)
Wendt J stated as follows "I think that the word "obligation" in this
definition is to be understood not in the narrow sense in which a parole
promise to pay, a promissory note and a mortgage, although given for the same
debt may be described as three different "obligations", but in the more
general understanding sense of a liability to pay that sum of money."

**331**

The High Court has fallen into error of not looking at the obligation in the
manner noted above. The court has merely looked at the statement of accounts
and drawn the inference that the obligation arises solely upon the account so
stated. In this instance the account stated is the quantification of the
liability incurred by the 1st Defendant on the different lines of credit
granted to him. It sets out the total due under each head as at 30. 09. 89 and
the interest debited thereon from 30. 09. 89 to 31. 12. 95 except in the case
of the pledge loan where the interest is computed upto 19. 10. 90. The
obligation which forms the cause of action is the liability which arises upon
the total accommodation granted to the 1st Defendant by the Bank and secured
by the Mortgage Bond. It has been clearly stated in paragraph 6 of the plaint
that the Mortgage Bond is pleaded as part and parcel of the plaint and that
the action is filed to enforce the obligation created thereby. The Mortgage
Bond that has been produced narrates that the Bank being an approved credit
agency has agreed to grant accommodation to the borrower by way of Overdraft,
Loan, Cash, Credit Account or otherwise under a drawing limit of Rs.
7,500,000/-. It is further stated that the accommodation is granted on the
agreed security consisting of machinery; movable property and the book debts
set out in the bond. The Mortgage Bond is thus the legal framework within
which the obligation to repay the debts contracted under different items, is
constituted. In the circumstances it cannot be said that the accommodation has
been granted "without written security," so as to attract the provisions of
section 7 of the Prescription Ordinance. The applicable section in my view
would be section 5. which relates to instances where the action is for the
recovery of any sum due upon any mortgage of any property or upon any bond
conditioned for the payment of money. The Mortgage Bond produced clearly falls
within that description. In the circumstances the action would not be
prescribed if it is filed 10 years from the date of the mortgage. As noted
above the action has been filed within that period and the claim against the
1st Defendant would not be prescribed.

**332**

As regards the Guarantee it is common ground that the applicable section is
section 6 of the Prescription Ordinance, which relate to amounts due on a
written promise or other written security and the period of prescription is 6
years. The question to be decided is whether the period of 6 years should be
computed from the date of the Guarantee being 22. 08. 86 or, from the date on
which there was a default in respect of the principal obligation or, the date
from which the payment upon the Guarantee became due.  
  
The liability in respect of the Guarantee is specifically stated in clause 2,
whereby the 2nd to 5th Defendants agreed to pay the Bank in Colombo, the money
therein mentioned, 10 days after demand in writing is made on them provided
always that the total liability ultimately enforceable under the Guarantee
shall not exceed the sum of Rs. 11,200,000/.  
  
It is thus seen that although the Guarantee of the 2nd to 5th Respondents is
valid from the date of its execution, payment thereon becomes due only upon a
demand being made. It is on a failure on the part of the guarantors to make
payment upon the demand that a breach of the Guarantee takes place. In terms
of Section 6 of the Prescription Ordinance an action is not maintainable
unless it is brought within 6 years of such breach.  
  
It is not disputed that the demand for payment on the Guarantee was made on
the 2nd to 5th Defendants by writing dated 26. 04. 96. Therefore the amount
stated in the guarantee became due upon such demand and a breach takes place
when there is a failure to make payment ten days after such demand is made. It
could not be contended that the action filed on 21. 05. 96 against the 2nd to
5th Respondents is in any way prescribed by the application of the provisions
of Section 6 of Prescription Ordinance.  
  
The High Court has held, that a breach of the guarantee takes place on the
date the principal debtor (1st Defendant)

**333**

stopped making payment which has, been taken as 30. 09. 89 from the statement
of accounts. Once again the High Court has failed to examine this question
from the standpoint of the cause of action pleaded against the 2nd to 5th
Defendants. The obligation of the 2nd to 5th Defendants although intrinsically
connected with that of the 1st Defendant rests on a distinct and different
legal basis. A default on the part of the 15` Defendant to pay the sum due on
the accommodation granted does not per se, (in the absence of a specific
provision to that effect in the Guarantee) amount to refusal on their part to
fulfill an obligation so as to constitute a cause of action against these
Defendants. As noted above the obligation on their part to make payment on the
Guarantee becomes effective only when the demand is made. It is only at that
stage the refusal to fulfill the obligation and the concomitant breach of
Guarantee takes place so as to attract the provisions of Section 6 of the
Prescription Ordinance. The basis on which the High Court has computed the
period of prescription is therefore untenable.  
  
For the reasons stated above I uphold the submissions of the Plaintiff
Appellant and set aside the Judgment dated 24. 04. 97. The case is referred
back to the High Court for trial to proceed in respect of other issues before
any Judge.  
  
Plaintiff would be entitled to the costs of this appeal fixed at Rs.,
15,000/-.  
  
**PERERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WEERASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal Allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/11.html_  

