##  Haleema Umma v. Abdul Rahuman - SLR - 293, Vol 2 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 11;
(1999) 2 Sri LR 293 (10 May 1999)

**293**

**HALEEMA UMMA  
v.  
ABDUL RAHUMAN**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
WIJETUNGA J. AND  
WEERASEKERA, J,  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 133/97  
C.A. NO. 484/92 (F)  
D.C. KANDY NO. 3056/T  
FEBRUARY 17 AND 26, 1999

_Testamentary action - Last Will - Issue of probate after decree nisi -
Jurisdiction of the District Court to recall probate - Sections 536 and 537 of
the Civil Procedure Code._

The respondent filed an application dated 1.7.83 in the District Court seeking
inter cilia, that the last will marked 'A' be declared the last will of the
deceased, that he be declared executor thereof and probate be granted to him.
No respondent was named in the petition and no reference was made to the
intestate heirs of the deceased. The petitioner averred that he had no reason
to suppose that his application will be opposed by anyone. On 18.8.83, the
Court in the exercise of its discretion made order nisi in the first instance
requiring any person to show cause why probate should not be issued. On the
order of the Court, the decree nisi was published in the 'Davasa' newspaper.
The order was made absolute on 16.11.84 and probate was issued to the
respondent.

Consequent upon an application by the appellant, the District Court by its
order dated 17.2.87 recalled probate on the basis that the order nisi had been
published in a Sinhala newspaper which could not be read and understood by the
appellant. Thereafter, the Court held an inquiry and by its judgment dated
31.01.92 held, inter alia, that the last will was not executed with the
knowledge and consent of the deceased and was not her act and deed.

**Held :**

1\. The finding that the appellant did not understand Sinhala was not
supported by any material of probative value.

294

2\. Sections 536 and 537 of the Civil Procedure Code must be read together.
Consequently, when the issue of probate has followed upon an order nisi, the
provisions of section 537 do not apply and all parties are concluded by the
issue of probate. Therefore, the District Court acted without jurisdiction in
recalling probate and proceeding to hold an inquiry which concluded with its
judgment dated 31.01.92.

**Cases referred to :**

1. _Katiramanthamby v. Lebbethamby Hadiiyar_ \- (1973) 75 NLR 228.  
_  
_ 2. _Adoris v. Perera_ \- (1915) 17 NLR 212, 215.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_Nehru Gunatilleke,_ PC with _N. Mahendra_ and _Miss D. Pathirana_ for
respondent petitioner-appellant.

_Faisz Musthapha,_ PC with _Hemasiri Withanachchi_ and _Sanjeewa Jayawardena_
for petitioner-appellant-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 10, 1999.  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.**

Haji Asia Umma died on 11.11.81. The petitioner-appellant-respondent (the
respondent) filed an application (petition and affidavit dated 1.7.83) in the
District Court of Kandy, seeking inter alia, that the Last Will marked "A" be
declared the Last Will of the deceased, that he be declared executor thereof
and probate be granted to him. No respondent was named in the petition and no
reference was made to the intestate heirs of the deceased. It was averred in
the petition that he was the adopted son of the deceased. Apart from the
affidavit of the respondent, there were the affidavits of the notary who
attested the Last Will and the affidavits of the 2 attesting witnesses. It was
further averred in the petition that he had no reason to suppose that his
application will be opposed by anyone (section 525 of the Civil procedure
Code).

295

On 18th, August, 1983, the Court made order nisi in the first instance
requiring any person to show cause why probate should not be issued. As stated
earlier, no respondent was named in the petition; nevertheless the Court in
the exercise of its discretion issued an order nisi and not an order absolute
in the first instance. On 3rd November, 1983, the Court made order directing
the publication of the order nisi. The order nisi was published in the
"Davasa" newspaper. Mr. Nehru Goontillake for the appellant stressed that the
order nisi was published in the "Davasa" which is a newspaper published in
Sinhala. The order nisi was made absolute on 16th November, 1984 and probate
was issued to the respondent in this appeal.

The respondent-petitioner-appellant (the appellant) who is a sister of the
deceased Haji Asia Umma by her petition and affidavit dated 27.2.85 (filed on
5.3.85) challenged the validity of the Last Will and prayed that the Last Will
be rejected and that an inquiry be held for this purpose. It is to be noted
that this application was made after the issue of probate upon an order nisi.
Moreover, there was nothing in the petition and affidavit to suggest that the
appellant could not read and understand Sinhala, the relevance of which will
be seen later.

The application of the appellant was fixed for inquiry. At the inquiry an
objection was taken on behalf of the respondent that the application cannot be
maintained for the reason that in terms of section 536 of the Civil Procedure
Code the District Court had the power to review its own order granting probate
only where probate had been issued "on an order absolute in the first
instance". (section 536 of the Civil Procedure Code). By its order dated 17th
February, 1987, the District Court overruled the objection, and recalled
probate on the basis that the order nisi had been published in a Sinhala
newspaper which could not be read and understood by the appellant. It is true
that the respondent did not seek to challenge the correctness or validity of
the aforesaid order dated 17th February, 1987, but the objection taken was on
a jurisdictional ground and could have been taken in the final appeal.

296

Consequent upon the order of 17.2.87, the parties proceeded to inquiry, issues
were raised and evidence was led. By its judgment dated 31st January, 1992,
the District Court held inter alia, that the Last Will was not executed with
the knowledge and consent of Haji Asia Umma and was not her act and deed. The
Last Will was accordingly rejected. Thereupon, the respondent preferred an
appeal to the Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal held that "the District
Judge had no jurisdiction to vary his own order and the order dated 17.2.87
has been made without jurisdiction. Section 536 of the Civil Procedure Code
provides for the District Court to recall probate only in the case where an
order absolute in the first instance has been made. Vide 17 NLR 212, 13 NLR
261, 67 NLR 488. As seen, in the instant case order absolute was not entered
in the first instance. As such the learned District Judge has exceeded his
authority in recalling probate and holding an inquiry **. . .** ".
Accordingly, the Court of Appeal set aside the judgment of the District Court
dated 31.1.92. It is of significance to note that the judgment was set aside
on a jurisdictional ground. The present appeal is against this judgment of the
Court of Appeal.

Mr. Nehru Goonetillake, counsel for the appellant, strenuously contended, by
way of oral and written submissions, (1) that no appeal was preferred against
the order of the District Court dated 17.2.87 and accordingly that order was
binding on the parties; (2) the District Court by the aforesaid order of
17.2.87 recalled probate on the good and valid ground that the order nisi was
published in a Sinhala newspaper (Davasa) whereas the intestate heirs were
Tamil-speaking persons who could neither read nor write Sinhala; (3) parties
have not been concluded by the issue of probate where there has been no valid
publication of the order nisi in terms of the imperative provisions of section
532 of the Civil Procedure Code. _Katiramanthamby v. Lebbethamby Hadjiyar_
(1).

With these submissions, I am afraid, I cannot agree. The finding reached by
the District Court in its order of 17.2.87 that the appellant cannot read and
understand Sinhala was not based on evidence, either oral or by way of an
affidavit. All that happened was that the appellant, who was a Muslim lady
living in a "Kandyan

297

area", was questioned by the Court and she informed the Court that she does
not understand Sinhala. It seems to me that this statement cannot form the
basis for the finding that the appellant did not understand Sinhala and
therefore there was no valid publication of the order nisi as required by the
provisions of section 532\. The "untested" information elicited by the Court
is of little or no evidentiary value. A Court cannot reasonably act upon such
information to reach a finding on the crucial issue, namely that there has
been a failure to comply with the mandatory provisions of section 532 of the
Civil Procedure Code, inasmuch as the publication of the order nisi was in a
language not understood by the appellant. In short, the finding that the
appellant did not understand Sinhala is unsupported by any material of
probative value.

Besides, there is the jurisdictional issue upon which the Court of Appeal set
aside the judgment of the District Court. The Court of Appeal itself has
referred to the relevant cases as seen from the passage in the judgment cited
above. It is unnecessary to burden this judgment with a discussion of the
cases. It is settled law that sections 536 and 537 of the Civil Procedure Code
must be read together and that 'when the issue of probate has followed upon an
order nisi the provisions of section 537 do not apply and that all parties are
concluded by the issue of probate" \- per De Sampayo, AJ. in _Adoris v.
Perera_ (2).

It is clear, therefore, that the District Court acted without jurisdiction in
recalling probate and proceeding; to hold an inquiry which concluded with the
judgment under appeal (judgment dated 31.1.92). The judgment of the Court of
Appeal is accordingly affirmed and the appeal is dismissed but, in all the
circumstances, without costs.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

**WEERASEKARA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/11.html_  

