##  Welakanda Dhammasiddi v. Kamburupitiye Somaloka Thero - SLR - 234, Vol 1
of 1990 [1990] LKSC 1; (1990) 1 Sri LR 234 (17 January 1990)

**

234

WELAKANDA DHAMMASIDDI  
v.  
KAMBURUPITIYE SOMALOKA THERO

**

SUPREME COURT.  
K. A. P. RANASINGHE, C.J., G. R. T. D. BANDARANAYAKE, J. and  
K. M. M. B. KULATUNGA, J.  
S.C. No. 19/88 - C.A. No. 335/80 (F) - D.C. MATARA 3770/ L  
NOVEMBER 21 and 22, 1989.

_

Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law - Succession to Viharadhipathiship - Abandonment.

_

**235**

On the death of Kahawe Nandarama Thero his senior pupil Kamburupitiye Somaloka
Thero the plaintiff - respondent was entitled to the viharadhipathiship of the
Wilegoda Viharaya. At a meeting of the Sangha Sabha of Wilegoda Viharaya
presided over by the Chief Sangha Nayake of the Matara - Hambantota Districts
to fill the vacancy which had arisen in the Viharadhipathiship of the Wilegoda
Temple, a co -pupil of the deceased Thero moved a resolution that the
defendant - appellant Welakande Dhammasiddi Thero be appointed. The plaintiff
- respondent Kamburupitiye Somaloka Thero, ' the most senior pupil of the
deceased Thero seconded the resolution and said that as he was employed as a
teacher in Government Service and also was functioning as the Viharadhipathi
of Tuwakkugodawatte Parana Viharaya he was finding it difficult to accept the
Viharadhipathiship of the Wilegoda temple and attend to its duties, and that
the defendant priest was in every way suitable to hold the Viharadhipathiship
and he was assigning and transferring whatever rights he had in respect of the
said incumbency to him. He added that all that he desired was that one of the
pupils or a co - pupil of the deceased Thero should hold the
Viharadhipathiship and work for the betterment of the pirivena and temple and
he expressed the hope that the defendant Thero would accept the
Viharadhipathiship. Therefore all the pupils and co - pupils of the deceased
There entrusted the Viharadhipathiship to the defendant priest. The minutes of
this meeting (D5) signed by the parties and lay dayakas were produced in
support of the plea of abandonment by the plaintiff priest.

**

Held

**

(1) What works the forfeiture of the right to an incumbency is the abandonment
of the temple.

(2) (a) In determining whether or not an abandonment has taken place a
renunciation by him who was in law entitled to succeed is an important item of
evidence.

(b) Abandonment connotes both a physical and a mental element. It means and
requires both a giving - up of or going away from the temple, coupled with a
dear manifestation of a decision not to attend to the functions and duties
which are traditionally associated with and are expected to be performed by
one who holds such office.

(c ) Whether a person who was, in law, entitled to succeed to the incumbency
has so conducted himself is a question of fact.

(3) (a ) The desire expressed by the plaintiff in the course of his speech
recorded in the minutes D5 does not seem to be compatible with the conduct of
one who has made up his mind to sever completely his association with the said
temple and to take no further interest in its future well - being.

(b) (i) The plaintiff was in fact residing in one of the temples of the
paramparawa.

(ii) The necessity to appoint someone to be in charge of Wilegoda temple had
arisen not only because the plaintiff was in actual residence in another
temple but also because he was a teacher in the Education Department.

(c) The claim for the incumbency is being advanced by the very priest who is
said to have abandoned the right to it.

(4) In view of the above facts the plaintiff cannot be said to have abandoned
his right to the incumbency. He has not forfeited his right to it.

**236**

**

Cases referred to

**_

(1) Dhammadaja Thero v. Wimalajothi Thero 79 (1) N.L.R. 145, 191_  

_

(2) Dhammaratna Unnanse v. Sumangala Unnanse 14 N.L.R. 400 - see also 20
N.L.R. 388_  

_

(3) Pemananda v. Welivitiye Soratha 51 N.L.R. 372, 376_  

_

(4) Jinaratana Thero v. Dhammaratana Thero 57 N.L.R. 372,374_  

_

(5) Sangananda Terunnanse v. Sumanatissa Terunnanse 66 N.L.R. 394, 396_  

_

(6) Amaraseeha Thero v. Sasanatilleke Thera 59 N.L.R. 289, 290_  

_

(7) Dharmapala Unnanse v. Sumangala Unnanse 41 N.L.R. 235_  

_

(8) Dhammavisuddhi Thero v. Dharmadassi Thero 57 N.L.R. 235_  

_

(9) Dheerananda Thero v. Ratnasara Thero 67 N.L.R 559_  

_

(10) B. Janananda Maha Thero v. B. Sirisunanda Thero [1988] 2 Sri LR 61, 73

_**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

T.B. Dissanayake P.C. with S. Walgampaya and N. Hatch_ for substituted
defendant - appellant.  

_

N. R. M Daluwatte P.C. with Mrs. D.K. Gabadage Manohara de Silva and S.
Abhayajeewa_ for plaintiff - respondent.

_

Cur. adv. volt.

_

January 17, 1990.  
**RANASINGHE, C.J.

**

The plaintiff - respondent has instituted these proceedings against the
defendant- appellant for a declaration that he is the lawful Viharadhipathy of
the Wilegoda Viharaya, on the footing that the succession to the said viharaya
is based on the principle of sisyanu sisya paramparawe and for ejectment of
the defendant appellant therefrom.

The defendant - appellant, in his answer, has taken up the position that the
plaintiff had abandoned whatever rights he (the plaintiff) had in respect of
the incumbency of the said temple; and that he, the defendant, is now the
lawful Viharadhipathy of the said temple.

The District Court entered judgment for the plaintiff and the defendant's
appeal therefrom to the court of Appeal has been dismissed by the Court of
Appeal.

Thereafter, upon the defendant moving this Court for special leave to appeal
to this Court, this Court, by its order dated 9.5.88, granted him special
leave upon the two questions the abandonment by the plaintiff of his rights as
Viharadhipathy whether the purported appoinment on 8.3.72, and later
recognised and confirmed by the Malwatte Chapter,

**237**

constituted a valid appointment of the defendant as Viharadhipathy of the said
temple.

When this appeal was taken up for argument before this Court learned
President's Counsel for the defendant - appellant informed this Court that he
was not pressing the second of the aforesaid two questions, namely, the
validity of the said appointment of the defendant on 8.3.72. The only
question, which now arises for consideration by this Court, is whether the
plaintiff has abandoned his rights to the Viharadhipathiship of the said
temple. An affirmative answer to this question would entail the dismissal of
the plaintiff's action.

The defendant-appellant relies entirely upon the document D5 which embodies
the proceedings of a Sangha Saba held at the said temple five days after the
death of the previous incumbent, Nandarama Thero, on 8.3.1972 to establish
that the plaintiff-respondent is not entitled to the incumbency of the said
vihare.

The document D5 contains the minutes of a meeting of the Sangha Saba held at
the Wilegoda Viharaya at 7.00 p.m. on the 8th March 1972, presided over by the
Chief Sangha Nayake of the Matara-Hambantota District. This meeting had been
convened at the special request of the robed pupils and the co-pupils of the
late Kahawe Nandarama Thero. The purpose of the meeting, as has been clarified
by the Chief Adikarana Sangha Nayake of the Matara Palatha, was to fill the
vacancy which had arisen in the Viharadhipatiship of the said Wilegoda Temple,
by appointing, with the common consent of all the robed pupils and the co-
pupils of the said deceased Nandarama Thero, a suitable priest. A resolution
had then been moved by Pilimatalawa Dhammapala Thero, who was a co- pupil of
the deceased Nandarama Thero, that Welakande Dhammasiddi Thero (the defendant)
be appointed to fill the said vacancy. Kamburupitiye Somaloka Thero, the
plaintiff, had then, whilst seconding the said motion, stated that, as he was
then employed as a teacher in the service of the Government and was also
functioning as the Viharadhipathi of the Tuwakkugodawatte Purana Viharaya in
Galle, he was finding it difficult to accept the Viharadhipathiship of the
Wilegoda temple and attend to its duties: that the said Dhammasiddhi Thero was
in every way suitable to hold the said Viharadhipathiship that he was
assigning and transferring whatever rights he has in respect of the said
incumbency to the said Dhammasiddhi Thero that all he desires is that one of
the pupils or a co-

**238**

pupil of the deceased Nandarama should hold such Viharadhipathiship and work
for the betterment of the pirivena and the said temple. Saying so, the
plaintiff had gladly seconded the said resolution, so moved by Dhammapala
Thero and had expressed the further hope that Dhammasiddhi Thero would accept
the said Viharadhipathiship. Thereupon all the pupils and co-pupils of the
said deceased Nandarama Thero, had entrusted the said Viharadhipathiship to
the said Dhammasiddi Thero subject to their right of maintenance. D5 also
makes it clear that thereafter the said Dhammasiddi Thero had been so
appointed, but that such appointment, was to be confirmed only after the lapse
of a period of three years, if his services were found to be satisfactory.
This decision of the Sangha Saba had been accepted by all the way dayakas who
had been present. This document has also been signed, inter alia, by the
plaintiff in this case, the said Kamburupitiya Somaloka Thero.

It has been contended by learned President's Counsel for the plaintiff on the
basis of the judgment of Gunasekera, J. in the case of Dhammadaja T hero v.
Wimalajothi Thero, (1) that: the conduct of the plaintiff at the said meeting-
in saying what he said and in seconding the said motion - does not amount to a
renunciation of his right to officiate as Viharadhipathi that, even if it
amounts to an act of renunciation such renunciation alone is not sufficient to
deprive him of the rights which he had, in law, become entitled to upon the
death of his tutor, the deceased Nandarama Thero, as his senior pupil: that
his conduct does not in law amounts to an abandonment of his rights and of the
said Wilegoda Vihare.

Gunasekera, J., had expressed the opinion that

"the Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law does not recongnise such a renunciation of
the right to function as Viharadhipati. The office of Viharadhipati is
inalienable and a priest on whom this office has devolved according to the
Sisyanu Sisya Paramparawa rule of succession only holds it in his life time to
pass it on according to law, to his senior pupil or such other pupil as he may
select."

Gunasekera, J., has proceeded to take the view, after a consideration of the
two judgments - Dhammaratna Unnanse v. Sumangala Unnanse, (2) and Pemananda v.
Welivitiye Soratha, (3) - that what deprives a monk, and his pupils of the
rights to succeed to a Viharadhipathiship, which devolves on him according to
law, is the "desertion of a vihare and the abandonment" of the office of
Viharadhipathiship.

**239**

Way back in 1910, in the case of Dhammaratna Unnanse v. Sumangala Unnanse (2)
the Supreme Court concluded, after having had the expert evidence of seven
Mahanayakes - which said evidence was intended to be "a source of information
for future reference on the points inquired about", and now published in the
Appendix to the 20th Volume of the New Law Reports, vide 20 N. L. R. p. 388:

"that a right of papillary succession will be forfeited if the pupil deserts
his tutor and the temple the incumbency of which he claims".

With regard to the question of "abandonment " by a Buddhist monk of his rights
to an incumbency, Windham, J., observed, in the case of Pemananda v.
Welivitiye Soratha, (3) that the "abandonment of such rights does not require
any notarial deed or other prescribed formality, but is a question of fact,
and the intention to abandon may be inferred from the circumstances
.........", and that the "question appears not to be covered by authority." It
has been held in Dammaratna Unnanse v. Sumangala Unnanse (supra) that when a
tutor disrobes himself for immorality, this does not deprive his pupils of
their rights of pupillary succession. But I think the case is different where
the tutor abandons his right to an incumbency. Disrobing , with the intention
of giving up the priesthood, is the equivalent, ecclesiasiastically, of
personal demise, and it does not entail, any more than death entails, an
abandonment of rights, but merely a personal incapacity to exercise them.
These rights can accordingly descend to a pupillary successor. The abandonment
of an incumbency by a priest, on the other hand, constitutes the forfeiture of
that to which his pupils' right of succession are attached, namely the
incumbency itself. The priest remains a priest, but abandons his rights to the
incumbency, upon which the pupillary right of succession are dependent. There
accordingly remain no rights for the pupil to inherit.

The evidence led in that case established that Sumangala Thero, through whom
the claim for the incumbency was founded had from the death of his tutor
Revathe, in 1894 until his own death many years later, officiated as incumbent
neither personally nor through a deputy. Furthermore, Sumangala Thero had in a
letter P9, expressed his desire not to be burdened with the temple. These
items of evidence, together with his, Sumangala Thero's failure at any time to
exercise any rights and functions of an incumbent either personally or through
deputies, were taken as having constituted an abandonment of Sumangala Thero's
rights to the said incumbency.

**240**

The case of Jinaratana Thero v, Dhammaratana Thero, (4) is another instance
where the Supreme Court expressed the opinion that a Buddhist monk could
renounce his rights to a Viharadhipathiship, even though it was held that, in
the circumstances of the case, no such renunciation has, in law, taken place.
Said Basnayake, A. C. J., at page 374

"It has been held by this court that a bhikku can renounce his right to be
Viharadhipathi of a vihare and that the renunciation of the right need not be
expressly made; but may be inferred from facts and circumstances. But an
intention to renounce will not be inferred unless that intention clearly
appears therefrom upon a strict interpretation of the facts and circumstances
of the case. If the facts and circumstances leave the matter in doubt then the
inference to be drawn is that there is no renunciation.

There being no presumption in favour of the renunciation of a right, the onus
is on the appellant to prove facts and circumstances from which it can be
clearly inferred that Ratanapala renounced his right to the office of
Viharadhipathi of Mungampola.

Learned Counsel for the appellant has not cited any authority in support of
his contention that a Viharadhipathi forfeits his rights to the office when he
leaves the temple of which he is Viharadhipati and takes up residence in
another of which he is also Viharadhipati. The office of Viharadhipati is not
one that can be abandoned by mere residence in another place. There is nothing
in the vinaya or the decisions of this court, which requires a Viharadhipathi
to reside in the temple of which he is Viharadhipati. A bhikku who is
Viharadhipathi of more than one temple must of necessity reside in one place
at a time and the mere fact that he makes one of the temples his permanent
residence does not operate as a renunciation of his right to the others."

Sangananda Terunnanse v. Sumanatissa Terunnanse. (5) is also another instance
where the concept of renunciation was affirmed, even though once again the
claim of a renunciation was held not to be established by the evidence relied
upon, Sansoni, J., dealt with the matter, at page 396 in this way

"The taw is clear that although a renunciation by a monk of his right to be
Viharadhipati may be inferred from facts and circumstances,

**241**

such an Inference will not be drawn if the matter is left in a state of doubt.
It is quite usual for a monk who is the Viharadhipathi of several temples to
give charge of one or more of those temples to other monks, who would normally
reside in and look after those temples and their temporalities. It is not
always convenient for a Viharadhipathi to look after temples, which are
situated some distance away from the temple in which he resides, and he may
appoint managers or deputies for this reason. Any acts of possession or
management by such appointees are referable to that appointment they would all
be on behalf of the lawful Viharadhipathi and would not give the appointee any
claim to that title."

The plea of renunciation was held to have been established by Chief Justice
Basnayake, in the case of Amaraseeha Thero v. Sasanatilake Thero, (6).
Basnayake, C.J., observed -

"................. the fact that the resolution to place the plaintiff in
charge of Sanghatissarama was proposed by Aggawansa and seconded by Gnanawansa
and adopted nemine contradicente by the assembled Sangha, removes all
difficulties that would otherwise have arisen. I have no doubt that on the
facts of this case the Plaintiff is the de jure Viharadhipathi of
Sanghatissarama. In my opinion it is correct to infer from the fact that
Aggawansa proposed and Gnanawansa seconded the resolution that they renounced
their rights."

In the case of Dharmapala Unnanse v. Sumangala Unnanse, (7) the Supreme Court
took the view that a senior pupil who deserts the temple forfeits his right to
the incumbency of the said temple. Although the question of desertion and the
consequent forfeiture of his rights had not been expressly taken up in the
lower court, the Supreme Court yet dealt with it for the first time in appeal,
and the Court was satisfied that there was sufficient material to justify the
conclusion that "R", the priest from whom the claim was put forward. had, on
the death of his tutor "S", left the temple, having "bolted" 10-12 days after
the tutor's death to another temple, and thus relinquished his claim to the
incumbency. In coming to the said conclusion the Supreme Court also took into
consideration that "R" had never returned to the temple and had not at any
time made any claim to the incumbency.

**242**

The claims to the incumbency in these two cases were not; it must be noted,
put forward by the very bhikkus who were alleged to have abandoned the rights
in dispute.

Dealing with the position of a bhikku who is Viharadhipathi of more than one
temple, Basnayake, A.C.J., did, in the case of Dhammavisuddhi Thero v.
Dhammadassi Them (8) , observe that : where such Viharadhipathi places a
bhikku, who is not necessarily a pupil of his, in charge of temple of which he
is also the Viharadhipathi while adopting for his usual residence only one of
there, the performance of any functions by such bhikku so appointed does not
have the effect of making such bhikku the Viharadhipathi of such temple; that
there being no particular duties, spiritual or temporal, which a
Viharadhipathi need perform for the purpose of keeping alive his rights, such
right cannot be said to be lost because another bhikku, who is actually
residing in the temple, manages its affairs and prevents the temple from
falling into decay; and that such other bhikku cannot by virtue of his
residence assert his right to be its Viharadhipathi.

Dheerananda Thero v. Ratnasara T hero, (9) is also a case in which the Supreme
Court had to consider a claim that a Viharadhipathi had abandoned his rights
to an incumbency, Sirimane J., dealt with this matter in this way at page 561

"The basis of abandonment is the intention to renounce one's rights; and this
intention must be clear and unambiguous. If there is any doubt on this matter,
the inference drawn must be against an abandonment. (see Jinaratane vs.
Dhammaratana Thero, 57 NLR 372 (4) at page 562)"

Sirimane J., proceeded to deal with the distinction between abandonment, or
relinquishing of one's rights and a conveyance of those rights to another,
thus

"When rights are abandoned they disappear, and cease to exist, and there is no
person to whom those rights accrue. In the case of a conveyance the transferor
asserts his rights, and then transmits them to the transferee so that rights
continue in the transferee. It may turn out that the act of transfer is
ineffective (as in this case) but then the rights of transfer or did not
disappear (for he never renounced them) but continue to remain in hire."

**243**

Having dealt the relevant facts and circumstances, the Court held that there
was, at least a great deal of doubt as to whether' Piyadassi Thero; through
whom the rights were claimed, had abandoned his rights or not, and, on that
basis, the Court affirmed the findings of the District Court that there was no
proof of abandonment.

The case of B. Janananda Maha Thero v. D. Sirisunanda (10) is also a case in
which the question of abandonment was considered, along with questions of res
judicata and estoppel, in relation to a claim of forfeiture of the right of
succession to an incumbency. The Court of Appeal judgment does not, however,
appear to be of much assistance for the reason that, having considered two
earlier cases and taken the view that, although the claim to the incumbency is
not barred by the principles. of res judicata, the plaintiff is nevertheless
estopped from maintaining the action. The court merely states, at page 73,
that the plaintiff has also "abandoned" his claim to the Viharadhipathiship.

On a consideration of the principles elucidated in the foregoing judgments of
the Supreme Court, in regard to this aspect of the Buddhist Ecclesiastical
Law, it would seem that, what works the forfeiture of the right to an
incumbency is the abandonment of the temple, the incumbency of which is in
dispute that, in determining whether or not such an abandonment has taken
place, a renunciation by him, who was, in law, entitled to succeed, is an
important item of evidence : abandonment connotes both a physical and a mental
element : it means and requires both a giving-up of or going away from the
temple, coupled with a clear manifestation of a decision not to attend to the
functions and duties which are traditionally associated with and are expected
to be performed by one who holds such office: whether a person, who was, in
law, entitled to succeed to the incumbency, has so conducted himself is a
question of fact: that such conduct must be conscious, deliberate, and must be
clearly established and should not be left in doubt.

The desire expressed by the plaintiff in the course of his speech, seconding
the motion as set out in D5, does not seem to be compatible with the conduct
of one who has made up his mind to sever completely his association with the
said temple and to take no further interest in its future well-being.

It is also in evidence that the plaintiff was, in fact, residing in one of the
temples of the paramparawa: that the necessity to appoint someone to be

**244**

in charge of the Wilegoda temple had arisen not only because the plaintiff was
in actual residence in another temple but also because the plaintiff had
accepted a job as a teacher in the Education Department.

It is also noteworthy that in this case - unlike in the cases where the claims
of abandonment were upheld, as in Dhammapala Unnanse v. Sumangala Unnanse
(supra), Pemananda v. W. Soratha (supra) and Amaraseeha Thero v. Sasanatilaka
Unnanse (supra) - the claim for the incumbency, which is resisted on the basis
of an abandonment, has been put forward by the very person who, it is claimed,
has abandoned the right to such incumbency.

In this view of the matter, I find myself unable to say that the findings of
the District Court, which have also been affirmed by the Court of Appeal -
that the plaintiff has not forfeited the right, which devolved on him on the
death of his tutor Nandarama Thero, in respect of the incumbency of the said
temple - should be set aside.

The appeal of the defendant-appellant is, therefore, dismissed with costs.

**

BANDARANAYAKE, J. -** I agree.

**KULATUNGA, J., -** I agree.

_**Appeal dismissed.**

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1990/1.html_  

