##  Basnagoda Hemaloka v. Sandanangama Attadassi - SLR - 224, Vol 2 of 1991
[1991] LKSC 14; (1991) 2 Sri LR 224 (28 March 1991)

### 224



**BASNAGODA HEMALOKA**

**v.**

**SANDANANGAMA ATTADASSI**



SUPREME COURT.

BANDARANAYAKE, J., FERNANDO, J. AND KULATUNGA, J.

S. C. APPEAL NO. 6/90.

S. C. SPL. L.A. NO. 3/90.

C. A. NO. 482/76 (F).

D. C. GAMPAHA NO. 16242/L.

FEBRUARY 11, 1991.



_Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law ‑ Right to main temple carries with it right to
appurtenant temples ‑ Office of Viharadhipathy is indivisible ‑ Succession._



Where it was conceded that the Sri Maha Viharaya is the main temple, the
appurtenant temples go with it ‑ the office of Viharadhipathy being
indivisible. In the case of a temple having appurtenant temples the
appurte­nant temples are merged with the main temple and the succession to the
office of Viharadhipathi or the appointment of a pupil to succeed in such
office has to be with reference to the tnain temple and the Viharadhipathi of
the main temple is entitled to the appurtenant temples. Where the claim arises
by virtue of an appointment, no reference to the appurtenant temples by name
is required. The defendant ‑respondent though the junior pupil hav­ing become
entitled to the Viharadhipathiship of Sri Maha Viharaya by virtue of a deed,
becomes entitled to the appurtenant temples. An incumbent of a Buddhist temple
is entitled to appoint any particular pupil as his succes­sor.



**Cases referred to:**



1\.         _Dhammajoti v. Sobita_ 16 NLR 408, 409.

2\.         _Saranankara Unnanse v. Indajothi Unnanse_ 20 NLR 385.

3\.         _Piyaratne Unnanse v. Sonuthrhara Unnanse_ 36 NLR 236.

1.                  _Piyatissa Terunnanse v. Saranapala Terunnanse_ 40 LR 262.



**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_A.      C. Gooneratne_ Q.C. with _Champaka Ladduwahetty_ for Appellant.



_P. A. D. Samarasekera_ P.C. with _W. P. Senanayake_ for Respondent.

_ _

_Cur.adv.vult._  



### 225



March 28, 1991.



**KULATUNGA, J.**



This is an appeal by the substituted plaintiff‑appellant from the judgment of
the Court of Appeal which affirmed the judgment of the District Court in the
above action and in terms of which Rev. Sandanangama Attadassi the
defendant­respondent was declared the Viharadhipathi of Radawana Sri Maha
Viharaya and its appurtenant temples. Rev. Pasgam­mana Ratnasara the originial
plaintiff‑appellant instituted this action claiming to be the Viharadhipathi
of these temples as the successor to the late Rev. Diyawala Jinananda under
the rule of pupillary succession as against the defendant­respondent. The
plaintiff‑appellant was eligible to have so suc­ceeded in the normal course as
the most senior pupil of Jina­nanda as against the defendant‑respondent who is
the pupil next in seniority to him. However, the defendant‑respondent claimed
that by deed IV7 Rev. Jinananda had appointed him to succeed as the
Viharadhipathi of the said temples.



The plaintiff‑appellant came to Court claiming that Sri Jinendraramaya was the
main temple of which Sri Maha Viha­raya the Pirivena and Abinawaramaya alias
Jayawardenara­maya were appurtenant temples. The case for the
defendant­respondent was that the Sri Maha Viharaya was the main temple and
the other three temples were appurtenant to it and the deed IV7 conveyed to
him all these temples. The learned District Judge held with the
defendant‑respondent and deli­vered judgment declaring him to be the
Viharadhipathi and dismissing the action of the plaintiff‑appellant who
appealed therefrom to the Court below. That Court affirmed the judg­ment of
the District Court and dismissed the appeal.



The only point urged by Mr. A. C. Gooneratne Q.C., on behalf of the
plaintiff‑appellant before the Court of Appeal and on behalf of the
substituted plaintiff‑appellant before this Court is that IV7 conferred on the
defendant‑respondent the



### 226



Viharadhipathiship of Sri Maha Viharaya only and therefore the other three
temples devolved by right of pupillary succes­sion on the senior pupil namely
the plaintiff‑appellant. The finding of the District Court that Sri Maha
Viharaya is the main temple is no longer canvassed. The learned Queen's
Counsel's present submission is that the determination of the question was
purely on an interpretation of the deed IV7 and therefore a question of law
that had to be decided on the cor­rect interpretation of IV7; that according
to the grammatical and ordinary meaning of the words used in the deed, the
grant therein is confined to the Sri Maha Viharaya and the two lands described
in the Schedule to the said deed; that the Dis­trict Judge could never have
answered the issue relating to the Viharadhipathiship without a correct
construction of the deed, even though this point was not specifically raised
before him; and that it is a pure question of law and could be raised for the
first time in appeal.



The relevant portions of IV 7 read –



"AND WHEREAS the said Diyawala Sri Jinananda Nayake Thero took unto himself
and robed five pupils who are in the order of robing as follows. Pasgammana
Ratnasara Thero, Sandanangama Attadassi Thero ............



AND WHEREAS the said Diyawala Sri Jinananda Nayake Thero is now desirous of
nominating and constituting and appointing the next in order of robing his,
senior pupil Sanda­nangama Attadassi Thero to succeed to the office of lawful
incumbent Controlling Viharadhipathi and Adikari Bikshu of the said temple
which is fully and particularly described in Schedule No. 1 hereto and its
appurtenants fully and particu­larly described in Schedule No. 2 hereto which
are of the reas­onable value of Rupees Ten Thousand (Rs. 10,000).



AND WHEREAS the said Diyawala Sri Jinananda Nayake Thero considering the
implicit disloyalty sees reason to discard the said Pasgammana Ratnasara Thero
from succeeding as





### 227



lawful incumbent Controlling Viharadhipathi and Adikari Bik­shu of the said
temple and its temporalities.



AND WHEREAS the said temple and its temporalities are exempt from s.4 of the
Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance.



NOW KNOW YE AND THESE PRESENTS WITNES­SETH that in pursuance of the said
desire and in considera­tion of the reasons aforesaid and diverse other good
causes and consideration hereunto moving and the said Diyawala Sri Jinananda
Nayake Thero for myself or any other claiming from me whether pupillary or
otherwise do hereby nominate, constitute and appoint the said Sandanangama
Attadassi Thero of Sri Maha Viharaya aforesaid to be and to continue as lawful
incumbent Controlling Viharadhipathi Adikari Bik­shu and Trustee in such
office of the said temple now known as Purena Sri Maha Viharaya fully and
particularly described in Schedule 2 hereto as my successor in such office
upon my departing. this life.



TO HAVE AND TO HOLD the office to which I have hereby nominated, constituted
and appointed the said Sanda­nangama Attadassi Thero absolutely and against
any other claiming to be whether pupillary or otherwise and to adminis­ter the
said temple and its temporalities".



The Schedule No. 1 describes the Sri Maha Viharaya and a land called
Kongahawatte. The Schedule No. 2 describes a land called Pinwatte.



The learned Queen's Counsel for the substituted plaintiff­-appellant submits
that however strongly Rev. Jinananda may have expressed his intention to
exclude the plaintiff‑appellant from succeeding to him, he has made the
appointment of his successor only to the Sri Maha Viharaya and the two lands
described in the schedule; hence the defendant‑respondent became entitled to
the Sri Maha Viharaya and the said lands only; and the plaintiff‑appellant as
the senior pupil succeeded to the Viharadhipathiship of the other three
temples by right of pupillary succession.



**228**



The argument of the learned Queen's Counsel is that even if the late Rev.
Jinananda may have discarded the plaintiff­appellant, everything was not given
to the defendant­respondent; that if nothing is said in IV7 about the other
tem­ples, the plaintiff‑appellant's right to such temples remained unaffected,
and that the reference to the "temporalities" in IV7 mean only those of the
Sri Maha Viharaya.



In English Law "temporalities" means ‑ in a wider sense ‑ the money revenue of
a church, derived from pew rents, sub­scriptions, donations, collections,
cemetary charges and other sources. Black's Law Dictionary 5th Ed. P1312. In
relation to a temple under the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance it means the
revenues of a temple. This is what Pereira J. meant in _Dhammajoti v. Sobita_
(1) at 409 when he said __



"In times anterior to the passing of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance (No.
8 of 1905) the management and control of the temporalities or revenues of the
temple went hand in hand with the incumbency of the temple".



Under the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance (Cap. 318) the Viharadhipathi has
the control of the revenues of the tem­ple. IV7 appoints the
defendant‑respondent to succeed to the Viharadhipathiship of Sri Maha Viharaya
and its "temporali­ties" (meaning its revenues and not appurtenant temples);
and hence the submission that upon a grammatical construction the deed is
confined to Sri Maha Viharaya is correct. If the matter stood at that, the
substituted plaintiff‑appellant would have succeeded in this appeal.



However, Mr. Samarasekera P.C. for the defendant­-respondent submitted that if
Sri Maha Viharaya is the main temple (and this is no longer contested) the
appurtenant tem­ples go with it; that the contest is not in respect of any
prop­erty but in respect of an office, and the office of Viharadhipa­thi is
not divisible. He cited the decision in _Saranankara_

_ _

_ _

### 229



_Unnanse v: Indajothi Unnanse_ (2) in support. In that case, the plaintiffs
prayed for a declaration that they are entitled to the incumbency of a Vihare
jointly with the defendant. It was held that a Vihare cannot be portioned out
in shares whether divided or undivided; that the office of incumbent is a
single office and cannot be held jointly; that a claim to a share of the
incumbency cannot be sustained; and that a Vihare is vested in the Sangha as a
whole and the succession to an incumbency connotes the selection for the
office".



In the case of a temple having appurtenant temples the appurtenants are merged
with the main temple and the succes­sion to the office of Viharadhipathi or
the appointment of a pupil to succeed in such office has to be with reference
to the main temple and the Viharadhipathi of the main temple is entitled to
the appurtenant temples. Where the claim arises by virtue of an appointment no
reference to the appurtenant temples by name is required. Thus in _Piyaratne
Unnanse v. Sonuththara Unnanse_ (3) it was held that Meda Pansala was
appurtenant to Degaldoruwa Vihare and that the 1st plaintiff as the rightful
incumbent of Degaldoruwa Vihare was entitled to Meda Pansala.



It follows that by virtue of his appointment under IV7 to succeed to the
Viharadhipathiship of Sri Maha Viharaya the defendant‑respondent became
entitled to its appurtenant tem­ples. Presumably, it was to defeat this right
that in the Dis­trict Court the plaintiff‑appellant took up the position that
Jinendraramaya is the main temple of which Sri Maha Viha­raya is an
appurtenant. Had he succeeded in establishing it the defendant respondent's
claim under IV7 could have been impeached. When he failed to establish it he
failed entirely and was left with no rights to any temple. I therefore hold
that both the District Court and the Court below were right in rejecting his
claim. His right of succession under the rule of pupillary succession has to
give way to the appointment made in favour of the defendant‑respondent. An
incumbent of a Buddhist temple is entitled to appoint any particular pupil as



### 230





his successor ‑ _Dhammajoti v. Sobita (supra)_ ; _Piyatissa Terun­nanse v.
Saranapala Terunnanse_ (4).



For the foregoing reasons, I affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeal and
dismiss the appeal with costs.



**Bandaranayake, J.** __ I agree.



**Fernando, J.** __ I agree.



_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/14.html_  

