##  Pannaloka Thero v. Sangananda Thero - SLR - 230, Vol 2 of 1991 [1991] LKSC
15; (1991) 2 Sri LR 230 (23 May 1991)

**230**

** **

## PANNALOKA THERO

**v.**

**SANGANANDA THERO**

SUPREME COURT.

BANDARANAYAKE, J., FERNANDO, J. AND KULATUNGA, J.,

S. C. APPEAL NO. 19/87.

C.A. NO. 207/76 (F).

D. C. KALUTARA NO. 1886/L.

MARCH 12, 13, 1991.



Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law ‑ Succession to Viharadhipathiship by virtue of
oral appointment‑Evidence of oral nomination ‑ Burden and standard of proof._



The appellant contended that Rev. Sumanatissa Thero in or about 1929 orally
nominated and appointed Rev. Saddhatissa Thero to the Viharadhi­pathiship of
the Duwe Deeparamaya Temple, that by virtue of the said appointment Rev.
Saddhatissa Thero became the Viharadhipathi of the tem­ple upon the demise of
Rev. Sumanatissa Thero in 1953; that he functioned in that office and died in
1969 having in 1967 made his Last Will which was admitted to probate in the
District Court of Colombo.



### 231



**Held :**



1.         There is no legal fetter against Sumanatissa Thero orally appointing his junior pupil to succeed him. There was no basis to disturb the District Judge's finding that the appointment had been so made.



2.         The evidence of an oral nomination need not in every respect be as precise as in the case of a written nomination but the Court should assess the evidence carefully and if necessary look for corroboration before acting on it. However there is no rule of evidence which requires a witness giving evidence long after the event to go into the form' and manner' of the nom­ination with absolute precision.



3.         The burden of proof is on the claimant to establish the nomination by a balance of evidence.



4.         The conduct of the plaintiff challenging the nomination is relevant where it suggests that there was such an oral appointment.



5.         While pupillary succession according to seniority is the rule, a Viha­radhipathy has the right to appoint any particular pupil as his successor.



**Cases referred to:**



1.         _Pemananda Thero v. Thomas Perera_ 56 NLR 413.  


2\.         _Amerasekera Thero v. Tittagala Sasanatilleke Thero_ 59 NLR 289.

  
3\.         _Dhammadaja Thero v. Wimalajothi Thero_ 79 [1] NLR 145.

  
4\.         _Jinaratne Thero v. Dhammaratana Thero_ 57 NLR 372.



5\.         _Morontota Sobitha Thero v. Amunugama Ratnapala Thero_ [1981] 1
Sri LR 201.



6\.         _Dhammajoti Thero v. Sobita_ 16 NLR 408.



7\.         _Piyatissa Terunnanse v. Saranapala Terunnanse_ 40 NLR 262.



8.                  _Pannavasa Thero v. Sudassi Thero_ 68 NLR 512.





**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_Eric Amerasinghe P.C._ with _T. B. Dissanayake P.C., Raja Bandaranayake_ and
_M. B. Peramuna_ for 1st defendant ‑ respondent ‑ appellant.



_L. C. Seneviratne P.C._ with _Ms. T. Keenawinna_ and _Harsha Amerasekera_ for
substituted appellant ‑ respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._

###  

### 232

May 23, 1991.



**KULATUNGA, J.**



The original plaintiff Rev. Wattaddera Somaratne (now dead) sued the 1st
defendant‑respondent‑appellant and the 2nd to 4th defendants being pupils of
late Rev. Benthara Saddha­tissa Thero. The plaintiff claimed to be the
Controlling Viha­radhipathi of Duwe Deeparamaya Temple in the Kalutara
dis­trict. He also claimed that by virtue of such Viharadhipathiship he is
entitled to the custody and manage­ment of two other temples "Anandaramaya"
and "Amara­singharamaya" and to the ownership of certain properties as forming
part of the temporalities of the said Deeparamaya temple. The 5th and 6th
defendants were made parties to give notice of the action as they are also
pupils of the said Ben­thara Saddhatissa. In the answer filed on behalf of the
defend­ants, the 1st defendant‑respondent‑appellant claimed the
Viha­radhipathiship of the three temples. It was however stated in the course
of the trial that "Anandaramaya" and "Amara­singharamaya" are not appurtenant
to Deeparamaya but dis­tinct temples and the defendants would claim their
rights to them in a separate action and the trial proceeded only in regard to
the plaintiff's claim in respect of Deeparamaya.



After a trial of the action on 25 dates from 11.10.72 to 17.12.75, the learned
District Judge upheld the 1st defendant's claim to the Viharadhipathiship of
Deeparamaya and dis­missed the plaintiff's action whereupon the plaintiff
appealed to the Court of Appeal. During the pendancy of the appeal the
plaintiff died and his senior pupil Rev. Omatte Sangananda Thero (the
respondent to this appeal) was made the substituted plaintiff‑appellant. The
Court of Appeal determined that the plaintiff was the lawful Viharadhipathi of
the temple and set aside the judgement of the District Court, and declared the
substituted plaintiff‑appellant to be the present Viharadhipathi of the temple
and further ordered that the 1st to 4th defend­ants be ejected from the temple
and the substituted plaintiff



### 233



appellant (hereinafter referred to as the respondent') be res­tored to the
possession thereof. The 1st defendant‑respondent­appellant (hereinafter
referred to as the appellant') appeals to this Court from the judgement of
the Court of Appeal.



The temple in dispute which is described in all the docu­ments as Deeparamaya
Duwe Viharaya is a temple which is exempted from the operation of S.4(1) of
the Buddhist Tem­poralities Ordinance (Cap. 318) but not being a temple
exemp­ted from the operation of the entire Ordinance the manage­ment of the
property belonging to it is, in terms of S.4(2), vested in its Viharadhipathi.
Rev. Kalutara Ratanapala was the original Controlling Viharadhipathi of this
temple. On his death his sole pupil Mahagoda Sumanatissa Thero succeeded him
in office. He died in 1953 leaving only two pupils i.e. the original plaintiff
and Rev. Benthara Saddhatissa Thero. The plaintiff was the senior pupil and
according to the rule of Sisyanu Sisya Paramparawa he would have succeeded to
the office of Viharadhipathi of the temple.



The appellant, however, contends that Rev. Sumanatissa Thero in or about 1929
orally nominated and appointed Rev. Saddhatissa Thero to the
Viharadhipathiship of the Duwe Deeparamaya Temple; that by virtue of the said
appointment Rev. Saddhatissa Thero became the Viharadhipathi of the temple
upon the demise of Rev. Sumanatissa Thero in 1953; that he functioned in that
office and died in 1969 having made his last will in 1967 (6D18); and that the
appellant succeeded to the said office under the provisions of 6D18 admitted
to probate in D.C. Colombo (6D19).



Evidence of the alleged oral appointment was given by Rev. Sugathadeera Thero
a monk of about 70 years of age. His tes­timony was assailed by Counsel for
the plaintiff who urged that he was deliberately giving false evidence to help
the appel­lant. It was submitted that his conduct and behaviour throughout the
years has been unbecoming of a monk and that he is unworthy of credit. It was
also submitted that at the time



### 234



of the alleged nomination there was displeasure between Rev. Saddatissa Thero
and his tutor Rev. Sumanatissa Thero and therefore it is unlikely and
improbable that Rev. Sumanatissa Thero would have nominated him. The learned
District Judge after a careful consideration of the evidence rejected these
allegations and submissions but in view of the position taken up by the
plaintiff regarding the character and credibility of this witness analysed the
other evidence in order to ascertain whether it tends to support the oral
testimony of the witness; upon such analysis the learned Judge reached the
conclusion that the documentary evidence and the conduct of parties as
disclosed by the evidence support the evidence that the appointment spoken to
by Rev. Sugathadeera had in fact been made.



Rev. Sugathadeera said that Rev. Sumanatissa made the alleged appointment at a
meeting hetd at the conclusion of a foundation laying ceremony for the vihare
in the presence of a gathering consisting of monks and prominent
representatives of the laity. The plaintiff and Rev. Saddatissa Thero were
also present. In the course of a lengthy cross‑examination the Counsel for the
plaintiff did not probe the details or the manner of the alleged appointment
or the words used in mak­ing such appointment except what appears in Sinhala
at page 442 of the brief the English version of which is as follows:



Q.        According to your evidence, you do not say that this oral
appointment is unequivocal?  


A.        I say that it is unequivocal.



Q.        What you say is that he said so?  


A.        No the appointment was made.



Q.        To what do you say this appointment was made?



A.        I was present at that meeting.



The point was not pursued and in the cross‑examination that followed Counsel
only put questions suggesting that as the witness belonged to the Amarapura
Sect he would not



### 235



have attended a function at the Duwe Temple which belonged to the Siamese
Sect.



However, the plaintiff's Counsel developed the point dur­ing his submissions
before the District Court when he said that the appointment must be proved
unequivocally. It must be clear and specific. The burden is on the defendant
to contro­vert the position that the plaintiff is the de jure Viharadhipa­thi.
The appointment is proved only if that is the only infer­ence possible. If
necessary, there must be corroboration. It was the Counsel's submission that
there is no evidence of an appointment to the Viharadhipathiship but that Rev.
Saddha­tissa was only the resident monk carrying out the religious functions.
The fact that he was so resident for many years or that he was addressed as
Viharadhipathi means nothing. It was on the basis of a similar submission that
the Court of Appeal set aside the judgement of the District Court.



Now the learned District Judge's approach in deciding the dispute differs from
the approach advocated above on behalf of the plaintiff. He might have more
usefully examined the submissions made but he did not consider them
specifically perhaps due to the paucity of cross‑examination on the details of
the alleged oral nomination. He decided the question of fact whether Rev.
Saddhatissa had been nominated to succeed Rev. Sumanatissa as the
Viharadhipathi of the Duwa Temple. In doing so he acted on the
"uncontradicted" evidence of Rev. Sugathadeera Thero for which he looked for
support in the other evidence. He regarded the evidence on this point as
uncontradicted because Rev. Sangananda who gave evidence for the plaintiff was
not in a position to say whether an appointment had in fact been made. He
however, stated that to his knowledge there was no appointment. The plaintiff
who is said to have been present at the time of the alleged appointment did
not give evidence. It was stated that the plaintiff was too ill to attend
Court and give evidence.



###  236



It seems to me that the question whether an appointment of a successor to the
Viharadhipathiship of the Duwe Temple had been proved is ordinarily a question
of fact even where the sufficiency of evidence on such appointment is
involved. Mr. L. C. Seneviratne P.C. for the respondent conceded that it is a
mixed question of fact and law. However, the Court of Appeal whilst mainly
considering the question of sufficiency of evidence concluded that it is
"entirely a question of law". According to that Court "the principal question
before the District Judge was as to the validity and efficacy of the alleged
oral nomination in 1929"; the "bald statement" of Sugatha­deera Thero that
such nomination was made without any "elaboration thereof " is inadequate;
thus the witness has not clarified whether the appointment was made to be
effective upon the death of Rev. Sumanatissa or only as Adhikari or the chief
resident monk for the time being. The Court observed that the District Judge
had failed to analyse the evidence; that in holding that there was a valid
nomination in 1929 upon this evidence the Judge merely adopted the conclusions
reached by Sugathadeera Thero and in doing so surrendered his function of
deciding the effect of evidence. In the circumstances the Court took the view
that the question of corroboration does not arise because on the evidence of
Sugathadeera Thero the correct decision is that either no such nomination was
in fact made or that there is no valid nomination; and that in consid­ering
that the documents produced supported the evidence of Sugathadeera Thero that
there was a nomination in 1929 the District Judge misdirected himself.



The Court of Appeal dismissed a submission by Counsel for the appellant that
it would be unrealistic to expect the wit­ness after so many years to
recollect the terms in which such nomination was made. The Court said that if
it is sought to deflect the succession away from the senior pupil so as to
dis­turb the normal rule, a nomination must be in "clear and intelligible
terms" which would be the case with respect to a written document; and there
is no logical basis for saying that



###  237



in the case of an oral nomination "It would suffice merely to say that there
was a nomination as in this case". The Court also thought that the rule that
an appellate tribunal should be slow to interfere with findings of facts
reached by a Court has no application for the reason that whilst what
Sumanatissa said in 1929 is undoubtedly a question of fact, what is involved
here is the legal effect of what he said which is entirely a question of law.



In the result, the Court of Appeal decided the entire case consisting of about
625 pages of evidence and submissions before the District Judge primarily with
reference to what it had gathered to be the evidence of Sugathadeera Thero and
on the basis that there was no question of fact which required scrutiny. In so
deciding the case that Court relied on certain dicta of the former Supreme
Court in judgements regarding the distinction between de facto and de jure
Viharadhipathi and the statutory provisions before and after the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance of 1931 as to the rights and privileges of the
incumbent or the Viharadhipathi of a temple. In that background and on the
basis that there is no evidence of a valid nomination, the Court expressed the
view that Saddha­tissa Thero was only the de facto Viharadhipathi of the Duwe
Temple or the agent of the Viharadhipathi (Sumanatissa Thero) resident
elsewhere; and that the evidence does not dis­close that anything took place
upon the death of Sumanatissa Thero in 1953 other than the fact that his
tenure of Viharadhipathi terminated with such death. Consequently, the Court
found that in 1953 the plaintiff as senior pupil of Sumanatissa Thero
succeeded him as Viharadhipathi of the temple in accordance with the Sisyanu
Sisya Paramparawa rule of succession. Our task is to determine the correctness
of the decision so reached.



As regards the distinction between de facto and de jure Viharadhipathi, the
Court cited _Pemananda Thero v. Thomas Perera_ (1) _Amarasekera Thero v.
Tittagala Sasanatilake Thero_

_ _

**  238**



(2) and _Dhammadaja Thero v. Wimalajothi Thero (3)_. I may add to this
_Jinaratna Thero v. Dhammaratane Thero_ (4) cited by Mr. L.C. Seneviratne P.C.
at the hearing of this appeal. The first of these cases held that a de facto
Viharadhipathi merely residing in the temple and looking after its property
with the permission of the Viharadhipathi had no right to lease the property
belonging to the temple. The other cases held that the de jure Viharadhipathi
will not be deemed to have renounced or abandoned a temple by reason of
residence in another temple of which he is also Viharadhipathi or by reason of
permitting another priest to occupy his temple; that a priest can be incumbent
of more than one temple; that a pri­est cannot acquire Viharadhipathiship by
residence in his tutor's Vihare whilst conducting a Pirivena and a school for
any length of time, and that the fact that the de jure Viharad­hipathi looks
on whilst another is described as Viharadhipathi does not deprive him of his
rights. None of these cases even remotely deal with a question of succession
to Viharadhipathi­ship by nomination. They would, however, be relevant if the
Court of Appeal is right in taking the view that the evidence of Sugathadeera
Thero fails and it was not open to the District Judge to have acted on it
subject to corroboration by other evidence.



As regards the statutory provisions before and after 1931 as to the rights and
privileges of the incumbent or the Viha­radhipathi of a temple the Court cited
_Morontota Sobitha Thero v. Amunugama Ratnapala Thero_ (5) which held that
"incumbent" under the Ordinance of 1905 which was in force in 1929 (when the
alleged appointment was made) include both the Viharadhipathi if he was
resident in the temple and the chief resident priest officiating in his behalf
(if he was not) the latter being known as Adhikari; under that Ordinance the
property of a temple vested in lay trustees. Under the 1931 Ordinance
"Viharadhipathi" means the principal Bikkhu of a temple...... whether resident
or not and where S.4(2) applies the property is vested in the Viharadhipathi
who then is



###  239



termed the Controlling Viharadhipathi. The Court thought that at the time of
the alleged nomination in 1929 the changes effected in 1931 could not have
been in the contemplation of Rev. Sumanatissa Thero, the nomination in 1929
had necessar­ily to be as an agent only and in the absence of a further
statement by him in 1931 Saddhatissa Thero could not have acquired any greater
right of succession to the Viharadhipathi­ship in 1953. The criticism of Mr.
Eric Amerasinghe P.C. for the appellant on this approach is twofold. Firstly
it is highly legalistic in that it requires the effect of the actions of
ordinary priests to be interpreted in the context of their appreciation of
laws; Secondly, it ignores the relevance of several judicial deci­sions which
Samarakoon C.J. examined (pp 218‑221) on the basis of which he concluded.



"The above cases show clearly that the Buddhist Tempor­alities Ordinance of
1889 and 1905 left untouched an incumbent's unalieanable customary rights and
interests in the temple and its endowments required to be exer­cised or used
by him for the purpose of his office".



If so, there was no legal fetter against Sumanatissa Thero appointing his
junior pupil in 1929 to succeed him as Viharad­hipathi of the Duwe Temple upon
his death whether such pupil was immediately placed incharge of that temple or
not; and that the appellant has proved the making of such appointment.



Has the Court of Appeal properly exercised its appellate jurisdiction by
reversing the judgement of the trial Court in the way it did, resting its
judgement on the evidence of Rev. Sugathadeera alone and on the basis that it
is entirely a ques­tion of law? Is the Courts view that the trial Judge had
merely adopted the conclusions of Sugathadeera Thero tenable? Did the District
Judge misdirect himself in accepting documentary evidence as supportive of the
alleged nomination? In deciding these questions one must bear in mind the fact
that the Court below did not exclude the evidence of Sugathadeera Thero on



###  240



the ground of inadmissibility but on the ground that it is vague and
unintelligible because the witness did not give details of the alleged
appointment by Sumanatissa Thero indi­cating that it was to enable Saddhatissa
Thero to succeed him on his death. There is, therefore, admissible evidence
regard­less of its evidentiary value. I shall presently refer to the rele­vant
evidence on the point but before I do so I wish to repro­duce the main points
urged on behalf of the respondent at the hearing before us.



Mr. L. C. Seneviratne P.C. made the following points in support of the
judgement of the Court of Appeal:



1\.         There must be acceptable evidence of nomination of Viharadhipathi.



2\.         The evidence presented to Court is insufficient in view of the
fact that the alleged nomination was made in 1929 without the necessity for
succession. The evidence did not disclose the form of nomination i.e. as
successor or as Adhikari; hence the case is not proved.



3.         Documents produced as corroborative evidence are cap­able of more than one meaning. They do not necessarily support the nomination of a successor and as such can­not be regarded as corroborative.



4.         The Court of Appeal rightly laid stress on the form of nomination and rightly acted with caution.



5\.         Sumanatissa being Viharadhipathi of three temples appointed
Saddhatissa as caretaker of one of them.



6\.         There is only a bald statement of an oral appointment. The
evidence is more compatible with Sumanatissa hav­ing appointed Saddhatissa as
de facto Viharadhipathi of the temple and gone to another temple.



The essence of these submissions is that Sugathadeera Thero's evidence by
itself is insufficient as proof of the alleged



###  241



appointment; hence there is nothing to begin with and the question of
corroboration does not arise; in any event the sup­porting documents are
equivocal and hence not corroborative. Thus the learned President's Counsel
did not contend that it is "entirely a question of law" as was understood by
the Court below.



The record shows that Sugathadeera Thero's evidence on the point had been
elicited not in the abstract but immediately in relation to document 6D49
dated March 1955 which is a joint appeal to the electors of the Kalutara
electoral district regarding the impending General Election to Parliament. It
had been prepared by the witness to be signed by the Viharadhipathis of the
area; the witness had included therein Saddha­tissa Thero as the
Viharadhipathi of the Duwe Temple; and the latter had signed it.



This was subsequent to the death of Sumanatissa Thero. Asked by the examining
Counsel how the witness knew that Saddhatissa was the Viharadhipathi to so
describe him, the witness answered that he knew from his personal knowledge
that Saddhatissa had been appointed to Viharadhipathiship by Sumanatissa Thero
and proceeded to give the details as to the year, the occasion etc. It is thus
clear that the witness was tes­tifying regarding the status of Saddhatissa in
1955 when Sumanatissa had ceased to be Viharadhipathi and in effect stating
that Saddhatissa was Viharadhipathi consequent upon a nomination in 1929. In
cross‑examination the witness said (though subject to some confusion at one
stage which I do not consider as material) that Sumanatissa Thero remained the
Viharadhipathi of the Duwe Temple until his death; that he was Viharadhipathi
of all his temples when he died and had not lost such status of Viharadhipathi
(pp 416, 417 of the brief). The witness was, therefore, testifying to an
appointment in 1929 which included the right of succession to the
Viharad­hipathiship of the Duwe Temple at a later date.



**  242**



If Sugathadeera Thero's evidence considered in its context was intrinsically
in respect of a nomination leading to succes­sion to the Viharadhipathiship of
the Duwe Temple, it cannot be said that there is no evidence to begin with and
that the trial Judge misdirected himself in looking for corroboration. If
further details of the appointment were required on the suffi­ciency of such
evidence the plaintiff's Counsel should have adequately cross‑examined the
witness. In the absence of such cross‑examination the trial Judge cannot be
faulted for acting on such evidence subject to corroboration. It is then a
ques­tion of fact for the trial Court and the Court of Appeal was not
warranted in interfering with the findings of fact of that Court in the way it
did.



In the context, I also have grave doubts as to the correct­ness of the view
expressed by the Court of Appeal that the evidence of an oral nomination must
in every respect be so precise as in the case of a written nomination. No
doubt the Court should assess such evidence carefully and if necessary look
for corroboration before acting on it. However, there is no rule of evidence
which requires a witness giving evidence regarding an event that occurred 45
years ago to go into the "form" and "manner" of the nomination with absolute
preci­sion. I do not think that the Counsel for the opposite party can then
refrain from testing such evidence and urge that the claim of a nomination is
"not proved"



The failure of the trial Judge to analyse the evidence of Sugathadeera Thero
did not result in the adoption of a wrong approach in deciding the case when
he looked for corrobora­tion because the evidence of the witness properly
examined is sufficiently specific to be acted upon subject to corroboration.
With great respect it is .my view that the Court of Appeal by failing to
examine the actual evidence of the witness on record erroneously assumed that
the issue was one of law as to the "legal effect" of his evidence and on that
assumption struck out the corroborative evidence and proceeded to reverse the
judge ment of the District Judge. By this process, the Court has unjustifiably
interfered with the findings of fact.





###  243



            What is more, the Court has expressed the view that cor­roboration is "not met by the large volume of evidence led in the case" because that evidence (which the Court has not pro­ceeded to discuss) merely suggests that Sugathadeera Thero was no more than de facto Viharadhipathi or the agent of Viharadhipathi resident elsewhere. This is one of the submis­sions urged by Mr. L.C. Seneviratne P.C.. The Court went beyond and said that the only evidence which could have been thought to he corroborative is the evidence of the 6th defend­ant Sangarakkitha Thero who testified that according to the information he had from his tutor (Saddhatissa Thero) the nomination in 1929 was to all the three temples. The Court made the point that this evidence tends to have the opposite effect, meaning that it contradicts Rev. Sumanatissa. This evi­dence which was given under examination in chief was over­ruled by the Court on an objection by the plaintiff's Counsel (p. 69 of the brief) and as such it was not competent to the Court of Appeal to have used it to contradict Sumanatissa Thero. The Court has committed a serious error in so using the evidence. Further by purporting to review corroborative evidence the Court has expressed views on facts without any discussion of the evidence or a critical examination of the views of the original Court on the various items of evidence. This too is a serious error. The judgement appealed from can­not therefore stand and must be set aside.



What I have said is sufficient to dispose of this appeal. However, for the
sake of completeness I wish to briefly com­ment on the merits as the Court of
Appeal has made certain observations thereon but without a proper examination
of the relevant evidence. Firstly, in view of my ruling that the District
Judge was competent to act on Sugathadeera Thero's evidence subject to
corroboration judicial decisions cited by the Court of Appeal would lose much
of their force in the instant case. Secondly, whilst pupillary succession
according to seniority is the rule, a Viharadhipathi has the right to appoint
any par­ticular pupil as his successor. _Dhammajoti v. Sobita_ (6) _Piya_ ‑



**  244**



_tissa Terunnanse v. Saranapala Terunnanse_ (7). It follows that the right to
Viharadhipathiship by nomination is as much a right as in the case of
pupillary succession except that the party claiming to succeed by appointment
must prove it. If necessary, the Court may look for corroboration; but the
burden on the claimant is to satisfy the Court on a balance of evidence.



Thirdly, it would appear that Sumanatissa Thero who was the Viharadhipathi of
three temples had as early as 1929 entrusted the Duwe Temple where he was
resident to Saddha­tissa. By 1932 he was resident at Anandaramaya and shifted
to Sri Dharmaramaya which was in‑charge of the plaintiff, about a month before
his death in 1953. The documents clearly show that until 1953 the plaintiff
and Saddhatissa Thero functioned as Viharavasis' (resident monks) of their
respective temples and that it was so understood by them and their tutor
Suma­natissa (P13, P20, P31, P32, P32A, P34, P34A, P43, 6D28, 6D29, 6D30).
From 1953‑1969 the plaintiff functioned as the Viharadhipathi of Sri
Dharmaramaya whilst Saddhatissa Thero was publicly acknowledged at religious
functions of Sri Dharmaramaya itself and in the media as Viharadhipathi of the
Duwe Temple to the full knowledge of the plaintiff. He published books under
his name as such Viharadhipathi. The plaintiff never objected to it. Instead
the plaintiff and his pupil Sangananda Thero addressed him letters describing
him as Viharadhipathi of the Duwe Temple in most respectful terms. Even in the
notice on the occasion of Saddhatissa's death pub­lished under the name of the
plaintiff and the funeral commit­tee, Saddhatissa is described as such
Viharadhipathi whilst the plaintiff is described as Viharadhipathi of Sri
Dharmaramaya (6D9, 6D10, 6D12, 6D13, 6D14, 6D15, 6D16, 6D37A, 6D37, 6D38A,
6D38, 6D39A, 6D39, 6D64, 6D64A, 6D65, 6D65A, 6D66, 6D66A, 6D67). The
explanation of Sangananda Thero is that they addressed Saddhatissa Thero as
Viharadhipathi out of respect; and that he functioned under that designation
with the plaintiff's permission. There is not a single document



###  245



in support of the plaintiff and he relies on the bare assertion of Sangananda
Thero to that effect; and the District Judge rejected this explanation being
of the view that the plaintiff's conduct supports the evidence of Sugathadeera
Thero that the appointment had in fact been made.



It is true that the fact that a person looks on whilst another is called
Viharadhipathi for any period whatsoever will not deprive him of rights; but
here there is an admission by the plaintiff against his interests and the
question is whether such admission tends to support the alleged nomination of
Saddha­tissa Thero to succeed his tutor. The plaintiff's conduct for 16 years
is most unusual for a priest who claims the Viharadhi­pathiship of a temple. I
am of the view that the District Judge's determination is correct.



The judgment of the District Court also derives some sup­port from the
decision in _Pannavasa Thero v. Sudassi Thero_ (8). There the plaintiff
claimed the incumbency of a temple as a pupil of Saranapala Thero (The
Viharadhipathi), by virtue of an appointment to succeed him. The defendant
claimed :



1\.         that the temple was never dedicated;

2\.         that the plaintiff had abandoned the temple;

3\.         that the defendant had been invited to the temple by the
Dayakayas.



It was held that the temple was sangika property, the alle­gation of
abandonment was false and the plaintiff alone had the right to possess the
temple and the Dayakayas had no power to choose the incumbent. Though this
decision is not directly in point, there is a finding in respect of the
plaintiff's cclaim of succession which is relevant. It was held that an
admission by Cunaratana, a pupil of Saranapala who was senior to the plaintiff
in a declaration under s.41 of the Bud­dhist Temporalities Ordinance and in
the plaintiff's favour strongly supported his claim. Another fact which
supported it is that it was the plaintiff and no other pupil had resided in
the temple and administered its affairs from the time of Saran‑



**  246**



apala's death in 1913, until the dispute arose in 1949. Sansoni J. (as he then
was) also said this __



"Not a single document has been produced to show that either Gunaratana or
Ratanapala (both senior pupils) over exercised powers in respect of the
temple, and I think the learned District Judge's finding that the pre­vious
incumbent Saranapala nominated the plaintiff as his successor is the only
possible one on the evidence".



This judgment does not specifically state that the alleged nomination was
oral. However, the tenor of the judgment and the fact that the plaintiff first
came to Court as a senior pupil of Saranapala, and later amended his plaint
and claimed the incumbency of the temple under an appointment suggests that it
was an oral appointment.



In the instant case, the dispute arose only after the death of Saddhatissa
Thero when his senior pupil the appellant sought to exercise his right to the
temple under Saddhatissa Thero's last will. The Court of Appeal held that the
conduct of the appellant and the 2nd to 4th defendants were contumacious and
made them liable to ejectment. In view of my findings this determination has
no merit.



For the foregoing reasons, I allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the
Court of Appeal and affirm the judgement of the District Court with costs
payable to the appellant in all the three Courts.



**Bandaranayake, J.** **__** I agree.



**Fernando, J.** **__**  I agree.

_  _

_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/15.html_  

