##  Ratnasara Thero v. Udugampola - SLR - 461, Vol 1 of 1983 [1983] LKSC 12;
(1983) 1 Sri LR 461 (2 February 1983)

# 461

RATNASARA THERO

**v** **.**

UDUGAMPOLA

SUPREME COURT

WIMALARATNE J.,RATWATTE J.,

COLIN THOME J.,ABDUL CADER J.

AND RODRIGO J.

S.C. APPLICATION NO. 125/1982

JANUARY 19TH 1983.



_Fundamental rights ‑ Confiscation of printed matter pre­pared for
distribution ‑ S 398 and S 453 of Penal Code ­Article 14 (1) (a) of the
Constitution ‑ Freedom of speech and expression including publication.  
 _

The petitioner who had printed some leaflets for distribution on the subject
of the referendum to be held for extending the life of the parliament,
complained that the 1st respondent had taken some of the leaflets into custody
The 1st respondent had initiated inquiries on the receipt of a com­plaint by
one Wimaladasa that he had seen a copy of the leaflets on public display.
Subsequently one Rev.Father Basil Nicholas had complained that he had been
deceived by one Father Reid Fernando into signing a copy of the same document.



The original copy signed by Rev. Father Basil Nicholas was not taken into
custody and Father Reid Fernando was not questioned. Wimaladasa's statement
had not been produced in court and it was admitted that the contents of the
leaflet were not unlawful.



#  462



The 1st respondent had not, stated under what provisions of the law he chose
to act and the learned Deputy ‑Solicitor General suggested that ire could have
acted under S 398 and S 453 of the Penal Code.  


**Held ‑**



S. 398 and S. 453 of the Penal Code had no application and that the
fundamental rights of the petitioner that is the freedom of speech and
expression including publication had been violated.



####  Case referred to :‑



Emperor vs. Raghunath Singh ‑ 1946 A.I.R. (Lahore) at p. 459.



S. _Nadesan_ Q.C. with Sri _Ranjan_ and S.H.M. _Reeza_ for the petitioners..



_Priyantha Perera_. D.S.G. . with C.R. _de Silya_ S.C for the respondents.

_Cur Adv Vult._

February 2,1983.  


**ABDUL CADER** **J.**



The petitioner is the Viharadhipathi of the Sama Vihara situated at Gampaha..
He has stated that an organisation called the "Pavidi Handa" was constituted
by a considerable number of the clergy, Buddhist and Christian, in Sri Lanka,
who were opposed to the proposal to extend the life of the present Parliament
for a further period of 6 years. At a meeting held on 18th November, 1982, it
was decided that a statement of the reasons for their opposition should be
sent to different parts of the Island and signatures obtained from those who
were in agreement and to print and distribute them. Accordingly, some
statements were prepared and sent to the clergy in various parts of the Island
for signature. The petitioner placed an order  

#  463  


for printing 50,000 copies of this statement with the names of the signatories
for the purpose of distribution to the members of "Pavidi Handa" for being
given to or posted to voters. 10,000 leaflets were delivered to the petitioner
while the balance was in the course of printing of which 5,000 copies had been
given out or had been posted to the voters, and the balance was with the
petitioner awaiting distribution. He had in addition in his possession 5,000
copies of the statement in English



On 8th December, 1982, on. a complaint, the Gampaha Police went to the press
in which there were some copies of this leaflet which had already been
printed. While the other copies were being printed, they seized and removed
about 20,000 prin­ted copies and also composed matter" and stopped further
printing of this statement. Thereafter, the Police went to Sama Vihara and the
Sub‑Inspector told the petitioner that they had seized leaflets from the press
and they wanted from the petitioner the originals of the documents signed by
the clergy. The petitioner gave them about a dozen such signed statements. The
petitioner states that when he questioned the Inspector why they seized and
removed the leaflets from the press, he replied that they were taken away
because it is illegal to print them under Emergency Rules and Election Law. He
had also told the petitioner that 3 persons from the press had been arrested
and it is likely that the press would be sealed and that the first three
signatories of whom the petitioner was the third were likely to be arrested.
The Sub‑Inspector did not take away the 5,000 copies which were in his
possession. He was asked to report at the Police Station the next day, that is
9th December, 1982. He filed this petition on the 9th, stating that after his
statement was recorded he feared that these 5,000 copies also may be seized
and taken away by the Police and that he would be arrested and his work in
connection with the Referendum may

#  464



be obstructed.   He has also expressed the fear that the Gamaha Police would
continue not to give him and other members of the "Pavidi Handa" the
opportunity to meet at the Vihara or elsewhere "to discuss our problem." He
has prayed for a declaration that the steps taken by the 1st respondent in
taking away the leaflets printed at the said press are unlawful and in
violation of the fundamental rights of the petitioner, to direct the 1st
respondent to restore the copies seized from the said press to the petitioner,
and for compensation in a sum of Rs. 25,000/=. I shall refer  to prayer  "D"
later.



The 1st Respondent, the Superintendent of Police, Gampaha, with reference to
the above allegations has stated that at 9.55 a.m. on 8.12.82, a complaint was
made at the Police Station at Gampaha by one Wimaladasa to the effect that he
had seen a copy of the document marked "A1" pasted on a letter box in the
Gampaha town, and at 10 a.m., about 5minutes later, Rev. Father Basil Nicholas
complained at the Police Station that he had been deceived into signing on a
blank paper and that his name now appears as the 70th signatory on the said
pamphlets to which he had never consented to be a signatory and that he
requested an investigation; a party of Police Officers was sent to ascertain
if there were any of these pamphlets pasted anywhere; that it was reported to
him that these pamphlets were seen pasted everywhere in town; that he traced
the original of these pamphlets to a printing press in Gampha; caused the
pamphlets found therein to be seized and, as it transpired that the petitioner
was responsible for getting these pamphlets printed, he visited the Sama
Vihara and recorded the statement of the petitioner. In his affidavit, he has
referred to the statements recorded subsequently of five other persons, copies
of which statements have been annexed to his affidavit, which are totally
irrelevant to these proceedings,



**465**



As they were recorded after the seizure of these pamphlets and, therefore,
could not have formed the material on which the 1st respondent acted.



In the affidavit filed by the 1st respondent, he has not stated under what
provisions of law he chose to act in this manner. The petitioner's statement
that the Sub-Inspector told him that the pamphlets were taken away "because it
was illegal to print them under Emergency Laws" has not been expressly
contradicted. There is, however, a general denial in paragraph 2 of the
affidavit of the 1st respondent. The Deputy Solicitor-General, did not support
the seizure of these pamphlets on the ground that the printing of these
pamphlets was a violation of the Emergency Laws and the Election Laws. The
Deputy Solicitor-General    referred  to Section 50(1) (b) of the Referendom
Act No. 7 of 1981, the violation of which is a cognizable offence. Section 50
(1) (b) reads as follows:-





"50\. (1) During the period commencing from the date of publication of the
Proclamation under section 2 and ending on the day following  the day of which
a poll is taken at Referendum, no person shall, for the purpose of promoting a
Referendum, display­-



(a)  
  
(b)   any handbill, placard, poster, drawing, notice, symbol or sign on any
place to which the public have a right of, or are granted, access except in or
on any premises on any day on which a meeting to promote the Referendum is due
to be held in that premises;".  


Wimaladasa's statement has not been produced in the Court; the pamphlets which
Wimaladasa saw pasted had not been removed and exhibited in this Court;

#  

#  466  


 nor an affidavit filed from Wimaladasa. Even the statement of the 1st
respondent that it was repor­ted to him that his officers saw these pamphlets
"pasted in the town" is hearsay as no affidavit has been filed from these
officers. In the light of these circumstances, the Deputy Solicitor‑General
did not support the action of the 1st respondent under this provision.



The Deputy Solicitor‑General then submitted that the 1st respondent could have
acted under Sections 398 and 453 of the Penal Code. Section 398 deals with
cheating and Section 453 with the making of a false document. Even assuming
that the peti­tioner or, for that matter, anyone else had committed the act
complained against by Father Basil Nicholas, there is doubt whether an offence
of cheating or forging a document would arise on­ that material. However, I
would adopt the submission made by the Deputy Solicitor‑General that the 1st
respondent could well make a mistake as regards the application of these
sections to the facts reported to him although in the final result a Court
might hold that no offence had been, in fact, committed under these sections.
But what is significant is that the 1st respondent has not stated that he
acted under either or both these sections. It is merely a proposition put
forward by the Deputy Solicitor‑General at the argument before us, so that it
is yet open to question whether the 1st respondent acted whi1st investigating
an offence under the Penal Code or an offence under the Emergency and Election
Laws.



The Deputy Solicitor‑General drew our atten­tion to Section 112(l) of the Code
of Criminal Procedure Act and submitted that since the respon­dent was
investigating a cognisable offence, he was entitled to search for any document
which he consi­dered necessary for the conduct of the investiga­tion and,
therefore, he was justified in taking

#  467

charge of the pamphlets.



The burden is on him to satisfy us that he complied with the requirements of
this Section; viz. that:



(1)   he considered that the production of these pamphlets were necessary to
the conduct of the investigation, and



(2)   there was reason to believe that the petitioner .... will not produce
these pamphlets in response to summons or order issued by court under Section
66, or



(3)   that such document is not known to be in the possession of the
petitioner.



In respect of the first of these conditions, Nadesan raised a very pertinent
question whether it was necessary that the respondent should take charge of
about 20,000 printed leaflets to prove the charges of cheating or forging a
docu­ment. In fact, the Police had in their possession one of these printed
documents before the respon­dent seized these leaflets because the statement
of the Rev. Father recorded by the Police commences with the words that the
printed pamphlet was shown to the Rev. Father before his statement was
recor­ded. I agree with Mr. Nadesan that it was not necessary to take charge
of 20,OOO pamphlets to prove either of these charges.  


In respect of the second requirement, I cannot see how the respondent could
have entertained any doubts that the petitioner would not produce the printed
leaflets when required to do so by Court when the petitioner had admittedly
printed this large number of pamphlets for distribution for a cause which he
believed to be right.



The third requirement is also not fulfilled

#  468



inasmuch as the 1st respondent himself had dis­closed that in the course of
the investigation it transpired "that the petitioner was responsible for
getting these pamphlets printed" and secondly he did not seize the documents
that were in the possession of the petitioner.



An examination of the facts will lend support to my conclusion that this
Section has no applica­tion. Assuming that the 1st respondent went out to
investigate one of these two offences, the first and important material
document that he should have taken charge of should have been the original
docu­ment in which the Rev. Father placed his signature. He did not do so.
According to the petitioner he took charge of some other original documents.
Ob­viously, the respondent did not give his mind to the document signed by the
Rev. Father. In fact, it was produced in Court at the hearing by Counsel for
the petitioner. What Father Basil Nicholas had stated was that Father Reid
Fernando saw him and asked him to sign a document on which the data was on one
sheet and the signatures on another, and so far as he could remember, he was
the second person to sign the document and that there were no signa­tures of
any Buddhist priests on that document. One would expect any intelligent Police
Officer to call for and obtain the documents on which Rev. Father had placed
his signature which, as I said earlier, was not done. Secondly, the respondent
has stated that the statement of the petitioner was recorded, but that
statement had not been produced before us to consider whether the petitioner
had been ques­tioned in the light of the submissions made by the Deputy
Solicitor before us. Thirdly, the Police showed the pamphlet to Father
Nicholas before recording his statement and, therefore, it has to be presumed
that the Police had started an investi­gation after recording the information
furnished by Wimaladasa. Though the priest had, complained of cheating and
requested the Police to hold an inqui‑

#  
469



ry, it would appear that the motive for the seizure was actually based on
Wimaladasa's com­plaint. It is significant that apart from the fact that the
respondent has not taken shelter behind the Penal Code, even the written
submissions refer to the complaint of Wimaladasa as one of the reasons for
seizing the pamphlets. Fourthly, if at all any person cheated the Rev. Father,
according to him, it was Father Reid Fernando who took the signature, but
Father Fernando was not questioned before the seizure of these pamphlets.
Fifthly, no affidavit has been filed from Father Basil Nicholas or from Father
Reid Fernando.  


Bhandari J. quoted Lord Camdon C.J. in _Emperor vs. Raghunath Singh_ reported
in 1946 A.I.R. Lahore, at page 459 as follows:‑



"The great end, for which men entered into society, was to secure their
property. That right is preserved sacred and incommunicable in all instances,
where it has not been taken away or abridged by some public law for the good
of the whole. The cases where this right of property is set aside by positive
law, are various. Distresses, executions, for feitures, taxes & c., are all of
this description; wherein every man by common consent gives up that right, for
the sake of justice and the general good. By the laws of England, every
invasion of private property, be it ever so minute, is a trespass. No man can
set his foot upon my ground without my licence, but he is liable to an action,
though the damage be nothing., which is proved by every declaration in
trespass, where the defendant is called upon to answer for bruising the grass
and even treading upon the soil. If he admits the fact, he is, bound to show
by way of justification that some positive law has empowered or ex‑



#  470



cused him. The justification is submitted to the Judges, who are to look into
the books if such justification can be maintained by the text of the statute
law, or by the principles of common law. If no such excuse can be found or
produced, the silence of the books is an authority against the defendant, and
the plaintiff must have judgment."



"Good faith" was discussed, but not put for­ward as a defence for seizure of
these pmphlets. I do not intend to discuss the question whether "good faith"
on the part of a public servant would con­stitute a defence for the violation
of fundamental rights. Section 51 of the Penal Code defines "good faith" as
follows:‑



"Nothing is said to be done or believed in .good faith which is done or
believed without due care and attention."



On the facts in this case, the respondent has, therefore, failed in this
regard, too.



The respondent having admitted the seizure of pamphlets, the burden lies on
the respondent to justify his conduct. In my opinion, the Deputy Solicitor‑
General has failed in his attempt to vindicate the conduct of the 1st
respondent.



I hold that the petitioner is entitled to relief in terms of his prayers
"B","C","D", "E", and "F".



Prayer "G" is for a direction to the respon­dent to permit the petitioner to
hold lawful mee­tings and "not to carry out the assurance that he (1st
respondent) "gave the unruly mob on the 3rd December, 1982;". The 1st
respondent has denied that he gave any such assurance or that he prevented the
petitioner from holding lawful meetings. He has given the assurance that the
Police do not intend



#  471



to prevent the holding of a meeting by the petitio­ner. Now that the occasion
for such meetings is no more and that the respondent has given the assurance
that the petitioner will not be obstruc­ted from holding lawful meetings, I do
not think it necessary to go into the matters raised in paragraphs 14 and 15
of the petition.



The petitioner has been prevented from exerci­sing his fundamental rights of
"freedom of speech and expression including publication." (Article 14(l)(a) of
the Constitution). About 20,000 copies of pamphlets which he printed for
publication to espouse a cause which he believed to be right had been seized
by the 1st respondent and the petitio­ner had been prevented from distributing
them. The D.S.G. agreed that the contents of these documents were not unlawful
and that he was not relying on the contents to justify the seizure of these
pam­phlets. In my view, this is a serious violation of the fundamental rights
of a citizen of this country which calls for the award of substantial damages.
A mere declaration without more in the form of some penalty will not deter
such future abuse of funda­mental rights of citizens. This Court does have the
power "to grant such relief or make such directions as it may deem just and
equitable in the circumstance" in terms of Article 126 (4) of the
Constitution.



Keeping in mind that 20,000 pamphlets were seized, I direct the 1st respondent
to pay a sum of Rs.10,000/‑ as compensation and costs fixed at Rs.2,100/‑ to
the petitioner.



**WIMALARATNE   J.  ‑** I agree.



**RATWATTE J         ‑ **I agree.





#  472



**PERCY COLIN-THOME J. -** I agree

**  **

**RODRIGO J.        -** I agree



_**Application upheld.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/12.html_  

