##  Seneviratne V Rajakaruna, Sub Inspector, C.I.D. and Others - SLR - 410,
Vol 1 of 2003 [2003] LKSC 12; (2003) 1 Sri LR 410 (30 May 2003)

**410**

**SENEVIRATNE  
V  
RAJAKARUNA, SUB INSPECTOR, C.I.D. AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA, CJ.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
EDUSSURIYA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 646/2001  
25TH NOVEMBER 2002, 31ST JANUARY  
AND 17TH AND 20TH FEBRUARY, 2003  
  
Fundamental Rights - Arrest for alleged use of a forged passport - Power of
arrest - Code of Criminal Procedure Act, section 32(1)(b) \- Reasonable
suspicion as a pro-condition for valid arrest._  
  
  
The petitioner who had served the Sri Lanka Navy from 1977 to 1982 later
joined a commercial liner as an able seaman and since 1991 was serving with
Fort Shipping Ltd. He submitted that at the time material to the incident in
suit, namely 20.10.2001 he had travelled overseas over 30 times. On that day
the petitioner was waiting to board an aircraft scheduled to leave for London
at 2.30 am. A few minutes before the departure he was informed by airline
officers of an allegation that he possessed a forged passport. He was then
questioned by an officer from the CID. Notwithstanding his explanation
supported by a number of documents, the 1st respondent police officer arrested
him and produced him before the Magistrate on the same day which was a
Saturday. The petitioner was remanded. On 23rd Monday, further inquiries
disclosed that his passport was authentic, whereupon the Magistrate discharged
him on the same day.

**411**

The reasons adduced by the airline officers for suspicion that the passport
was not genuine were:  
  
(a) the lamination of the photo page was detached at a comer;  
  
(b) the photograph on the impugned passport and the photograph on his previous
passport differed.  
  
Prior to his arrest, the petitioner produced his passport P1, air ticket P2,
seaman's book P3, his previous passport obtained in 1983, P4, seaman's
identification and record book P5, flight details document P6, appointment
letter P7, diving licence PS, and the certificate of proficiency in watch
keeping P9. As per his previous passport and the certificate of discharge as
seaman (1982), which also the 1st respondent admits to having compared, the
petitioner had a clean shaven face. The current passport which was obtained 10
years later in 1993 shows that by then the petitioner had grown a beard and a
moustache. The change of appearance was due to age. Besides the 1993 passport
was itself 10 years old having been extended once until the year 2003.  
  
**Held:**  
  
On the facts of this case there was no reasonable suspicion that the
petitioner was concemed in committing the offence of travelling on a forged
passport; and that the arrest and detention of the petitioner infringed his
rights under Articles 12(1), 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution.  
  
**Case referred to:  
**  
1\. Veeradas v Controller of Immigration and Emigration (1989) 2 Sri LR 205
(distinguished)  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
Asoka Weerasuriya with H. S Ponnampenima for petitioner.  
  
Palitha Kumarasinghe with Palitha Yaggahawita for 4th respondent.  
  
K. A. P Ranasinghe, State Counsel for 1st and 2nd respondents.

_Cur.adv.vult._

May 30, 2003.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
**  
The petitioner who has served in the Sri Lanka Navy from 1977 to 1982 had
later joined a commercial liner in the rank of able seaman and since 1991 was
serving with Fort Shipping Ltd. He submitted that at the time the incident
material to this application took place, he had

**412**

travelled overseas over 30 times. On 19.10.2001 he arrived around 11.45 p.m.
at the Bandaranaike International Airport (hereinafter referred to as the BIA)
in order to leave for London. His schedule time for departure was at 2.30 a.m.
on 20.10.2001. After going through Customs the petitioner proceeded to obtain
his boarding pass. When he had submitted his travel documents to the lady
employee at the BIA counter, she had informed him to wait for a while in which
time she had taken the documents to another senior officer. On querying as to
the delay he was informed that he will have to wait for a while and around
1.50 a.m. the said lady officer had informed him that there is a problem with
his passport. Immediately thereafter, an officer from the CID questioned the
petitioner on the incident. The petitioner had produced his passport (P1), Air
ticket (P2), Seaman's book (P3), his previous passport (P4), Liberian seaman's
identification and record book (P5), Flight detail document which contains
emergency contact numbers/agent (P6), Appointment letter (P7), Driving licence
(P8) and the Certificate of proficiency in watch keeping (P9).  
  
Nevertheless, the 1st respondent arrested the petitioner. The petitioner was
thereafter produced before the learned acting Magistrate of Negombo along with
a B report, the offence being that the petitioner had attempted to travel to
London by producing a forged passport. The Magistrate had ordered to remand
him. Later on 23.10.2001, the Magistrate had discharged him.  
  
This court granted leave to proceed for the alleged infringement of Articles
12(1), 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution.  
  
The 1st respondent conceded that he had arrested the petitioner at the BIA
around 4.30 a.m. on 20.10.2001. He contended that the 4th respondent informed
him that the petitioner and another passenger with suspicious travel documents
had attempted to travel on board a Sri Lankan Air Lines flight to London,
which was due to depart on 20.10.2001. Both passengers were produced by the
4th respondent who had requested the 1st respondent to inquire into the
matter. According to the 1st respondent, the 4th respondent in his complaint
alleged that he suspected that the petitioner's passport was tampered with and
that it needs to be investigated. The 4th respondent had elaborated the kind
of tampering, viz, that the photograph of the passport holder may have been
inserted and that it appeared to him that the place of birth of the passport
holder had been changed (1R1).

**413**

Therefore, the 1st respondent contended that the petitioner was arrested and
produced before the Magistrate, Negombo on 20.10.2001. He was remanded until
23.10.2001 pending further investigations. The 1st respondent submitted that
as the petitioner was arrested on a Saturday, the earliest opportunity of
establishing the authenticity of the impugned passport was on Monday the 22nd
October and immediately after it transpired that the passport in question was
an authentic passport, a further B report was filed on the 23rd October
informing the Magistrate that no further action would be taken against the
petitioner. Later the petitioner was discharged.  
  
Learned State Counsel on behalf of the 1st respondent submitted that the
arrest of the petitioner was made in terms of section 32(b) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Act, No.15 of 1979. This section is on the following terms:  
  
"32(1)-  
  
Any peace officer may without an order from a  
  
Magistrate and without a warrant arrest any person -  
  
(b) who has been concerned in any cognizable offence as against whom a
reasonable complaint has been made or credible information has been received
or a reasonable suspicion exists of his having been so concerned."  
  
It is common ground that there was no credible information or a reasonable
complaint against the petitioner. The 1st respondent submitted that the 4th
respondent informed him that the petitioner was attempting to travel with
suspicious travel documents and that he had arrested the petitioner on the
grounds of reasonable suspicion. The suspicion, according to the 4th
respondent, was after intense scrutiny by the airline staff. The 4th
respondent, who was on duty at the checking counter, was the first to observe
the suspicious nature of the passport. This was brought to the notice of the
Duty Supervisor, who was also of the opinion that the passport had been
tampered with and her statement (1 R6) describes the kind of tampering. This
was reported to the Duty Manager at the relevant time at the BIA, which was
finally referred to an immigration Officer on duty, who was of the view that
the authenticity of the passport was in doubt. It was at this stage that a
decision was taken to hand over the petitioner to the 1st respondent for the
purpose of further investigation.

**414**

The Duty Supervisor who had checked the originals of the travel documents of
the petitioner on a request made by the 4th respondent, has been of the view
that the passport has been tampered with and that the photograph of the
passport was different. In her statement, she gives her reasons in the
following terms (1 R6):  
  
Mr. Rasika Anthony brought to me the original documents...and requested me to
check the documents as the lamination of the passport was detached from the
cover. I checked the same and I too observed that the lamination of the
photograph was detached. I also observed that the photograph of the passport
No. G.... and passport No. L.... differed from each other."  
  
The Duty Manager too had come to the conclusion that the lamination on the
photo page of the passport had come out and therefore the authenticity of the
passport was in doubt. At that stage, she had referred the matter to the 1st
respondent and the culmination of the whole episode was the arrest of the
petitioner 'on suspicion' that he had attempted to board a flight to England
on forged documents. The alleged suspicion was based on the facts that the
passport was tampered with and the 4th respondent and the Duty Supervisor had
come to this conclusion due to the fact that,  
  
a. the lamination of the photo page was detached;  
  
b. the photograph of the impugned passport and the photograph of the previous
passport differed.  
  
On an examination of the passport, with the help of a magnifying lens and an
ultra violet light, the Duty Manager had got her opinion confirmed and had
taken the decision to hand over the matter to the 1st respondent for
investigation. The 1st respondent has categorically stated that he arrested
the petitioner only on 'suspicion' that his pass-'port was either tampered
with or he was using forged documents.  
  
The Passenger Service Manual of the Sri Lankan Airlines (4A1) refers to the
guidelines on passenger acceptance. Details are given regarding the travel
documents that are necessary for the purpose and the manual refers to the
following:  
  
"2\. Travel documents

**415**

2.1 Travel documents consisting of passenger ticket, passport, visas and
health certificates. To confirm that these are in order check-in and transfer
desk must ensure;  
  
\- the ticket is valid for the flight and date of travel  
  
\- the route and class of travel are in order  
  
\- any endorsements and restrictions are met  
  
\- the name on the ticket tallies with that on the passport  
  
\- the validity of the passport does not expire before the end of the journey
(for some countries 6 months before entry)  
  
\- valid visas for destination and/or intermediate points are held. Any
suspicious passports and or visas be immediately referred to the officer or
supervisor."  
  
It appears that out of the checks on passports and visas, the manual has
emphasized the check on visas, by stating as follows:  
  
'2.2 The visa check is an extremely important function of check-in and
transfer desk agents. It is imperative that passengers hold destination visas
and transit visas required by en route points. In case of doubt, refer to the
current TIM or to the TIMATIC in the DCS  
  
No allegations were made against the petitioner with regard to any of the
other requirements referred to in terms of travel documents in the Passenger
Service Manual. It is therefore accurate to add that, the suspicion was purely
on the basis of the passport, which was in the petitioner's possession.  
  
The petitioner in his statement made at 2.15 p.m. on 20.10.2001 has
categorically stated that he had obtained the passport in issue in 1993 at the
time the Passport Office was located at Chaitya Road, Colombo. Later he had
got the period extended until the year 2003 at the new office at
Bambalapitiya. Further he had answered a question raised by an officer stating
that he had himself obtained the British Visa from the British High Commission
and that at no stage had he handed over the passport to any one else.  
  
The submissions made on behalf of the respondents, and the documents filed by
them clearly indicate that if there was any kind of suspicion regarding the
petitioner's travel documents, it could have

**416**

been at the most only on his passport. Even with regard to the petitioner's
passport, the observations of the 4th respondent were that,  
  
a. the lamination of the photo page has come out from the corner; and b.
instead of the doffed printing of the letters at the place of birth, there
were hand written letters.  
  
The 4th respondents position was that the petitioner's passport was a possible
case of "a photo insertion".  
  
The 4th respondent finally submitted that he had compared the photograph on
the photo page of the passport in question together with the other photograph
in the previous passport, certificate of discharge of seaman (CDS) and visas
and stated that he "observed that there was a marked difference in the photo
page of passport No. L...."  
  
It is to be noted that the passport in question was obtained in February 1993
(P1), whereas the previous passport was issued in April 1983 (P4). The
Certificate of Discharge was issued in June 1982. The photograph in the
earlier passport and the photograph of the Certificate of Discharge are
identical and in my view the petitioner has used two copies of the same
photograph taken during the time he obtained the certificate of discharge and
the earlier passport. The passport in question was obtained ten years later
and therefore it should not be a surprise that the photograph in the second
passport is different to that in the 1st passport. A time span of 10 years
could make several changes to the facial features of any person, especially a
weather beaten seamen. Furthermore, it is interesting to note the similarity
in the photograph of the Liberian Seaman Identification and record book (PS),
which was issued in January 1997. The similarity in the two photographs, which
appear in the said record book and the second passport are clear even to the
naked eye. Ironically, the 1st respondent accepts that this document was
produced before him at the time the petitioner was arrested and it is even
entered in the production registry under PR 129. It is observed that between
the time the petitioner obtained his 1st passport and the 2nd, he had grown a
beard and a moustache. His 1st passport and the Certificate of Discharge bear
photographs of a fully shaven face whereas the 2nd passport and the Liberian
Seaman Identification card carry photographs of a bearded person. If careful
attention was given to the photograph in the Liberian

**417**

Seaman identification card and if that was compared with the photograph of the
passport in question, it would have clearly indicated the authenticity of the
passport. The respondents made their submissions on the basis that they
suspected that a photograph had been inserted in the passport belonging to the
petitioner.  
  
The petitioner was scheduled to fly on 20th October 2001 by UL 505 at 2.30
a.m. to join MT 'Lanrick', a LPG carrier owned by Fort Shipping Ltd., in
Scotland, United Kingdom. Apparently, this was not the first visit the
petitioner was making to Scotland to join the said company, as he has been
serving Fort Shipping Ltd., since 1991. The petitioner had with him his
appointment letter dated 01.10.2001 (P7) issued by the Assistant Shipping
Officer of the Ministry of Internal and International Trade and Commerce,
Shipping Development and Muslim Religious Affairs (merchant shipping
division). Attached to the said document was a letter issued by the
Director/General Manager of the Colombo office of Fort Shipping Ltd.,
informing that the petitioner will be joining the tanker MT "Lanrick". The
petitioner was carrying with him a letter issued by the Colombo office of the
Fort Shipping Ltd., with the emergency contact addresses and telephone numbers
in Sri Lanka and in England. In fact a telephone number in Colombo that could
be contacted after office hours was also included in the list. In the
circumstances, it is surprising that the petitioner was taken into custody by
the 1st respondent on suspicion that he was in possession of a passport, which
had been tampered with or with the possibility of an insertion of a
photograph. Even if he was not satisfied after checking all the documents
referred to above, the 1st respondent could have contacted the Colombo office,
prior to taking a decision to arrest the petitioner.  
  
The officers at the BIA, including the immigration officers and the CID
officers no doubt must be empowered to carry out necessary investigations. If
there are any violations the offenders should be brought before the courts of
justice to ensure that law and order is maintained and the proper procedure is
followed. However, in this particular instance, when there was material
available to indicate the bona fides of the petitioner, the conduct of the
officers and the respondents involved in overlooking the credentials of the
petitioner, paints a dismal picture of the attitude towards a hapless
traveller en route to accept his employment in a foreign country.

**418**

Learned State Counsel for the 1st and 6th respondents relied on Veeradas v.
Controller of Immigration and others (1) which he submitted as strikingly
similar to the instant case and where the Supreme Court held that the
respondents had not violated any fundamental right of the petitioner. I find
it difficult to agree with the learned State Counsel for the 1st and 6th
respondents as the instant case could be clearly distinguished from the
decision of Veeradas's case for the following reasons.  
  
Firstly it would be difficult to state that the facts in these two cases are
strikingly similar. In Veeradas's case, the petitioner, who was from Kolavil,
Akkaraipattu was to travel to the United Kingdom at the invitation of the
Islington and Hackney Group of the British Section of Amnesty Intemational to
address the Group in a series of talks in a seminar organized on the theme
'Sri Lanka Today' with regard to the Human Rights situation in Sri Lanka and
the Sri Lankan refugees in the United Kingdom. Amnesty International had
provided his flight ticket. His passport initially was valid only for certain
designated countries in the Asian region. By an endorsement made on 09.08.1988
its validity was extended to all countries. The British government had issued
a single visit visa for the journey. At the airport the petitioner had checked
in, paid the embarkation tax, proceeded through the customs to the Immigration
and Emigration counter. While he was seated in the departure lounge, he was
informed that there was a problem with the petitioner's passport and had taken
him in for questioning. When his travel documents and the baggage were
checked, the officers found notices regarding the petitioner's earlier
detention in custody by the Minister of National Security dated September 1986
and April 1987 under emergency regulations. When the passport was examined by
the investigating officer of he BIA, it was found that,  
  
a. there was a mark, similar to an eraser mark on page 3 of his passport in
the space below the petitioner's photograph at the point of his signature; and  
  
b. that there was a difference in the first name given in his National
Identity Card as compared with his first name as appearing in his passport.
While in his National Identity Card the name appeared as Kulandeivel Veeradas,
in his passport it appeared as Kulanthavelu Veeradas.

**419**

Secondly it is also important to note that the court had no opportunity of
examining the passport in question due to the fact that the original passport
not being tendered to court as the petitioner at the time his case was being
heard was said to be in the United Kingdom.  
  
In the instant case, the petitioner was present in court and the passport in
question was in the custody of the Registrar and the court had the advantage
of examining the passport.  
  
The present case therefore cannot be said to have 'striking similarities' as
in Veeradas's case. In fact it is important to consider the atmosphere that
prevailed during the time Veeradasa was arrested. Referring to this
Bandaranayake, J., in his judgment in Veeradas's case stated that,  
  
"In the circumstances suspicions were raised that the passenger may be a
person involved in anti-government terrorist activity constituting offences
under anti-terrorist and Emergency laws and regulations in the back ground of
continuing widespread civil unrest in the country and a suspicion that his
passport was forged, irregular or altered."  
  
The arrest of the petitioner in the case presently before court was not done
in such circumstances.  
  
There is one more point that needs to be examined before I depart from this
judgment. Reference was made to section 32 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
Act, No.15 of 1979 that the 1st respondent took the petitioner into custody on
'reasonable suspicion' that the petitioner was attempting to leave for the
United Kingdom with a forged passport or presumably with a tampered passport.
The question which arises here is that was it a reasonable suspicion or a
'mere suspicion' that the petitioner did not have a genuine passport in his
possession. We are mindful and fully possessed of the difficulties faced by
the airport officials in dealing with the passengers and appreciate the
efforts taken to eradicate the violations and the steps taken to apprehend the
violators. At the same time officials must ensure that passengers with genuine
passports are not put to the inconvenience of rescheduling or cancelling their
flights due to their (officials) acting hastily and negligently in the absence
of credible material in the circumstances of each case. The wording in section
32 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act refers to a 'reasonable complaint' or
'credible information' or a 'reason-

**420**

able suspicion'. Therefore the legislature has been emphatic that a mere
suspicion alone would not be sufficient to arrest a person in terms of section
32 of the Code. Defining suspicion, Sohoni in his work on the Indian Criminal
Procedure Code, which uses the identical wording incorporating the phrases of
reasonable complaint, credible information or reasonable suspicion (18th
edition, volume 1, pg.240), stated as follows;  
  
"A general definition of what constitutes reasonableness in a complaint or
suspicion and credibility of information cannot be given. But both must depend
upon the existence of tangible legal evidence within the cognizance of the
police officer and he must judge whether the evidence is sufficient to
establish the reasonableness and credibility of the charge, information or
suspicion. What is a reasonable complaint or suspicion must depend on the
circumstances of each particular case, but it must be at least founded on some
definite fact tending to throw suspicion on the person arrested and not on
mere surmise or information."  
  
As referred to earlier in detail, the petitioner had produced several other
documents to the 1st respondent for him to clarify the petitioner's bona fides
svisa-vis his travel documents. A comparison of his passport with the Liberian
Seaman's identity card would in my view have cleared any kind of doubt the
officials would have had in their minds.  
  
For the aforementioned reasons I hold that the petitioner was treated
unequally and was arrested and detained illegally and therefore the
petitioner's fundamental rights guaranteed in terms of Articles 12(1), 13(1)
and 13(2) were violated by the 1st and 3rd respondents. I accordingly direct
the State to pay a sum of Rs. 30,000/- as compensation and costs. This amount
must be paid within three (3) months from today.  
  
**S. N. SILVA, C.J. -          **I agree  
  
**EDUSSURIYA, J. -          **I agree _ **  
  
Relief granted.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/12.html_  

