##  Nandasena v. Chandradasa, O. I. C., Police Station, Hiniduma And Others -
SLR - 207, Vol 1 of 2006 [2005] LKSC 13; (2006) 1 Sri LR 207 (14 October 2005)

**

207

NANDASENA  
  
VS  
  
CHANDRADASA, O. I. C., POLICE STATION,  
HINIDUMA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
WEERASURIYA, J. AND  
UDALAGAMA, J  
SC (SPL) APPLICATION No. 12/2004  
17TH JUNE AND 15TH SEPTEMBER, 2005

_

Fundamental Rights-Articles _ 11, _and_ 13(1) _of the Constitution-Alleged
unlawful arrest and torture-Insufficiency of evidence on torture-Arrest for_ a
_breach of the peace._

The petitioner complained that the 1st respondent OIC came near his boutique
in a jeep; and after summoning him assaulted him on his face. He was then
taken to the police station by other police officers. He complained of
infringement of Articles 11 and 13(1) of  the Constitution. He alleged that a
part of his boutique had been demolished.

It was proved that on information received by the 1st respondent over the
telephone, from a Pradeshiya Sabha Member that the petitioner was making an
unauthorized construction encroaching on the public road and that a crowd

**208**

had gathered creating unrest and a possible breach of the peace, the 1st
respondent visited the scene. He found an atmosphere of unrest there. The
evidence of the 1st respondent was supported by the Pradeshiya Sabha Member
and another witness by their affidavits.

The petitioner's version which was supplement by his petition and a belated
statement made to a Grama Niladhari was contradictory. He had no injuries to
establish the alleged assault.

The 1st respondent's version was that he reached the scene on information
received over the telephone and saw the unlawful construction which the
petitioner refused to remove. There was unrest in the crowd that had gathered
there. In the context, the 1st respondent arrested the petitioner to prevent a
breach of the peace .

There was no medical evidence showing any injury to the petitioner.

Article 13(1) requires arrest according to procedure established by law; and
the person arrested should be informed of the reason for the arrest.

Article 11 provides that no person should be subjected to torture or to cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

**HELD:**

1\. The petitioner must discharge his burden regarding alleged infringement of
Article 11 with a high degree of certainty. In the instant case, the evidence
falls short of the required standard.

2\. Under section 32 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979, an
arrest without a warrant is competent where, _inter- alia,_ a person commits a
breach of the peace, in the presence of the arresting officer. In the instant
case, the evidence established the commission of a breach of the peace.

3\. In the circumstances, there was no infringement of Articles 13(1) or 11 of
the Constitution.

**

Cases referred to :

**

1. _Me. Nabb_ vs. U. S. (1943) 318 US 332

2 _. Channa Peiris_ vs. _Attorney-General and Others_ (1994) 1 Sri LR **** 1
****

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights. _Kapila
Gamini Jayasinghe_ for petitioner.

D. _Akurugoda_ for 1st respondent.

**209**

K. A. P. Ranasinghe, State Counsel for 2nd and 3rd respondents

Cur.adv. vult

14th October, 2005  
  
**SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

The petitioner, who was 54 years of age at the time of the incident, is a
small scale trader, carrying on his business at Thawalama, a village situated
in the Galle District. He alleged that on 02.09.2003 around 10.00 o'clock in
the morning, the 1st respondent, who was the Officer-in Charge of the Police
Station at Hiniduma, arrived near his boutique in his jeep and after summoning
the petitioner near the jeep assaulted him on his face.Thereafter the 1st
respondent, along with some other police officers had taken the petitioner to
the Police Station. Prior to that, part of his boutique had been demolished by
the aforementioned group of police officers. The petitioner further submitted
that he was produced before the Magistrate's Court of Baddegama on 03.09.2003
and was released on bail.

The petitioner therefore complained that the 1st respondent had violated his
fundamental rights guaranteed in terms of Articles 11, 12(1), 12(2), 13(1) and
14(1 )(g) of the Constitution.

This Court granted leave to proceed for the alleged infringement of Articles
11 and 13(1) of the Constitution.

The petitioner's allegations were against the 1st respondent that he was
arrested on 02.09.2003 without any basis and that he was assaulted at the time
he was so arrested on 02.09.2003. In support of his complaint against the 1st
respondent, the petitioner had produced an affidavit from one Jinadasa
Vithanage from Thawalama, Galle and a copy of the complaint made by the
petitioner to the Grama Niladhari of Thawalama.  
  
Of the allegations made against the 1st respondent, let me first consider the
alleged violation of Article 13(1) of the Constitution. Article 13(1) of the
Constitution, which relates to freedom from arbitrary arrest, reads as follows
:-

"No person shall be arrested except according to procedure established by law.
Ariy person arrested, shall be informed of the reason for his arrest."

**210**

According to 1st respondent, around 9.00 a.m. on 02.09.2003, he had received a
telephone message (1R7) informing him that a person was erecting a structure
encroaching the road and thereby causing an obstruction to the public at
Halvitigala-Aswalandeniya junction. On the on received he had decided to visit
the place in question and on his arrival at the said junction he had seen that
a person was erecting a shed encroaching several feet of the Aswalandeniya
road: The 1st respondent had also observed that at that time a crowd had
gathered and the two parties were about to clash. At that instance the 1st
respondent had dispersed the said crowd and had warned the petitioner to
remove the unauthorised construction, which was being erected by him
encroaching the road. The petitioner, according to the 1st respondent, had
refused to remove the said unauthorised construction and continued with his
work irrespective of the warning given by the 1st respondent. Accordingly
after explaining to the petitioner that he was causing a public nuisance which
may lead to an imminent breach of the peace, the 1st respondent had taken the
petitioner into custody. In support of his contention the 1st respondent had
produced an affidavit from a Member of the Pradeshiya Sabha of Thawalama,
namely, one Waidyaratne Attanayake Herath Mudiyanselage Sumathipala, who had
been an eye witness to the aforesaid incident. According to him around 8.00
a.m. on 02.09.2003 a group of villagers had informed him that the petitioner
had started to construct a temporary shed obstructing the junction near
Aswalandeniya Road. According to his version if this construction was allowed
to remain that would have obstructed the roadway and would have prevented any
vehicle using the. road. At the time the said Sumathipala had approached the
Aswalandeniya junction (1 R2), villagers had assembled near the junction and
were becoming restless.  
  
The 1st respondent had also filed a further affidavit from one Gardi Hewavasam
Dodangodage Sujeewa Lakmal who was carrying on a business of collecting and
transporting tea leaves from Dammala, in Hiniduma area. According to him
around 7.00 a.m., when he was passing Aswalandeniya in his truck, he had seen
the petitioner constructing a temporary shed obstructing the main road.
Sometime later, a Member of the Pradeshiya Sabha, had arrived at the scene and
had warned the petitioner not to carry out the construction, but to no avail.
Later the 1st respondent had arrived and had warned the petitioner, but as the
petitioner continued with his construction, the 1st respondent arrested him
after dispersing the crowd that had gathered near the junction (1 R6).

**211**

On a consideration of the afore mentioned affidavits it is apparent that the
1st respondent had arrived at the scene in question on the information he had
received by way of a telephone message, that had been given as had been found
out later, by the Member of the Pradeshiya Sabha. It is also clear that the
1st respondent had arrested the petitioner as it had clearly appeared to him
that the petitioner was causing a public nuisance.

Section 32 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979 describes the
instances where peace officers could arrest persons without a warrant.
According to Section 32 (1) (b)

"Any peace officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a
warrant arrest any person  
  
(a) who in his presence commits any breach of the peace;  
  
(b) who has been concerned in any cognizable offence or against whom a
reasonable complaint has been made or credible information has been received
or a reasonable suspicion exists of his having been so concerned".

It is common ground that the petitioner was arrested by the 1st respondent.
The contention of the 1st respondent is that the petitioner was arrested as he
was causing a public nuisance. In such circumstances could such an arrest be a
violation of the petitioner's fundamental rights guaranteed in terms of
Article 13(1) of the Constitution? In terms of Article 13(1), as stated
earlier, the arrest should be 'according to procedure established by law'. The
importance of observing the 'correct and proper procedure' was correctly
evaluated by Justice Frankfurter in Me. Nabb Vs US.(1) where he had stated
that 'the history of liberty has largely beer; the history of observance of
procedural safeguards'. The purpose of following the correct procedure is
therefore to safeguard the liberty as well as maintain law and order and
thereby to mete out justice and fairplay.

Considering the circumstances of this matter, it is clear that the 1st
respondent had arrested the petitioner as he was instrumental in causing a
public nuisance leading to a breach of the peace. The police had taken
necessary steps against the petitioner and criminal proceedings were

**212**

instituted against him. On an examination of the totality of the evidence, I
am inclined to accept the version given by the 1st respondent.  
  
In such a situation the arrest of the petitioner cannot be regarded as an
illegal arrest and therefore the petitioner's claim with regard to Article
13(1) of the Constitution should fail.

The petitioner has complained that the 1st respondent had assaulted him on
02.09.2003 and thereby he has alleged that the 1st respondent had violated his
fundamental rights guaranteed in terms of Article 11 of the Constitution.
Article 11 of the Constitution refers to freedom from torture and states as
follows :-

"No person shall be subjected to torture or to cruel  inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment"

According to the complaint made by the petitioner, the 1st respondent had
assaulted him on his face at the time the latter had arrived near his
boutique. Except for his petition and affidavit where he refers to the said
assault, it is to be borne in mind that the petitioner has not produced any
medical evidence to substantiate his allegations against the 1st respondent.  
  
Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner had not
received any medical treatment with regard to the aforementioned assault and
that it was the reason for the non-production of any medical certificates.
Accordingly it is' clear that there were no injuries due to the alleged
assault. Learned Counsel for the petitioner drew our attention to the
affidavit given by Jinadasa Vithanage (P3) and the complaint made by the
petitioner to Grama Niladhari on 23.09.2003 (P3A) as supporting documents to
substantiate his allegations against the 1st respondent. In the' affidavit
given by the said Jinadasa Vithanage (P3) it is averred that the 1st
respondent had summoned the petitioner near the jeep and thereafter had
assaulted the petitioner on his face. Paragraph 3 of the said affidavit refers
to the said incident in the following terms:  
  
  
(emphasis added)".

**213**

However, in the complaint made to the Grama Niladhari at Thawalama (P3A) what
is stated is as follows :-  
  
  
(emphasis added)".  
  
On an examination of these two documents it appears that the petitioner's
version given in his petition and affidavit is different to the version stated
in the two documents filed by him to substantiate his position.  
  
When there is an allegation based on violation of fundamental rights
guaranteed in terms of Article 11of the Constitution, it would be necessary
for the petitioner to prove his position by way of medical evidence and/or by
way of affidavits and for such purpose it would be essential for the
petitioner to bring forward such documents with a high degree of certainty for
the purpose of discharging his burden. Discussing this position, Amerasinghe,
J. in Channa Peiris and other vs Attorney General and others (2) had clearly
stated that,  
  
"Having regard to the nature and gravity of the issue a high degree of
certainty is required before the balance of probability might be said to tilt
in favour of the petitioner endeavouring to discharge his burden of proving
that he was subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment".  
  
Considering the non-availability of any medical evidence with regard to the
alleged assault, it would be necessary to examine carefully the supporting
documents produced by the petitioner to substantiate his allegations against
the 1st respondent.  
  
The petitioner attempted to substantiate his allegations against the 1st
respondent on the basis of the complaint made by him to the Grama Niladhari of
Thawalama and relying on an affidavit he had filed along with his petition of
one Jinadasa Vithanage. The first document, being the complaint made. to the
Grama Niladhari of Thawalama (P3A), indicates that the petitioner had made the
said complaint on 23.09.2003. Accordingly the petitioner had decided to make a
statement to the Grama Niladhari only after 3 weeks from the date of the said
incident. The affidavit of Jinadasa Vithanage (P3) on the other hand is dated
22.03.2004, which is over 6 months from the date of the incident.

**214**

Learned Counsel for the 1st respondent contended that the said Jinadasa
Vithanage, who is the author of the affidavit dated 22.03.2004, is a close
relative of the petitioner and is the owner of the boutique adjoining the
petitioners grocery store at Thawalama. Therefore it is not possible to place
any reliance on the. aforesaid affidavit not only that being the single
affidavit filed by the petitioner to substantiate his position, but also, as
referred to earlier, the contents of this affidavit differ from what was
stated by the petitioner in his petition and affidavit.  
  
In the event where there has been no evidence of physical harm and the only
document produced by the petitioner being a statement by him that the 1st
respondent had assaulted him on his face which statement had not been
supported by any independent evidence by way of affidavits or by medical
evidence, I am of the view that the petitioner has not been able to satisfy
this Court that his fundamental rights guaranteed in terms of Article 11 were
infringed by the 1st respondent.  
  
Considering all the circumstances referred to above it is apparent that the
1st respondent has not violated the fundamental rights of the petitioner
guaranteed in terms of Articles 11 and 13(1) of the Constitution.  
  
I accordingly hold that the petitioner has not been successful in establishing
that his fundamental rights guaranteed in terms of Articles 11 and 13(1) of
the Constitution have been violated by the actions of the 1st respondent. This
application is accordingly dismissed, but in all the circumstances of this
case without costs.  
  
**WEERASURIYA,** J.-I, agree.  
  
**UDALAGAMA,** J.-I agree.  
  
Application dismissed

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2005/13.html_  

