##  Parameswary Jayathevan v. Attorney General and Others - SLR - 356, Vol 2
of 1992 [1991] LKSC 13; (1992) 2 Sri LR 356 (30 October 1991)

**356**

**PARAMESWARY JAYATHEVAN** **  
v.** **  
ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
KULATUNGA, J.  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
P. R. P. PERERA, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 192/91  
29 AND 30 JULY 1992.

Fundamental Rights - Article 12(1) of the Constitution - Deprivation of
Government Quarters and mala fide transfer by officers of a Provincial Council
- Do acts or omission of a Provincial Council or its officers constitute
executive or administrative action ? - Attorney-General's position - Status
and role in relation to a Provincial Council - Jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court \- Liability of the State \- Enforcement of Orders of the Supreme Court
against the Provincial Council and its officers._

The petitioner was in occupation of Government Quarters as a Pharmacist. The
Regional Director of Health Services, Vavuniya sought to deprive her of the
facility of occupying Government Quarters and when she resisted this the
Secretary, Ministry of Health and Women's Affairs of the North-East Province
transferred her to the General Hospital, Batticaloa. She complained of
discrimination and infringement of her fundamental rights under Article 12(1)
by the transfer which she said was mala fide. The following questions arose
for decision.

357

(a) Do the acts or omissions of a Provincial Council or its officers
constitute executive or administrative action?

(b) Has the Attorney-General the right to be heard in relation to a Provincial
Council?

(c) What is the liability of the State?

(d) If the Supreme Court has jurisdiction, how were its orders under Article
126(4) to be enforced?

**Held:**

(1) The impugned acts constitute executive or administrative action within the
ambit of Article 17 of the Constitution which this Court has jurisdiction to
review under Article 126.

(2) The Attorney-General has the right to be heard in the proceedings of the
case in terms of Article 134(1) of the Constitution and was properly made a
party under the Supreme Court rules.

(3) In respect of infringements of fundamental rights arising out of the acts
of public officers or public corporation, in addition to the State which is
primarily liable the offending officer is also liable, and accordingly, in
appropriate cases both the State and such officer may be ordered to pay
compensation. In an appropriate case the liability of the State would remain
purely conceptual, and relief may be granted against the offender alone.

(4) The 13th Amendment has not eroded the judicial power of the People. The
writ of the Supreme Court runs through the length and breadth of Sri Lanka.
The Supreme Court has full power to enforce its orders including those made
under Article 126(4).

(5) The medical administration in Vavuniya had helped the petitioner when she
was in difficulty owing to the civil disturbances and permitted her to occupy
quarters which no other pharmacist had been permitted to occupy. Her refusal
to vacate the premises taints her conduct. She desired to enjoy a facility to
which she was not entitled.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Karunaratne v. Rupasinghe - S.C. Application No. 71/90 S.C. Mins. of
17.6.91.  
_  
_2\. Sirisena v. Perera - S.C. Application No. 14/90 S.C. Mins. of 27.8.91  
_  
_3\. Cannossa Investment Ltd. v. E. E. B. Perera - S.C. Application No. 12/90
S.C. Mins. of 10.10.90._

**358**

_4\. In re Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution and the Provincial
Councils Bill [ 1987] 1 Sri L.R. 312, 323, 327.  
_  
_5\. Ratnasara There, v. Udugampola 2 F.R.D. 364.  
_  
_6\. Perera v The University Grants Commission, 1 F.R.D. 103, 104._  
  
_7\. Elmore Perera v. Jayawickrema [ 1985] 1 Sri L.R. 285, 358, 359.  
_  
_8\. Gunaratne v. People's Bank [ 1986 )1 Sri L.R. 338, 354.  
_  
_9\. Roberts v. Ratnayake [1986] 2 Sri L.R. 36.  
_  
_10\. A. G. v. Liyanage[1962] N.L.R. 313; 354, 359._

**APPLICATION** for infringement of fundamental rights.

_R. E. Thambiratnam with K. V. Mahendra for petitioner.  
_  
_R. K. W. Goonasekera with L. C. M. Swarnadhipathy, for 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th
respondents.  
_  
_A. S. M. Perera, D.S.G. for the Attorney-General._

_Cur. adv vult._

17th September, 1992.  
**KULATUNGA, J.**

The petitioner is a Pharmacist attached to the Base Hospital, Vavuniya under
the Ministry of Health and Women's Affairs of the North-East Provincial
Council. Since 1989 she has been an officer of the Provincial Public Service
of that Council. In her application, the petitioner, complained that the 2nd
respondent (the Regional Director of Health Services, Vavuniya) sought to
deprive her of the facility of occupying government quarters to which she was
entitled and when she resisted it, the 4th respondent (the Secretary, Ministry
of Health and Women's Affairs of the North-East Province) transferred her to
the General Hospital, Batticaloa; that although the said transfer order
purports to be for administrative reasons, it has been made mala fide solely
on account of her dispute with the 2nd respondent regarding her occupancy of
government quarters; and that the denial of her right to occupy government
quarters and the said transfer are discriminatory and violative of her rights
under Article 12(1) of the Constitution. The 3rd and the 5th respondents are
the District Medical Officer and the Secretary, Provincial Public Service
Commission,

359

North-East Province, respectively. The petitioner has also named the Attorney-
General as a respondent in compliance with the Supreme Court Rules.

**QUESTIONS OF LAW**

In this application the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 126 of the
Constitution has been invoked for the first time in respect of alleged
infringement of fundamental rights by officers of a Provincial Council; and
His Lordship The Chief Justice, acting in terms of Article 132(3), has
directed that this application be heard by a Bench of five Judges. I shall
first examine the four important questions of law which had been raised for
consideration by this Bench and in respect of which, the parties have, as
directed by this Court, filed written submissions. The questions are as
follows:

(1) Whether this Court has jurisdiction under Article 126 on the basis that
"executive or administrative action" includes the acts or omissions of a
Provincial Council or its officers;

(2) What is the position, status and role of the Attorney-General as the Chief
Law Officer of the State, in relation to a Provincial Council, particularly in
the context of Article 134 and the Rules requiring the Attorney-General to be
made a party to applications under Article 126;

(3) If this Court has jurisdiction, what is the liability of the State, namely
the Government of Sri Lanka, in respect of infringements of fundamental rights
by a Provincial Council or its officers.

(4) If this Court has jurisdiction, how are the orders made in fundamental
rights applications against the officers of a Provincial council, and the
Provincial Council itself, to be enforced.

**JURISDICTION OF THE SUPREME COURT**

Although the above questions have been formulated in wide terms, I have taken
the view that having regard to the facts and the issues in this application,
it would be sufficient if we express our

360

opinion on the said questions strictly to the extent that it is necessary for
the purpose of deciding the case before us. Viewing the matter in that light,
the first question is whether the impugned transfer and the deprivation of
government quarters constitute "executive or administrative action" within the
ambit of Article 17 of the Constitution. The authors of the Constitution, in
their wisdom, have not defined this expression. However, in the area of the
Central Government ("The Centre"), we are very familiar with its meaning,
whether in relation to the acts of **public officers** or officers holding
office under **public corporations**. Ordinarily, it means their acts done
under the colour of office in the exercise or the purported exercise of
governmental functions. There are numerous decisions of this Court on this
point almost all of which are referred to in the recent decisions in
_Karunaratne v. Rupasinghe_ (1) and _Sirisena v Perera_ (2). It has been held
that complaints arising upon judicial orders are not justiciable under Article
126. See Cannossa Investments Ltd. _v. E. E. B. Perera_ (3) and the decisions
referred to therein.

All the Centre, Article 4(d) of the Constitution provides that the executive
power of the people is exercised by the President. An elaboration of this
power is to be found in Chapter VII. Articles 30-41 (President of the
Republic), Chapter VIII, Articles 42-53 (The Cabinet of Ministers) and Chapter
IX Articles 55-61 (The Public Service). Subject to the President's power to
make certain appointments, the exercise of the power of appointment, transfer,
dismissal and disciplinary control is vested in the Cabinet of Ministers. The
Cabinet is empowered to delegate some of its powers to the Public Service
Commission, which may in turn delegate its power to a public officer. Under
Article 55(4) the Cabinet of Ministers is empowered to provide for and
determine all matters relating to public officers; accordingly, the
Establishments Code (1985) which has been approved by the Cabinet of Ministers
makes detailed provision in respect of such matters including the transfer of
public officers and the allocation of government quarters to them; and such
acts constitute "executive or administrative action" reviewable under Article
126.

At the level of a Provincial Council, Article 154C provides that executive
power extending to matters with respect to which a Provincial Council has the
power to make statutes shall be exercised by the Governor of the Province
directly or through the Board of

361

Ministers, or through officers subordinate to him, in accordance with Article
154E Article 154F establishes a Board of Ministers and provides, inter alia,
that the Governor shall, in the exercise of his functions, act in accordance
with the advice of the Board of Ministers, except in so far as he is by or
under the Constitution required to exercise his functions in his discretion.
Under Article 154G read with List 1 of the Ninth Schedule, Health is a subject
which has been devolved to Provincial Councils and under S.1:2 of appendix II
to List I, it would appear that a Provincial Council is permitted to
administer, control and utilise government quarters comprised in State land
within the province and which are made available to such Council by the
government.

Article 154Q empowers Parliament to enact further provision relating to
Provincial Councils. Such provisions were made by the Provincial Councils Act
No. 42 of 1987 as amended by Acts Nos. 27 of 1990 and 28 of 1990. Under S.32
of the Act, the appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of
officers of the provincial Public Service of each Province is vested in its
Governor. The Governor may delegate such power to the Provincial Public
Service Commission, which in turn may delegate its power to the Chief
Secretary or any officer of the Provincial Public Service (see S.32 (2A)).
Under S.32 (3), the Governor is empowered to provide for and determine all
matters relating to officers of the Provincial Public Service: accordingly the
Governor of the North-East Provincial Council has made an order dated 17.12.90
setting out the guidelines for the Provincial Public Service Commission.

By his order dated 10.10.90, the Governor of the North-East Provincial Council
has delegated his powers of appointment etc. over officers of the Provincial
Public Service to the Provincial Public Service Commission, whilst retaining
to himself such powers in respect of certain posts; and the Commission by its
order dated 14.10.90 has delegated its powers to the officers indicated
therein. Under the said delegation, the powers of transfer and disciplinary
control over the petitioner are vested in the 4th respondent. The 2nd
respondent is the Regional Head in Vavuniya having administrative authority
over the petitioner, including the power to allocate government quarters to
her. In its determination on the Bills for the

362

enactment of the 13th Amendment and the Provincial Councils Act, this Court
held that such powers have been conferred by way of "devolution" or
"delegation" of "Central Government powers" within the framework of the
Unitary State postulated, by Article 2 of the Constitution. Having examined
Article 154C and the relevant provisions, the majority of the Court said -

". . . There can be no gainsaying the fact that the President remains supreme
or sovereign in the executive field and the Provincial Council is only a body
subordinate to him."

In _re Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution and the Provincial Councils
Bill_ (4). I have, therefore, no doubt that the impugned acts constitute
"executive or administrative action" within the ambit of Article 17 of the
Constitution, which this Court has jurisdiction to review under Article 126.

**THE POSITION, STATUS AND THE ROLE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL**

It follows from my above finding that the Attorney-General has the right to be
heard in these proceedings in terms of Article 134 (1) of the Constitution and
has been properly made a party under the Supreme Court Rules. It would be
unnecessary, for the purposes of this application, to decide the other issues
involved in the second question set out above.

**LIABILITY OF THE STATE**

In respect of infringements of fundamental rights arising out of the acts of
public officers or public corporations, it has been held (in the light of
Articles 4(d) and 126(4) of the Constitution) that in addition to the State
(which is primarily liable) the offending officer is also liable; and
accordingly, in appropriate cases both the State and such officer may be
ordered to pay compensation. Karunaratne v. Rupasinghe (supra) and Sirisena v.
Perera (supra). In an appropriate case, the liability of the State would
remain purely conceptual, and relief may be granted against the offender
alone. _Ratnasara Thero v._

363

_Udugampola_ (5); _Perera v. The University Grants Commission_ (6). In the
instant case the relief, if any, need not go beyond the 2nd and the 4th
respondents; hence the liability of the State, if any, remains purely
conceptual. The third question before us impliedly raises another issue
namely, whether a Provincial Council itself may incur a liability analogous to
that of the State on account of an infringement of fundamental rights. That
issue also does not arise for decision in this case. I would, however,
conclude my opinion on this question with the observation that under the 13th
Amendment, the Republic of Sri Lanka alone is sovereign and Provincial
Councils have been established for the purpose of devolving some of the powers
exercised by the Centre and they are no more than components of the Republic,
created for that purpose. The status of a Provincial Council is, therefore,
not analogous to that of the State in fundamental rights cases. However, the
question whether relief may be granted against the Provincial Council alone on
account of an infringement of fundamental rights by "executive or
administrative action" within its area can arise for decision in an
appropriate case in which event, this Court will express its opinion thereon.

**ENFORCEMENT OF THE ORDERS OF THE SUPREME COURT UNDER ARTICLE 126 (4)**

In the determination of this Court on the 13th Amendment and the Provincial
Councils Bill this Court said -

"The Bills do not effect any change in the structure of the Courts of judicial
power of the People. The Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal continue to
exercise unimpaired the several jurisdictions vested in them by the
Constitution. There is one Supreme Court and one Court of Appeal for the whole
Island . . ." (P.323)

I myself subscribe to the view that the 13th Amendment has not eroded the
judicial power of the People and hold that the writ of this Court still runs
through the length and breadth of Sri Lanka and that this Court has the full
power to enforce its orders, including those made under Article 126(4).

364

**CONSIDERATION OF THE DISPUTE ON THE MERITS**

**Occupation of Medical Quarters by the petitioner**

The petitioner is one of the six pharmacists attached to the Base Hospital,
Vavuniya. Unlike in the case of medical officers, pharmacists are not entitled
to scheduled quarters (i.e. those assigned to a particular post or grade
within a Department; see S.1 of Chapter XIX of the Establishments Code). The
petitioner states that in Vavuniya there are six such quarters assigned for
the use of medical officers ("medical quarters") but the respondents state
that there are only five such quarters, a discrepancy which is not important
because the petitioner is, in any event, not entitled to such quarters.
However, the medical administration in Vavuniya had helped the petitioner when
she was in difficulty due to the civil disturbances there and permitted her to
occupy such quarters, which fact ultimately led to the present dispute. No
other pharmacist has been permitted to occupy scheduled or other government
quarters.

In 1989 the petitioner had rented out a private house in Vavuniya and was
living there, when the I.P.K.F. acquired it; whereupon she was permitted to
occupy the old D.M.O.'s quarters which was vacated by a Medical Officer. The
inventory P14 shows that it is a spacious house (with fans) consisting of 4
rooms (with attached bathrooms), a hall, verandahs, kitchen, dining room and a
garage. By a letter dated 06.10.89 (2R 1), she informed the R.D.H.S.. that
since the I.P.K.F had acquired her house without notice and as she was with
children, she was in temporary occupation of the old D.M.O.'s quarters for
want of alternative accommodation. On 07.10.89, the D.M.O. Vavuniya reported
to the R.D.H.S. that as the office of the Regional Medical Officer (Anti-
Malaria Campaign) was being shifted to the P.H.l.'s quarters, the petitioner
may be allowed to occupy the building which was being vacated by the R.M.O.,
on condition that she should vacate it on 31.12.89 (2R2). On 20.10.89 the
R.D.H.S. approved it and instructed that the petitioner be requested to shift
to the said building and to immediately hand over the old D.M.O's quarters to
the D.M.O. (p.15). This was done.

Although the petitioner was expected to vacate the R.M.O's quarters by
31.12.89 she appears to have been allowed to live there

365

 until June 1990 when due to the occurrence of violence, she had to leave the
area. She resumed work in September 1990 when on 26.09.90 the R.D.H.S.
instructed her to hand over the R.M.O.'s quarters to the D.M.O. and to shift
to the old D.M.O.'s quarters (P2). She complied with these instructions and
shifted to the old D.M.O.'s quarters on 27.09.90 (P3, P16).

**DECISION THAT THE PETITIONER SHOULD VACATE MEDICAL QUARTERS**

The 2nd respondent assumed duties as R.D.H.S. Vavuniya in November 1990. On
21.11.90 the 2nd respondent held a conference for the allocation of quarters
to medical officers, which the petitioner attended. At the said conference the
R.M.O. Dr. Thiyagarajah wished to occupy the R.M.O.'s quarters then occupied
by the D.M.O. This was allowed. The D.M.O. did not wish to shift to the old
D.M.O.'s quarters; instead he wished to occupy a quarters being vacated by an
outgoing doctor. The 2nd respondent wished to occupy the old D.M.O.'s quarters
then being occupied by the petitioner; and it was agreed that he would
immediately occupy a part of the said quarters until the end of December 1990
when the petitioner was due to go on transfer to Negombo. On 23.11.90 the 2nd
respondent made a minute of the said conference and endorsed it to the
petitioner with instructions that she will be released to assume duties in
Negombo on 31.12.90. She was also requested to hand over duties, with an
inventory of articles (P4). Consequently, on 29.12.90 the D.M.O. appears to
have called upon her to relinquish duties to which she protested by a writing
dated 30.12.90 (P5). She took up the position that her transfer to Negombo had
been ordered 3 years ago but was not implemented and that as she was now an
employee of the North-East Provincial Council she could not be transferred
except with the concurrence of the North-West Provincial Council. She
indicated that pending clarification of this issue she was not prepared to
proceed to Negombo.

**REFUSAL OF THE PETITIONER TO VACATE MEDICAL QUARTERS**

On 25.01.91 the 2nd respondent reminded the petitioner that in terms of the
decision made on 21.11.90, she should have vacated

366

 the quarters occupied by her by the end of December 1990 and requested her to
do so before the end of January 1991 (P6). On 30.01.91 the 2nd respondent
received a letter from the Attorney-General (2R4) calling for observations on
a notice of action given by the petitioner. In the said letter the Attorney-
General also advised the 2nd respondent to refrain from taking steps to
dispossess the petitioner (from the quarters occupied by her) pending a final
decision on the notice of action.

On 08.02.91 the petitioner replied P6, the 2nd respondent's letter. In her
reply (P7), she said that as her transfer to Negombo was not effective she
proposed to remain in the quarters allotted to her. There followed two
reminders dated 27.02.91 and 23.04.91 from the Attorney-General addressed to
the 2nd respondent calling for observations on the petitioner's notice of
action (2135 and 2136). In each of these letters the Attorney-General strongly
advised the 2nd respondent to refrain from taking steps to dispossess the
petitioner from the quarters occupied by her or to transfer her from Vavuniya
without reference to him. However, after further consideration, the Attorney-
General, by his letter dated 12.09.91 addressed to the petitioner (with copy
to the 2nd respondent) declined to intervene in the matter in view of the fact
that she was an employee of the Provincial Council and that the premises in
question was under the control of the Council (2R7).

**ACTION BY THE AUTHORITIES TO RECOVER MEDICAL QUARTERS OCCUPIED BY THE
PETITIONER: HER TRANSFER TO BATTICALOA**

Following the Attorney-General's ruling, the 2nd respondent reported the
matter to the 4th respondent who by his letter dated 28.09.91 (P8) directed
the petitioner to vacate the quarters forthwith on pain of disciplinary
action. The correspondence that followed consists of 3 letters addressed to
the 4th respondent by the petitioner, on 18.01.91 (P9), 15.11.91 (P10(a)) and
10.12.91 (P12), and 2 letters addressed to the petitioner by the 4th
respondent, on 30.10.91 (P10) and 30.11.91 (P11), the second of which was an
order transferring the petitioner to the General Hospital, Batticaloa with
effect from 01.01.92 for "administrative reasons". The petitioner

367

 claimed that she was entitled to occupy the old D.M.O.'s quarters; that she
resumed work after the cessation of violence as she had been assured quarters
for her residence; that two clerks had also been permitted to occupy medical
quarters (this is denied by the 2nd respondent who states that the houses
given to the clerks are quarters meant for clerks), and that her transfer and
dispossession from quarters were both discriminatory.

The 4th respondent transferred the petitioner when it was clear that she would
not surrender the D.M.O'.s quarters even on the threat of disciplinary action.
On the other hand, she requested the 4th respondent to direct the 2nd
respondent to vacate the portion of the said quarters which the 2nd respondent
was in occupation as it was inconvenient for her to share the quarters with
him. Finally, on 11.12.91 the petitioner appealed to the North-East Provincial
Public Service Commission against her transfer alleging that it was motivated
solely by the desire to deprive her of the quarters occupied by her and that
in any event, there were two other pharmacists who were more eligible for
transfer than her. They are (i) Mrs. Paramakulasingham who had served in
Vavuniya for 7 years as against the petitioner who has served there only for 5
years (ii) Mr. Selvaratnam a retired pharmacist who had been re-employed on a
contract basis.

**SUBMISSIONS OF COUNSEL**

The learned Counsel for the petitioner did not press the allegation of
discrimination based on the orders given to the petitioner to vacate the
quarters occupied by her. She had been allowed to occupy medical quarters on
sympathetic grounds. She has no right to such quarters. No other pharmacist
had been allowed to occupy such quarters. She alone enjoyed the favour of
occupying medical quarters. The 2nd respondent is a medical officer besides
being the Regional Head in Vavuniya under the Ministry of Health and Women's
Affairs of the North-East Provincial Council. He is entitled to medical
quarters. As such the order to the petitioner to vacate the old D.M.O.'s
quarters to enable the 2nd respondent (or any other medical officer) to occupy
the same cannot constitute discrimination. The allegation that two clerks are
in occupation of medical quarters has

368

been denied. Assuming that a clerk has also been permitted such a facility, it
is not alleged that it has been done as a special favour with the intention of
placing him in a more advantageous position over the petitioner; and hence
such clerk too will be under the same obligation as the petitioner to vacate
such quarters upon being directed to do so. So that, even if a clerk is in
occupation of medical quarters (on account of the exigencies of the service)
it cannot constitute discrimination violative of Article 12(1) of the
Constitution.

Learned Counsel for the petitioner said that the petitioner's real grievance
is her transfer to Batticaloa which he submitted was done not for
administrative reasons but maliciously, on account of the dispute regarding
government quarters, which dispute ought to have been resolved by recourse to
the remedy of ejectment by legal action. Counsel pointed out to the fact that
the petitioner was transferred without a replacement for her in Vavuniya. He
submitted that this supported the allegation of mala fides. The 2nd respondent
states that Mrs. Paramakulasingham whom the petitioner says could have been
transferred was not in the same position as the petitioner because her husband
was employed in Vavuniya Kachcheri and as such it was not proper to transfer
her out of Vavuniya; and that in any event, the petitioner had served in the
Vavuniya Division for 12 years which was the longest period among the
pharmacists attached to the Base Hospital, Vavuniya.

Learned Counsel for the petitioner also contends that it is clear from all the
facts that the impugned transfer Was not effected upon a consideration of the
relevant facts; that it constitutes "hostile discrimination" in that the
transfer was a hostile act intentionally directed against the petitioner due
to illwill created by her refusal to vacate government quarters; and that as
such it is violative of the right to equal protection of the law (see _Elmore
Perera v. Jayawickrama_ (7) per Wimalaratne, J.). Learned Counsel for the
respondents submitted that the impugned acts cannot be attributed to iliwill
or malice and that the petitioner's transfer was justified in that -

(a) she had created a serious problem by refusing to surrender medical
quarters which are specially meant for medical officers;

369

(b) she abused the facility given to her to occupy such quarters in times of
difficulty;

(c) she challenged the authority of her superiors;

(d) no other pharmacist created such a situation at the Vavuniya Hospital;

(e) that in these circumstances the transfer was necessary to ensure the
smooth functioning of the hospital services at Vavuniya even without a
replacement; and that the Batticaloa Hospital could be better served by the
petitioner.

I am in agreement with the submissions of the learned Counsel for the
respondents. In answer to Court, the learned Counsel for the petitioner said
that assuming that this Court sets aside the transfer, the petitioner will
continue to occupy the old D.M.O.'s quarters and she cannot even indicate when
she may vacate the same. This clearly shows that the real object of these
proceedings has been to secure her occupation of medical quarters. If so, her
real grievance is not the transfer. Her conduct is tainted by the desire to
enjoy a facility to which she is not entitled; and that in the circumstances
she has failed to establish the charge of "hostile discrimination".

For the foregoing reasons, I hold that the alleged infringement of the
petitioner's fundamental rights under Article 12(1) has not been established
and dismiss her application, but without costs.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**P R. P. PERERA, J.** \- I agree.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.**

I have had the advantage of reading, in draft, the judgment of my brother
Kulatunga, and I agree with his conclusion that the petitioner has failed to
establish any violation of her fundamental rights.

370

However, I wish to state my views in regard to what constitutes "executive or
administrative action", and the liability of the State for violations of
fundamental rights by executive or administrative action.

**" Executive or Administrative Action" **

Learned Counsel for the petitioner commenced his arguments by reiterating the
opening paragraphs of his written submissions:

(a) Although the Constitution does not define 'executive or administrative
action', the Supreme Court has held that the 'Constitutional guarantees of
fundamental rights are directed against the State and its organs . . . In the
context of fundamental rights, the 'State' includes every repository of State
power. The expression 'executive or administrative action' embraces executive
action of the State or the agencies or instrumentalities exercising
governmental functions. It refers to exertion of State power in all its forms'
(Perera v. The University Grants Commission) (6). 'the Courts have been
progressively extending the concept of State and today it has come to include
almost any institution performing public functions' _(Gunaratne v. People's
Bank)_ (8).

(b) In order to ascertain whether a particular institution is an organ or
instrumentality or agency of the State, the 'functional' and 'governmental
control' tests have been customarily applied. Does the institution exercise
and perform governmental functions? Is,it charged with or entrusted with
functions which otherwise the Central Government would have performed? Does
the State exercise control over that institution? (Roberts v. Ratnayake (9).
It was also said in this case that 'where a Public Authority is charged or
entrusted with Governmental functions, the 'Governmental Control test' is
inappropriate and inapplicable' (p.69). However that may be, it is my
respectful submission that a Provincial Council satisfies the two tests
referred to above and constitutes an organ or agency of the State."

Articles 3 and 4 of the Constitution refer to the three powers of government;
governmental power therefore includes the legislative

371

 and the judicial power of the people. It is clear that in Articles 17 and 126
(and probably also in Article 157) "executive" action refers to the result of
the exercise of the executive (but not the legislative or the judicial) power
of the people. With much respect,. therefore, I find it difficult to agree
that this phrase "refers to exertion of State power in all its forms". The
word "administrative" is significant, and cannot be treated as a mere
superfluity. The classification of governmental powers is not always easy;
there are grey areas of uncertainty, as well as residual and ancillary powers
which, analytically or historically, do not fit neatly into one of the
traditional categories (see, for instance, A G v. Liyanage (10), where an
essentially administrative power was held to be ancillary to the judicial
power). Accordingly these powers which cannot appropriately be classified as
legislative, judicial, or executive, but are nevertheless "administrative" in
a public law sense, are also included in the phrase "executive and
administrative". Thus the question whether an act falls within the ambit of
this expression cannot be determined on the assumption that it includes all
exertions of State power, or the performance of a governmental power of
function; nor on the basis that if particular institutions, functionaries or
officials are "legislative" or "judicial", their acts are necessarily
excluded. In the scheme of the Constitution, as laid out in Articles 3 and 4,
one of the powers of government is the judicial power of the people; the
judiciary thus exercises a governmental power of function. The acts of a
judicial officer, in the exercise of judicial power, are not within the ambit
of Article 126; however, it may not follow that every act of a judicial
officer is excluded, for it is not inconceivable that some acts may be
"administrative" in character and thus not in the exercise of the judicial
power of the people. In my view, therefore, the test must always be whether
the impugned act was "executive or administrative", not whether the
institution or the person concerned can be characterised as "executive" (or
"governmental", which is often used as if it were equivalent). Of course,
reference to the "executive" character of such institution or person, and the
degree of "executive" control, may be justifiable, and necessary, in
borderline cases, but ultimately the decision must depend on whether the act
is "executive or administrative" in character, and not upon the status of the
institution or the official.

In the case before us, Article 154C provides for the exercise of the executive
power, and there is no dispute that the impugned acts were done in pursuance
thereof. Those acts were therefore "executive or administrative action",
regardless of the character or status of the institutions and the officials
involved.

372

**Liability of the State**

Since the Petitioner has failed to establish her allegations, it is strictly
unnecessary to deal with this question. However, it was one of the matters
referred to this Bench. Chapter III of the Constitution enumerates fundamental
rights, and while Articles 17 and 126 confer jurisdiction on this Court in
respect of infringements by "executive or administrative action", there is no
provision as to who is liable therefor. While I agree with my brother
Kulatunga that in appropriate cases relief may be granted both against the
offender and the State, it is nevertheless unnecessary to decide whether the
State is "primarily" liable. It is sufficient to state that this Court has the
power and the discretion under Article 126(4) to make appropriate orders for
relief, taking into consideration the degree of culpability or responsibility
of the several respondents.

_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/13.html_  

