##  Pathiraja v. Mannapperuma, Secretary Ministry of Public Administration,
Management and Reforms and Others - SLR - 141, Vol 1 of 2005 [2004] LKSC 13;
(2005) 1 Sri LR 141 (5 October 2004)

**141**

**PATHIRAJA  
v.  
MANNAPPERUMA, SECRETARY MINISTRY OF PUBLIC  
ADMINISTRATION, MANAGEMENT AND  
REFORMS AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
YAPA. J.  
UDALAGAMA. J. AND  
DISSANAYAKE .J  
SC (FR) NO. 665/2003  
31ST AUGUST, 2004  
  
Fundamental Rights - Training abroad without approval of the relevant
Ministry-Chapter XII of the Establishments Code - Denial of promotion for
absence from work without approval - Articles 12 (1) of the Constitution.  
  
_The petitioner who was a member of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service
(Combined Service) was a Senior Assistant Secretary of the Ministry of
Constitutional Affairs at the relevant time. He applied through the Secretary
of

**142**

his Ministry (3rd respondent) for a post graduate degree course in Scotland
and was selected.  
  
The petitioner had to pay an initial deposit for the course which the External
Resources Department refused to fund. Hence he left the country and qualified
for the degree utilizing his own funds.  
  
On the petitioner's return to the country he was deprived of a promotion due
to the fact that he had been absent from work without leave approved by the
Secretary, Ministry of Public Administration (1st respondent). Such leave was
required under section 14.3.1. of Chapter XII or section 1:3 of chapter XV of
the Establishments Code, whether the leave sought was for no pay or full pay
study leave abroad.  
  
**Held:  
**  
1\. The petitioner went abroad without obtaining leave as required by the
Establishments Code.  
  
2\. In the circumstances denial of a promotion to the Petitioner was not a
violation of Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.  
  
3\. The fact that the air ticket for one way only was sponsored by a Swiss
contact was approved by the External Resources Department was not sufficient
compliance with the requirements of Chapters XII or XV of the Establishments
Code.  
  
**Case referred to :  
**  
1\. The Public Service United Nurses Union v Montague Jayawickrema, Minister
of Public Administration and Others (1988) (1) SRI LR 229  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Prinath Fernando_ for petitioner.  
  
_Rajive Goonetilake,_ State Counsel for 1s' respondent and Attorney - General

**143**

October 5, 2004  
  
**UDALAGAMA, J.  
**  
The petitioner had been granted leave to proceed in respect of an alleged
infringement of fundamental rights to equality guaranteed under Article 12 (1)
of the Constitution.  
  
The petitioner who joined the Sri Lanka Administrative Service in 1990 was at
the time he made this application, a Senior Assistant Secretary of the
Ministry of Constitutional Affairs.  
  
The petitioner having come to know of the availability of a Post Graduate
Degree course in the University of Glasgow, Scotland, leading to an
International Masters Degree in Business Administration applied through the
3rd respondent, the Secretary, Ministry of Constitutional Affairs and appears
to have been selected, vide the contents of document marked P6 filed of
record. Paragraph 2 of the aforesaid P6 requests the petitioner to remit Post
Graduate fees as specified therein and the petitioner further informed that
latter's position is not guaranteed until payment is so made.  
  
Although the petitioner had requested the External Resources Department to
provide funds to enable him to follow the aforesaid course the request was
turned down by P7 which refusal had been acknowledged acknowledged by the
petitioner as apparent from the contents of paragraph 12 of the petition.  
  
It is also apparent that the petitioner did proceed to follow the Post
Graduate course referred to above utilizing his own funds.  
  
Having completed the said course which included a subsequent extention the
petitioner admittedly reported back to his Ministry.  
  
When the petitioner was due for promotion to the Sri Lanka Administrative
Service Class II, Grade I, and duly made an application to be considered for
the said post, the petitioner's aforesaid application was refused on the basis
of his absence from work without duly approved leave. This refusal in turn,
admittedly caused a loss of seniority thereby depriving the petitioner of his
promotion.

**144**

That the petitioner was requested to obtain proper approval from the Secretary
of the Ministry of Public Administration to follow the aforesaid course with
full study leave as provided for by section 14:3:1 of Chapter XII of the
Establishment Code which reads as follows: "the prior permission of the
Secretary to the Ministry of Public Administration should be obtained in the
case of an officer in the Combined Services" is manifest.  
  
That the aforesaid provision applies to the petitioner is also beyond question
as Chapter 1 of the Establishment Code defines the Sri Lanka ,Administrative
service to be encompassed in the combined services.  
  
" That, the petitioner would in any event be entitled to, under the present
circumstances, to full pay study leave only in accordance with the provisions
of section 1:5:1: or 1: 5:2 in Chapter XV of the Establishment Code and the
grant of leave, determined by sections 14,15 and 16 of Chapter XII of the
Code, is also unambiguous. The fact that the petitioner failed to obtain full
pay leave as provided for under the aforesaid provisions of the Code is
uncontroverted.  
  
As stated above section 14:3:3 mandates that the petitioner should have
obtained the prior permission of the Secretary to the Ministry of Public
Administration which admittedly the petitioner had failed to do for whatever
reasons. At most the petitioner had travelled overseas with the approval of
the Secretary of his own Ministry and without the prior permission of the
Secretary to the Ministry of Public Administration which responsibility cast
on the petitioner was also admittedly shirked by the petitioner as evident
from the contents of paragraph 4 of P19, a letter made under the hand of the
petitioner dated 14.08.2003 and filed of record.  
  
The learned Counsel for the petitioner's submission that the petitioner's air
ticket to travel abroad, which incidentally appears, to be a ticket for one
way only was sponsored by a Swiss contact and approved by the External
Resources Department which position, would satisfy section 14:1:4: of Chapter
XII has to be rejected as the mere success of obtaining funding for an air
ticket and approval thereto would not amount to a scholarship offered by a
foreign Agency or a foreign Government as envisaged by terms of section 1:5:1
or 1:5:2: of chapter XV of the Establishment Code.

**145**

It must also be emphasized that as held in Public Services United  Nurses
Union vs. Ministry of Public Administration, (1) provisions of the
Establishment Code have statutory force.  
  
Accordingly, the petitioner having failed to obtain a foreign funded
scholarship or a Government sponsored course of study for training abroad and
having in this instance significantly failed as provided by section 14:1 of
Chapter XII of the Establishment Code to obtain the prior permission of the
Secretary to the Ministry of Public Administration in accordance with the
provision of section 14:3 and specifically section 14: 3:1 to leave the Island
for study or training abroad and also considering importantly the adverse
administrative precedents that would be created in the event of the granting
of relief as prayed for by the petitioner, I would hold that the petitioner
has failed in establishing the violation of his fundamental rights guaranteed
under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.  
  
This application is accordingly dismissed but in all the circumstances without
costs.  
  
**YAPA, J.** \- I agree  
  
**DISSANAYAKA, J.** \- I agree  
  
_**Application dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/13.html_  

