##  Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam and Others - SLR - 100, Vol 1 of 1985 [1984]
LKSC 13; (1985) 1 Sri LR 100 (20 July 1984)

**

100

EDIRISURIYA  
v.  
NAVARATNAM AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., WANASUNDERA, J. AND RANASINGHE, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION No. 109/84.  
NOVEMBER 28, 29 AND 30, 1984.

_

    Fundamental Rights-Application under Article 126 (2) of the Constitution for violation of fundamental rights of freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention (Article 13 (1) and (2) ) and equality (Article 12 (1) and (2) )-Time limit for such application-Detention under Regulations 18 (1) and 19 (2) of the Emergency Regulations-Sections 36, 37 and 38 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

_

On 20th July 1984 the 2nd respondent (Officer-in-charge of the Tissamaharama
Police Station) went to the residence of the petitioner along with some police
officers, searched his house sometime between 2-.15 p.m. and 4.00 p.m. and
took him to the old Police Station, Galle which they reached about 8.00 p.m.,
saying he was wanted by the 1st respondent (Deputy Inspector-General of
Police, Southern Range) and also removed some books and journals for which a
receipt D was issued. On the night of 21.7.1984 a Detention Order (A/3R 1)
issued by the 1st respondent purporting to act under Regulation 19 (2) of the
Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations No. 7 of 1984 said
to be effective from the previous day was served on him. The petitioner was
kept under detention at the old Police Station in the charge of the 3rd
respondent (Officer-in-charge of the Galle Police Station) and questioned up
to about 26.7.84 about the burning of the Tissamaharama Magistrate's Court
which had taken place on 29.6.84. The petitioner alleged that he had not at
any time been informed of the reasons for his arrest and the arrest was not in
fact and in law according to procedure established by law and the questioning
of him about the fire in the Magistrate's Court of Tissamaharama was mala fide
and because he belonged to a political party opposed to the party now in
power.

The 2nd respondent averred that he explained the reason for the arrest to the
petitioner that it was connection with investigations into the offence of
setting the Magistrate's Court on fire and the damage so caused. After the
arrest the petitioner was detained in pursuance of the Detention Order A/3R 1.

**101**

He also raised the objection that the petition dated 20.9.1984 was time-barred
as it vas more than one month after the arrest on 20.7.1984 and that the
validity of the Detention Order was not justiciable. The petitioner has
countered the allegation that the ' application was time-barred by the plea
that he could not have filed the application between 20.7.84 and 30.8.84 when
he was released as the members of his family, his relations and lawyers who
had been permitted to see him (and that too after 25.7.84) were strictly
forbidden to discuss the case, and that in any event the Court could grant
relief under Article 126 (4) of the Constitution.

**

Held

**

  1. The time limit of one month set out in Article 126 (2) of the Constitution is mandatory. Yet, in a fit case the Court would entertain an application made outside the limit of one month provided an adequate excuse for the delay could be adduced. If the petitioner had been held incommunicado, the principle lex non cogit ad impossibilia would be applicable. But he re there were documents proving that the petitioner had opportunities to discuss his case with his wife and lawyer.

Even if the petitioner was not told on 20.7.1984 or at any time thereafter
that he was arrested, the objection that the petitioner has failed to make his
application within one month of the arrest is unsustainable and cannot stand
in the face of the facts which make it clear that the petitioner was in fact
arrested, whether that arrest was according to law or not being another
matter.

The petitioner's detention from 20.7.84 (8.00 p.m.) till his release on
30.8.1984 was under Regulation 19 (2). A person can be taken in for detention
under Regulation 18 (1) either for purposes of search or by way of arrest
without warrant and such a person can be detained up to a period of ninety
days in a place authorised by the Inspector-General of Police or by a Deputy
Inspector-General of Police. When the exercise of powers such as these is
challenged it is open to the Court to go into the matter and see whether or
not the impugned power has been exercised as required by law in circumstances
under which alone such power could have been exercised. Once the existence of
facts and circumstances upon which a reasonable man could have so acted is
established to the satisfaction of the Court, the 'judicial intrusion' should
then come to a halt. It is only if no reasonable man could have, in the
circumstances, done what was done, that the Court can justifiably intervene.
On the material available at the time incriminating the petitioner (though
subsequently recanted) the detention order ' can be supported.

  2. Sections 36; 37 and 38 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act (providing for the production of an arrested person before a Magistrate) are not applicable in relation to a person arrested under Regulation 18.

The arrest and detention were legal and the application fails.

**

Cases referred to :

**_

(1). Vadivel Mahenthiran v. A.G. et al - S.C. Application No. 68 of 1980, S.
C. Minutes of 5.8,1980.

(2). B. M. Jayawardena v. A.G. et al -. S.C. Application No. 4 of 1981; S.C.
Minutes of 6.3.1981.

Sri Lanka Law Reports [ 1985] 1 Sri L. R.

_

**102**

_

{3). Gunawardena et al v. E. L. Senanayake et al - S. C. Minutes of 8.4.1981.

(4). Hewakurruppu v. G. A. de Silva. Tea Commissioner et al - S.C. Application
No. 118/84-S. C. Minutes of 10. 11. 1984.

(5). Janatha Finance and Investments Ltd. v. D. J. F Liyanage - S.C.
Application No. 127 of 82: S.C. Minutes of 14. 2.82.

(6). Yasapala v. Ranil Wickremasinghe et al - S.C. Application No. 103 of 1980
S. C. Minutes of 8.12.80.

(7). Kumaranatunga v. Samarasinghe and Others: S.C. Application No. 121 of
1982 - S. C. Minutes of 3.2.1983.

(8). Venkata Ramiah v. State of Andhra Pradesh AIR 1964 Andh. Pr. 416, 419.

(9). Pieris v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue (1963) 65 NLR 457.

(10). Deviprasad Khandelvel and Sons Ltd. v. Union of India AIR 1969 Bom. 163,
173

_**

APPLICATION** under Article 126 of the Constitution.

_

Dr. Colvin R. de Silva with B. Weerakoon, Miss M. Kanapathipillai, K.
Balapatabendi, A. 0. R. Fernando and Miss Saumya de Silva for petitioner.

Sunil de Silva, Additional Solicitor-General with Upawansa Yapa, Deputy
Solicitor-General and Mrs. S. Tillekawardena for 2nd, 3rd and 4th respondents.

_

_Cur. adv. vult._

January 15, 7985.

**

RANASINGHE, J.

**

The petitioner, who is an attorney-at-law and had also been a Member of
Parliament, has come before this Court, under the provisions of Article 126
(2) of the Constitution, alleging that the 1 st to 3rd respondents, who are
all members of the Sri Lanka Police Force, have "by their actions......
violated the petitioner's fundamental rights as contained in Article 13 (1),
(2) (viz. freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention), and also in Article 12
(1) and (2) (viz. right to equality) of the. Constitution of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka".

The, position taken up by the petitioner is briefly :that, on the 20th July,
1984, the 2nd respondent, who is the Officer-in-charge of the Tissamaharama
Police Station, came along with several other police officers to his residence
Hambantota, searched his residence and

**103**

'thereafter took him away from his house stating that he was want by the
Deputy Inspector-General of Police, Southern Range", who is the 1st respondent
; that the 2nd respondent also removed from the petitioner's home "some
political books and some journals that had come by post around that time", and
in respect of which the receipt, marked "D", was issued by the 2nd respondent
; that the petitioner was driven away in a police vehicle, and was taken to
the old Police Station at Galle at about 8p. m. ; that, on the night of the
following day, 21.7.84, a Detention Order, issued by the 1st respondent,
purporting to act under Regulation 19 (2) of the Emergency (Miscellaneous
Provisions. and Powers) Regulation No. 7 of 1984, and said to be effective
from the previous day, was served on him ; that the petitioner continued to be
detained at the said old Police Station in the charge of the 3rd respondent,
who was the officer-in-charge of the Galle Police Station ; that "A" is a copy
of the said Detention Order ; that the petitioner was not permitted to see
either the members of his family or his lawyers for several days ; that from
about 26.7.84 the petitioner's wife was allowed to see him ; that thereafter,
from time to time, the petitioner's wife and relations and his lawyers were
allowed to see him ; that on such occasions the petitioner and his visitors
were expressly directed "not to discuss about the case" ; that, during the
time he was so detained, the petitioner was questioned. up to about 26.7.84,
about the burning of the Tissamaharama Magistrate's Court, (which had taken
place on 29.6.84) ; that, on or about 28.8.84, the Court of Appeal issued
notice of an application for Habeas Corpus made by the petitioner's wife
seeking the release of the petitioner :that amongst the grounds set out in the
said application is a ground set out in this petition, viz. that the said
Detention Order could not have been legally issued under the provisions of the
said Regulation 19 (2) for the reason that the conditions precedent to such
detention had not obtained, and that therefore the petitioner's detention on
the orders of the 1st respondent was unlawful ; that at no time was the
petitioner informed by the respondents that he was under arrest ; that, even
if the respondents were to claim now that the petitioner had been so arrested,
such arrest was not, in fact or in law, according to procedure established by
law ; that the petitioner was not also informed of any reason for such arrest
; that therefore the respondents have violated the petitioner's fundamental
right enshrined in Article 13 (1) of the Constitution ; that the detention and
the questioning of the petitioner

**104**

in regard to the fire in the Magistrate's Court of Tissamaharama was mala fide
; that the petitioner was never "a communalist or a racialist"; that the
Police have acted mala fide for reasons other than those now given merely
because he was a former Member of -Parliament and belongs to a political party
opposed to the party now in power , that the said unlawful acts of the
respondents have caused him damage and financial loss in a sum of Rs. 20,000
which said sum the petitioner claims from the respondents jointly and
severally.

When this matter was taken up for inquiry it transpired that notice has not
been served upon the 1st respondent who has been reported to be out of the
Island ; and the inquiry was proceeded with as against the other respondents.

The position put forward by the 2nd, 3rd and 4th respondents (hereinafter
referred to as "the respondents") is briefly : that the 2nd respondent
arrested the petitioner on 20.7.84, as he lawfully might, for the purpose of
conducting further investigations into the offence of damaging the said
Magistrate's Court of Tissamaharama by fire as he, the 2nd respondent, had
formed a suspicion, in consequence of certain statements which had been
recorded in the course of the investigation into the said offence, that the
petitioner himself was guilty of an offence in regard to the said incident ;
that, at the time the said arrest was effected, the 2nd respondent explained
to the petitioner the reason for such arrest, that "it was in connection with
the investigations into the offence committed with the damage to the
Tissamaharama Magistrate's Court by setting it on fire"; that the 2nd
respondent complied with the procedures established by law for the purpose of
making such arrest ; that, at the time of such arrest, the Ad respondent also
recovered from the possession of the petitioner a 12 bore cartridge for the
possession of which the petitioner had no licence, which said act also
constituted an offence under the said Emergency Regulations 3 of 1983 ; that
the petitioner was, after such arrest, detained at the old Police Station in
Galle in pursuance of a Detention Order (a copy of which was produced marked
3131) lawfully issued by the 1 st respondent under the provisions of
Regulation 19 (2) of the said Emergency Regulations 3 of 1983 ; that the said
Detention Order was served on the petitioner ; that during the period the
petitioner was so detained, members of the petitioners family and several
attorneys-at-law visited the petitioner.

**105**

Learned Additional Solicitor-General, who appeared for the respondents, also
put forward several "counter submissions" objecting to the petitioner's
application being inquired into by this Court ; that the said application has
not been made within the time limit of one month set out in Article 126 (2) of
the Constitution, for the reason that the said petition, which alleges a
violation of a fundamental right (declared in Article 13 (1), viz. freedom
from arbitrary arrest) on 20.7.84, has been lodged in this Court only on the
20th September 1984 ; that, in terms of Section 8 of the Public Security
Ordinance (Chapter 40), the said Detention Order, which has been made under
the provisions of the Emergency Regulations, is not subject to review by this
Court and is therefore, not justiciable ; that the provisions of Article 15
(7) read with those of Article 155 (2) of the Constitution permit the
promulgation. of procedures by way "of Emergency Regulations, made under the
provisions of the Public Security Ordinance (Chapter 40), which will have the
effect of overriding, amending or suspending the operation of not only .the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, but also of
the provisions of Article 13 (1) and (2) of the Constitution.

The submissions made on behalf of the petitioner to counter the objection,
that the petitioner's complaint of the infringement of the fundamental right
under Article 13 (1) of the Constitution is out of time are : that the
petitioner was not informed, at the time he was taken away from his home on
the 20th July by the 2nd respondent, that he was being arrested : nor was he
so informed at any later point of time : that, that being so, the limitation
in regard to time would not run against the petitioner : that in any event,
the petitioner could not have, during the period 20.7.84 to 30.8.84 taken any
steps to have come before this Court : that during the said period even though
the petitioner was permitted to see his wife, his relations and his lawyers,
yet, he could not have given any instructions to them to take any steps to
obtain any relief for him as he, the petitioner, was expressly forbidden to
have any discussion with them "about the case" : that in any event this Court
could grant the petitioner relief in terms of sub-article (4) of Article 126
of the Constitution.

This Court has consistently proceeded on the basis that the time limit of one
month set out in Article 126 (2) of the Constitution, is mandatory : Vadivel
Mahenthiran v. A. G. et al (1) , B. M. Jayawardena v. A. G. et al (2) ;
Gunawardena et al v. E. L. Senanayake

**106**

et al (3) ; Hewakuruppu v. G. A. de Silva. Tea Commissioner et al (4) ; In
Vadivel Mahenthiran's case (supra) and in Hewakuruppu's case (supra), this
Court has expressed the view that this Court has a discretion in a fit case,
to entertain an application made outside that said time limit of one month but
that, in such cases, the petitioner must provide an adequate excuse for the
delay in presenting the petition.

Article 126 (1) of the Constitution has conferred upon this Court sole and
exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine any question relating to the
infringement or imminent infringement by executive or administrative action of
any fundamental right declared and recognized by Chapter 3 of the
Constitution. The right to invoke such jurisdiction by an aggrieved person is
set out in Article 17, which has been given the status of a fundamental right
itself. Article 4 (d) of the Constitution has ordained that the fundamental
rights which are declared and recognized by the Constitution should be
respected, secured and advanced by all the organs of government and should not
be abridged, restricted or denied save in the manner and to the extent
provided by the Constitution itself. A solemn and sacred duty has been imposed
by the Constitution upon this Court, as the highest Court of the Republic, to
safeguard the fundamental rights which have been assured by the Constitution
to the citizens of the Republic as part of their intangible heritage. It,
therefore, behaves this Court to see that the full and free exercise of such
rights is not impeded by any flimsy and unrealistic considerations.

The learned Additional Solicitor-General conceded that, if the petitioner had,
after he was taken into custody by the Police, been held incommunicado, then
the period he was so held without having the opportunity of communicating with
his relations and or lawyers and of taking any meaningful steps to invoke the
jurisdiction of this Court should not and would not be counted in computing
the period of one month referred to in sub-article (2) of Article 126 of the
Constitution and that the maxim lex non cogit ad impossibilia would, in such a
situation, apply. He, however, contended that. the petitioner in this case
cannot be said to have been held under such restraint, and that there is no
justification for not counting the said. period of one month from the 20th
July 1984 itself. -.in respect of the complaint of infringement of the
provisions of Article 13 (1 ).

**107**

Notes made by the Police officer who was on duty during the visits paid from
28.7.84, to 29.8.84 to the petitioner by the members of his family and by
several attorneys-at-law whilst the petitioner was under detention, have been
produced marked 2R6 to 2R 18. Whilst 2R7, 2R8, 2R9, 2R10, 2R1 1, 2R12, 2R14,
2R16 and 2817 disclose that no discussions took place "about the case" between
the petitioner and his visitors ; 2R7 arid 2R 10 clearly show that the
petitioner and his visitors had been expressly directed not to speak or talk
"about the case". If that had been .the situation which had prevailed
throughout the period of detention, then the petitioner cannot be faulted and
penalised for not coming before this Court before the expiration of a period
of one month from 20.7.84 - or even from 27.7.84. No meaningful step could
have been taken, or even attempted to be taken in such circumstances. A
consideration of several other documents, out of the group of documents
referred to earlier, however, reveals that, although such stern directions had
been given at times, yet, at other times the petitioner had had no such
constraint imposed upon him and he had not only been able to hand over to his
wife a document, which is of the utmost importance in regard to his detention,
but had also been able to speak freely to a lawyer, who saw him about the
statement he, the petitioner, had made to the Police and also "discuss the
case". 2R8 dated 3.8.84 shows that the Detention Order served on the
petitioner was handed over by the petitioner to his wife. That the petitioner
had spoken, about the statement made by him to the Police, to Sarath
Wijesinghe, an attorney-at-law, without any hindrance, and had also similarly
"discussed the case" with the said attorney-at-law is evidenced by the
document 2R13 dated 19.8.84. The attorney-at-law, through whom the petitioner
has filed this application in this Court and who is also closely connected to
the petitioner by marriage, had also visited the petitioner on at least two
occasions. It is also in evidence that, whilst the petitioner, was still under
detention, an application for a writ of Habeas Corpus, seeking the release of
the petitioner, was filed in the Court of Appeal by the petitioner's wife. It
has also to be noted that an application for relief under the provisions of
Article 126(2) of the Constitution can be made to this court; in terms of the
self same provisions, by an attorney-at-law on behalf of the petitioner. Such
an application is not required to be made by the petitioner himself.

**108**

It has also been contended on behalf of the petitioner, as set out earlier,
that the petitioner not having been told that he has been arrested either on
the 20th July 1984, or at any time thereafter the said objection - of not
coming before this Court before the expiration of a period of one,. month from
the date of arrest - cannot be sustained. It is the position of the petitioner
that he was never arrested, but that he was only told that the 1st respondent
wanted to meet him. He bases his claim upon an arrest only because the
respondents claim to have arrested the petitioner. Whether the claim, founded
upon a breach of a Fundamental Right by an executive or administrative act, is
based upon facts which are alleged by the applicant of his own personal
knowledge, or whether such claim is based upon a set of facts asserted by the
respondents, what gives rise to an application for relief or redress under
Article 126 (2) of the Constitution is the infringement (or the imminent
infringement) in fact of such Fundamental Right. If there is no such
infringement then there is no cause for an application under sec. 126 (2) of
the Constitution. Whatever form such complaint takes - whether it be upon the
applicant's own knowledge or upon the assertions made by the respondent
himself - an infringement is essential. Not only is an infringement essential
; the date of such alleged infringement also becomes essential in view of the
element - of one month - set out in the said sub-article (2) of Article 126 of
the Constitution.

The position of the 2nd-4th respondents is that the petitioner was arrested -
and it is their position that it was a lawful arrest \- on the 20th July 1984
at the petitioner's home in Hambantota. Although the exact time of such arrest
has not been expressly stated, yet, it is clear that the said arrest would
have been effected sometime between 2.15 p.m. and 4 p.m. Having regard to all
the circumstances surrounding : the arrival of the 2nd respondent at the
petitioner's home on the 20th July 1984 shortly after 2 p.m. with several
other police officers ; what the 2nd respondent said and did in that house on
that occasion : the petitioner being taken from his home that evening by the
2nd respondent in the police van : the place and the manner in which the
petitioner was thereafter kept during the night of the 20th July and the days
which followed ; and having regard also to the entry 2R4, to the statement "E"
made by the petitioner to the police on 27.7.84, and to the explanation set
out in sub-section (1) of sec. 23 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15
of 1979, it is clear not only that the petitioner was arrested - whether such
arrest was

**109**

effected according to law or not is another matter -by the police on the 20th
July 1984, and that the Petitioner, who is himself a lawyer, would have
realised, at least by the 27th July 1984, that-he had in fact been arrested,
and was being detained upon the basis of the Detention Order which had been
served on him on 'the 21st July . 1984.

The petitioner has not, apart from stating that his wife was permitted to see
him only from about the 25th July 1984 and his - lawyers only about two weeks
thereafter, and that one lawyer, who saw him with the permission of the
Inspector-General of Police on one occasion, was instructed by the 3rd
respondent not to discuss the case, in his petition referred to his inability
to have presented his petition to this Court within the time limit of one
month set out in the said Article 126 (2). Nor has he pleaded any excuse or
explanation regarding the failure to comply with the said requirement.

On a consideration of the foregoing, I am of opinion that the objection raised
on behalf of the respondents - to the consideration by this Court of the claim
based upon the alleged infringement of the petitioner's Fundamental Right set
out in Article 13 (1) of the Constitution - must be upheld.

Although it is not necessary to consider the other objection put forward on
behalf of the respondents, based upon the provisions of sec. 8 of the Public
Security Ordinance (Chapter 40), and Articles 15 (7) and 155 (2) of the
Constitution, suffice it to say that this Court has on several either
occasions asserted the right of this Court to entertain complaints in regard
to the validity of various Orders made in pursuance of the powers conferred by
Emergency Regulations promulgated under the provisions of the Public Security
Ordinance (Chapter 40), and has clarified the scope, nature and the extent of
the powers of this court to examine and pronounce upon the legality and
validity of such Orders - Janatha Finance and Investments Ltd. v. D. J. F.
Liyanage (5); Yasapala v. Rand Wickremasinghe et. al., (6); Kumaranatunga v.
Samarasinghe and Others (7). Having regard to the principles set out in the
said Judgments, I am of poinion that this objection must fail.

I shall now proceed to consider the petitioner's claim of an infringement of
his Fundamental Right under Article 13 (2), viz. freedom from arbitrary
detention. It is common ground that the

**110**

petitioner was detained at the old Police Station, Galle from 8 p.m. on
20.7.84 - after he had been taken away from his home, around 4 p.m. on
20.7.84, in custody by the 2nd respondent- until he was released on 30.8.84,
in charge of the 3rd Respondent. The respondents rely upon the Order - marked
"A" and also 3R2 - to justify the said detention. The said Order is as follows

**" DETENTION ORDER**

By virtue of powers vested on me in terms of Regulation No. 19 (2) of the
Government Gazette No. 306/8 of 18.7:84.

I, A. Navaratnam, Deputy Inspector-General of Police, Southern Range, do
hereby authorise Officer-in-Charge of Police Station, Galle the detention of
suspect TENNYSON EDIRISOORIYA of Sea Spray, Galewela, Hambantota in his
custody at Old Police Station Galle from 20.7.84 to 17.10.84.

21.7.84.  
Date.

A. Navaratnam,  
Deputy Inspector-General of Police,  
Southern Range."

The principal submission put forward on behalf of the Petitioner against the
validity of the said Detention Order is : that the 1st Respondent, who is said
to have made the said Order, had no power to have made such an Order : that
Regulation 19 (2) of the said Emergency Regulations does not operate to confer
power upon the Inspector-General of Police (or on any Deputy Inspector-General
of Police) to make an Order of Detention such as "A" (or 3R1) for the reason
that the said Regulation is not an empowering provision such as, for example,
the preceding Regulations 16 and 17 are.

Regulation 18 (1) empowers inter alia, any police officer to "search, detain
for purposes of such search or arrest without warrant any person ....... whom
he has reasonable ground for suspecting to be concerned in 'or to be
committing or to have committed an offence under any emergency
regulation......... Regulation 19, whilst it provides in paragraph (1) that
the provisions of Sec. 36, 37, and. 38 of the Code of Criminal procedure Act
No. 15 of 79 shall not apply in relation to persons arrested under regulation
18, provides in paragraph (2) that "any person detained in pursuance of the
provisions of regulation 18 in a place authorized by the Inspector-General of

**111**

Police may be so detained for a period not exceeding ninety days reckoned from
the date of his arrest under that regulation, and shall at the end of that
period be released by the officer-in-charge of that place unless Such person .

A consideration of the provisions of Regulations 18 and 19, referred to above,
shows that the combined effect of these two Regulations is that where a
person, who falls within any one of the three categories of persons referred
to in the latter half of paragraph (1) of Regulation 18, is either "detained
for purposes of search" or "arrested without a warrant" by any of the persons
referred to at the commencement of the said paragraph (1), then that person,
if he is detained in a place authorized by the Inspector-General of Police (or
by a Deputy Inspector-General of Police) could continue to be so detained for
a period of ninety days, and that the said period of ninety days is to be
calculated from the date on which he was arrested under Regulation 18. The
period of ninety days referred to in paragraph (2) of Regulation 19 applies
only to a person who is detained in a place authorized by the Inspector-
General of Police (or by a Deputy Inspector-General of Police). A person who
can be so detained in such an authorized place is a person who has either been
detained for purposes of search or has been arrested without a warrant under
Regulation 18. The pre-requisites to a detention extending up to ninety days
empowered by paragraph (2) of Regulation 19 are : a person who has already
been taken in for detention under paragraph (1) of Regulation 18, either for
purposes of search or by way of arrest without a warrant, and : a place
authorized for such detention by the Inspector-General of Police (or a Deputy
Inspector-General of Police). The power to take a person in, either by way of
detention for purposes of search or by way of arrest without a warrant, is
provided by Regulation 18 (1). The power to keep such a person in. detention
thereafter from that point of time up to ninety days is furnished by
Regulation 19 (2). That the wording of paragraph (2) of Regulation 19 is
sufficient to empower the Inspector-General of Police (or a Deputy Inspector-
General of Police) to authorize a place of detention admits of no doubt :-
Bindra : Interpretation of Statutes (6 edt.) p 49 ; Venkata Ramiah v. State of
Andra Pradesh (8).

.The nature, scope and the extent of the powers of this Court when an Order,
which is said to have been made under the provisions of an emergency
regulation such as the said Emergency Regulation No. 7 of

**112**

1984 and which is regular on the face of it, is produced have been discussed
in the several judgments of this Court referred to earlier \- the Janatha
Finance and Investments Ltd., case (supra); Yasapala's case (supra); and
Kumaranatunga's case (supra).

Paragraph (1) of Regulation 18 also sets out, in the second half of that
paragraph, the circumstances under which the powers of detention and of
arrest, specified therein, can be exercised by those to whom such authority is
granted. The existence of at least one of the grounds specified therein is a
condition precedent to the exercise of the power of detention or of arrest. It
does not confer a power to arrest arbitrarily. It is a power to be exercised
only upon the existence of the circumstances expressly stated therein. When
the exercise of such powers is challenged it is open to the Court to go into
it and see whether or not the impugned power has been exercised as required by
law in circumstances under which alone such power could have been exercised.
Once the existence of facts and circumstances, upon which a reasonable man
could have so acted is established to the satisfaction of the Court, the
"judicial intrusion" should then come to a halt. It is not open to the Court
to substitute its own opinion for that of the person who has been vested with
the power to act. It is only if the facts and circumstances, upon which the
impugned order )s sought to be justified by those who have exercised the
powers in question, are such that it is clear that no reasonable man could
have, in these circumstances, done what has been done, that the court can
justifiably intervene.

The 2nd respondent seeks to justify his action upon the contents of the two
statements, 2R2A, dated 12.7.84, and 2131A, dated 15.7.84, made by the two
suspects K. Gamini and L. Prematilaka respectively, both of which had been
recorded in the course of the police investigations into the burning of the
Tissamaharama Magistrate's Court building on the night of 29.6.84. In their
statements the suspects implicate the petitioner as having engaged them to set
fire to the court building. The 2nd respondent, though he was the officer-in-
charge of the Police Station, Tissamaharama and could have acted on his own;
had, nevertheless, decided to consult his superior. officers.. It was only
thereafter, on the 20th July, 1984, upon receipt of the directions from the
1st respondent set out in 2R 19131, that the 2nd respondent had proceeded to
the petitioner's home and taken him into custody. The 2nd respondent has, in
his

**113**

affidavit filed in this Court, averred in paragraph 6 : "I only admit that I
arrested the petitioner at his residence on 20.7.84 on the orders of the 1st
respondent". This averment, it must be noted, has been made by the 2nd
respondent whilst expressly answering an averment in the petition. l do not
think that this averment must be taken to mean that, in taking the petitioner
into custody, he was merely carrying out an order he had received from a
superior, and that he himself had no knowledge of the facts and circumstances
upon which the petitioner was being taken into custody, and that there was no
occasion for him to exercise his own independent judgment in regard to this
matter. In fact, the succeeding averments in this affidavit, particularly
paragraphs 7, 8 and 9, make it quite clear that he was himself aware- of all
the relevant facts and circumstances and had himself considered the matter and
taken the view that the petitioner had to be taken into custody for further
investigations. 2131,9131 had been in the nature of an approval of what he
himself had thought should be done. Two counter affidavits have been filed by
the petitioner, marked "G" and "H", from K. Gamini, who had earlier made the
statement 2R1 A, and L. Prematilaka, who had earlier made the statement 2R2A,
respectively. In these affidavits these two persons retract their earlier
statements, which incriminate the petitioner and state that their earlier
statements incriminating the petitioner were made at the instigation of the
2nd respondent. These two affidavits, though dated 24.10.84, were filed in
this Court only on 21.1 1.84, the day before this matter was due to be taken
up for inquiry by this Court on 22.1 1.84 ; and no opportunity was thus given
to the 2nd respondent to file a counter affidavit in regard to the said
allegations. In those circumstances it is not possible, upon the material
before this Court, to pronounce upon the truth or falsity of the said
allegations. This matter has, therefore, to be considered upon the material
placed before this Court as the material available to, and upon which the 1st
and 2nd respondents acted on the 20th and 21st July 1984.

It was contended that the fact that the 1st respondent directed the release of
the petitioner a few hours after the Court of Appeal directed the issue of
notice in the Habeas Corpus application amounts to an admission that such
detention could not be supported. As set out earlier, the 1st respondent had
not been served with notice and was not, therefore, present at the inquiry
before this Court. It was contended, on behalf of the 2nd-4th respondents,
that no adverse inference should be drawn against the respondents ; for the
reason

**114**

why the 1st respondent acted in the way he did would only be a matter for
conjecture. This submission made on behalf of the respondents should, in my
opinion, be accepted.

The Order 3R 1 (or A) has, admittedly, been made on 21.7.84. Although it is
sought to be made applicable from 20.7.84, 3R1 (or A) cannot, in law, have any
retrospective effect.. It will, therefore, be operative only from the earliest
moment of that day, 21st July 1984.

Regulation 19 (1) makes the provisions of sees. 36, 37 and 38 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 not applicable in relation to persons
arrested under Regulation 18. Thus the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act requiring : the person arrested to be sent before a Magistrate
without unnecessary delay : the person arrested not to be detained in any
event for a longer period than twenty-four hours : arrests without warrant to
be reported to the Magistrate, will not apply in regard to those arrested
under the said Regulation 18. Even if the arrest of the petitioner attracted
to it the provisions of sees. 36 and 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act
No. 15 of 1979, yet, the detention of the petitioner from about 2.15 p.m. on
20.7.84 to midnight of the 20th-21st July would not be illegal.

In this connection it is also relevant to bear in ,mind the principle that as
long as an authority has the power to do a thing, it does not matter if he
purports to do it by reference to a wrong provision of law, and the order can
always be justified by reference to the correct provision of law empowering
the authority making the order to make such order-Bindra (6 edt.)
Interpretation of Statutes p. 153 ; Peiris v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue
(9) Deviprasad Khandelvel and Sons Ltd. v. Union of India (10) ;
Kumaranatunga's Case (supra).

In this view of the matter, I am of opinion that the detention of the
petitioner, from the time he was taken into custody on 20.7.84 until he was
released on 30.8.84, did not constitute an infringement of the petitioner's
Fundamental Rights declared and recognised in Article 13(2) of the
Constitution.

The petitioner has, in his petition, complained of infringements of his
Fundamental Rights embodied in Article. 12(i) and (2) of the Constitution. No
submissions were, however, made to this Court in regard to them at the hearing
of this application. Having regard to the

**115**

principles that have been laid down by. this Court in applications alleging
infringements of the Fundamental Rights embodied in Article 12(1) and (2) of
the Constitution, it appears to me that the material set but in the petition
is insufficient to establish the claim put forward under the said Article.

For these reasons. I am of opinion that the petitioner's claim must fail. The
application is accordingly dismissed, but without costs.

**

SHARVANANDA, C. J**. - I agree.

**

WANASUNDERA, J.

**

I have read the judgment of Ranasinghe J. and I am in agreement with the order
proposed by him. Since I have arrived at this same conclusion for reasons
somewhat different from him on some matters and my reasoning may be of some
interest in construing the legal provisions considered by us, I think it would
be useful if I were briefly to set them down here.

It is not necessary to recapitulate the facts which are detailed by Ranasinghe
J. in his judgment. First, I shall turn to the two preliminary objections
raised by the learned Deputy Solicitor-General Ranasinghe, J. has upheld the
first' of these objections, namely, that the petition is out of time as it has
not been filed within one month of the alleged violation of the fundamental
right as required by Article 126 (2) of the position to avail himself of his
constitutional remedies within the time limit could be accepted.

The validity of the first preliminary objection depends on the questions -
first, whether or not the petitioner can be said to have been arrested and the
date of such arrest and, second, whether or not the excuse of the petitioner
that he was under restraint and not in a position to avail himself of his
constitutional remedies within the time limit could be accepted.

In regard to the first question, I agree with Ranasinghe J. that the
petitioner would or should have been aware that he was under arrest at least
by 27th July 1984. I am inclined to think that in making the so called arrest
on 20th July at the petitioner's residence at Hambantota, spoken to by the
police, while the police intended to arrest the petitioner, and in their own
minds thought that they were making an arrest, they had probably out of tact
or regard for the standing and

**116**

status of the petitioner,. conducted themselves in such a manner as to make it
equivocal and ambiguous to the petitioner and the by-standers whether what was
taking place was an arrest or the petitioner was being taken merely for
questioning.: Viewed in this light, I can see no real conflict between the
affidavits relied on by the petitioner and the respondents. In view of this
finding, his petition is out of time and cannot be entertained by us unless he
can provide some legal justification for the delay.

My brother Ranasinghe, J. has taken the view that, while the delay could be
excused up to a point of time during his detention, the petitioner was
thereafter in a position to avail himself of his legal rights and therefore
his application would still fall outside the prescribed time limit. It is
conceded by counsel that if the petitioner during his period of detention was
not afforded an opportunity of communicating with his relations and lawyers or
was so placed that he could not or was unable to take any meaningful steps to
invoke the jurisdiction of this Court, then such period should be left out of
the reckoning in computing the time limit under Article 126 (2). It is also
conceded that while under detention orders the petitioner was expressly
enjoined not to speak or discuss "about the case" with any of his visitors.
"The case" referred to is the investigation into the setting fire to the
Magistrate's Court, Hambantota, which the police were investigating and in
respect of which the petitioner states he was unlawfully detained.

My brother Ranasinghe; J. refers to a few instances when; according to him,
this injunction not to discuss "the case" had not been complied with. For
example, the petitioner had been able to hand over the Detention Order served
on him to his wife. It would appear that on one occasion he had also managed
to discuss the statement he made to the police with the attorney-at-law Sarath
Wijesinghe. Ranasinghe, J. also states that Mr. Fernando his present attorney
and a close relation had visited him on about two occasions. Finally, during
his period of detention, his wife had filed an application for Habeas Corpus,
which had directly or indirectly led to his release, apparently the suggestion
being that this may have been done on his instructions. On this material,
Ranasinghe J. is of the view that the petitioner did in fact have the
opportunity of availing himself of his legal remedies within the time limit.

As against this, it is conceded that after his arrest the petitioner was held
incommunicado and it was only on the 25th July that his wife was allowed to
see him. After the lapse of about two weeks his lawyers

**117**

were allowed to see him. . But all this time he was under a strict injunction
not to discuss his case. Even the lawyer who obtained the Inspector-General's
permission to visit him was expressly instructed by the 3rd respondent not to
"discuss the case". The injunction it appears operated both ways, i.e.,
imposed both on the petitioner and his visitor. The discussions, if any,
referred to by my brother would have been in violation of these express
instructions and must necessarily have been of a furtive, hurried and
incomplete nature. It is significant that in documents 2R7, 2R8, 2R9. 2R10,
2R11, 2R12, 2R14, 2R15, 2R16, 2R17 and 2R18 - the record of such visits -
specific note has been made of the fact that nothing relating to the case was
discussed at such meetings. This would give some Idea of the strictness and
force of the injunction and how meticulously it was enforced. In fact, even a
letter addressed to the Inspector-General of Police, handed by the petitioner
to the detaining authorities questioning his detention, was returned to him.
My brother himself has thought that they were "stern instructions".'

the only document suggesting anything to the contrary is 213 13. This is a
record of the visit on 19th August 1984 by Mr. Sarath Wijesinghe. On this
occasion, apart from Mr. Sarath Wijesinghe, the petitioner's wife and two
daughters, his brother and brother's son were all present. The entry shows
that those persons arrived at 10.45 a.m. The note states that the petitioner
discussed his statement to the police with Mr. Wijesinghe and Mr. Wijesinghe
left at 11.25 a.m. Thereafter the entry goes onto say that they discussed the
case and the others left at 12.10 p.m. It is therefore far from clear from
this subsequent sentence who the "they" meant, i.e., as to whether it was with
Mr. Wijesinghe or with the others that the petitioner discussed the case apart
from the discussion of his statement to the police mentioned earlier. In any
event, could it be said on this flimsy material that the petitioner had been
afforded that amount of facilities, time and freedom that is reasonably
expected by the law in the case of a person so placed, so as to enable him to
discuss his case and instruct counsel ? I am unable to say that even the
minimum standards expected in such a situation have been met in this case. I
would therefore overrule both the preliminary objections.

I now turn to the merits of the case. I am in agreement with Ranasinghe, J.
that regulation 18 empowered the police to arrest the petitioner without
warrant and that at the time of the arrest there was sufficient material to
justify such arrest. A person so arrested can be

**118**

detained for a period of 90 days. The power for such detention is contained in
regulation 19 itself and takes effect automatically by operation of law. In
addition, regulation 19 empowers the I.G.P. to nominate the place of
detention.

While regulation 19 (1) makes the provisions of sections 36, 37 and 38 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure Act inapplicable in relation to a person arrested
under regulation 4, I do not think that as the regulation stands, it dispenses
with the requirement for the arrested person to be produced before a
Magistrate. While the effect of regulations 18 and 19 is to obviate the need
for a magisterial order in respect of the period of detention or as regards
the place of detention, yet the requirement for production of an arrested
person before a Magistrate remains untouched. Such a requirement is always
considered a salutary provision to ensure the safety and protection of an
arrested person. It is more than a mere formality or an empty ritual, but is
generally recognised by all communities committed to the Rule of Law as an
essential component of human rights and fundamental freedoms. In fact, if the
petitioner had been produced before a Magistrate upon his arrest, some of the
matters now in issue before us may not have arisen for consideration.
Accordingly, in my view, the production of the detainee is still a requirement
of the law even though upon such production the police can do no more than
invite the Magistrate's attention to the provisions of regulations 18 and 19.
In the face of these provisions, I presume the Magistrate cannot make any
order except to make a note of this and thereupon for all practical purposes
his concern in the matter will cease.

I have arrived at the above conclusions without disputing Mr. Sunil de Silva's
submission that Article 15 (7) of the Constitution enables restrictions to be
imposed by Emergency Regulations on the fundamental rights contained in
Article 13 (2). But the relevant provisions must be subjected to a close
scrutiny to indicate my reasoning.

Let me begin With Article 13 (2), which is worded as follows :

"Every person held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of personal
liberty shall be brought before the judge of the nearest competent court
according to procedure. established by law,, and shall not be further held in
custody, detained or deprived of personal , liberty except upon and in terms
of the order of such judge made in accordance with procedure established by
law."

**119**

It would be observed that this constitutional requirement in so far as it is
relevant to the matter now being discussed contains two components, namely -

1\. that a detained person shall be brought before the judge of the nearest
competent court, and

2\. that this should be done according to procedure established by law.

I do not think that it can be seriously suggested that the requirement for an
accused person to be produced before a Magistrate is provided for in the
ordinary law, namely the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, referred to below and
not in the Constitution. For, if so, why did the draftsman of the Constitution
labour to include a provision such as Article 13 (2) in the Constitution ?

The Code of Criminal Procedure Act 15 of 1979 contains the following
provisions, establishing the procedures contemplated in (2) above. These
sections are as follows :

"36\. A peace officer making an arrest without warrant shall without
unnecessary delay and subject to the provisions herein contained as to bail,
take or send the person arrested before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in
the case.

"37\. Any peace officer shall not detain in custody or otherwise confine a
person arrested without a warrant for a longer period than under all the
circumstances of the case is reasonable, and such period shall not exceed
twenty-four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the
place of arrest to the Magistrate.

"38\. Officers in charge of police stations shall report to the Magistrates"
Courts of their respective districts the cases of all persons arrested without
warrant by any police officer attached to their stations or brought before
them and whether such persons have been admitted to bail or otherwise."

Now, in whatever way these provisions may be worded, the reference therein to
the need for the production of a suspect before a Magistrate is merely a
repetition and a recital of the constitutional requirement and is set down by
way of preface. That requirement is one not provided by the Code but by the
Constitution and what the sections of the Code really provide for is the
procedure for bringing such person before a Magistrate and for the period of
detention.

**120**

Accepting learned Deputy Solicitor - General's submission that the fundamental
right can be restricted the question is whether that has been done or been
done effectively in the present case. He has pointed to regulation 19 (1)
which states :

"The Provisions of sections 36, 37 and 38 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
Act. No. 1979 shall not apply in relation to persons arrested under regulation
18."

The provision certainly has the effect of overriding the provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure Act, but leaves untouched and unaffected the
requirement of Article 13 (2). If it is intended to restrict the requirement
of 13 (2) - which undoubtedly can be done by a suitable wording of the
regulation so as to have a direct impact on Article 13 (2) itself, when
natural security or public order demands it - this must be specifically done.
Article 13 (2) cannot be restricted without a specific reference to it. But
this has not been done. Instead we have restriction imposed on the operation
of sections 3 6to 38 of the Code. In the result the constitutional requirement
that the detained person shall be brought before the judge of the nearest
competent court remains unaffected. Though it will continue to exist in a
truncated form still being a constitutional requirement, it must be complied
with in a reasonable way and within a reasonable time.

What the are the consequences of this omission? No constitutional requirement
relating to fundamental rights can generally be treated as a technicality. It
behoves us therefore to see that provisions such as this, safeguarding human
rights and human freedom are exactly complied with. But in the present case,
the arrest and the detention (both as regards the period and place of
detention) have been otherwise provided for by the law and are valid. They are
not made to depend on magisterial order. The conclusion I have arrived at
turns on a question of construction. It is essentially a legal issue. The
police appear to have been unaware of these implications, but there is nothing
to suggest that the police had intended to ride rough-shod over the law. The
petitioner has also not been prejudiced by this omission in any substantial
way. In these circumstances I feel that an order against the respondents would
not be justified.

In the result I would dismiss this application, but without costs.

_Application_ _dismissed_.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/13.html_  

