##  Tampoe v. Rudra Rajasingham, Inspector-General of Police, and Others - SLR
- 399, Vol 1 of 1984 [1983] LKSC 13; (1984) 1 Sri LR 399 (18 November 1983)

**  399**

**  **

#### TAMPOE

**v.**

**RUDRA RAJASINGHAM, INSPECTOR ‑GENERAL OF POLICE, AND OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT.

COLIN‑THOME' J., RANASINGHE, J. AND RODRIGO, J

S. C. APPLICATION No 5/84

MARCH 2, 1984,



Article 126 of the Constitution ‑Infringement of the fundamental rights of
freedom of association and movement‑Article 14(l)(b) and (h) and Article 15(7)
and (8) of the Constitution‑Meaning of procession‑Regulation 12 of the
Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations, No. 7 of 1983.



The petitioner as General Secretary of the Ceylon Mercantile Union (C.M.U.)
forwarded a letter to the President inviting him and the Prime Minister to the
Galle Face Green at any convenient time between 9.00 a.m. and 1.00 p.m. on
15th December, 1983, to meet worker victims of the July 1983 attacks on
workplaces and explain to them what the Government was prepared to do for
them. Among the invitees were the Inspector‑General of Police and the Heads of
the Armed Forces.



The petitioner was informed that the procession and proposed meeting at Galle
Face Green would not be permitted in the interests of security and because a
breach of the peace was feared.



The petitioner complains that on 15.12.1983 after an initial prevention by the
Police of entry at the head of 22nd Lane, which was later relaxed the members
of the C.M.U. were permitted to assemble at their Headquarters at 22nd Lane.
About 1,135 members assembled at the Headquarters and the petitioner addressed
them. The Police informed the petitioner that no procession would be permitted
nor the proposed meeting at Galle Face Green. The petitioner and the assembled
members of his Union attempted to proceed to Galle Face Green in small batches
of five separated by a few feet from one another but were prevented.



In their affidavits filed by way of defence the I.G.P. and the other Police
Officers denied that the members of the C.M.U. were at any time prevented from
entering their own Headquarters or walking up and down along 22nd Lane, They
admitted prohibiting the meeting at Galle Face Green and stated there was an
attempt to go in procession to the

#  400



Galle Face Green by the members of the C. M. U. carrying banners and shouting
slogans. Photographs were produced in support. A breach of the peace was
feared. The Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations, No. 7
of 1983 (Reg.­12) would have been contravened if there was a public procession
as no permit had been issued and moreover the Galle Face Green itself was
vested in the Army Commander.



# Held‑



(1)        A procession is the action of a body of persons going or marching
along in orderly succession. A public procession means a procession in a
public place which includes any highway. 22nd Lane is a highway and therefore
a public place. The members of the union tried to proceed starting from 22nd
Lane to the Galle Face Green in groups of five separated by a few feet. This
too was the action of a body of persons going or marching along in orderly
succession in a highway and therefore a public procession. This contravened
Regulation 12 of the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers)
Regulations, No. 7 of 1983, as no permit had been obtained.



(2)        The claim that the petitioner and members of the union were
prevented from entering or leaving 22nd Lane is not borne out by the
photographs. The Police scrupulously adhered to the law in preventing a public
procession.



**APPLICATION** under Article 126 of the Constitution for breach of
fundamental rights.



_Nimal Senanayake, S. A.,_ with _Saliya Mathew, L. M. Samarasinghe, A. D.
Telspha, Thilak Balasuriya_ and _A. B. Dissanayake_ for petitioner.



_S. Aziz, D. S. G.,_ with _Upali Jayatileke, S. C.,_ and _T. G. Gooneratne, S.
C.,_ for respondents.

_  _

### Cur. adv. vult



March 13, 1984.



**COLIN ‑THOME', J.**



This is an application by the petitioner under Article 126 of the Constitution
of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka for a declaration that the
petitioner's fundamental rights under Articles 12 (1), (13) and 14(1) ( _b_ )
of the Constitution had been violated and to grant the petitioner such relief
in respect of the aforesaid violation.



The petitioner is the General Secretary of the Ceylon Mercantile Union which
has a membership of over 30,000. On 9.12.83 he forwarded a letter to His
Excellency the President inviting him as well as the Prime Minister and
Cabinet Ministers "To Meet Worker Victims (of the Ceylon Mercantile Union) of
July 1983 attacks on Workplaces" In the letter to the President the petitioner
stated that 1,730 members of the C. M. U. were out of work as a result of
damage or destruction of

#  401



industrial establishments in July 1983. Only 317 of the affected workers had
been provided with work. The rest were without work and had not received any
financial assistance from the Government. The invitees were asked to meet the
members of the C.M.U. on Thursday, 15th December, 1983, at any convenient time
between 9 a.m. and 1 p.m. at Galle Face Green, Colombo, near the Galle Face
Hotel end, to explain to members of the C. M. U. what the Government was
prepared to do for those members of the C. M. U. who were affected by the
damage and destruction caused in July 1983.



Invitations to attend this meeting on Galle Face Green were also extended by
the petitioner, on behalf of the union, to the Leader of the Opposition,
members of the Opposition in Parliament, the National Security Council,
Inspector‑General of Police, heads of the Armed Services, Commissioner‑General
of Essential Services and the Chairman of Repia.



The I.G.P. by his letter dated 14th December, 1983, replying to the
invitation, informed the petitioner that "no meeting nor assembly of persons
on Galle Face Green as sought by you on the 15th December, 1983, will be
permitted."



The petitioner in his petition and affidavit (paragraph 13) has stated that
two police officers called at his residence on 14.12.83 and informed his wife
that the Union would not be allowed to go in procession to Galle Face Green.
His wife, at the insistence of the police officers, made a statement that the
members of the C.M.U. had no intention of going in procession to Galle Face
Green.



According to the affidavit of Tilak Edirisinghe, filed by the petitioner, on
15.12.83 he came to Kollupitiya at 6.30 a.m. to go to the C.M.U. Headquarters
which was located about half way down 22nd Lane, Kollupitiya. He was stopped
by armed police at the entrance to 22nd Lane from the Galle Road and was told
by the Police that the C.M.U. office was closed and that no one will be
allowed to go to the building but later C.M.U. members spoke to the police and
the police allowed him and others to go to the C.M.U. building. At about 10.30
a.m. when the members of the C.M.U. and others wanted to go to Galle Face
Green they were prevented from doing so by Mi. Gaffoor and other police
officers.



The petitioner also averred in his affidavit that he too as well as other
members of the C.M.U. were prevented by the police from entering 22nd Lane
stating that the Union Office was closed, but after he

#  402



informed the police that the office was open that day both he and' other
members were permitted to enter 22nd Lane and to go to their' headquarters.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner stated from the Bar that the C.M.U. office
generally opened at 8.30 a.m. 1,135 members entered the headquarters and the
petitioner addressed them. The petitioner stated that shortly before that Mr.
Gaffoor, Superintendent of Police (3rd respondent), informed him that the
members of the C.M.U. would not be allowed to proceed to Galle Face Green.
However, the members of the C.M.U. present at the headquarters unanimously
decided they would attend Galle Face Green that morning to discuss their
grievances with any persons who were present there on their invitation. The
members decided that they would not go in any procession and that "they would
go in small groups" and speak to any of the Union's invitees who might be
present on Galle Face Green.



The petitioner stated that at both ends of 22nd Lane were posted police
officers armed with tear gas, guns and other weapons; women police officers
had wicker shields and batons. The police officers prevented egress from 22nd
Lane and prevented the members who were on their way to Galle Face Green from
proceeding. At this stage, the petitioner stated that "22nd Lane was
completely blocked with members" . . . . "Mr. Gaffoor told me who was leading
the C.M.U. members that they could not be allowed to proceed." He told Mr.
Gaffoor that most of the workers had assembled with the intention of meeting
the invitees in a peaceful and legitimate manner at Galle Face Green. Mr.
Gaffoor told him that he had to prevent them proceeding as he apprehended a
breach of the peace not by the C.M.U. members but by others. Although the
petitioner told Mr. Gaffoor that he and 4 others were not going in any
procession but intended to walk to Galle Face Green they were prevented from
doing so.



The petitioner pleaded that the action of the 3rd and 4th respondents and
other police officers who prevented and obstructed the C.M.U. members from
entering 22nd Lane or attending the C.M.U. headquarters and in cordoning off
22nd Lane at both ends and preventing the members of the Union from leaving
22nd Lane was a violation of the fundamental right of freedom of association,
freedom of movement of the petitioner and members of the C.M.U.



He further pleaded that as General Secretary of the Union he was entitled to
act in furtherance of the objects of the Union and to meet members of the
Union involved in the Union's programme of action.

#  403

** **

and acts resulting in obstruction to union members meeting him and in
obstructing him from implementing the decision of the members were, a
derogation of his fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 14 (1) ( _b_ )
and 13 of the Constitution.



The petitioner also pleaded that the order of the Inspector‑General of Police
referred to by Mr. Gaffoor and the information conveyed by the
Inspector‑General of Police in his letter dated 14.12.83 that he would not be
allowed to proceed to Galle Face Green and the action of the 3rd and 4th
respondents and other police officers in preventing him and other members from
proceeding to Galle Face Green were in violation of the fundamental rights
referred to in Articles 14 (1) (b) and 13 and in violation by the police
officers of their duty to afford him equal protection of the law guaranteed by
Article 12 (1) of the Constitution and were acts done in pursuance of
executive and/or administrative actions.



Mr. Rudra Rajasingham, Inspector‑General of Police (1st Respondent), stated in
his affidavit that he had received information that the union members who were
affected by the ethnic disturbances together with others were planning to meet
on Galle Face Green on 15th December, 1983. He and his senior officers were of
the view that a threat to security and public order was posed by this
assembling of persons for this meeting. On information received he was
satisfied that there was every likelihood of serious breaches of the peace if
the meeting was allowed. Another consideration was that neither the Union nor
the organisers of the procession sought or obtained the permission of the
police as required by law to go out in procession nor was the permission of
the Secretary, Ministry of Defence, or higher authority sought or obtained for
the use of Galle Face Green for organising a meeting or assembly.



Galle Face Green which was Government land was always in the charge of the
Secretary, Ministry of Defence, who exercised his control through the Army. On
7th May, 1980, the land comprising the entirety of the Green was formally
handed over by the Government Agent, Colombo, with the approval of the Land
Commissioner, to the Army Commander. Plan No. 5433 was prepared by the
Surveyor‑General's Department depicting the entirety of Galle Face Green which
stretches from the land immediately in front of the Galle Face Hotel to the
other end of the Green. This land was now in the charge of the Army. Use of
the Green for recreational purposes was

#  404



allowed but the public can be excluded on any given occasion when the use of
the Green was required by the army or permitted by the Army for use by others.
He produced, marked 1R1, a certified copy of the letter issued by the District
Land Officer of the Kachcheri dated 27th May, 1981, which stated that the land
depicted in Plan No. 5433 was handed over to the Army Commander, as from that
date by the Government Agent, Colombo, with the approval of the Land
Commissioner.



It was confirmed at a security meeting which was attended by the Secretary,
Ministry of Defence, the Army Commander, the Inspector‑General of Police and
others that no permission had been sought or given for the use of Galle Face
Green for the assembly of the meeting or members of the union on 15th
December, 1983. At this security meeting the proposed meeting on Galle Face
Green was discussed and in view of the grave risk to public order by
permitting such a meeting or procession a decision was taken that all steps
should be taken to avert this risk, including the stopping of the procession.



Thereafter, the Inspector‑General of Police issued instructions to the D.I.G
and the Commissioner of Police, Colombo, to take steps to prevent the
assembling of persons at this meeting.



Mr. Neil Weerasinghe, Commissioner of Police (2nd Respondent), stated in his
affidavit that on receiving information on 12.12.83 that the C.M.U. was
organising a meeting and/or assembly of their members affected by the recent
ethnic disturbances he caused inquiries to be made regarding this. In the
course of investigations it transpired that the meeting was to be held on
15.12.83 at the Galle Face Green which was to be preceded by a procession of
the members of the C.M.U. and others from their headquarters to Galle Face
Green. Information also reached him that some of the participants were
prepared to disobey the orders of the Police and provoke the police to
retaliate by using force and court arrest. He immediately conveyed this
information to the Inspector‑General of Police and considered the security
aspects arising from the intended meeting which in his view was prejudicial to
the maintenance of public order and peace.



Some of the matters which he considered in reaching this conclusion were, that
the objective of the meeting and the procession which was to precede it was to
canvass a matter relating to the recent

#  405

** **

ethnic disturbances; that both were organised by a Trade Union with a very
large membership; that there had been instances in the past where similar
processions and assemblies had gone out of control and caused serious and
widespread damage to property and injury to person, that there was hardly any
time to verify and take steps to ensure that the procession and meeting did
not pose any risk to security and public order; that for the same reason the
safety of the members of the Union and other participants could not be
ensured, and that no permission had been sought by the Union, nor given by the
Secretary, Ministry of Defence, or Army Commander for the use of Galle Face
Green.



After meeting the Inspector‑General of Police he gave directions to the O.I.C.
Police Station, Colpetty, the 4th respondent, and to the Senior Superintendent
of Police, the 3rd respondent, as stated in their affidavits.



Mr. A. C. A. Gaffoor, Superintendent of Police (3rd Respondent), denied in his
affidavit that the wife of the petitioner had stated that the members of the
Union had no intention of going in procession to Galle Face Green. He produced
a copy of her statement to Inspector Paranathala, 4th respondent, marked 3 RI.
He specifically denied that there was prohibition at any time on persons
seeking to enter the premises of the Union. The only restriction placed was on
the C.M.U. procession being taken to Galle Face Green. There was no other
interference with, or prevention of, the movements of the members of the Union
who assembled on 15th December.



Mr. Gaffoor informed the petitioner that it would not be possible to allow the
members of the Union who had gathered in very large numbers to proceed to
Galle Face Green in procession. He denied that there was any decision by the
Union not to go in procession. On the contrary it was quite clear that the
large crowd which had gathered were getting ready to go as one body and had in
fact lined up for that purpose and were carrying large banners and shouting
slogans. The photographs he produced 3R31, 3R3L, 3R3M, 3R3N and 3R30 revealed
that 22nd Lane at a certain stage was throughout its length and breach filled
to capacity with union members.



At a certain stage the members were in formation with the petitioner at the
helm almost abutting Galle Road. He informed the petitioner and some members
of the procession that a meeting or assembly on Galle Face Green had not been
permitted and also that proceeding to Galle

#  406



Face Green in this manner was a breach of the Emergency Regulations. He
informed the petitioner and, at the petitioner's request, some members of the
Union that if the procession and meeting were permitted there was a strong
likelihood of a breach of the peace. The petitioner and the members of the
Union accepted this situation and the petitioner informed him that since he
could not take the members to Galle Face Green he wished to give them lunch
and thereafter request them to leave. For this purpose some union members were
sent out to bring lunch.



Mr. Gaffoor stated that from about 10 a. m. about 1800 members had collected
at the union headquarters by proceeding along 22nd Lane on foot as well as in
vehicles. This Lane was not cordoned off from any end at anytime of the day
nor was the entry or exit of the C.M.U. members or other members of the public
prevented. The only restriction which was placed was to prevent the large
gathering of members from proceeding to Galle Face Green in a procession.



Inspector J. Paranathala stated in his affidavit that with a view to
preventing a procession to Galle Face Green he deployed police squads at both
ends of 22nd Lane. Instructions were given to these squads that on no account
was any procession of the union members or others to be allowed to proceed
from the headquarters to Galle Face Green. Strict instructions were given that
the movement of the members of the public or of the Union into and out of 22nd
Lane otherwise than in procession was not to be interfered with or obstructed
in any manner. He was present at the scene throughout that day and he was
satisfied that those instructions were complied with by his officers.



The affidavit of witness W. K. Wimalaratne, PS 7033, was filed. He was on duty
at 22nd Lane on the 15th from 6.45 a.m. He saw members of the Union assembling
at their headquarters. At about 10.30 a.m. he heard the petitioner address
those assembled in the building. Thereafter the petitioner went up to the 3rd
respondent or Galle Road and, after speaking to the 3rd respondent, returned
to the headquarters and addressed the members of the Union.



In the course of his address the petitioner told the C.M.U. members "Now that
we are getting ready to go to Galle Face we have been asked to bear the police
assaults without running and fall down wherever we are".

#  407

** **

After addressing the large crowd present at this time the petitioner started
to lead the large crowd (about 1,500‑2,000 present) towards Galle Road. The
petitioner again spoke to the 3rd respondent and thereafter he requested the
3rd respondent to speak to the members. There was cordiality between the
members of the Union and the police force. He heard the petitioner tell the
crowd that policemen too have their grievances and that they should fight for
their rights. The petitioner further stated that the members will remain till
around 1 p.m. and disperse after lunch. Thereafter, some persons brought lunch
packets for the members and the petitioner addressed the crowd once more and
concluded by thanking the police that the police had discharged their duties
and hence there was no enmity between the Union and the police.



The petitioner in his counter‑affidavit averred that no organised or public
meeting was planned and no procession was intended by the members of the
C.M.U. His wife had informed the 4th respondent that no meetings, processions
or picketing was intended. He annexed her affidavit marked 'YI'



He repeated his earlier allegations of police obstruction and submitted that
some of the photographs produced by the 3rd respondent proved this contention.
He repeated that he informed the 3rd respondent of the decision of the union
members to proceed to Galle Face Green in small groups of five well separated
from other groups. He drew attention to photograph 3R3E in support of this.



He stated that the photograph 3R3L showed him addressing the union members
after 1 .00 p.m. stating that they had now to abandon their plan to meet the
invitees and should return to headquarters for lunch.



He stated that P. S. Wimalaratne omitted to mention in his affidavit that part
of his speech to the members of the Union that they will move in groups of
five separated at intervals.



Learned Counsel for the petitioner informed Court that he was not pressing the
submission that the petitioner's fundamental rights under Articles 12(1) and
13 of the Constitution were violated, He confined this plea only to Article
14(1)(h) of the Constitution and not to Article 14(1)( _b_ ). Although Article
14(1)( _h_ ) is not specifically stated in the petition and affidavit in
paragraph 26 of the petitioner's affidavit he

#  408



does refer to violation of the fundamental right of freedom of movement "of
mine and the other members of the Ceylon Mercantile Union". The compass of the
petitioner's original application has therefore now been considerably confined
within narrow bounds.



Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the police officers violated
the fundamental right of freedom of movement under Article 14(1)(h) of the
petitioner and other members of the Union when they obstructed their entry
into and exit from 22nd Lane. He further submitted that there was no
procession on this day. Lawful action against a procession could be taken only
after a procession is formed. He submitted that the photograph X4 filed by the
petitioner revealed that the members of the Union were in groups of five along
22nd Lane separated by a few feet. They intended to proceed to Galle Face
Green in this manner but were prevented from doing so. This was not a public
procession. He also submitted that the photographs filed by the 3rd respondent
completely nullified the averments of Mr. Gaffoor that at a certain stage the
members of the C.M.U. were in formation with the petitioner at the helm almost
abutting Galle Road.



Article 14(1)(h) of the Constitution reads "Every citizen is entitled to the
freedom of movement and of choosing his residence within Sri Lanka"



However, under Article 15(7):



"The exercise and operation of all the fundamental rights declared and
recognised by Articles 12, 13(1), 13 (2) and 14 shall be subject to such
restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the interests of national
security, public order etc. or for the purpose of securing due recognition and
respect for the rights and freedoms of others, or of meeting the just
requirements of the general welfare of a democratic society. For the purposes
of this paragraph 'law' includes regulations made under the law for the time
being relating to public security"



"This has to be read with Article 15(8):



"The exercise and operation of the fundamental rights declared and recognised
by Articles 12 (1), 13 and 14 shall, in their application to the members of
the Armed Forces, Police Force and other Forces charged with the maintenance
of public order, be subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by law
in the interests of the proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance
of discipline among them."

#  409

** **

In 1983, following grave acts of violence and lawlessness in various parts of
the country a state of emergency was declared throughout the country.
Regulations were made by the President under section 5 of the Public Security
Ordinance (Chapter 40) cited as the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and
Powers) Regulations, No. 7 of 1983. On the 15th December, 1983, the
Regulations published in Gazette Extraordinary No. 271/21, on Friday, November
18, 1983, were still in force.



Regulation 12 is as follows: ‑



"12.(1) The President may, by order, prohibit the holding of public
processions or public meetings, or of such public processions or meetings as
may be specified in that order in any area in Sri Lanka for such period as may
be so specified, subject to such exemptions as may be made by that order or by
any subsequent order made under this regulation.



(2)        The President may give directions prohibiting the holding of any
procession or meeting in any area in Sri Lanka the holding of which would be,
in the opinion of the President, likely to cause a disturbance of public order
or to promote disaffection.



(3)        Any police officer may take such steps, and use such force, as may
be reasonably necessary for securing compliance with any order or directions
made or given under this regulation."



The Order made by the President under Regulation 12 and published in Gazette
Extraordinary No. 271/27 on Friday, November 18, 1983, reads:

#### "Order



1\.         This Order may be cited as the Emergency (Public Processions)
Order.



2.         The holding of any public procession whatsoever in any part of Sri Lanka is hereby prohibited during the continuance in force of this Order:

Provided, however, that the preceding provisions of this paragraph shall not
prevent the holding of any procession in the case of which the following
conditions are satisfied: ‑



( _a_ )        that the officer‑in‑charge of the police station in the area in
which the procession is to commence or any police officer of a rank not below
that of Assistant Superintendent has in his absolute discretion granted a
permit authorising the        procession;

#  410



            ( _b_ )        that the total number of persons taking part in the procession does not exceed such number as may be specified by the said officer in the permit so granted; and



           ( _c_ )        that the procession commences and disperses within such periods as may be specified in the permit authorising such procession."



The words "public procession" in Regulation 12 have not been defined.
According to the Shorter Oxford Dictionary a "procession" is the "action of a
body of persons going or marching along in orderly succession." A "public
procession" therefore means a procession in a public place, which includes any
highway. 22nd Lane is a highway and therefore a public place. Did the members
of the C.M.U. at any stage go in procession along this highway? The petitioner
denies this The affidavits of Mr. Gaffoor and P.S. Wimalaratne aver that at a
certain stage a vast concourse of members of the Union emanated from their
headquarters and proceeded along 22nd Lane carrying banners and shouting
slogans with the petitioner at the helm. They proceeded along 22nd Lane to the
point where it abutted Galle Road. There was every indication that this large
body of persons which at one stage almost occupied the whole of 22nd Lane
intended to march to Galle Face Green. This is not only supported by
photographs 3R3L and 3R3M but also there is the admission by the petitioner in
paragraph 21 of his affidavit "Mr. Gaffoor told me who was leading the Ceylon
Mercantile Union members that they could not be allowed to proceed "



After being thwarted in their objective petitioner adopted a change of tactics
in order to reach Galle Face Green. The members of the Union tried to proceed
to the Green in groups of five separated by a few feet. In my view this too
was the "action of a body of persons going or marching along in orderly
succession". It was still a "public procession  and contravened the Order made
by the President under Regulation 12 as the petitioner and/or the C.M.U. bad
not obtained a permit authorising the procession I hold, therefore, that in
the circumstances of this case Mr. Gaffoor and the police officers were
scrupulously adhering to the law by preventing such a public procession.



Secondly, did the police officers prevent the petitioner and members of the
Union from entering or leaving 22nd Lane as claimed by the petitioner? The 3rd
and 4th Respondents deny that there was any such obstruction. In fact the 4th
Respondent has averred that



#  411

** **

strict instructions were given to the police squad that the movement of the
members of the public or of the Union into and out of 22nd Lane otherwise than
in procession was not to be interfered with or obstructed in any manner and
these instructions were compiled with by the police officers.



It is common ground that a large number of union members went down 22nd Lane
and had a meeting in their headquarters which was addressed by the petitioner.
The photographs show large numbers of them freely moving up this lane. The
photographs of the petitioner also reveal that he was free to move up and down
the lane. The photographs 3R3A and 3B3B show him talking to Mr. Gaffoor on the
pavement alongside Galle Road without any constraint.



For the reasons stated I hold that the petitioner's freedom of movement was
not violated on 15th December, 1983, by any police officer. The application of
the petitioner is dismissed. I make no order as to costs.



**RANASINGHE, J.** ‑ I agree.



**RODRIGO, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/13.html_  

