##  Sirimal and Others v. Board of Directors of the Co Operative Wholesale
Establishment and Others - SLR - 23, Vol 2 of 2003 [2003] LKSC 13; (2003) 2
Sri LR 23 (8 August 2003)

23

SIRIMAL AND OTHERS  
v.  
BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE CO-OPERATIVE

WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT AND OTHERS

SUPREME COURT

S. N. SILVA, CJ.

ISMAIL, J. AND

WEERASURIYA, J.

SC (FR) NO. 445/2002

18TH FEBRUARY, 14TH MARCH

2ND APRIL, 21ST MAY, AND 10TH AND 30TH JUNE, 2003

Fundamental Rights - Extension of services beyond 55 years_ \- _Retirement at
55-Previous condition for allowing extensions up to 60 years - Legitimate
expectation - Lack of notice of change of policy and opportunity of making
rep足resentations_ \- _Whether alternative remedy precludes the remedy of
seeking relief for violation of fundamental rights - Constitution, Articles
12(1) and_ _126(1)._

The petitioners complained that the 1 st respondent ('The CWE") did in
viola足tion of their rights under Article 12(1) of the Constitution stopped
extension of their services beyond 55 years and purported to retire them from
31.7.2002, by circular dated 21.6.2002(P6). The previous circular dated
14.11.1995(P5) provided for granting of annual extension from 55 until 60 as
in the case of the public sector under Chapter V section 5 of the
Establishments Code. The rea足sons given for the new policy decision were:

(a)        Redundant labour force

(b)        Heavy losses; and

(c)        Reorganization of the CWE to make it a profit making organization

The applications of all petitioners except Nos. 19 and 20 were recommended by
the Service Extension Committee; and no application was sent to the Ministry
for decision. The previous practice was to grant annual extension up to 60
years except where medical or disciplinary grounds existed.

**Held :** ****



1\. The optional age of retirement in the CWE had been 55 years of age with a
right to seek extension up to 60 years of age as in the public sec足tor. The
impugned circular seeks to make retirement compulsory at 55 years.





24



2\. The petitioner had a legitimate expectation of receiving extension up to
60 years except where medical or disciplinary grounds were present.  
  
3\. Where it is sought to change conditions of service denying the right of
extension, the employees should be given a reasonable time and an opportunity
of showing cause against change. The court may decide whether the change of
conditions of service on policy was lawful. Where the decision is perverse or
irrational, the court will intervene.  
  
  
4\. The failure by the CWE to send up to the Ministry the petitioners'
applications, the refusal to duly entertain the applications and the
compulsory retirement of petitioners affected their livelihood.  
  
5\. There was no evidence or analytical reports to rationally establish the
grounds urged for premature retirement. On the contrary there was evidence of
retirement of additional employees, including a Market Manager, of a person
over 55 years at a monthly salary Rs.80,000/-.  
  
6\. The decision of the CWE to change the age of retirement is not war ranted
upon consideration of public interest or principles of fairness.  
  
7\. The petitioners are entitled to seek relief for violation of fundamental
rights within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Court under Article 126(1) of
the Constitution, even if there were other available reliefs e.g., those under
the Industrial Disputes Act.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
  
**1\. R.v Secretary of State for the Home Department exp.Khan (1985) 1 ALL E R
40  
  
2\. Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service (1984)3
ALL E R 935  
  
3\. R v Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food exp. Hamble (Offshore)
Fisheries Ltd (1995) 2 ALL E R 714, 731  
  
4\. R v Secretary of State for the Home Department exp. Hargreaves (1997)1 ALL
ER 397  
  
5\. Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v Wednesbury Corporation (1947)
ALL E R 680  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
Chamantha Weerakoon Unamboowa with Ayanthi Abeywickrama and M. Kurera for
petitioners.  
  
Romesh de Silva, P.C, with Palitha Kumarasinghe for 1st to 3rd respondents

  
_Cur.adv.vult_

  
August 08, 2003 **  
  
WEERASURIYA, J.**  
  
The petitioners who are employees of Co-operative Wholesale Establishment
("C.W.E.") complain that the decision of the Board of Directors of C.W.E.
("1st respondent board") not to grant extension of service and to retire them
with effect from 31.07.2002 is mala fide, arbitrary and discriminatory and
violates their fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the
Constitution.  
  
The petitioners claim relief on the following basis : that the employees of
C.W.E. are governed by provisions of the Establishments Code and optional age
of retirement is 55 years; that Circular No.1-1/07 dated 14.11.1995 (P5) laid
down that generally requests for extension of service beyond 55 years will be
granted except on medical or disciplinary grounds; that the practice has been
to grant extension of service for one year at a time upto the age of 60 years
unless they are medically unfit or refused on disciplinary grounds; that the
petitioners possess a good service record and are medically fit and therefore
they had a legitimate expectation of continuity of employment upto the age of
60 years.  
  
The 1st respondent Board contends that terms and conditions of employment of
the petitioners do not entitle them to be employed after 55 years of age; that
employees of C.W.E. are not governed by provisions of the Establishments Code,
though its provisions are made use of as a guide in dealing with disciplinary
matters; that C.W.E. is overstaffed and heavily in debt to the Banks amounting
to Rs.5000/= Million with an accumulated loss of Rs.4000/= Million and
presently running at a loss without any funding from the Treasury; and that
the decision not to grant extensions of service to the petitioners was a
policy decision taken after much consideration of the above matters in the
best interest of C.W.E. which is reasonable and apply to all without
discrimination.  
  
**Age of Retirement  
**  
It is common ground that prior to the Circular No.27/2002 dated 21.06.2002
(P6) Circular in operation was Circular No. 1-1/07 dated 14.11.1995 (P5). This
Circular as is evident from

**26**



  
the caption deals with policy of the Ministry regarding requests for extension
of service of employees serving in institutions under its purview, it would be
significant to note that this Circular is addressed to all Heads of
Departments/Institutions and reference is invited to Circular dated 29.09.1995
of even number in respect of procedure in making recommendations for
extensions of service. It thereafter draws attention to Chapter V section 5 of
the Establishments Code which deals with extension of service of employees who
are over 55 years.  
  
The letters of appointment of the petitioners have been produced marked 1
R3(A) \- 1 R3(S). These letters of appointment contain terms and conditions of
employment of the petitioners. However, it is noteworthy that these letters of
appointment do not contain any provision in respect of the age of retirement
of employees. Therefore, to ascertain the age of retirement, it is necessary
to examine the Circulars and Regulations formulated by the Ministry. Even the
Circular bearing No. 1-1/07/ dated 14.11.1995 (P5) does not stipulate the age
of retirement. This Circular while making provision for employees to seek
extension of service beyond 55 years of age merely draws attention to Chapter
V section 5 of the Establishments Code. It is to be highlighted that the 1st
respondent Board has conceded that in dealing with disciplinary matters,
C.W.E. has recourse to provisions of the Establishments Code for guidance.
Thus the 1st respondent concedes the part application of provisions of the
Establishments Code in respect of its employees. The 1st respondent Board
having denied the applicability of the provisions of the Establishments Code
in respect of its employees claimed that the age of retirement of employees is
55 years. However, it failed to produce a single Circular or any Regulation
formulated by the Ministry or, a decision of the 1st respondent Board which
governs the age of retirement of its employees. In the circumstances, I hold
that optional age of retirement of employees of C.W.E. has been 55 years of
age with a right to seek extensions upto 60 years of age which accords with
section 5 of Chapter V of the Establishments Code applicable to all employees
of the public sector. It is to be noted that the impugned Circular seeks to
make retirement compulsory at 55 years.



**27**

  
**Genesis of Legitimate Expectation  
**  
The claim of the petitioners that they had a legitimate expectation of
continuity of employment upto 60 years was founded on three grounds.  
  
(a) The Circular bearing No.1-1/07 dated 14.11.1995 (P5) states clearly that:  
  
"Generally a request for an extension of service is granted except on
disciplinary and medical grounds". This Circular sets out a uniform procedure
for employees who are over 55 years of age to seek extension of service. It is
significant that this Circular while inviting reference to the Circular of
even number dated 25.09.1995, draws attention of all Heads of
Departments/Institutions under the Ministry to section V of Chapter 5 of the
Establishments Code which deals with the extension of service of employees
over 55 years of age in the public sector. Section 5:2 of Chapter V of the
Establishments Code states that no officer should be continued in service
after he reaches the age of 55 years except as provided for in Sections 5:3
and 5:4. Thus optional age of retirement in the public sector is 55 years with
a discretion to extend the services upto the age of 60 years.  
  
(b) Excepting 19th and 20th petitioners who were granted extensions earlier,
the other petitioners consequent upon their applications for extension,
received letters marked P2(A) - P2(M), informing them that their applications
for extension had been recommended by the Service Extension Committee and that
they are permitted to continue in employment pending approval by the Ministry
of Commerce and Consumer Affairs which was taken as a mere formality in the
previous years.  
  
(c) The previous practice of C.W.E. has been to grant  extensions of service
to its employees beyond 55 years to continue in service upto the age of 60
years except on disciplinary or medical grounds. It is necessary to state that
Circular No.1-1/07/  (P5) confirms the existence of this practice and merely
stipulates the procedure that is to be followed. The 1 st respondent Board has
conceded that in the past, the Minister has granted extensions of service to
employees beyond years of age.

**28**

  
Legitimate expectations can arise in situations where a public body has set
out criteria for application of policy in a certain area and where an
applicant has relied on this criteria and the public body seeks to apply a
different criteria. (R, v. Secretary of State for the Home Department exp.
KharP))  
  
A previous pattern of conduct too can give rise to a legitimate expectation
(Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service (2) )  
  
**Substantive Legitimate Expectation  
**  
The frontiers of legitimate expectation in Administative Law have been greatly
expanded in recent years to admit of a substantive content. Therefore, the
expectation that the law may be called upon to protect can be divided broadly
into two groups: procedural expectations, where procedural justice of one form
or another is expected and substantive expectations where a favourable
decision of one kind or another is expected. The distinction between procedure
and substance is of considerable practical significance. This would be evident
by an examination of the facts of the instant case. The expectations of the
petitioners to continue in employment upto the age of 60 years were frustrated
by a decision of the 1st respondent Board which was described as a policy
decision. If the legitimate expectations are protected only procedurally, the
most employees could hope for, would be an order requiring consultation before
a change of policy is effected. If however, the legitimate expectations are
substantive the position is different, in that it is open to a Court to
require the public authority to confer upon the person the substantive benefit
which he is expected to receive under the earlier policy.  
  
This doctrine seems to be somewhat controversial since it appears to fetter
the freedom of action of the public authority. However, it is equally
necessary to give relief to people who have been betrayed by officials after
making solemn assurances on which they have placed their trust. There is no
inherent conflict between legitimate expectation and the rule against
fettering discretion because the discretion is only fettered to the extent
that the public interest does not require otherwise.  


**29**

  
**Protection of Legitimate Expectation  
**  
There is no controversy that substantive expectations may be procedurally
protected and that procedural protection of substantive expectations provides
some protection to the trust that is placed to the authority's assurance while
not fettering its discretion.  
  
In R. v. Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food exp. Hamble (Offshore)
Fisheries Ltd (3) Sedley J. developed a particular approach to the protection
of substantive expectations. He states legitimacy of expectations "... is a
function of expectations induced by government and of policy considerations
which militate against their fulfilment. The balance must, in the first
instance, be for the policy maker to strike; but if the outcome is challenged
by way of judicial review, I do not consider that the Court's criterion is the
bare rationality of the policy maker's conclusion. While policy is for the
policy maker alone, the fairness of his or her decision not to accommodate
reasonable expectations which the policy will thwart remains the Court's
concern (as of course the lawfulness of the policy)".  
  
However, this approach was overruled and described as 'heresy' by Hirst L.J.
in ft v. Secretary of State for the Home Department exp. Hargreaved (4) The
reason for the Court of Appeal's antipathy was that this amounts to an
intrusion into the substance of the decision and it was wrong in principle for
the Court to involve itself in such matters given that the Minister was
responsible to Parliament. He said at page 412 "on matters of substance (as
contrasted with procedure) Wednesbury provides the correct test". Therefore
when there is a substantive legitimate expectation in need of protection, it
is for the decision maker and not the Court to judge whether that expectation
should be protected or whether broader public interest is so strong as to
override the expectation. The Court would only intervene if the decision
maker's judgment was perverse or irrational. Thus the present position is that
the substantive protection of legitimate expectation has to be sought on the
more traditional approaches of the English Law namely (a) procedural
protection and (b) protection in terms of 'Wednesbury' unreasonableness.

**30**

  
**Procedural Legitimate Expectation  
**  
Let us now examine whether there has been procedural propriety before the
decision was taken not to grant extension of service to the petitioners. It
would appear that all the petitioners had submitted their applications for
extension of service within the stipulated time period. The petitioners had a
good service record and they were of sound health. Despite the recommendations
of Service Extensions Committee these applications were not submitted to the
Ministry for approval. The explanation was that since the issue of non-
granting of extension was under consideration by the Ministry, C.W.E. did not
forward the applications for extension of service of the petitioners to the
Ministry. Thereafter by Circular No.27/2002 dated 21.06.2002(P6) the Acting
General Manager communicated the decision of the 1st respondent Board not to
grant extension of service to employees over 55 years of age and to retire
them with effect from 31.07.2002. This undoubtedly affected the livelihood of
the employees of C.W.E. who have reached 55 years of age.  
  
It is necessary to emphasise that published policy criteria in respect of
extension of service as found in Circular No.1-01/07 dated 14/11/95 (P5) was
in accordance with the provisions of the Establishments Code and the practice
adopted by C.W.E., was to grant extensions upto 60 years except on medical and
disciplinary grounds. If there is any departure from such policy it is
imperative that those who are likely to be affected by the change ought to be
given sufficient notice. The substantive legitimate expectation of the
ultimate benefit is protected by a right to a hearing and a right to make
representation prior to changes being effected. This right was recognized by
House of Lords in Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil
Service (supra at page 954). Lord Roskill laid down this principle in the
following terms: "The principle (of legitimate expectation) may now said to be
firmly entrenched in this branch of the law. As the cases show, the principle
is closely connected with 'a right to be heard'. Such an expectation may take
many forms. One may be an expectation of a prior consultation. Another may be
an expectation of being allowed time to make representations, especially where
the aggrieved party is seeking to persuade an authority to depart from a
lawfully established policy

**31**

  
adopted in connection with the exercise of a particular power because of some
suggested exceptional reasons justifying such a 220 departure".  
  
Craig in his article entitled "Legitimate Expectation: A Conceptual Analysis"
(The Law Quarterly Review Vol.108 -1992 79 at pages 85 and 86) identifies
procedural rights as both instrumental and non-instrumental in nature. He
observes "One of the principal justifications for the existence of procedural
rights is instrumental in nature. This rationale emphasises the connection
between procedural due process and the substantive justice of the final out
come ; the procedural rights perform an instrumental role in the sense of
rendering it more likely that there will be an accurate decision on the
substance of the case Other justifications for procedural rights are non-
instrumental in nature. They focus on formal justice and the rule of law, in
the sense that rules of natural justice help to ensure objectivity and
impartiality and facilitate the treating of like case alike. Procedural rights
are also seen as protecting human dignity by ensuring that the individual is
told why he is being treated unfavourably and by enabling him to take part in
that decision."  
  
There was no material to suggest that before the 1st respondent Board took the
decision for non-granting of extension of ser-vice to employees beyond 55
years of age, that consultation of any form or degree ever took place between
the management and the employees or their trade unions. It would appear that
the 1st respondent Board has deviated from the national policy which is
reflected in section 5 of Chapter V of the Establishments Code. It need hardly
be emphasised that procedural fairness will protect the integrity of the
decision which is in issue.  
  
**Grounds for Change of Policy  
**  
Even if the expectation is reasonable and legitimate there may be good reasons
for the public body to act in terms of policy considerations which may
frustrate legitimate expectations.  
  
The purported policy decision of the 1st respondent Board which tends to
defeat legitimate expectations of the petitioners, was justified on the
following basis.

**32**

  
(1) Redundant labour force  
  
(2) Heavy losses  
  
(3) Need to reorganize and revitalize to make C.W.E. a profit making
organization.  
  
The grounds enumerated above have to be assessed in the light of the principle
of unreasonableness expounded in the judg- ment of Lord Grean, M.R. in
Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporations (5) Two
meanings have emerged of the term 'unreasonable' from this judgment. These
relate to deviation from purpose and deviation from fundamental principles.
Unreasonableness in the first sense is used as a synonym for a host of more
specific grounds of attack such as taking into account of irrelevant
considerations, acting for improper purposes and acting mala fide. The second
meaning is the substantive sense which would include a decision so
unreasonable that no reasonable body could have made it. (Administrative Law
P.P. Craig - 4th Edision 1999 Edition page 537). The application of the above
criteria can involve the danger that the Court may indirectly substitute its
judgment on the merits for that of the public body. This however is a general
problem that the review of administrative decisions would entail.  
  
**(1) Excess Staff  
**  
The issue of an excess labour force has not been discussed at the Board
meeting held on 05.06.2002. The 1st respondent Board acting on a directive by
the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs, which was described as a
"policy decision" has decided not to grant extensions of service to employees
beyond 55 years and to retire them with effect from 31.07.2002. This is
evident by an examination of the contents of the Board decision produced
marked 1R1. It reads as follows:  
  
(a) As per policy decision of the Hon. Minister of Commerce and Consumer
Affairs, there will be no extensions of service after 55 years of age for
officers/employees.  
  
(b) These officers/employees serving on extensions of service will be given
one month's notice to be treated as retired as effective from 31 st July 2002.

**33**

  
(c) These officers/employees who have requested for service extensions and
continue to be in service without approval will be considered to be in service
till the retirement date of 31st July 2002.  
  
This view is further reinforced by an examination of the Circular No.27/2002
dated 21/06/2002 (P5) which incorporated the Board decision referred to above.
The first two paragraphs of this Circular contain reasons for the 1st
respondent Board to take the decision not to grant extensions. Two reasons
enumerated in the Circular are:  
  
(a) Due to the accumulation of losses for several years, loss for the year
ending on 31.12.2001 was Rs.4000/= Million and by May 2002 Bank overdraft
stood at Rs.5000/= Million.  
  
(b) Since the overall economy is facing a severe crisis seeking financial
assistance from the General Treasury with a view to generate new sources of
revenue is difficult. It is not possible to draw the inference that losses had
been caused due to the excess labour force.  
  
It is manifest that the issue of redundancy of the labour force, has come into
focus only when objections were filed by the 1st respondent.  
  
Several other matters are relevant in assessing good faith of the 1 st
respondent Board on this issue in the context of a denial of the existence of
an excess labour force by the petitioners.  
  
The 1st respondent Board has failed to place any material by way of a Board
paper, or a report by the Human Resources Manager to establish that there is
an excess of staff. It is common knowledge that excess staff has to be
identified after considera- tion of cadre requirements and structural
organization of all the departments of C.W.E. The Ministry by its earlier
Circular (P5) has addressed the issue of a possible excess of staff by
stipulating that if the institutions are overstaffed new recruitments could be
delayed for a certain period.

**34**

**(2) Heavy Losses and (3) Reorganization  
**  
1st respondent Board claims that reduction of staff by discontinuance of
casual employees and the retirement of over 55 employees by denying their
extensions has saved C.W.E. Rs.6.5 Million a month.  
  
There was no evidence of any rational assessment as to the overhead cost
reduction of C.W.E. arising from this exercise. What we have is the bare
statement by the 1st respondent Board of the saving which is denied by the
petitioners.  
  
The recruitment drive of the 1st respondent Board assumes much significance in
view of its claim of reduction of overhead costs.  
  
The 1st respondent Board claims that in order to avoid allegations of
discrimination and unequal treatment C.W.E. decided to discontinue all casual
employees across the board without excep- tion, despite the need to retain
services of some. In similar circumstances, the non-extension of over 55
employees has taken place, despite the need to retain the services of some.  
  
As was stated in a preceding paragraph there was no intimation of an official
figure in respect of excess employees emanating from a systematic study of the
structural organization and cadre requirements of C.W.E. In the absence of
such data based on agreed principles it would appear that fresh recruitments
would be on a haphazard and irrational manner without any attempt to correlate
to the actual needs of the organization. This is evident by the fact that the
management has recruited 38 employees (Vide P13(D) \- P13(H), P13(K) - P13(Z),
P13(Z1), P11, P8(A) - P8(J), P8(L) - P8(O) before the date of discontinuance
of the casual employees namely on 18.03.2002.  
  
It was never the position of the 1 st respondent Board that in anticipation of
the discontinuance of casual employees it recruited new employees with the
intent of filling vacancies that would be created in the future. It has to be
borne in mind that retirement of over 55 employees came into effect from
31.07.2002. Therefore, it is not correct to say that C.W.E. recruited some
employees on a casual basis to fill the vacancies created after the
discontinuance

**3** **5**



of casual employees and retirement of over 55 employees.  
  
The petitioners disputed the purpose of discontinuance of casual employees and
the recruitment drive for new casual employees on the ground that
discontinuance was effected to get rid of employees appointed by the previous
government to pave the way for the management, to recruit supporters of the
present government.  
  
The theme of cost reduction in respect of recurring overhead expenses is open
to doubt in the absence of any official figure relat- ing to discontinuance of
both casual and over 55 employees. It has been established that 64 employees
(inclusive of 16 for the Investigation Unit of the Ministry and 3 for the
Sathosa Management Service Ltd.) had been recruited before the Circular No.15
dated 23.05.2002 (P10) of Secretary to the Treasury came into effect. The case
of Super Market Manager for Welisara Super Market recruited on a monthly
salary of Rs.80,000/= and the likelihood of several more similar appointments
in the near future in terms of advertisement marked P12, is a pointer in the
direction of enhanced overhead expenses, defeating objectives of the new
policy.  
  
The petitioners have placed material to establish that Sathosa Management
Services, is a subsidiary funded by the C.W.E. by documents P15, P16(a),
P16(b) and P17(a) - P17(h). The 1 st respondent Board has not denied that
salaries of the 16 officers attached to the Investigation Unit of the Ministry
of Commerce and Consumer Affairs are paid by C.W.E. (Vide P18(A) - P18(F). The
1st respondent Board has described the Investigation Unit as having duties to
perform embracing all institutions under the purview of the Ministry of
Commerce and Consumer Affairs.  
  
It has been established that 4 employees of the Investigation Unit and 2
officers from the Sathosa Management Services Ltd., one being newly appointed
Super Market Manager for Welisara Super Market, are over 55 years of age. This
is a glaring example of differential treatment which would strengthen the case
of the petitioners in establishing both unreasonableness and discriminatory
treatment meted out to the petitioners.  
  
Secretary to the Treasury by his Circular No.15 dated 23.05.2002(P10)
outlining government policy directed Secretaries



**36**



of all Ministries, Heads of Departments and Chairmen of Corporations,
Statutory Boards and Government Owned Business Undertakings to suspend
forthwith until further notice all new recruitments on any basis. The 1st
respondent Board disregarding the content of this Circular has recruited nine
employees as evident from documents marked P9(A), P9(B), P9(C), P14(A), P14(B)
and P14(C).  
  
In this Circular (P10) Secretary to the Treasury has made several proposals to
meet a situation of excess staff. He has proposed that a work study be
undertaken to identify excess cadre and to redistribute the work among the
existing workforce to ensure smooth functioning of the organization. The 1st
respondent Board  has proceeded to act disregarding these proposals, which
commend itself for consideration in addressing problems associated with excess
staff.  
  
In view of the foregoing material, the decision of the 1st respondent Board to
effect a change of policy in respect of extension of service of over 55
employees is not warranted either upon considerations of public interest or
upon known principles of fair-ness.  
  
Nevertheless, the change of policy will affect future recruitments having
regard to the fact that the public body is free to formulate and reformulate
policy. The duty of the Court is to safeguard rights, as well as interests
deserving protection based on legitimate expectations.  
  
**Other Remedies  
  
**The 1st respondent Board had taken up the position that the petitioners have
other remedies to pursue, to seek relief and therefore they ought not to be
granted relief in terms of Article 12(1) of the Constitution.  
  
It is not disputed that petitioners could seek relief either -  
  
(b) by way of an application to the Labour Tribunal or by  
  
(c) Arbitration in terms of Section 26 of C.W.E. Act.  
  
Nevertheless, they have chosen to seek relief for infringment of their
fundamental rights in terms of Article 12(1) of the Constitution. Article
126(2) of the Constitution vests the sole and exclusive jurisdiction in the
Supreme Court to have and determine any question relating to infringement or
imminent infringement of any fundamental right guaranteed by the Constitution.
It is to be highlighted that the constitutional provisions being the higher
norm, will prevail over other statutory provisions and therefore petitioners
are entitled to seek relief for alleged infringement of their fundamental
right even in situations where there are other remedies to pursue.  
  
**Relief  
**  
The petitioners were given interim relief in terms of prayer (b) of their
petition by restraining the 1st respondent Board from retiring them until the
final determination of this application. The petitioners have failed to submit
their applications for extension of service while the proceedings of this case
were pending. It is to be observed that petitioners are required to make their
applications for extension, 3 months before the expiry of the earlier
extension. In the circumstances, it is not possible to claim a further
extension of service. Therefore, upon a consideration of totality of the
circumstances, it is just and equitable to grant the petitioners compensation
for violation of their fundamental rights.  
  
For purposes of convenience, I propose to classify the petitioners into five
categories in terms of their age for granting relief.  
  
**Description of the Petitioner  
**  
**IMAGE**

**38**



**IMAGE**



 19th and 20th petitioners are due to retire on reaching 60 years on
16.01.2004 and 15.09.2003 respectively. In the circum- stances, I order the
1st respondent Board to pay compensation to the petitioners in the following
manner.  
  


1st petitioner -  |  \- Rs.375,000/=  
---|---  
05th, 07th, 09th, 15th, 16th & 17th & 18th petitioners  |  \- Rs.325,000/=
each  
3rd, 04th, 6th, 08th, 10th, 11th, 13th, 14th & 21st petitioners  |  \-
Rs.275,000/= each  
02nd & 12th petitioners -  | -Rs.225,000/= each  
19th & 20th petitioners  |  \- Rs.30,000/= each  
  
  
I order 1 st respondent Board to pay the petitioners Rs.5000/= each as costs
of this application.  


**39**

  
  
These payments shall be made by the 1 st respondent Board to the petitioners
on or before 30th November 2003.  
  
**S .N. SILVA, C.J. -** I agree.

  
**ISMAIL, J. -** I agree.

  
_**Relief granted.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/13.html_  

