##  Adhikary and Another v. Amarasinghe and Others - SLR - 270, Vol 1 of 2003
[2002] LKSC 13; (2003) 1 Sri LR 270 (8 May 2002)

270

**ADHIKARY AND ANOTHER** ****

**v.** ****

**AMARASINGHE AND OTHERS** ****



SUPREME COURT

BANDARANAYAKE, J.

EDUSSURIYA, J., AND

YAPA, J.

SC APPLICATION No.251/2002

10TH SEPTEMBER AND 14th AND 28th OCTOBER 2002



Fundamental Rights - Acts of indignity and assault not causing injury -Whether
such acts may constitute infringement of Article 11 of the Constitution.



The 1st petitioner an attorney-at-law was proceeding in his car from Nawala to
the Bandaranaike International Conference Hall (BMICH) with his wife the 2nd
petitioner and his child and the mother to attend an exhibition. At
Narahenpita there was traffic block. When the vehicles started moving the 1st
and 2nd respondents came up to petitioner's car and pulled the petitioner out
and abused him and stopped him. When the 2nd petitioner intervened they abused
her also and slapped her. When the 1st petitioner disclosed that he was an
attorney-at-law the respondents continued to threaten and said they will shoot
and kill him. They claimed to be security officers of a Minister.



**Held :**



1\. The respondents had infringed the petitioner's rights under 11 of the

Constitution.



Per Bandaranayake, J.



" the protection in terms of Article 11 would not be restricted to the
physical harm caused to a victim, but would certainly extend to a situation
where a person had suffered psychologically due to such action"

2\. Per Edussuriya, J (with Yapa, J agreeing)



" it is my view that it would be a travesity if the State, which includes the
ordinary law abiding citizen was made to bear the full brunt of compensation
for the errant acts of two policemen."



3\. The petitioners are entitled to compensation for the infringement of their
rights a part of which shall be paid personally by the 1st and 2nd
respondents.

** **

**271**



**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.



**Cases referred to :**

1.       _W.M.K. de Silva v Chairman, Ceylon Fertilizer Corporation_ (1989) 2 Sri LR 393  


2.       _Kumarasena v SI Sriyantha and Others_ SC Application No. 257/93 SCM of 23.05.1994  


3\. _Saman v Leeladasa and another_ (1989) 1 Sri LR 44

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Manohara de Silva_ with _J. Fernando, D. Weeraratne_ and _G.W.C.B._
_Thalagune_ for petitioners.

_ _

_S. Ediriweera_ with _Lakshman Fernando_ for 1st and 2nd respondents.

_ _

_K.A.P. Ranasinghe,_ State Counsel for 5th respondent.

# Cur. adv. vult

February 14,2003

**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.**



The 1st petitioner, an attorney-at-law, with the 2nd petitioner, his wife, who
is a teacher by profession, was travelling in his vehi­cle along with their 18
months old son, his mother, mother-in-law and sister to the Bandaranaike
Memorial International Conference Hall (hereinafter referred to as the BMICH),
to view an exhibition that was being held there. When he reached the
Narahenpita junc­tion, on the evening of 09th April 2002, after driving
through Nawala Road, with the intention of turning towards Borella to proceed
to the BMICH, there was the usual congestion due to the flow of heavy traffic.
At the time of his arrival, it was a bleak scene at the Narahenpita inter-
section, where the movement of traffic had virtu­ally come to a standstill
with no police officer to control the move­ment of traffic.

 A short while later, with the assistance of a few volunteers, the congestion
began to clear, and the vehicle which was in front of the petitioners' car
started to move. Following suit, the 1st petition­er too, moved forward, when
the 1st to 4th respondents appeared

272



before the 1st petitioner's vehicle preventing him from proceeding any
further. Two of the respondents, punched the bonnet of the petitioner's car
with their fists and told the 1st petitioner not to move. At that point, the
1st petitioner inquired from them as to why they were prevented from
proceeding. The 1st and the 2nd respon­dents started abusing and humiliating
the 1st and 2nd petitioners and the family. Suddenly, the 2nd respondent
opened the door of the driver's side of the car; held the 1st petitioner by
his collar; pulled him out of the vehicle to the road and slapped him. Seeing
what was going on, the 2nd petitioner carrying the little child got out of the
vehicle and came to the rescue of her husband. The 1st respondent stopped the
2nd petitioner moving towards her hus­band and slapped her while abusing her
in filth.



The 1st petitioner at this stage informed the respondents that he is an
attorney-at-law by profession. No sooner this was told, the 2nd respondent
once again held the 1st petitioner by his collar and started shouting saying
that, "we are the security personnel of a Minister. You can do anything you
want. We will shoot and kill you." The 2nd respondent once again assaulted the
1 st petitioner. At that stage the 1st petitioner's mother came to his rescue
and the 2nd respondent while pushing her said that, "we are not scared. You
can do anything you want, we are Minister ....'s security guards". While all
these things were happening, the 1st petitioner noticed that the respondents
were carrying walkie talkies and one of them had a weapon. The respondents
left the scene thereafter.



The petitioners immediately proceeded to the Narahenpita Police Station and
lodged their complaints (P1 and P2). The fol­lowing day the 1st petitioner had
brought this incident to the notice of the President of the Bar Association of
Sri Lanka (hereinafter referred to as BASL). The BASL took action by passing a
resolution condemning the incident. Copies of the resolution were sent to the
Prime Minister and the Ministers of Interior, Defence, Employment and Labour
(P5A, P5B, P5C, P5D). Later the Bar Association, informed the 1st petitioner
that Mr. D.M.T.B. Kehelgamuwa, DIG, had informed that the services of 3
respondents had been termi­nated and steps were taken to interdict the other
respondent (P8 and P9).

273

Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that in or around 11.04.2001,
the 3rd and 4th respondents, came to the peti­tioners' residence and
apologized for being involved in the afore­mentioned incident. The petitioner
therefore did not seek to obtain any relief against the said 2 respondents.

  
The petitioners contended that the 1st and 2nd respondents' action was in
violation of the petitioners' fundamental rights for which this Court granted
leave to proceed in terms of Article 11 of the Constitution. In view of the
apology tendered by the 3rd and 4th respondents to the petitioners and the
submissions made by learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioners
did not wish to proceed against them, the 3rd and 4th respondents were
dis­charged from the proceedings at the time leave to proceed was granted by
this Court.  


Learned counsel for the 1st and 2nd respondents took up the position that the
petitioners had not identified the respondents at the time they made the
complaints at the Narahenpita Police Station. Further, the 1st and 2nd
respondents in their statements made at the police station had denied taking
part in the said incident.



The statements of the petitioners, of which parts are repro­duced by both
learned counsel for petitioner and the 1st and 2nd respondents, indicate that
both the petitioners had referred to the persons who assaulted them as
security guards of a Minister. The proceedings at the Magistrate's Court
indicated that the 3rd and 4th respondents had not taken any part in the
assault and that they had attempted to settle the matter. However, there is no
reference made in the proceedings made to the effect of non-participation of
the 1st and 2nd respondents in this incident. It is to be noted that the 1st
to 4th respondents were arrested and their statements were recorded by the
Narahenpita police. Thereafter, while in the process of making arrangements to
produce the respondents before the Magistrate the respondents had run away. On
11.04.2002, a warrant was issued for the arrest of the respondents and this
was re-issued on 24.04.2002 and on 08.05.2002. The 1st to 4th respondents
surrendered by themselves and they were remanded until 22.05.2002. In the
circumstances, it is my view that there was participation by the 1st and 2nd
respondents in this inci­dent.

274

The allegation against the 1st and 2nd respondents made by the petitioners is
based on the alleged infringement of Article 11 of the Constitution. Article
11 provides that 'no person shall be sub­jected to torture or to cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or pun­ishment'. Petitioners generally have
sought a declaration of viola­tion of the fundamental right in terms of
Article 11, in situations where there had been assault and/or infliction of
injuries. In the instant case, although the petitioners' claimed that they
were assaulted, the basic allegation is not on the physical injuries caused to
them by such action. In fact there is no material before this Court regarding
any kind of physical injuries and no submis­sions were made to the effect that
the petitioners had sought any medical assistance. However, the fundamental
rights guaranteed in terms of Article 11 are not restricted to mere physical
injury. The words used in Article 11, viz., 'torture, cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment1*would take many forms of injuries which
could be broadly categorized as physical and psychological and would embrace
countless situations that could be faced by the vic­tims. Accordingly, the
protection in terms of Article 11 would not be restricted to mere physical
harm caused to a victim, but would cer­tainly extend to a situation where a
person had suffered psycho­logically due to such section.

In _W.M.K. de Silva v. Chairman, Ceylon Fertilizer Corporation,(1)_
Amerasinghe. J., said,



"I am of the opinion that the torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment contemplated in Article 11 of our Constitution is not confined
to the realm of physical violence. It would embrace the sphere of the soul or
mind as well"

It is however, to be noted that in _W.M.K. de Silva_ vs. _Ceylon_ _Fertlizer
Corporation_ (supra) the distress caused to an employee of a corporation by
her employer's extreme unkindness was held to be not violative of Article 11.
On the other hand in _Kumarasena_ vs. _SI Sriyantha and others_ (2) where
there was no physical impairment or a disability, it was held that the
'suffering occasioned was of an aggravated kind and attained the level of
severity to be taken cog­nizance of as a violation of Article 11 of the
Constitution'. Therefore,

275

the test which has been applied by our Courts is that whether the attack on
the victim is physical or psychological, irrespective of the fact that, a
violation of Article 11 would depend on the circum­stances of each case.



Accordingly, it would be necessary to consider the circum­stances of this case
and the nature of the acts complained of to decide whether there is a
violation of Article 11 of the Constitution.



It is to be noted that the incident in question took place at the Narahenpita
junction, a busy intersection and a place where there is heavy vehicular
traffic throughout the day and is at its heaviest during the evenings. The
ordeal faced by the two petitioners was undoubtedly of an aggravated nature.
The anguish faced at that time by the wife who was torn between the safety of
her husband and the child, but still moved to prevent her husband being
assault­ed, while carrying her 18 month old child and the feelings of a
for­lorn husband who could not protect his wife and the little child from the
abuse and assault by the 1 st and 2nd respondents would in my view, suffice to
prove the required level of severity that is necessary to prove violation of
Article 11 of the Constitution. The psychologi­cal trauma faced by an innocent
child, while in the tender hands of the mother, for no rhyme or reason, would
add to the severity of the actions of the 1st and 2nd respondents. In any
event, the conduct of the 1st and 2nd respondents at that time and place would
cer­tainly amount to degrading treatment of the petitioners.



Admittedly the 1st and 2nd respondents are State officers; they being police
officers attached to the Ministerial Security Division. Their position becomes
aggravated as they are officers who had acquired a special training to be
attached to the Security Division for Ministers. The fact remains that the 1st
and 2nd respondents, under the colour of their office, decided to dictate
terms as to how a motorist should use the road and in the process attacked a
young couple who were proceeding with the members of their family, to see an
exhibition at the BMICH. Their conduct in my view amounts to a total lack of
discipline, regard and respect to the general public in the country. When
police officers, who are guardians of the law and whose duties include 'to
prevent all offences, preserve peace and to apprehend disorderly characters',
behave in an outrageous manner without paying heed to safe-

276

guarding and protecting the rights of the people, a dismal picture of such
officers held in such high esteem emerges.



The 1st and 2nd respondents, as mentioned earlier were attached to the
Ministerial Security Division. Thus, they have been clothed with authority by
the State. If officers with such authority are not trained to act with dignity
and humility in respect of the rights of the people, it is my view that the
State has an obligation to bear the costs of such action. It is not in any
sense to punish the State, but merely as a regret and a _solatium_ for the
hurt caused to the petitioners by the actions of the 1st and 2nd respondents.
We have, however, to be mindful of the amounts to be awarded so that it would
not be burdensome on the common man in the street. Referring to such
situations, Amerasinghe, J. in _Saman_ vs. _Leeladasa and another   (3),
_stated that,



"............. I am unable to agree that deterrence is a relevant ele­ment in
the assessment of compensation in a Fundamental Rights action. Being as they
are actions against the State, an attempt by this Court to punish the State
would, I think be imprudently venturesome. To attempt to deter it would be
hopelessly futile,... Large awards will only increase the bur­ den of the tax-
payer and that of the ordinary man in the street to whom the burden of the
tax-payer will, lamentably, be passed on eventually. Therefore, we need to act
with restraint in awarding compensation in these matters".



For the foregoing reasons I hold that the 1st and 2nd respon­dents had
violated the Petitioners' fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 11 of
the Constitution. I direct the State to pay to the petitioners a sum of
Rs.20,000/- as compensation and a sum of Rs.5,000/- as costs. These amounts
must be paid within 3 (three) months from today.

**EDUSSURIYA, J.**

Having read the judgment of Bandaranayake J, I agree with the reasoning set
out therein with regard to the complicity of the 1st and 2nd Respondents.



The 1st and 2nd Respondents, merely because they were

277



Ministerial Security officers have conducted themselves in a man­ner that no
right thinking person however high he may be would have acted.



In the circumstances, it is my view that it would be a traves­ty if the State,
which includes the ordinary law abiding citizen was made to bear the full
brunt of compensation for the errant acts of two policemen.



I therefore direct the 1st and 2nd Respondents each to per­sonally pay a sum
of Rs. 5000/- as compensation to the Petitioners whilst the State is directed
to pay a sum of Rs. 15,000/- to the Petitioners as compensation and costs. All
payments to be made within three months of today.

**YAPA, J.** ** **- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/13.html_  

