##  Anura Bandaranaike v. W.B. Rajaguru Inspector General of Police and Others
- SLR - 104, Vol 1 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 13; (1999) 1 Sri LR 104 (19 February
1999)

**104**

**ANURA BANDARANAIKE  
v.  
W. B. RAJAGURU, INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF  
POLICE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 239/97  
DECEMBER 8, 1998.

Fundamental rights - Entering a house to arrest a person - Powers of a police
officer - Sections 24 and 25 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act - Section
125 of the Evidence Ordinance - Article 12 (1) of the Constitution._

On 12. 02. 1997 at about 2.15 am the 2nd respondent Deputy Inspector-General
of Police, Criminal Investigation and the 3rd respondent Deputy Director,
Criminal Investigation entered the petitioner's residence without a warrant or
the petitioner's permission purporting to act under sections 24 and 25 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure Act on the basis that they had 'reason to believe"
that a murder suspect - one Punchi Nilame had entered the premises. Those
respondents stated that they acted on the instructions of the 1st respondent
Inspector-General of Police who had told the 1st respondent that a private
informant whom he (the 1st respondent) had known personally for 15 years and
had given reliable information on many previous instances told him that he
(the said informant) had observed Punchi Nilame entering the petitioner's
residence at about 9 pm on 11. 02. 1997. The informant was then produced
before the 2nd respondent who after questioning him directed the 3rd
respondent to question him further. The 3rd respondent has made a note that he
questioned the informant who stated that he observed the suspect entering the
petitioner's residence from the rear side entrance.

The informant refused to disclose his identity; and no IB extracts were
produced to show whether the informant had been questioned inter alia,
regarding the circumstances of his presence near the petitioner's residence
which was situated in a high security zone, guarded by security personnel. The
credibility of the information had not been checked. The police searched the
petitioner's residence but did not find Punchi Nilame. No other house in the
vicinity was searched.

**105**

**Held:**

1\. The 1st respondent failed to satisfy court that he received any reliable
information from an informant. The 2nd and 3rd respondents failed to satisfy
court that they had 'reason to believe' that the suspect had entered the
premises of the petitioner.

2\. Section 125 of the Evidence Ordinance which inter alia provides that a
police officer shall not be compelled to say whence he got the information of
any offence has no application where a violation of a fundamental right is
alleged. The respondent cannot under the cover of section 125 proclaim that he
had 'reason to believe' the information on which they acted. It is the duty of
the court to scrutinize the material placed before the court and determine
whether in fact the informant referred to existed.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Faiz Musthapha, PC_ with _Ananda Kasturiarachchi, Sanjeewa Jayawardena, Nalin
Dissanayake, Ms. Faisze Markar_ and _Thushani Machado_ for the petitioner.

_Lalitha Fernando, DSG,_ with _Buvaneka Aluvihare, SSC_ for the respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

February 19, 1999.  
  
**JUDGMENT OF THE COURT**

The petitioner has a unique and a distinguished parentage; his late father was
one time Prime Minister of this country and his mother, besides being the
present Prime Minister, has been Prime Minister several times earlier. The
petitioner is their only son. Her Excellency the President of Sri Lanka, is
his sister. In his own right, the petitioner has been a Member of Parliament
for about 20 years; he was at one time the Leader of the Opposition and a
Minister of State. The background of the petitioner is mentioned here, not to
accord him any special privilege before the law, but to demonstrate how the
fundamental rights of even a person of such standing are liable to be violated
by errant executive and administrative action. The liberty of one citizen is
no less and no more important that of any other.

106

The incident which will be narrated later, which gave rise to the petitioner's
complaint of the violation of his fundamental rights, is connected with the
assassination of the late Nalanda Ellawala (Ellawala), a youthful Member of
Parliament at Ratnapura about 4 pm on 11. 02. 1997. The petitioner stated that
he is a near relative and a close associate of the Ellawala family and knew
young Ellawala intimately from Ellawala's infancy. The petitioner states that
he was greatly shocked and deeply grief-stricken at the news of the
assassination which he received about 6 pm on that day. One of the suspects in
the assassination of Ellawala is Susantha Punchi Nilame (Punchi Nilame), a
Member of Parliament. At the time of the assassination, both the petitioner
and Punchi Nilame, as Members of Parliament in the opposition, represented the
same political party, namely, the United National Party.

The petitioner's Colombo residence, where the incident complained of occurred,
is situated adjoining the residence of his mother the Prime Minister and both
those premises abut Rosmead Place. Along the Kynsey Roadside boundary of the
petitioner's premises, there is a bye lane which comes to a dead end
immediately passing the petitioner's premises. From this bye-lane there is a
side entrance to the petitioner's residence. Access could be had to the
petitioner's mother's residence, from the petitioner's own residence, through
a connecting door situated at the rear of his residence. The petitioner, as a
Member of Parliament, is provided with security personnel, who are attached to
the Government Ministerial Security Division. A high security zone screens the
residences of the petitioner and his mother. No outsider could gain access to
any one of those two premises, either from the direction of Wijerama-Rosmead
Place intersection, or from the direction of Kynsey Road, without obtaining
clearance from the security personnel posted along Rosmead Place, at the two
ends of the security zone (sketch P4). The two check-points are manned by
members of the elite Special Task Force, the Army and the Police.

On 11. 02. 1997, the petitioner left from his residence at Horagolla, to the
Gampaha Kachcheri, in order to submit the nomination papers of candidates
contesting several local bodies in the Gampaha District, from the United
National Party. He returned to his residence in Colombo around 1.30 pm. About
11 pm he retired to bed; his bedroom was situated on the upper floor of his
residence. The only persons in the petitioner's residence, besides himself,
were, his Chief Security

107

Officer, Hewage Torrington Swaranthilake (Swaranthilake) of the Ministerial
Security Division and several domestic servants. In the early hours of 12. 02.
1997, about 2.15 am when the petitioner was asleep, he was suddenly awakened
by Swaranthilake, who informed him that two persons, later identified as 2nd
and 3rd respondents, had demanded and gained forcible entrance to his
residence and were insisting upon making a search of every room (affidavit
P5). The petitioner immediately got out of his bedroom in order to descend the
stairs. To his surprise, he encountered the 2nd and 3rd respondents already
ascending the staircase despite the vehement protests of Swaranthilake. The
petitioner states that he was considerably frightened by the rude intrusion of
2nd and 3rd respondents and he apprehended harm to his person and/or property.
The petitioner promptly asked the two intruders, who were wearing civilian
clothes, who they were, and why they had come to his residence at that hour.
The two respondents then identified themselves and told the petitioner that
they had been ordered by the 1st respondent to search the petitioner's
residence for Punchi Nilame, who they said was the prime suspect in the
assassination of Ellawala. The petitioner vehemently protested against the
unlawful and forced intrusion into his residence. He also felt utterly
humiliated because the search suggested that he was a person capable of
harbouring a man wanted in connection with a heinous crime. However, after a
thorough search of the bedrooms of the petitioner's residence, which lasted
about 20 minutes, respondents left, finding no Punchi Nilame anywhere
Strangley no other house in the vicinity was searched.

The petitioner stated that he subsequently came to know that the 2nd and 3rd
respondents had arrived at his residence with a posse of policemen in several
police vehicles, which had created the impression to the neighbours that a
large scale raid was being conducted on the petitioner's residence. The
petitioner also stated that the 4th respondent had forced his servants through
threats and intimidation to open the front door of his residence, through
which the 2nd and 3rd respondents gained entrance.

The petitioner contended that by the acts of the 1st to 4th respondents, his
fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 12 (1) of the Constitution were
violated.

108

The 2nd and 3rd respondents admitted the search of the premises of the
petitioner. The position of the 1st respondent is that on the day of the
killing of Ellawala, around 11.20 pm, a person known to him personally, who
has been a private informant for a period of over 15 years contacted him over
the telephone at his official residence. According to the 1st respondent, the
informant had furnished him with accurate and reliable information on many
previous instances during his career as a police officer. The informant had
told him that he saw Punchi Nilame enter the residence of the petitioner at
Rosmead Place, through the side entrance, around 9.00 pm and that the
petitioner was harbouring him. Since the 1st respondent considered this
information to be reliable, he immediately contacted the Deputy Inspector
General in charge of the Criminal Investigation Department (CID), who is the
2nd respondent, and 2R passed on the information received by him. He told him
that the informant was long-standing private informant who had given him
accurate information on many previous instances. The 1st respondent had
instructed the 2nd respondent to consider the information given by him and
take necessary action. He also instructed the 2nd respondent to be at his
office so that he could make arrangements for the informant to meet the 2nd
respondent in his office. The 1st respondent instructed the informant to
proceed to Police Headquarters and meet the 2nd respondent. The 1st respondent
submitted that he had sufficient reason to believe that the petitioner was
harbouring Punchi Nilame.

The 2nd respondent averred that on 11. 02. 1997, around 11.30 pm he was
contacted by the 1st respondent who informed him that a long-standing private
informant, who had furnished him with reliable information in the past had
informed him that he had seen Punchi Nilame enter the residence of the
petitioner at Rosmead Place around 9.00 pm. The 1st respondent informed him
that he would get the informant to meet him at his office and directed him to
report to his office immediately. He then contacted the 3rd respondent around
11.35 pm and instructed him to report at his office. Around 12.10 am on 12.
02. 1997, a person said to be the informant was produced before him by Sub
Inspector Chandrasena, who was the duty officer (2R1). The 2nd respondent
questioned the informant who did not disclose his name. The 2nd respondent
formed the opinion that there was reason to believe him and instructed the 3rd
respondent to question the informant further. The 2nd respondent was of the
opinion that the information given by the informant should be kept
confidential as far

109

as possible, lest the suspect comes to know and attempts to escape being
arrested.

The position of the 3rd respondent is that he questioned the informant in
detail and that he considered the information to be credible. He was of the
view that immediate action should be taken. As there was no time to obtain a
warrant lest the suspect should escape, he decided to act in terms of sections
24 and 25 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act and to search the residence of
the petitioner with a view to arresting Punchi Nilame, who was suspected of
having committed the offence of murder. He informed the 2nd respondent of his
intention and instructed the 4th respondent to report to him to assist in the
investigation. The 4th respondent denied that he had intimidated or threatened
the servants of the petitioners in order to facilitate access of the 2nd and
3rd respondents to the petitioner's residence.

The respondents relied on the relevant provisions of section 125 of the
Evidence Ordinance which states that -

"No Magistrate or police officer shall be compelled to say whence he got the
information as to the commission of any offence, **. . .** "

Accordingly, it was submitted that the respondents cannot be compelled to
disclose the identity of the informant. Further it was submitted that under
sections 24 and 25 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, if there was "reason
to believe" that a person to be arrested has entered into any place, a search
could be carried out by a person who had the authority to arrest.

In spite of this provision, it is not infrequently that this court has been
taken into confidence and confidential and/or privileged material placed
before the Judges (off the record) for them to satisfy themselves as to the
relevant matters which have resulted in the executives or administrative
decisions which were in question. No such attempt at such disclosure was made
in this case. At the hearing of this application, the question as to the
existence or non-existence of this

110

so-called informant loomed so large, that we questioned the learned DSG
whether he made any attempt to verify for himself the existence and identity
of this person. He confessed that he was neither informed by the respondent
police officers nor did he venture to ask them for the so-called informant's
identity. When it comes to a question of violation of fundamental rights, it
would be highly dangerous from the view-point of the liberty of the citizen,
for us to permit officials to conveniently hedge behind section 125 of the
Evidence Ordinance and proclaim that they had "reason to believe" that matters
on material particulars provided by persons whose identity cannot be
disclosed, must be taken as true. In these circumstances it is our bounden
duty to scrutinise the material placed before us by the State most diligently,
to find out the truth as to the existence or non-existence of such an
informant in the first place.

The 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents in their affidavits, state that since the
petitioner is a senior member of the United National Party and since the
suspect is also a member of the same party, they had reason to believe that
the petitioner was harbouring him with the intention of protecting a fellow
Member of Parliament of his own party from being arrested.

It is common ground that the petitioner's residence is situated in a high
security area where 24-hour surveillance is carried out. The 1st, 2nd and 3rd
respondents say that they had spoken to the informant but according to their
affidavits only the 1st respondent was aware of the identity of the informant.
Except the document marked 3R1, there are no IB extracts attached to the
affidavits of the respondents. 3RI is a document prepared by the 3rd
respondent which states that -

" **. . .** I questioned the informant in detail but he was not prepared to
discolose his identity but he stated that he has been a longstanding private
informant of Inspector-General of Police, Mr. W. B. Rajaguru and he has passed
him valuable information which was found to be true and correct. The informant
stated that he personally saw the suspect entering into the house of MP for
UNP Mr. Anura Bandaranaiake at about 2100 hrs. through the rear

111

side entrance and that Mr. Anura Bandaranaike was harbouring suspect Susantha
Punchinilame, who is wanted in a case of double murder. He further stated that
for a successful arrest of S. Punchinilame. prompt action should be taken
without affording the person to be arrested an opportunity of escape. I
believe the information to be credible. There is no time to obtain a warrant.

This is a self-serving document. It is the burden of the respondents to prove
that the search was lawful. Although the respondnets submitted that they were
of the belief that the information was reliable, no satisfactory evidence was
placed before us to indicate the basis of their conclusion. Although the 1st
respondent stated that the informant had for the past 15 years furnished him
with accurate and reliable information and although this statement was
repeated parrot-like by 2nd and 3rd respondents, no details of these items of
accurate and reliable information have been provided to us so as to enable us
to verify the truth of this statement. According to 3R1, the informant stated
that "he personally saw the suspect entering into the house of MP for UNP, Mr.
Anura Bandaranaike at about 2100 hrs". The 1st and 3rd respondents have
averred that they questioned the informant in detail. We have not been
provided with any details on what he was questioned upon; nor the answers
given by him. What is in our possession is their bare statements to effect
that the informant was questioned in detail. There are no contemporaneous
notes available as to what these details are. There is nothing to indicate
that the 1st, the 2nd or the 3rd respondents questioned him as to where he was
when he said he saw the suspect entering the petitioner's premises from "the
rear side entrance". Was he questioned how far away he was from the rear side
entrance of the petitioner's residence when he saw the suspect? What was state
of the illumination available for recognising the suspect that night? How did
the suspect get near the rear side entrance of the petitioner's residence? Did
he walk or come in a vehicle? Was he alone or in the company of another? Most
importantly, was the informant asked how he entered the high security zone to
see what he says he 'saw? What did the informant mean when he said "and Anura
Bandaranaike was harbouring him"? There is nothing to indicate that the
informant was questioned on these lines.

112

These are questions any normal person with average intelligence would have
asked an informant in order to satisfy himself as to whether the informant was
speaking the truth or not. We are starved of those details and there is
nothing to indicate that the respondents had any of those details themselves.

The 1st respondent has failed to satisfy us that he received any reliable
information from an informant who has been supplying him such information for
15 years previously. The 2nd and 3rd respondents have failed to satisfy us
that they had "reason to believe" that the suspect has entered the premises of
the petitioner. In these circumstances it is more likely that the informant
was non-existent and that the search was conducted in the petitioner's
residence with some other undisclosed purpose in mind.

We find that the 4th respondent has only played a minor role in this incident
in the company of his superiors. We hold that the 1st to 3rd respondents have
violated petitioner's fundamental right to equal protection of the law
guaranteed under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution. We direct each of the
1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents to personally pay to the petitioner a sum of Rs.
40,000 as compensation and Rs. 10,000 as costs; and the State to pay the
petitioner a sum of Rs. 200,000 as compensation. The petitioner will be
entitled in all to a sum of Rs. 350,000. This amount should be paid within one
month from today.

**DHEERARATNE, J.**

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.**

**SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J**.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/13.html_  

