##  Malraj Piyasena v. Attorney-General And Others - SLR - 117, Vol 2 of 2007
[2006] LKSC 13; (2007) 2 Sri LR 117 (23 November 2006)

**117**

**MALRAJ PIYASENA  
V  
ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
DR. SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
UDALAGAMA, J. AND  
SOMAWANSA, J.  
S.C. (F.R.) APPLICATION NO. 390/2005  
27TH JULY 2006

_Fundamental Rights - Infringement of Article 126 of the Constitution - Is the
Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. (ANCL), a Limited Liability Company
amenable to fundamental rights jurisdiction - Whether the impugned acts of 7th
and 8th respondents constitute executive or administrative action - Supreme
Court Rules 44(1) C of the Supreme Court Rules (1990)._

At the hearing two preliminary objections were raised, namely-

(a) the petitioner cannot invoke the fundamental rights jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court, as the impugned act/s by the 2nd to 8th respondents do not
constitute executive or administrative action/actions.

(b) the petitioner has not complied with the Rule 44(1 )(C) of the Supreme
Court Rules of 1990, as he had not taken steps to file relevant and necessary
documents along with his petition or thereafter.

**Held:**

(1) Fundamental rights jurisdiction cannot and should not be frustrated on the
grounds of lack of jurisdiction without ascertaining the true character of the
Institution and therefore it is essential that the true legal character of the
Institution in question be examined before arriving at a decision.

(2) ANCL is an instrumentality or an agency of the State, subject to direct
control by the Government. In such circumstances, there is no possibility of
construing that the acts of ANCL cannot come under the jurisdiction of
fundamental rights, guaranteed in terms of Article 126 of the Constitution.

(3) In terms of Rule 44(1)(C), what is necessary is to tender to Court only
the documents and affidavits which are available to the petitioner.

**118**

There is no compulsion in terms of Rule 44(1)(C) to make, an effort to tender
documents, which are not in the possession of the petitioner. The petitioner
should plead for any other relevant documents and should file them as and when
they are available to the petitioner with the permission of the Court.

(4) In terms of Article 126 read with Article 4(d) of the Constitution, it is
apparent that fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution cannot be
'abridged', 'restricted' or 'denied' and it is evident that it  
would be the duty of the Supreme Court to ensure that such rights are not
abridged, restricted or denied to the People.It is not possible to restrict
the applicability of fundamental rights through mere technicalities.

_per_ Dr. Shirani Bandaranayake, J:

"The sole purpose of incorporating a Chapter on Fundamental Rights in the
Constitution was to protect and promote such rights and this was done on
behalf of the people. These rights have established a firm foundation for a
democratic society, which is rid of all inequalities, which should lead to a
new social order and thus the fundamental rights are chiefly for the
betterment of the individual and would eventually lead to the formation of a
just society."

Cases referred to:

(1) Thadchanamurthi v Attorney-General FRD(1) 129.

(2) Velmurugu v Attorney-General (1981) 1 SLR 406.

(3) Ireland v United Kingdom January 18, 1978 Decisions of the European Court
of Human Rights.

(4) Mariadas v Attorney-General and another FRO Vol. 2, 397.

(5) Wijetunga v Insurance Corporation (1982) 1 SLR 1.

(6) Gunawardena v Perera (1983) 1 SLR 305.

(7) Perera v University Grants Commission FRO (1) 103.

(8) Peter Leo Fernando v Attorney-General and others (1985) 2 SLR 341.

(9) Rajaratne v Air Lanka Ltd. (1987) SLR 128.

(10) Leo Samson v Air Lanka (2001) 1SLR 94.

(11) Jayakodyv Sri Lanka Insurance and Robinson Hotel Company Ltd. (2002) 1
SLR 365.

(12) Som Prakash Rekhiv Union of India AIR (1981) S.C. 212.

(13) Sukdev Singh v Bhagatram AIR (1975) S.C. 1331.

(14) Ramana Dayaram Shetty v The International Air Port Authority of India AIR
(1979) S.C. 1628.

(15) Ajay Hasia v Khalid Mujib (1981) AIR S.C. 487.

(16) Romesh Thappar v State of Madras AIR (1950) SC124.

**119**

(17) Prem Chand Garg v Excise Commissioner, u.P. AIR (1963) S.C. 996.

(18) B. v.M. Fernando and others v Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. S.C.
(FR) 274/2004.

**APPLICATION** for infringement of Fundamental Rights.

J.C. Weliamuna for petitioner.

Aravinda Athurupana for 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 7th and 8th respondents.

_Cur.adv. vult._

November 23, 2006

**DR. SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

The petitioner, an Assistant Manager Security Services (Operations) of the
Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd., viz., the 2nd respondent (hereinafter
referred to as ANCL) alleged that by the promotion granted to the 7th
respondent as manager Operations at ANCL, his fundamental right guaranteed in
terms of Article 12(1) of the Constitution was violated for which this Court
granted leave to proceed.

When this matter was taken up for hearing, learned Counsel for the 2nd to 5th,
7th and 8th respondents (hereinafter referred to as the learned Counsel for
the 2nd respondent), took up a preliminary objection stating that ANCL is not
amenable to fundamental rights jurisdiction, as ANCL, which is a limited
liability Company or its officers is/are not instrumentalities of the State
and that the petitioner has not filed any material to show that ANCL falls
within the meaning of executive or administrative action in terms of Article
126 of the Constitution.

Accordingly learned Counsel for the 2nd respondent submitted that -

i. the petitioner should have annexed the gazette notification referred to in
paragraph 3(b) of the petition to indicate that ANCL has been listed as an
institution under the Ministry of Information and Media;

ii. as ANCL is a Company, the petitioner should have filed Form 48 and share
certificates to indicate that the State has the majority of the shares in
ANCL; and

**120**

iii. for the reasons referred to in i and ii above, learned Counsel for the
2nd respondent contended that there was non-compliance with Rule 44(1) (c) of
the Supreme Court Rules of 1990.

In the circumstances, it was decided to take up the preliminary objection for
consideration and both learned Counsel were so heard.

On a consideration of the preliminary objection raised by the learned Counsel
for the 2nd respondent, it is apparent that his objection is based mainly on
two grounds; namely

A. the impugned act/s by the 2nd to 8th respondents do not constitute
executive or administrative action and therefore the petitioner cannot invoke
the fundamental rights jurisdiction of this Court; and

B. the petitioner has not complied with the Rule 44(1)(c) of the Supreme Court
Rules of 1990, as he had not taken steps to file relevant and necessary
documents along with his petition or thereafter.

Having stated the objections of the learned Counsel for the 2nd respondent,
let me now turn to examine the said objections.

**A. Whether the impugned act/s by the 2nd to 8th respondents constitute
executive or administrative action**

Although Article 126 of the Constitution refers to executive or administrative
action, with reference to fundamental rights, the Constitution does not
provide any definition to this concept. It would therefore be necessary to
analyze the case law in order to consider the definition in this respect. The
case law, it is to be noted, clearly indicates a gradual evolution towards
broadening the concept, since the early decisions after 1978.

In _Thadchanamurthiv Attorney-General (1) _at 129 a very narrow view was taken
while considering an infringement of fundamental rights by executive or
administrative action, where it was stated that torture inflicted by police
officers were unlawful and ultra vires of the duties of the police officers
and therefore it would not amount to state action. It was also stated that the
State would be liable for

**121**

SC Attorney-General and Others (Dr.Shirani Bandaranavake, J.) the wrongs of
its subordinate officials only when an 'administrative practice' had been
adopted. A few years later in Velmurugu v Attorney-Generat2) at 406 in the
majority view it was held that if liability is to be imputed to the State it
must be on the basis of an administrative practice and not on the basis of an
authorization, direct or implied, or that those acts were done for the benefit
of the State. However, in the minority decision, Sharvananda, J. (as he then
was) had taken a broader view in giving a meaning to the phrase 'executive or
administrative action' to encompass all actions by State officials. Referring
to several judgments of other jurisdictions and especially the decision in
Ireland v United Kingdom(3) Sharvananda, J. (as he then was) stated that,

"There is no justification for equating 'executive or administrative action'
in Article 126 to 'administrative practice' or to acts resulting from
administrative practice. 'Practice' denotes 'habitual or systematic
performances' and contemplates a series of similar actions. No known or
limited constitution of the phrase 'executive or administrative action',
which, ordinarily understood, embraces in its sweep all acts of the
administration, especially when what is at stake is the subject's
Constitutional remedy. In my view, all that is required of a petitioner under
Article 126 is that he should satisfy this Court that the act of infringement
complained of by him is the action of a State official or repository of State
power. Any violation of fundamental rights by public authority, whether it be
an isolated individual action or consequent to administrative practice,
furnishes, in my view, sufficient basis for an application under Article 126."

This view expressed in 1981 was reiterated by Sharvananda, J., (as he then
was) in Mariadas v Attorney-General and another..4) and in Wijetunga v
Insurance Corporation(5) at 397. The interpretation thus propagated by
Sharvananda, J. (as he then was) was again referred to in Gunawardena v Perera
(6) at 305. In Perera v University Grants Commission (7) at 103 Sharvananda,
J. (as he then was), again referred to the phrase 'executive or administrative
action' within the framework of Articles

**122**

17 and 126 of the Constitution and stated that,

"The expression 'executive or administration action' embraces executive action
of the State or its agencies or instrumentalities exercising governmental
functions."

A Divisional Bench of this Court in Peter Leo Fernando v Attorney-General and
others(8) at 341 referred to the interpretation given by Sharvananda, J. (as
he then was) to the phrase 'executive or administrative action' in Velmurugu v
Attorney-General and others (supra), Perera v University Grants Commission
(supra) and in Wijetunga v Insurance Corporation and another (supra) and
quoted with approval the principle, which had emerged through the
aforementioned decisions in giving a meaning to the concept of 'executive or
administrative action'. Colin-Thome',J. in his judgment, thus stated that the
test to be applied in deciding, whether the action in question is executive or
administrative, is to examine the nature of the function and the degree of
control that has been exercised.

In Rajaratne v Air Lanka Ltd.(9)at 128 the question, which arose was as to
whether the actions of Air Lanka Ltd., would come within the meaning of
'executive or administrative action'. Atukorale, J. after an exhaustive
examination of Sri Lanka and Indian cases, took the view that the expression
executive or administrative action in terms of Articles 17 and 126 of the
Constitution should be given a broad construction and Air Lanka Ltd., was a
Company formed by the government, owned by the government and controlled by
the government and these functions render Air Lanka an agent or organ of the
government, which is thereby amenable to the fundamental rights guaranteed in
terms of Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution.

The Divisional Bench decision in Leo Samson v Air Lanka(10)at 94 and the
decision in Jayakody v Sri Lanka Insurance and Robinson Hotel Company Ltd.(11)
at 365 on the other hand had used different parameters in deciding whether
government control is exercised over a respondent Company. Accordingly in Leo
Samson's case (supra), the Court had applied the 'deep and pervasive control
test' whereas in Jayakody (supra) the Court after examining the structure of
the respondent Hotels Company had

**123**

held that although it was carrying on 'commercial functions' it would still be
a State agency.

Having said that, let me now turn to examine the position of the application
under review.

The petitioner in his petition had stated that the 2nd respondent is in terms
of the provisions of section 2 of the Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd.
(Special Provisions) Law, No 28 of 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the Law),
a Company other than a private Company within the meaning of the Companies
Act, No. 17 of 1982. In such circumstances could it be possible to hold that
the action of the 2nd respondent comes within the purview of 'executive or
administrative' in terms of Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution?

It is not disputed that the 2nd respondent falls within the category of a
Company. The chief contention of the learned Counsel for the 2nd respondent
was that, since the decision of Leo Samson (supra), the necessary requirement
in proof of 'executive or administrative action' would be the 'deep and
pervasive' test. Learned Counsel further contended that 'neither Leo Samson's
case (supra) nor Jayakody's case (supra) has whittled down the requirement of
deep and pervasive state control'.

In Leo Samson's case (supra) one of the petitioners had alleged that the
termination of his services by the Chief Executive Officer of Sri Lankan
Airlines Ltd was violation of Article 12(1) of the Constitution. The other
petitioner had alleged, inter alia, that his being posted as Manager, Kuwait
is violative of Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

A preliminary objection was raised on behalf of Sri Lankan Airlines that
consequent to the Shareholders Agreement signed by the Government with Air
Lanka and Emirates Airlines and the amended Articles of Association of Air
Lanka, the impugned acts do not constitute 'executive or administrative
action'. This Court held that the 'executive or administrative action' would
include executive or administrative action of the State or its agents or
instrumentalities. In deciding so Ismail, J. had stated that, it was clear
from the provisions of the Memorandum and Articles of Association and the
Shareholders Agreement that the management

**124**

power, control and authority over the business of the Company were vested in
the Investor with certain management decisions, being vested exclusively in
it.

It is thus clear that the Court had based its decision on a consideration of
the provisions of the amended Articles of Association and the Shareholders
Agreement and accordingly had held that the Government had lost the 'deep and
pervasive' control exercised earlier by it over the Company.

The decision in Jayakody (supra), had considered the rationale of Leo Samson
(supra) and answered in the negative the question as to whether the judgment
in the latter would affect the decision taken in Jayakody v Sri Lanka
Insurance and Robinson Hotel Go. Ltd. (supra). The Court in Jayakody's case
(supra) took the view that the 2nd respondent in that case is a State agency
and therefore its actions are executive or administrative in character.
Therefore in Jayakody (supra) the Court had taken the view that the test to
decide whether an act comes within the purview of executive or administrative
action would be to consider whether the party in question is a State agency
and to consider whether the State has the effective ownership of such
establishment and if so whether such an establishment would come under the
category of State Agency.

Therefore it is apparent that whilst Leo Samson (supra) had considered the
kind of control, which is necessary to come within the framework of executive
or administrative action, in Jayakody (supra) the Court had examined the
character of the establishment in order to decide whether there could be
executive or administrative action carried out by such an institution.
Accordingly it is apparent that the decision in Jayakody (supra) could be
clearly distinguished from the decision in Leo Samson's case (supra).

Considering the circumstances and the questions that has arisen in the present
application, it is apparent that they are quite similar to the questions,
which had been considered in Jayakody v Sri Lanka Insurance and Robinson Hotel
Go. Ltd. (supra). Moreover on such a comparison, and for the reasons
aforementioned, it is also apparent that the present application could thus be
distinguished from that of the decision of Leo Samson (supra).

**125**

The question before this Court therefore is to examine whether ANCL, is a
State Agency.

Learned Counsel for the 2nd respondent strenuously contended that ANCL is not
an entity controlled by the State, but that it is a Company and its decisions
cannot be questioned in terms of Article 126 of the Constitution.

It is however an accepted fact that fundamental rights jurisdiction cannot and
should not be frustrated on the grounds of lack of jurisdiction without
ascertaining the true character of the Institution and therefore it is
essential that the true legal character of the Institution in question be
examined before arriving at a decision. In fact this position has been
considered by Krishna lyer,J. in Som Prakash Rekha v Union of India(12)
upholding the views of Mathew, J. in his land mark decision in Sukhdev Singh v
Bhagatram(13) which was adopted by Bhagwati, J. in Ramana Dayaram Shetty v The
International Air Port Authority of India(14).

In Ramana Shetty's case (supra), Bhagwati, J. considering the doctrine of
agency propounded by Mathew, J. in Sukhdev Singh (supra) stated that, "Where a
Corporation is wholly controlled by government not only in its policy making,
but also in carrying out the functions entrusted to it by the law establishing
it or by the Charter of its incorporation, there can be no doubt that it would
be an instrumentality or agency of government ..." Upholding the views
expressed by Mathew, J. in Sukhdev Singh (supra) Bhagwati, J. in the judgement
of a Divisional Bench in Ajay Hasia v Khalid MujiJ:f...15) at 487 clearly
stated that,

"The Government in many of its commercial ventures and public enterprises is
resorting more and more frequently to this resourceful legal contrivance of a
corporation because it has many practical advantages and at the same time does
not involve the slightest diminution in its ownership and control of the
undertaking. In such cases, the true owner is the State, the real operator is
the State and the effective controllorate is the Stateand

**126**

accountability for its actions to the community and the Parliament is of the
State. " I (emphasis added).

In Ajay Hasia (supra) the society in question was registered under the
Societies Registration Act for the purpose of establishing an Engineering
College, which was sponsored, supervised and financially supported by the
Government. The Indian Supreme Court held that such a society should be an
instrumentality or an agency of the State.

It is therefore evident that careful attention should be given to several
factors, which are relevant in considering whether a Company or a Corporation
is an agency or an instrumentality of the Government. Having this in mind let
me now turn to examine the status of the 2nd respondent.

It is not disputed that ANCL is a creature of a statute as its status was
changed by the Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. (Special Provisions) Law,
No. 28 of 1973 (as amended). The preamble to this Law clearly states that it
is, "A Law to change the status of the company carrying on business under the
name of the Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Limited, to provide for the
redistribution of the shares of such company, and for the reconstitution of
the body responsible for the management and administration of the business and
affairs of such company "

Provision has been made in this Law that not less than 75% of the total number
of all the shares of the Company to be vested in the Public Trustee on behalf
of the Government (section 2(b) of the Law). Moreover, unlike the other
Companies, in terms of section 17 of the Law, the Minister is empowered to
make regulations for the purpose of giving full force and effect to the
principles and provisions of this Law. Section 11 of the Law provides the
Minister to revoke or amend the Memorandum and Articles of Association of the
Company by regulation published in the Gazette.

It is pertinent to note the provisions made in terms of section 16(1) of the
Law read with sections 9 to 12 of the Public Corporations (Financial Control)
Act, where the accounts and property of ANCL are to be audited by the Auditor-
General.

**127**

Considering the aforementioned factors, it is thus clear that ANCL is prima
facie a statutory body with government control.

Learned Counsel for the petitioner in fact submitted that as averred in
paragraph 3(b) of the affidavit of the petition, ANCL is an institution, which
functions under the direct purview of the Ministry of Information and Media.
The petitioner had thus averred that,

" Moreover, by Order of Her Excellency the President, published in the
Government Gazette (Extraordinary) of 28.04.2004, the ANCL has been listed as
an institution under the purview of Ministry of Information and Media."

On a consideration of all the aforementioned facts and circumstances, it is
evident that ANCL is an instrumentality or an agency of the State, subject to
direct control by the government. In such circumstances, there is no
possibility of construing that the acts of ANCL cannot come under the
jurisdiction of fundamental rights, guaranteed in terms of Article 126 of the
Constitution. Accordingly could it be said that the impugned acts by ANCL do
not constitute executive or administrative action and therefore the petitioner
cannot invoke the fundamental rights jurisdiction of this Court? The answer to
this question is clearly in the negative as it is clearly evident from the
reasons aforesaid that ANCL is an authority, which falls within the parameters
of an instrumentality or agency of the State.

**B. Non-compliance with Rule 44(1)c of the Supreme Court Rules of 1990.**

Learned Counsel for the 2nd respondent strenuously contended that the
petitioner had not complied with Rule 44(1)c in reference to two matters
alleged in paragraph 3(b) of his petition. Paragraph 3(b) of the petition as
referred to earlier, deals with the legal status of ANCL, where the petitioner
had stated that, "In terms of the provisions of section 2 of the Associated
Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. (Special Provisions) Act, No. 28 of 1993
(hereinafter ANCL Act), the 2nd respondent Associated Newspapers of Ceylon
Limited (hereinafter ANCL) is a Company other than a private Company within
the meaning of the Companies Act, No. 17 of 1982. Further

**128**

in terms of section 2(b) of the ANCL Act not less than seventy-five per centum
of all the shares of the Company shall vest in the Public Trustee on behalf of
the Government. Moreover, by Order of Her Excellency the President, published
in the Government Gazette Extraordinary of 28.04.2004, the ANCL has been
listed as an institution under the purview of Ministry of Information and
Media."

Learned Counsel for the 2nd respondent submitted that the petitioner cannot
rely on the Law by itself and submit that 75% of the shares of ANCL are held
by the Public Trustee as at the date the petitioner had filed his petition.

Learned Counsel for the 2nd respondent further contended that if the
petitioner had wanted to rely on share holding position, he should have filed
a copy of the Annual Return of ANCL. He also  
submitted that if the petitioner has not annexed to the petition any such
document to indicate that at least 75% of the total shares of ANCL, being
vested in the Public Trustee, as at the time of the petition, that would
amount to non-compliance with Rule 44(1)(c) of the Supreme Court Rules of
1990.

Rule 44 of the Supreme Court Rules of 1990 is contained in Part IV, which
deals with the applications under Article 126. Rule 44(1)(c) of the aforesaid
Rules is in the following terms:

"tender in support **such petition, such affidavits and documents as are
available to him; " (emphasis added)**.

It is thus apparent that in terms of Rule 44(1)(c), what is necessary is to
tender to Court only the documents and affidavits, which are available to the
petitioner. In such circumstances could it be possible for this Court to
consider that in terms of Rule 44(1)(c), the petitioner is under an obligation
to tender all the relevant documents?

Rule 44(1)(c) clearly specifies that the petitioner has to tender to Court in
support of his application, the petition, affidavit and other documents as are
available to him. Thus Rule 44(1)(c) is emphatic on the point of the types of
documents that should be tendered to Court. What it states is that, the
petitioner should tender only the documents, which are available to him. In
other words, there is no

**129**

compulsion in terms of Rule 44(1)(c) to make an effort to tender documents,
which are not in the possession of the petitioner. What is necessary in terms
of Rule 44(1)(c) is to tender all relevant documents to support the
petitioner's application, that are available to him at the time of filing the
application. The petitioner should plead for any other relevant documents and
should file them as and when they are available to the petitioner with the
permission of the Court.

The basis of this position could be clearly understood by examining the nature
of the fundamental rights jurisprudence vis a vis, the civil and criminal
litigation process. Article 126 of the Constitution clearly states that the
Supreme Court shall have sole and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine
any question relating to the infringement or imminent infringement by
executive or administrative action of any fundamental right or language right
declared and recognized by Chapter III or Chapter IV of the Constitution.
Article 4(d) emphasizes on the exercise of sovereignty through the fundamental
rights jurisdiction and states as follows:

"the fundamental rights, which are by the Constitution declared and recognized
shall be respected, secured and advanced by all the organs of government, and
shall not be abridged, restricted or denied, save in the manner and to the
extent hereinafter provided; "

It is therefore to be noted that in terms of Article 126 read with Article
4(d) of the Constitution, it is apparent that the fundamental rights
guaranteed by the Constitution cannot be 'abridged, restricted or denied' and
it is evident that it would be the duty of this Court to ensure that such
rights are not abridged, restricted or denied to the People. These rights,
which are fundamental in nature, are inalienable as Article 3 of the
Constitution clearly states that,

"In the Republic of Sri Lanka sovereignty is in the People and is inalienable.
Sovereignty includes the powers of government, fundamental rights and the
franchise,"

**130**

Fundamental rights are conferred on the People, which are inalienable.
Therefore such rights are to be enjoyed by them. The sole purpose of
incorporating a Chapter on Fundamental Rights in the Constitution was to
protect and promote such rights and this was done on behalf of the People.
These rights have established a firm foundation for a democratic society,
which is rid of all inequalities, which should lead to a new social order and
thus the fundamental rights are chiefly for the betterment of the individual
and would eventually lead to the formation of a just society. Unlike an
ordinary legal right, which is protected and enforced by the ordinary law, the
fundamental rights are guaranteed and protected by the Constitution and they
are available only against executive or administrative action. Referring to
such fundamental rights, Patanjali Sastri, J.; (as he then was) in Romesh
Thapper v State of Madras-16)at 124 commented that,

"This Court is thus constituted the protector and guarantor of fundamental
rights and it cannot, consistently with the responsibility so laid upon it,
refuse to entertain applications seeking protection against infringements of
such rights."

A decade later, in 1963, Gajendragadkar, J.; Prem Chand Garg v Excise
Commissioner, U.P'(17)emphasized the important position held by the
fundamental rights jurisdiction in a democratic system in the following words:

"The fundamental right to move this Court can, therefore, be appropriately
described as the cornerstone of the democratic edifice raised by the
Constitution." In such circumstances it is quite clear that it is not possible
to restrict the applicability of fundamental rights through mere
technicalities.Having said that let me now turn to examine the contention of
the learned Counsel for the 2nd respondent in his preliminary objection on the
ground of non-compliance with Rule 44(1)(c) of the Supreme Court Rules of
1990.

The main submission of the learned Counsel for the 2nd respondent is that,

**131**

(a) the petitioner had not filed Form 63 of the Companies Act; and

(b) the petitioner had not filed the Gazette Notification to support the
submissions referred to in paragraph 3(b) of the petition. It is not disputed
that the petitioner in his petition dated 28.09.2005 referred to the legal
status of the 2nd respondent in paragraph 3(b) of the petition, which
paragraph was re-produced earlier. That paragraph clearly stated the number of
shares that was vested with the Public Trustee and referred to the Gazette
Extraordinary of 28.04.2004, where ANCL was listed as an institution under the
purview of the Minister of Information and Media.

The Company Secretary of ANCL in her affidavit dated 04.01.2006, denied the
averments in paragraph 3(b) and had averred that,

"I deny the averments in paragraph 3(b) of the said petition except that the
provisions of the Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Limited (Special Provisions)
Act, No. 28 of 1973 are applicable to the 2nd respondent."

Paragraph 3(b) of the petition, as referred to earlier, speaks of the Law and
its provisions, which states that not less than seventy five per centum of its
shares being vested in the Public Trustee.

It is thus evident that ANCL had not denied this position and therefore it is
apparent that the reference to the Law had been sufficient to justify the
proposition propounded by the petitioner.

Considering the fundamental rights jurisdiction exercised by this Court in
terms of Rule 44(1 )(c) of the Supreme Court Rules of 1990, it has been the
practice of this Court to have a liberal approach in entertaining documents.
There have been many instances, where parties have moved Court to call for
necessary documents. Needless to say that, documents are necessary and vital
for the purpose of ascertaining whether there has been a violation of any
fundamental rights as the said jurisdiction is exercised and facts are
ascertained through affidavits and

**132**

documents. It has also to be borne in mind that in terms of Article 126(2) of
the Constitution that in order to exercise the fundamental rights
jurisdiction, an aggrieved person should apply to this Court by way of
petition within one month of the alleged infringement. Thus in order to
advance the fundamental rights jurisdiction and also to ensure that such
jurisdiction is not 'abridged, restricted or denied' to the People, it would
be necessary to give a liberal and a purposive construction to Rule 44(1)(c)
of the Supreme Court Rules of 1990.

Considering all the aforementioned factors, it is evident that in terms of
Rule 44(1)(c), once a petitioner has pleaded a document in his petition he
would be entitled to submit it 'as is available to him' and with the
permission of Court or move Court to call for such document.

It is also important to note that, it was the responsibility of the 2nd
respondent to have disclosed relevant and material facts if they were to deny
the averments of the petitioner. If the respondents were to deny the position
taken by the petitioner, the onus was on the respondents to produce such
material facts and disclose that to this Court. It is however not disputed
that the respondents have not produced any material either to deny the
contention of the petitioner or to substantiate their position. In such
circumstances it would not be correct for the learned Counsel for the 2nd
respondent to state that the petitioner had not complied with Rule 44(1)c as
he has not filed Form 63 of the Companies Act. Learned Counsel for the 2nd
respondent also contended that the petitioner should have filed the Gazette
Extraordinary of 28.04.2004 along with the petition.

As referred to earlier, the question of the aforesaid Gazette  notification
not being filed by the petitioner came up at the stage of hearing, when
preliminary objections were raised by the learned Counsel for the 2nd
respondent. Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that, at the time of
filing the petition, a copy of the said Gazette was not available and stated
that a copy would be submitted along with his written submissions. In fact the
learned Counsel for the petitioner had filed a copy of the said Gazette,
marked X, along with his written submissions.

**133**

In these circumstances, the objection by the learned Counsel for the 2nd
respondent on the ground of non-compliance of Rule 44(1 )(c) of the Supreme
Court Rules of 1990 cannot be sustained.

 It would be worthy to note before I part with this judgment the submission of
the learned Counsel for the petitioner where he stated that, there were
several cases filed against ANCL and that this Court had considered those on
their merits and none had held that the actions of ANCL are not executive or
administrative action in terms of Article 126 of the Constitution. He cited
the recent decision by this Court in B. v.M. Fernando and others v Associated
Newspapers of Ceylon Limitecl18), where the Court had considered ANCL as an
agent of the State.

On a consideration of all the material placed before this Court I hold that
the 2nd respondent, namely the Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd., is a
State agency and that its actions were therefore executive or administrative
in character and that the petitioner had complied with Rule 44(1)( c) of the
Supreme Court Rules of 1990.

I according overrule the preliminary objection, with costs in a sum of
Rs.10,000/- payable by ANCL (2nd respondent) to the petitioner. This amount to
be paid within one month from today.

Since this matter cannot be concluded before this Bench, this will be listed
before any Bench for hearing on the merits, on a date next term to be fixed by
the Registrar of the Supreme Court.

**UDALAGAMA, J.** \- I agree.

**SOMAWANSA, J.** \- I agree.

_Preliminary objection overruled._

_Matter set down for Argument._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2006/13.html_  

