##  Jeyaraj Fernandopulle v. Premachandra De Silva and Others - SLR - 70, Vol
1 of 1996 [1996] LKSC 14; (1996) 1 Sri LR 70 (9 July 1996)

**70**

**JEYARAJ FERNANDOPULLE  
v.  
PREMACHANDRA DE SILVA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
G.P.S. DE SILVA, C. J.,  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.,  
RAMANATHAN, J. AND  
ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.  
S. C. APPLICATION NOS. 66 & 67/95.  
JUNE 10, 1996.  
  
_Revision, Review or Re consideration of the judgment of the Supreme Court -
Practice of the Court-Curses curiae est lex curiae - Judicial comity -Powers
of the Supreme Court - Powers of the Chief Justice - Constitution of Benches -
Finality of judgments and orders of the Supreme Court -Constitution, Article
132 \- Inherent Powers of the Court - The per incuriam principle - Relevance
of questions of general and public importance._  
  
The violations of fundamental rights found to have been committed by the 10th,
11th, 13th and 14th respondents in Applications 66/95 and 67/95 were held to
have been instigated by the 1st Respondent-petitioner by a majority of three
judges of the Supreme Court. The disagreement between the majority and
minority of the Bench was based on -  
  
(i) the admissibility of a speech in Parliament made by the 1st
RespondentÂ­-petitioner and reported in Hansard for the purpose of
contradicting his affidavit filed in Court having regard to the privileges
enjoyed by him as a member of Parliament;  
  
(ii) the evidentiary value to be attached to the matters referred to in the
speech, having regard to the context in which it was made.  
  
The 1st Respondent-petitioner prayed that the Court be pleased to revise
and/or review and/or further consider the use of Hansard by referring the same
for consideration by a fuller Bench.  
  
The Acting Chief Justice nominated a Bench of five judges to hear the petition
of the 1st Respondent-petitioner, himself being one. However of the nominated
Bench, the Acting Chief Justice declined to serve on the Bench and another
nominated Judge relinquished his office to take over the office of Attorney-
General. Thereafter the present Bench was constituted to hear the case.

**71**

**Held:**  
  
1\. Usually, in the case of a petition, motion, application or letter
addressed either to the Chief Justice or to the Chief Justice and the other
Honourable Judges of the Supreme Court, the Registrar submits it to the Chief
Justice for directions; if it pertains to an appeal, proceeding or matter
pending before or decided by a Bench of the Court, the Chief Justice refers it
to the Judges who heard the case to which the petition, motion, application or
letter relates. If upon consideration in Chambers of the documents and
affidavits submitted, an oral hearing is, in the opinion of the Judges, not
warranted, the Judges would refuse to entertain the matter. The Judges
concerned may decide to hear the party in support of his petition, motion or
application. If they so decide after the hearing, they may reject it, and
notice will not be issued on the other party and the matter will be at an end.
If the Judges so decide, the Judges may request the Chief Justice to
constitute a Bench of five or more Judges to hear the matter; or the Judges to
whom the matter had been referred in the first place, may hear the matter and
either grant the relief prayed for or refuse to grant relief. Where by an
oversight the matter is listed before another Bench, that Bench will direct
that the matter be listed before a Bench composed of the Judges who made the
order. Cursus curiae est lex curiae. The practice of the Court is the law of
the Court. It is in accord with the conventions of judicial comity.  
  
2\. It is an inveterate practice of the Court which the Court has regarded as
having hardened into a rule that the same Judges who participated in the
formal hearing should constitute the new Bench or should also be included, as
far as possible in the new Bench where a re-examination is decided. Not only
may the Judges who were supposed to be in error be the persons to whom the
matter should be addressed, they ought to be the persons to whom the matter
should be referred. Apart from the need to observe the conventions of judicial
comity, there is the further consideration that, unless the practice of the
Court in this regard is adhered to, the Court's position as the final court
will be placed in jeopardy.  
  
3 (i) When the Supreme Court has decided a matter, the matter is at an end and
there is no occasion for other judges to be called upon to review or revise a
matter. The Supreme Court is a creature of statute and its powers are
statutory. The Court has no statutory jurisdiction conferred by the
Constitution or by any other law to rehear, review, alter or vary its
decision. Decisions of the Supreme Court are final.  
  
(ii) As a general rule, no Court has power to rehear, review, alter or vary
any judgment or order made by it after it has been entered.

**72**

(iii) A Court has no power to amend or set aside its judgment or order where,
it has come to light or if it transpires that the judgment or order has been
obtained by fraud or false evidence. In such cases relief must be sought by
way of appeal or where appropriate, by separate action, to set aside the
judgment or order. The object of the rule is to bring litigation to finality.  
  
4\. However all Courts have inherent power in certain circumstances to revise
an order made by them such as -  
  
(i) An order which has not attained finality according to the law or practice
obtaining in a Court can be revoked or recalled by the Judge or Judges who
made the order, acting with discretion exercised judicially and not
capriciously.  
  
(ii) When a person invokes the exercise of inherent powers of the Court, two
questions must be asked by the Court  
  
(a) Is it a case which comes within the scope of the inherent powers of the
Court?  
  
(b) Is it one in which those powers should be exercised?  
  
(iii) A clerical mistake in a judgment or order or some error arising in a
judgment or order from an accidental slip or omission may be corrected.  
  
(iv) A Court has power to vary its own orders in such a way-as to carry out
its own meaning and where the language is doubtful, to make it plain or to
amend it where a party has been wrongly named or described but not if it would
change the substance of the judgment.  
  
(v) A judgment against a dead party or non-existent Company or in certain
circumstances a judgment entered in default or of consent will be set aside.  
  
(vi) The attainment of justice is a guiding factor.  
  
(vii) An order made on wrong facts given to the prejudice of a party will be
set aside by way of remedying the injustice caused.  
  
5\. Public or general importance of a matter or dissent by a minority of the
Judges constituting the Bench does not give the Chief Justice the authority

**73**

to constitute an appellate division of the Supreme Court to review and revise
its own decisions. Apart from exceptional instances in which it has been
statutorily vested with jurisdiction to express its opinions, the business of
the Court is adjudication. A "question" or "issue" of general or public
importance in the abstract cannot be the subject of a judgment of the Supreme
Court - it is not a matter susceptible to adjudication. A judgment is a
judicial determination of a cause agitated between real parties; upon which a
real interest has been settled.  
  
6\. When any division of the Supreme Court constituted in terms of the
Constitution sits together, it does so as the Supreme Court. It is one Court
though it usually sits in several divisions. Each division has co-ordinate
jurisdiction. What is conveniently, but inaccurately called a "fuller Bench"
has no greater powers or jurisdiction than any division of the Court though a
decision of such a court carries greater weight. The judgment of the Supreme
Court shall, when it is not an unanimous decision, be the decision of the
majority regardless of the fact that it may, in the opinion of any person
whomsoever, be wrong. Nor is it open to anyone to devalue a decision of the
Court on the assumption that one or more judges "merely agreed" with the
opinion of another judge.  
  
7\. Article 132 (3) does not confer any right of appeal, revision or review.
It has always been taken for granted that a matter is referred to a Bench of
five or more judges by the Chief Justice, whether of his own motion, or at the
request of two or more judges hearing the matter, or on the application of a
party, because the question is one of general and public importance. Article
132 provides for the manner in which the jurisdiction of the Court may be
ordinarily exercised. It does not confer any jurisdiction on the Court nor
does it empower the Chief Justice to refer any matter of public or general
importance to a Bench of five or more judges. It empowers him to constitute a
Bench of five or more judges to hear an appeal, proceeding or matter which the
Court has jurisdiction to entertain and decide or determine. The Court has no
statutory jurisdiction to re-hear, reconsider, revise, review, vary or set
aside its own orders. Consequently, the Chief Justice cannot refer a matter to
a Bench of five or more judges for the purpose of revising, reviewing, varying
or setting aside a decision of the court. The fact that in the opinion of the
Chief Justice the question involved is a matter of general or public
importance makes no difference.  
  
8\. The Court has inherent powers to correct decisions made per incuriam. A
decision will be regarded as given per incuriam if it was in ignorance of some
inconsistent statute or binding decision - wherefore some part of the decision
or some step in the reasoning on which it is based is found on that account to
be demonstrably wrong.

**74**

9\. The fact that the question involved is a matter of general or public
importance has never been regarded as a ground for the exercise of the Courts'
inherent powers.  
  
**Per Amerasinghe, J:**  
  
"The inherent powers of a Court are adjuncts to existing jurisdiction to
remedy injustice. They cannot be made the source of new jurisdictions to
revise a judgement rendered by Court".  
  
**Cases referred to**  
  
1. _Gamage William Singho and Others_ S.C. LA No. 60/96.  
  
2. _All Ceylon Commercial and Industrial Workers Union v. The Ceylon Petroleum Corporation and Others_ [1995] 2 Sri L.R. 295, 296, 297.  
  
3\. _Re Ganeshanathan's Application - S. C. Application_ No. 20/83S.C. Minutes
of 21.07.1983.  
  
4\. _Hettiarachchi v. Seneviratne and Others_ (No. 2) - [1994] 3 Sri L. R.
293, 296, 297 - 299, 304 - 305.  
  
5\. _Senerath v. Chandraratne, Commissioner of Excise and Others_ [1995] 1 Sri
L. R. 209, 212, 216.  
  
6\. _Suren Wickremasinghe and Others v. Cornel Perera S.C._ (SLA) No. 49/96 S.
C. Minutes of 21.3.1996.  
  
7\. _Wayland v. Transvaal Government_ 1904 TS 758.  
  
8\. M _oosajees Ltd., v. Fernando and Others_ (1966) 68 N.L.R. 414.  
  
9\. _Liyanage and Others v. The Queen_ (1965) 68 N.L.R. 265, 420.  
  
10\. _Ganeshanatham v. Vivienne Goonewardene_ [1984] 1 Sri L. R. 319, 329,
340, 355, 377, 378.  
  
11\. _Vivienne Goonewardene v. Hector Perera and Others_ [1983] 1 Sri L.R.
305.  
  
12\. _Tucker v. New Brunswick Trading Company of London_ 1890 Ch. D. 249.  
  
13\. _Palitha v. O.I.C. Police Station, Polonnaruwa and Others_ [1993] 1 Sri
L. R. 161.  
  
14. _Billimoria v. Minister of Lands_ [1978-80] 1 Sri L.R. 10, 14, 15.  
  
15\. _Young v. Bristol Aeroplane Co.,_ [1944] 2 All E. R. 293, 298, 300.  
  
16\. _Marambe Kumarihamy v. Perera_ [1919] VI C.W.R. 325.  
  
17\. _Thynne Marchioness of Bath v. Thynne (Marquess of Bath)_ [1955] 3 All E.
R. 129, 145, 146.  
  
18\. _Mapalathan v. Elayavan_ (1939) 41 N.L.R. 115.  
  
19\. _Elo Singho v. Joseph_ (1948) 49 N.L.R. 312.  
  
20\. _The London Street Tramways Company Limited v. The London County Council_
[1898] AC 375, 380.  
  
21\. _Duchess of Kingston's Case_ 20 St. Tr. 355, 478, 479.

**75**

22\. _Bandon v. Becher_ 3 CI. & F 479, 510.  
  
23\. _Husaam Haj Yihyeh v. The State of Israel: The Jerusalem Post Law Reports
reported in Asher Felix Landau_ 1993 p. 234.  
  
24\. _Wijesinghe et al v. Uluwita_ (1933) 34 N.L.R. 362, 364.  
  
25\. _Easwaralingam v. Sivagnanasunderam_ (1962) 64 N.L.R. 396, 398.  
  
26\. _Meier v. Meier_ (1948) p. 89, 95.  
  
27. _Mohamed v. Annamalai Chettiar_ (1932) 12 CL Rec. 228, 229.  
  
28\. _Padma Fernando v. T. S. Fernando_ (1956) 58 N.L.R. 262.  
  
29\. _Lawrie v. Lees_ (1881) 7 App. Cas. 19, 34.  
  
30\. _Re Swire_ (1895) 30 CH. D. 239, 246.  
  
31\. _Paul E. de Costa & Sons v. S. Gunaratne _(1967) 71 N.L.R. 214, 215.  
  
32\. _Hatton v. Harris_ (1892) A.C. 547, 560.  
  
33\. _Raju v. Jacob_ (1968) 73 N.L.R. 517.  
  
34\. _Kariapperuma and Another v. D. J. Kotelawala_ (1971) 77 N.L.R. 193.  
  
35\. _Valliammai Atchi v. O. L. M. Abdul Majeed_ 45 N.L.R. 169.  
  
36. _Jonga v. Nanduwa_ 45 N.L.R. 128.  
  
37\. _Menchinahamy v. Muniweera_ (1950) 52 N.L.R. 409, 414 - 415.  
  
38 _. Caldera v. Santiagopillai_ (1920) 22 N.L.R. 155.  
  
39. _Juan Perera v. Stephen Fernando_ (1902) 2 Brown Rep. 5.  
  
40\. _Thambiraja v. Sinnamma_ (1935) 36 N.L.R. 442.  
  
41\. _Publis v. Eugena Hamy_ (1948) 50 N.L.R. 346.  
  
42\. _Sirivasa Thero v. Sudassi Thero_ (1960) 63 N.L.R. 31,33,34.  
  
43\. _Rodger v. Comptoir D' Escompte de Paris_ (1871) LR 3 1/4C 465.  
  
44\. _Kadiramanthamby and Another v. Lebbethamby Hadjiar_ (1971) 75 N.L.R.
228, 231.  
  
45\. _Paulusz v. Perera_ [1933] 34 NLR 433  
  
46\. _Loku Banda v. Assen_ (1897) 2 N.L.R. 31.  
  
47\. _Karuppannan v. Commissioner for Registration of Indian and Pakistani
Residents_ (1953) 54 N.L.R. 481.  
  
48. _Velupillai v. The Chairman Urban District Council, Jaffna_ (1936) 16 CL Rec. 75, 76.  
  
49\. _The Police Officer of Mawalla v. Galapatta_ (1915) 1CWR 197.  
  
50. _P. C. Batticaloa 8306, In Revision_ (1921) 23 N.L.R. 475.  
  
51. _The King v. Baron Silva et al_ (1926) 4 Times of Ceylon Reports 3.  
  
52\. _Ranmenikhamy and Another v. Tissera and Others_ (1962) 65 N.L.R. 214,
215.  
  
53\. _Farrell v. Alexander_ (1976) 1 All ER 129, 145.  
  
54\. _Huddersfield Police Authority v. Watson_ (1947) 2 All ER 193, 196.  
  
55\. _Alasuppillai v. Yavetpillai_ (1948) 39 CLW 107.  
  
56\. _Morelle Ltd., v. Wakeling_ (1955) 1 All ER 708,718.  
  
57\. _Craig v. Kanssen_ (1943) 1 All ER 108.  
  
58\. _Chief Kofi Forfie v. Barima Kwabena Sheifah Kenyaschene_ (1958) 1 All ER
289 (PC).

**76**

59\. _Woolfenden v. Woolenden_ (1947) 2 All ER 653.  
  
60\. _Nisha Sudarshi Ganeshi Kumarasena v. Sub-Inspector Sriyantha and Others
SC Application_ 257/93 - SC Minutes 23.5.1994.  
  
61\. _Re a Solicitor_ [1944] 2 All ER 432, 434.  
  
62\. _Rost v. Edwards and Others_ (1990) 2 All ER 641, 644, 645.  
  
63\. _A. G. of Ceylon v. De Livera_ (1962) 3 All ER 1066, 1069, (1963)AC 103,
120.  
  
64\. _Dissanayake v. Kaleel_ [1993] 2 Sri LR 135.  
  
65. _Jayatillake v. Kaleel_ [1994] 1 Sri LR 319.  
  
66\. _London Street & Tramways Co., v. London Council_ (1898) AC 375, 380,
381\.  
  
67\. _Jones v. National Coal Board_ (1957) 2 QB 55, 64.  
  
68\. _Broome v. Cassell & Co., Ltd., & Another_(1971) 2 All ER 187, 198 -
200\.  
  
69\. _Rookes v. Barnard_ [1964] 1 All ER 367.  
  
70\. _Brown v. Deam and Another_ (1910) AC 373, 375.  
  
_Petition for revision and/or review and/or further consideration by a fuller
Bench of the use of Hansard in Court Proceedings._  
  
_R. K. W. Goonesekera_ with _J.C. Weliamuna_ for the 1st Respondent-
PetiÂ­tioner in S. C. Application No. 66/95.  
  
_Faiz Musthapa, P.C._ with _Dr. J. Wickramaratne, Mahanama de Silva_ and _S.
M. Senaratne_ for the 1st Respondent - Petitioner in S.C. Application No. 67/
95.  
  
_T. Marapana P.C._ with _D. Weerasuriya, N. Ladduwahetty, Jayantha Fernando, A
Premaratne_ and _S. Cooray_ for the 1st-29th Petitioners-Respondents in S. C.
Application No. 67/95.  
  
_Upawansa Yapa P. C.,_ Solicitor-General with _Chanaka de Silva, S. C._ for
the Attorney-General.

_Cur. adv. vult._

July 09, 1996.  
  
**AMERASINGHE,J.**  
  
This is a matter relating to a petition by Mr. Jeyaraj Fernandopulle, M.P.,
dated the 19th of December, 1995, addressed to his Lordship the Chief Justice
and the other Honourable Judges of the Supreme Court.

**77**

Two applications numbered 66/95 and 67/95 had been filed in this Court under
Article 126 of the Constitution alleging that certain fundaÂ­mental rights of
the petitioners in those applications had been violated by the respondents
cited in those applications. Mr. Jeyaraj Fernandopulle, M.P., was the 1st
Respondent in both those applications. Since he is the petitioner in the
matter before us, I shall hereafter, unless the context otherwise requires,
refer to him as the 1st Respondent-Â­petitioner.  
  
Argument on the two applications was heard on the 13th and 27th of September
by a Bench of three Judges. Their Lordships took time for consideration.
Judgment was delivered on the 30th of November 1995. Albeit in separate
judgments, the three Judges agreed that the petitionÂ­ers were entitled to a
declaration that their fundamental rights under Articles 12(1), 12 (2) and
14(1) (c) read with 14(1) (g) had been violated by the 10th, 11th, 13th and
14th respondents; and to the reliefs granted by the Court.  
  
However, although two of the Judges were of the view that the violations had
resulted from the first Respondent-Petitioner's instigation and that he should
therefore pay a sum of Rs. 50,000 as costs; Rs. 25,000 to the petitioner-
society, the 63rd petitioner, in S.C. Application No. 66/95 and Rs. 25,000 to
the petitioner-society, the 30th Petitioner, in S. C. Application No. 67/95,
the third Judge was of the view that the first Respondent-Petitioner had not
been proved to have acted in violation of any of the fundamental rights of the
petitioners, and consequently that he was not liable to pay any sum by way of
costs.  
  
The disagreement between the majority and minority was based on -

* the admissibility of a speech in Parliament made by the 1st Respondent- Petitioner and reported in Hansard for the purpose of contradicting the affidavit of the 1st Respondent-Petitioner, having regard to the privileges enjoyed by him as a Member of Parliament;

* the evidentiary value to be attached to the matters referred to in the speech, having regard to the context in which it was made.

On the 19th of December, 1995, the 1st Respondent-Petitioner submitted a
petition supported by an affidavit to this Court. After setting

**78**

out the views expressed by the Judges on these matters, he stated in paragraph
16 of his petition that "the question of the use of Hansard to assess the
veracity of the affidavit of the 1st Respondent (petitioner) is a matter of
public or general importance and having regard to the expression of dissent by
(one of the Judges), the issue merits further consideration and/or review
and/or revision by a fuller Bench of Your Lordships' Court".  
  
In his petition, the 1st Respondent-Petitioner prayed that this Court be
pleased,  
  
"(a) to revise and/or review and/or further consider the aforesaid issue of
the use of Hansard, by referring the same for consideration by a fuller Bench,
and  
  
(b) to grant such other and further relief as Your Lordships' Court shall seem
meet."  
  
When a petition addressed to his Lordship the Chief Justice and the other
Judges of the Supreme Court relating to a concluded matter is received, the
Registrar of the Court submits it with the record of the case to his Lordship
the Chief Justice for directions. In the matter before us, since his Lordship
the Chief Justice was out of the country, the Registrar submitted the
documents to his Lordship the Acting Chief Justice on the 19th of December,
1995. On the 22nd of December, 1995, his Lordship the Acting Chief Justice
stated as follows:  
  
The 1st Respondent-(Petitioner) in SC (FR) Applications Nos. 66/ 95 and 67/95
has made application in terms of Article 132 (3) of the Constitution by way of
petition and affidavit, moving that a fuller bench of the Supreme Court be
constituted to consider a question which he says is a matter of general and
public importance that arose in the course of hearings before a Bench of 3
Judges in the aforesaid Fundamental Rights applications; to wit: that the use
of the contents of Hansard - P 16 - containing speeches, debates and
proceedings in Parliament by the majority of Judges of the said Court, to
assess the veracity or reliability or acceptability of affidavits filed by him
as 1st Respondent to those applications, and the decision of the said majority
as to the legal relevance of

**79**

speeches, debates and proceedings in Parliament as contained in Hansard
amounts to a violation of the freedom of speech, debates and proceedings in
Parliament in terms of the Parliament (Powers and Privileges) Act recognized
and kept alive by Article 67 of the Constitution.  
  
A perusal of the judgments of the Court that heard the said applicaÂ­tions
shows a strong division of opinion on this question of the use of speeches,
debates and proceedings in Parliament as reflected in Hansard. The majority of
judges of that Court used extracts from Hansard to discredit the affidavits of
the 1st Respondent-Petitioner filed in the said applications and declare the
contents of the affidavits as unreliable. The minority judgment sharply
disapproves of the use to which extracts from Hansard have been put by the
said majority of judges and has concluded that the privilege of freedom of
speech and debate associated with proceedings in Parliament -quote - "being
the cornerstone of a democratic Parliamentary system" \- has been gravely
prejudiced and has ruled out its use to impeach the creditworthiness of the
1st Respondent-Petitioner (sic) in his responses by way of affidavit to the
complaint of infringement of the Petitioners-Respondents, fundamental rights.  
  
I am of opinion that the question whether speeches, debates and proceedings in
Parliament and reflected in Hansard can be used as being legally relevant
evidence to compare and contrast and confirm or reject or discredit as
inconsistent or unreliable affidavits of members of Parliament or of other
persons filed in Court proceedÂ­ings or before other Tribunals referring to
events and matters outside Parliament is a question of general and public
importance, all privileges of Parliament being part of the general and public
law of the land which ought to be considered and decided by a fuller Bench
comprising five (5) judges of the Supreme Court.  
  
I am further of the opinion that the nomination of any of the Honourable
Judges who comprised the Court of three (3) Judges to a fuller Bench is not
appropriate in the circumstances. One of the Hon. Judges that comprised the
majority dealt with the point raised in this petition only as a response to
the view of the other who expressed the minority dissenting view, while the
third Hon. Judge

**80**

merely agreed with the view that now forms the majority viewpoint that has
given rise to the present petition. The Hon. Judge who expressed the minority
viewpoint thereupon responded to the majority view point in his judgment.  
  
I accordingly nominate the following Hon. Judges to constitute a Bench of Five
(5) Judges of the Supreme Court, namely,  
  
Hon. **G. P. S. de Silva**  
Hon. **G. R. T. D. Bandaranayake  
**Hon. **P. Ramanathan  
**Hon. **S. W. B. Wadugodapitiya  
**Hon. **S. N. Silva  
**  
to hear, consider and determine the question whether speeches, debates and
proceedings in Parliament as reflected in Hansard can be used as being legally
relevant evidence to compare and contrast and confirm or reject or discredit
as inconsistent or unreliable, affidavits of members of Parliament or of other
persons filed in Court proceedings or before other Tribunals referring to
events or matters outside Parliament, or that they cannot be so used for other
purposes, for to do so could strike at or inhibit the freedom of speech,
debate and proceedings in Parliament there by constituting a breach of the
privileges of Parliament as recognized by law; and to make consequential
orders thereto. Consequently the following findings and orders made and
reliefs awarded in each case and contained in the judgment of Hon. Wijetunge,
J. at pp. 36 and 37 noted as (i) and (iv) thereof with which Hon. Fernando, J.
has agreed, consequent to the use of Hansard, would lie in suspense until the
Fuller Bench of Five (5) judges has come to its decision, as those orders and
reliefs affect the 1st Respondent-Petitioner in each case; to wit:  
  
(a) the finding that the fundamental rights of each individual petiÂ­tioner-
Respondent in each case, enshrined in Articles 12 (1),12 (2), 14 (1) (g) read
with 14 (1) (c) of the Constitution have been infringed by the 1st Respondent-
Petitioner;  
  
(b) the finding that the said violations resulted from the 1st RespondÂ­ent-
Petitioner's instigation; and the order for costs in the stated

**81**

sum of money to be paid in each case by the 1st Respondent Â­ Petitioner.  
  
Registrar to notify the parties in each case of the nomination of a fuller
bench of five Judges of the Supreme Court to consider and decide the above
question of general and public importance marked X and Y and to inform them of
the date of hearing.  
  
Registrar to inform the Judges of the Fuller Bench of said nominaÂ­tion.  
  
Hon. G. R. T. D. Bandaranayake  
(Acting) Chief Justice  
22nd December 1995  
PS.  
  
**REGISTRAR**  
  
Copies of documents placed before Bench of Three (3) Judges and copies of the
petition and affidavit of the present 1st Respondent Petitioner to be made
available to the judges of the Fuller Bench.

TDB  
22/12/95

In response to the directions of the Acting Chief Justice, the Registrar of
the Supreme Court on the 29th of February 1996, notified the parties in S. C.
Applications Nos. 66/95 and 67/95 as follows:  
  
**WHEREAS** the 1st Respondent petitioner abovenamed has filed an application
that this matter be referred to a fuller Bench to revise and/or review and/or
further consider, the issue of the use of Hansard, take notice that this
matter has been listed for hearing on the 10th, 11th & 12th of June 1996
before a Divisional Bench of the Supreme Court to consider and decide the
following questions:  
  
(i) Whether speeches, debates and proceedings in Parliament

**82**

and reflected in Hansard can be used as being legally relevant evidence to
compare and contrast and confirm or reject or discredit as inconsistent or
unreliable, affidavits of Members of Parliament or of other persons filed in
Court proceedings or before other Tribunals referring to events and matters
outside ParliaÂ­ment is a question of general and public importance, all
privileges of Parliament being part of the general and public law of the land
which ought to be considered and decided by a Fuller Bench comprising 5 (five)
Judges of the Supreme Court.  
  
(ii) Whether speeches, debates and proceedings in Parliament as reflected in
Hansard can be used as being legally relevant evidence to compare and contrast
and confirm or reject or discredit as inconsistent or unreliable, affidavits
of Members of Parliament or of other persons filed in Court proceedings or
before other Tribunals referring to events or matters outside Parliament, or
that they cannot be so used for the above purposes, for to do so would strike
at or inhibit the freedom of speech, debate and proceedings in Parliament,
thereby constituting a breach of the privileges of Parliament as recognized by
Law.  
  
And to make consequential orders thereto.  
  
Copies of petition and affidavit filed by the 1st Respondent-petitioner are
annexed.

Registrar of the Supreme Court

The Bench nominated by the Acting Chief Justice could not be constituted, for
although his Lordship the Hon. Mr. Justice G. R. T. D. Bandaranayake, when he
was Acting Chief Justice, had nominated himself as one of the Bench of five
Judges to hear the matter, his Lordship had later indicated to the Honourable
Chief Justice that he did not wish to participate in the hearing and
determination of the matter. The Hon. Mr. Justice S. N. Silva who had been
nominated by the Acting Chief Justice, had, since his nomination, relinquished
office to assume duties as Attorney-General. The parties had, as we have seen,
been noticed to appear. The matter of the petition was, therefore, listed to
be considered by a Bench constituted by His Lordship the Chief Justice.

**83**

**CURSUS CURIAE**  
  
Usually, in the case of a petition, motion, application or letter addressed
either to the Chief Justice or to the Chief Justice and the other Honourable
Judges of the Supreme Court, the Registrar submits it to the Chief Justice for
directions; if it pertains to an appeal, proceeding or matter pending before
or decided by a Bench of the Court, the Chief Justice refers it to the Judges
who heard the case to which the petition, motion, application or letter
relates. If upon consideration in Chambers of the documents and affidavits
submitted, an oral hearing is, in the opinion of the Judges, not warranted,
the Judges would refuse to entertain the matter. E.g. see _Gamage William
Singho and Others_.(1) The Judges concerned may decide to hear the party in
support of his petition, motion or application. If they so decide after the
hearing, they may reject it, and notice will not be issued on the other party
and the matter will be at an end: _All Ceylon Commercial and Industrial
Workers Union v. The Ceylon Petroleum Corporation and Others_ ,(2) If the
Judges so decide, the parties may be noticed and after hearing them, the
Judges may request the Chief Justice to constitute a Bench of five or more
Judges to hear the matter: _Re Ganeshanatham's Application_ , (3) or the
Judges to whom the matter had been referred to in the first place, may hear
the matter and either grant the relief prayed for (e.g. see H _ettiarachchi v.
Seneviratne_ ,(4); or refuse to grant relief: (e.g. see _Senerath v.
Chandraratne, Commissioner of Excise and Others_ ,(5) _Suren Wickramasinghe
and Others v. Cornel Perera._ (6) Where by an oversight the matter is listed
before another Bench, that Bench will direct that the matter be listed before
a bench composed of the Judges who made the order: _Senerath v.
Chandraratne_.(5)  
  
Cursus curiae est lex curiae. The practice of the court is the law of the
Court. Wessels, J in _Wayland v. Transvaal Government_ ,(7) held that it is no
argument to say that there was no actual contested case in which this
procedure has been laid down; for a course of procedure may be adopted and
hold good even though there has been no decision on the point. However, in Sri
Lanka the practice of the Court has been recognized in judgments of the Court.  
  
The practice of the Court in these matters is in accordance with the
conventions of judicial comity. In _Moosajees Ltd. v. Fernando and_

**84**

_Others,_ (8) the applications for writs of certiorari had been referred under
section 51 of the Courts Ordinance for hearing before five Judges in regard
mainly to the question whether the tribunal concerned in each application was
a "judicial officer". After expressing their views on the question, and
assuming that the tribunals had jurisdiction, it was ordered that the
applications be set down for further hearing before a Bench of two Judges upon
other matters raised by the respective petitioners. As the two Judges before
whom they were listed for further hearing were unable to agree in regard to
the order they should make, the applications came to be listed before another
Court of five Judges. After the earlier Court of five Judges had delivered its
judgment, the Privy Council decided _Liyanage and Others v. The Queen_ , (9).
In the light of that decision, which recognized a separation of powers as
between the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary, the tribunals
concerned had no jurisdiction to entertain the references. It was held by the
majority (4-1) that, inasmuch as the earlier Court of five Judges had not
entered a decree finally disposing of the applications, it was open to the
later Court of five Judges to re-examine, in the light of the decision of the
Privy Council, the supreme and ultimate appellate authority at that time, the
question whether the tribunals had jurisdiction. H. N. G. Fernando, SPJ at
p.420 said:  
  
In the interests of judicial comity, it would certainly have been preferable
if the same five Judges who participated in the former hearings of these
applications had also constituted the present Bench. But even if my brother
Sri Skanda Rajah had been a member of this Bench, his presence would have made
no difference to the ultimate decision. Even on the assumption that he would
have adhered to his former opinion, the majority decision of the Bench (The
Chief Justice, my brother Fernando and myself) would be that the tribunals in
these cases had no jurisdiction and that the relief sought by the petitioners
should be granted. That being so, the absence from this Bench of one member of
the former Bench becomes a technical consideration only, and I doubt whether
our revocation of the former orders will constitute a precedent inconsistÂ­ent
with the conventions of judicial comity. The circumstances of the revocation
are probably unique, in that the error of a former judgment has been
manifested in a decision of the Privy Council delivered before the former
judgment had become effective by the passing of a decree determining the
rights and obligations of the parties.

**85**

_Ganeshanatham v. Vivienne Goonewardene_ ,(10) was no exception. Ratwatte,
Colin Thorne and Soza, JJ had heard and decided _Vivienne Goonewardene v.
Hector Perera and Others,_ (11), in which it had been held that V.
Ganeshanatham had been responsible for the arrest of the petitioner in
violation of her fundamental rights. The decision of the Court in _Vivienne
Goonewardene v. Hector Perera_ was based upon the affidavit of Ganeshanatham
filed by the 2nd Respondent, the Inspector-General of Police, in which
Ganeshanatham had stated that he had arrested Mrs. Goonewardene. Ganeshanatham
filed an application complaining that the finding against him was made per
incuriam. Ganeshanatham's application was listed before a Bench- comprising
the same Judges who had heard Vivienne Goonewardene's case. After hearing
counsel, on the 21st of July 1983, the Court decided as follows:

On a consideration of the papers filed before us and the arguments adduced by
counsel we are of the view that the following questions arise for
determination preliminarily, namely:  
  
1\. Has the Supreme Court jurisdiction to review or revise in any manner its
own judgment in S.C. Application No. 20/83?  
  
2\. If so,  
  
(a) on what grounds or under what circumstances can such jurisdiction be
exercised?  
  
(b) what procedure should be followed to obtain relief?  
  
In view of the importance of these questions, we think that a fuller Bench of
the Supreme Court than at present constituted, should finally decide them.
Acting under Article 132 (3) (ii) of the ConstituÂ­tion, we therefore request
His Lordship the Chief Justice to put these questions up for early decision
before a fuller Bench of the Supreme Court by virtue of the powers vested in
him by Article 132 (3) of the Constitution.

The Chief Justice acceded to the request of the three Judges. The Hon. Mr.
Justice Colin Thome, who had been one of the Judges who had decided the
earlier matter was one of the Judges of the Bench of seven

**86**

Judges nominated by the Chief Justice. With great respect, I find it difficult
to understand why his Lordship the Acting Chief Justice acted in disregard of
an inveterate practice of the Court that this Court has regarded as having
hardened into a rule. I respectfully regret my inability to accept his
Lordship's explanation in his directions of 22nd December 1995, namely, that
the Bench was divided in its opinion, for excluding the Honourable Judges who
heard the case from a consideration of the petition before us. I respectfully
find myself in disagreement with the view expressed by his Lordship the Acting
Chief Justice that he felt constrained to refer the matter to a "fuller Bench"
because "One of the Honourable Judges that comprised the majority dealt with
the point raised in this petition only as a response to the view of the other
who expressed the minority dissenting view, while the third Hon. Judge _merely
agreed with the view that now forms the majority viewpoint that has given rise
to the present petition_. The Hon. Judge who expressed the minority viewpoint
thereupon responded to the majority viewpoint in his judgment."  
  
The emphasis is mine.  
  
Not only may the Judges who were supposed to be in error be the persons to
whom the matter should be addressed, they ought to be the persons to whom the
matter should be referred to. (Cf. _Tucker v. New Brunswick Trading Company of
London_ (12)) Apart from the need to observe the conventions of judicial
comity, there is the further considÂ­eration that, unless the practice of the
Court in this regard is adhered to, the Court's position as the final Court
will be placed in jeopardy.  
  
When the Supreme Court has decided a matter, the matter is at an end, and
there is no occasion for other Judges to be called upon to review or revise a
matter. However, as we shall see, the Court has inherent power in certain
circumstances to revise an order made by it. On the basis that one division of
the Court may do what another may do, it would be competent for one, division,
in the exercise of that power, to set aside an order of another division of
the Court. This must be so, for there may be circumstances in which it may not
be possible for the review to be undertaken by the same Bench: For instance,
one or more of the Judges who decided the first matter may not be available,
due to absence abroad, or retirement or some such reason. E.g. see _Palitha_

**87**

_O.I.C. Police Station Polonnaruwa and Others_ ,(13) Justice cannot be denied
because one or more of the Judges are not available. However, where they are
available, such matters should be considered by the same Bench of Judges. _In
Billimoria v. Minister of Lands_ ,(14) Samarakoon, CJ said:  
  
The Attorney-General contended that it was competent for one Court to set
aside an order made per incuriam by another Bench of the same Court. Generally
this would be so. But it has been the practice of our Courts for parties or
their Counsel to bring the error to the notice of the Judge or Judges who made
the order so that he or they can correct the order. Indeed this has always
been a matter of courtesy between Bench and Bar and I regret to note that it
has not been done in this instance nor has the second Court thought it fit to
direct Counsel to make the application to the Court that made the stay order.  
  
We have advanced beyond graceful politeness and considerateness in intercourse
as a justification of the practice: The Supreme Court in _Suren Wickramasinghe
& Others v. Cornel Perera & Others_, (5) held that "law, practice and
tradition" required that matters pertaining to a decided case should be
referred to the Court composed of the Judges who had heard the case. The
practice of the Court in this regard is the law of the Court -lex curiae- and
it must be given effect to in the same way in which a rule of Court must be
given effect to. (Cf. the observations of Lord _Greene MR. in Young v. Bristol
Aeroplane Co_ ,(15) where his Lordship said that "The Rules of the Supreme
Court have statutory force and the court is bound to give effect to them as to
a statute.")  
  
In the matter before us, following the usual practice of referring a matter
for reconsideration to the Judges who decided it was more justified than ever,
because the complaint revolves around what tranÂ­spired in Court and afterwards
when the Judges were considering the matter. The Judges who decided the matter
seemed to be the obvious choice. In fact, thinking aloud, I did suggest during
the argument that this might perhaps yet be done. Upon further consideration,
however, since the parties are before us on notice, and there is sufficient
material in the Judgments in S. C. Applications 66/95 and 67/95 to decide the
matter, I am of the view that we should deal with the matter; but the

**88**

course of action we take in the extraordinary circumstances of this case
should not be regarded as a precedent for departing from the rule established
by practice. An exception confirms the rule.  
**  
STATUTORY JURISDICTION**  
  
When the matter of the petition of the 1st Respondent-Petitioner was taken up
for consideration by this Court, Mr. Marapana submitted that the Court had no
jurisdiction conferred on it by the Constitution or by any other law to accede
to the prayer of the 1st Respondent-petitioner to revise or review the
decision of the Court. .  
  
An order which has not attained finality according to the law or practice
obtaining in a Court can be revoked or recalled by the Judge or Judges who
made the order, acting with discretion, exercised judicially and not
capriciously. ( _See Moosajees Ltd. v. P.O. Fernando and Others_.(8)) However,
as a general rule, no court has power to rehear, review, alter or vary any
judgment or order made by it after it has been entered (cf. _Marambe
Kumarihamy v. Perera_ ,(16)) either in an application made in the original
action or matter or in a fresh action brought to review the judgment or order.
If it is suggested that a Court has come to an erroneous decision either in
regard to factor law, then amendment of the judgement or order cannot be
sought, but recourse must be had to an appeal to the extent to which the
appeal is available. (See _per Morris, LJ in Thynne (Marchioness of Bath) v.
Thynne (Marquess of Bath)._ (17) A Court has no power to amend or set aside
its judgment or order where it has come to light or if it transpires that the
judgment or order has been obtained by fraud or false evidence. In such cases
relief must be sought by way of appeal or where appropriate, by separate
action, to set aside the judgment or order. (Halsbury, paragraph 556). The
object of the rule is to bring litigation to finality. The rule is subject to
certain exceptions (See Halsbury, Vol. 26 paragraph 556) which I shall deal
with later, but taking one thing at a time, let me deal with the question of
statutory jurisdiction.  
  
_In Ganeshanatham v. Vivienne Goonewardene and Three Others, (supra)_ ,
Ganeshanatham sought relief from the Supreme Court in the exercise of the
revisionary and inherent powers of the Court. His complaint was that another
Bench of the Court had, to his detriment, acted per incuriam for the several
reasons set out in his application.

**89**

Samarakoon, CJ (at pp. 327 - 328) referred to the provisions of the
Constitution conferring jurisdiction on the Supreme Court and stated that none
of those provisions gave the court a jurisdiction to revise its own decisions.
Nor had the Legislature, the Chief Justice further observed, acting in terms
of Article 118 (g) conferred such a jurisdiction by law. His Lordship held
"that this Supreme Court has no jurisdiction to act in revision in cases
decided by itself." Justices Sharvananda, Wimalaratne, Colin Thome, and
Wanasundera agreed with the Chief Justice. Ranasinghe, J. and Rodrigo, J.
dissented. However, the dissenting Judges granted the relief prayed for, not
in the exercise of the Court's ordinary, statutory jurisdiction but in the
exercise of the Court's extraordinary, inherent jurisdiction.  
  
In general, a decision of the Court is final: it is not subject to an appeal,
revision, review, reargument, or reconsideration: _Hettiarachchi v.
Seneviratne and Others_ ,(4) _Suren Wickramasinghe and Others v. Cornel Perera
and Others_ , (5) Cf. _Mapalathan v. Elayavan_ ,(18) (17) cf. _Elo Singho v.
Josep_.(19)  
  
The Supreme Court is a creature of statute and its powers are statutory. The
Court has no statutory jurisdiction conferred by the Constitution or by any
other law to re-hear, review, alter or vary its decision. The decisions of the
Supreme Court are final. (E. g. see _Senerath v. Chandraratne, Commissioner of
Excise and Others_ , (5) _All Ceylon Commercial & Industrial Workers Union v.
The Ceylon Petroleum Corporation and Others_,(1). In Ganeshanatham, (supra),
Samarakoon, CJ. (at p. 328) drew attention to the fact that the use of the
phrase "shall finally dispose of" in Article 126 (5), in dealing with the
exercise of the court's powers in relation to fundamental rights and language
rights petitions, and the phrase "final and conclusive" in Article 127 in
dealing with the Court's appellate jurisdiction, signified that once a matter
was decided by the Supreme Court, the thing is over. There is nothing more
that can be done. As far as the matters which are the subject of the decision
are concerned, it is all over. There is an end to such litigation - as needs
must be with all litigation. Public policy requires that there must be an end
to litigation, for the sake of certainty and the mainteÂ­nance of law and
order, in the pacific settlement of disputes between the citizen and the State
or between other persons; for the sake of preventing the vexation of persons
by those who can afford to indulge in

**90**

litigation; and for the conservation of the resources of the State. _Interest
rei publicae ut sit finis litium_.  
  
Some people may regard a particular case as being unusual or extraordinary or
of special significance for one reason or another. However, when the decision
is that of the "final" Court, as is every decision of the Supreme Court, due
consideration should be given to that fact. The Earl of Halsbury, LC, (Lords
MacNaughten, Morris and James of Hereford concurring) in _The London Street
Tramways ComÂ­pany Limited v. The London County Council_ ,(20) observed as
follows with regard to decisions of the final Court in the U.K.:  
  
My Lords, it is totally impossible, as it appears to me, to disregard the
whole current of authority upon this subject, and to suppose that what some
people call an "extraordinary case" an "unusual case", a case somewhat
different from the common, in the opinion of each litigant in turn, is
sufficient to justify the rehearing and rearguing before the final Court of
Appeal of a question which has been already decided. Of course I do not deny
that cases of individual hardship may arise, and there may be a current of
opinion that such and such a judgment was erroneous; but what is that
occasional interference with what is perhaps abstract justice as compared with
the inconÂ­venience - the disastrous inconvenience - of having each question
subject to being reargued and the dealings of mankind rendered doubtful by
reason of different decisions, so that in truth and in fact there would be no
real final Court of Apeal? My Lords, "interest rei publicae "that there should
be " _finis litium_ " at some time, and there could be no " _finis litium_ "
if it were possible to suggest in each case that it might be reargued because
it is "not an ordinary case," whatever that may mean. Under these
circumstances I am of opinion that we ought not to allow this question to be
reargued.  
  
**WHAT WAS THE HON. ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE ATTEMPTING TO ACHIEVE?  
**  
The Hon. Acting Chief Justice, in his Lordship' directions of the 22nd of
December, 1995 explained that he referred the matter to a Bench of five Judges
because there was "a strong division of opinion", and because the "minority
judgment sharply disapproves of the use to which

**91**

extracts from Hansard have been put by the said majority. . ." The Hon. Acting
Chief Justice states that the question on which the Judges were divided was a
matter of "general and public importance". What, may I respectfully inquire,
might his Lordship's position have been had there been unanimity in regard to
either of the views taken? Would he have then deemed it appropriate to refer
the matter to a "fuller Bench" because it was still a matter of general and
public importance?  
  
Mr. Marapana conceded that the matter of parliamentary privilege was
important, but inquired, "So, what?". The public or general imporÂ­tance of a
matter does not give the Chief Justice the authority to constitute an
appellate division of the Supreme Court to review and revise its own
decisions. Indeed, if "general or public importance" is a compelling reason
for referring a matter to a Bench of five or more Judges, then in every case
that the Supreme Court grants leave under the Proviso to Article 128 (2)
(which requires that the Supreme Court shall grant leave to appeal in every
matter or proceeding in which it is satisfied that the question to be decided
is of public or general importance), the Chief Justice on the application of a
party would be obliged to refer the matter to a Bench of five or more Judges,
unless he is prepared to say that, although the Court had held it to be
otherwise, the question was not one of general and public importance. Ought
the Chief Justice to come to such a conclusion after the Supreme Court has
decided otherwise? From where is such a power derived by the Chief Justice?
Each Bench of the Supreme Court constituted according to law, is the Supreme
Court and its decision on a matter is final. The Chief Justice is the head of
the Judiciary and as such he has certain unique powers and privileges; but he
has no superior powers vis-Ã -vis the other Judges of the Court in the matter
of adjudication. He is not empowered to overrule or even to suspend the
decisions of the Court. Nor can he confer jurisdictions on Benches nominated
by him which the law has not given the Court. Article 132 (3) does not confer
an appellate or consultative jurisdiction on a Bench constituted by the Chief
Justice.  
  
What is it that the Acting Chief Justice referred to a Bench of five Judges
purporting to act under the provisions of Article 132(3) ? It is not an
"appeal", for it is not sought to obtain the assistance of the Court to
correct any error in fact or in law which has been committed by the Court of
Appeal or any Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution.

**92**

(Article 127). As we have seen, the Supreme Court is the highest and final
Superior Court of record (Article 118) and, therefore there can be no appeals
from its decisions. Indeed, the 1st Respondent-Petitioner does not in his
petition state that the decision of the court was incorrect. His position, on
a plain reading of the petition, is that "the question of the use of Hansard
to assess the veraciy of the affidavit of the 1st Respondent is a matter of
public or general importance and having regard to the expression of the
dissent by (one of the Bench of three judges), the issue merits further
consideration and/or review and/or revision by a fuller Bench of Your
Lordships Court." In his prayer, the 1st Respondent-petitioner does not
clearly and directly request the Court to set aside its order, but prays
instead in an ambiguous manner that the Court be pleased "to revise and/or
review and/or further consider the aforesaid issue of the use of Hansard, by
referring the same for consideration by a fuller Bench". "Revision", "review"
and "further considÂ­eration" are quite distinct functions. Of course, the
usual general prayer was added: "to grant such other and further relief as to
Your Lordship"s Court shall seem meet."

The Acting Chief Justice in his directions of the 22nd of December 1995
nominated a Bench of five Judges,

> to hear, consider and determine the question whether speeches, debates and
> proceedings in Parliament as reflected in Hansard can be used as being
> legally relevant evidence to compare and contrast and confirm or reject or
> discredit as inconsistent or unreliable, affidavits of members of Parliament
> or of other persons filed in Court proceedings or before other Tribunals
> referring to events or matters outside Parliament, or that they cannot be so
> used for other purposes, for to do so could strike at or inhibit the freedom
> of speech, debate and proceedings in Parliament thereby constituting a
> breach of the privileges of Parliament as recognized by law; and to make
> consequential orders thereto....

What, I might respectfully inquire, were the "consequential orders" that were
contemplated upon a determination of the Court with regard to the complex
matters on which the Acting Chief Justice sought the opinion of the Bench of
Judges His Lordship has constituted? How does all this relate to what the 1st
Respondent-petitioner actually said in his

**93**

petition? Was his Lordship primarily seeking an opinion of a "fuller Bench" on
the questions formulated by him?  
  
Most certainly, if it is empowered to do so, the Supreme Court may provide its
_opinion_ , as distinguished from a _judgement_ , on any matter upon which it
is empowered by the law to render. The Constitution provides for those
matters. E.g. see Articles 120,121,122,123, 125 and 129.  
  
Article 129 (1) of the Constitution provides as follows:  
  
If at any time it appears to the President of the Repubic that a question of
law or fact has arisen or is likely to arise which is of such a nature and of
such public importance that it is expedient to obtain the opinion of the
Supreme Court upon it, he may refer that question to that Court for
consideration and the Court may, after such hearing as it thinks fit, within
the period specified in such reference or within such time as may be extended
by the PresiÂ­dent, report to the President its opinion thereon.  
  
The Chief Justice is not empowered by the Constitution to call upon the
Supreme Court to express its opinion on a matter of public importance; nor has
the Court the jurisdiction to entertain such a request.  
  
Apart from the exceptional instances in which it has been statutorily vested
with jurisdiction to express opinions, the business of the Court is
adjudication. A "question" or "issue" of general or public importance in the
abstract cannot be the subject of a judgment of this Court. A petition for the
consideration of a matter merely on the ground of its importance in general
should be rejected by this Court, for it is not a matter susceptible to
adjudication. A judgment "is a judicial determinaÂ­tion of a cause agitated
between real parties; upon which a real interest has been settled." Otherwise,
"there is no judge; but a person invested with the ensigns of a judicial
office is misemployed in listening to a fictitious cause proposed to him;
there is no party litigating, there is no party defendant, no real interest
brought into question." (per Solicitor-General Wedderburn during the argument
in the _Duchess of Kingston's Case_ ,(21) and adopted by Lord Brougham in
_Bandon v. Becher_.(22)

**94**

There could be no " _finis litium_ " if it were possible to suggest in each
case in which leave to appeal has been granted under Article 128(2) or in a
case referred by the Chief Justice under Article 132 (3) to a Bench of five or
more Judges, that it might be reargued because it was concerned with a matter
of public or general importance: The unsuccessful party each time would have a
right to have his matter considered by a another Bench of five or more Judges.
Notwithstanding the declaration in the Constitution that the Supreme Court is
the final court of appeal, in effect we would have no final Court of Appeal if
the decision of one division of the Court was subject to review or revision or
rehearing or further consideration in any manner whatsoever by another
division of the Court. At the heart of the matter before us seems to be a
misunderstandÂ­ing of what is a decision of the Supreme Court.  
  
**WHAT IS A DECISION OF THE SUPREME COURT?**  
  
There can be no appeal to a higher court or institution from a decision of the
Supreme Court, for Article 118 of the Constitution declares the Supreme Court
to be the highest and final Superior Court of Record. The Supreme Court
consists of the Chief Justice and of not less than six and not more than ten
other Judges. (Article 119). The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court may be
exercised in different matters at the same time by the several judges of that
Court sitting apart, provided that its jurisdiction shall, subject to the
provisions of the Constitution, be ordinarily exercised at all times by not
less than three Judges of the Court sitting together as the Supreme Court.
(Article 132 (2)). In the matter of considering whether leave to proceed
should be granted when a person alleges that his fundamental rights or
language rights have been violated, the jurisdiction of the Court may be
exercised by a Bench of not less than two judges. (Article 126 (2)). In the
exercise of its consultative jurisdiction, the opinion, determination and
response of the Court shall be expressed after consideration by at least five
Judges of the Supreme Court, of whom, unless he otherwise directs, the Chief
Justice shall be one. (Article 129 (1)) The hearing and determination of a
proceeding relating to the election of the President of the Republic shall be
by at least five Judges of the Supreme Court of whom, unless he otherwise
directs, the Chief Justice shall be one. (Article 130).  
  
When any division of the Court constituted in terms of the ConstituÂ­tion sits
together, it does so "as the Supreme Court". (Article 132 (2)).

**95**

It is one Court though it usually sits in several divisions. Each division has
co-ordinate jurisdiction. What is conveniently, but inaccurately called a
"fuller Bench" has no greater powers or jurisdiction than any division of the
Court. If a Bench of all the Judges is a Bench of the Full Court - there is no
such description as the "fullest Court" \- what does a "fuller Bench" mean?
The judgment of the Supreme Court shall, when it is not an unanimous decision,
be the decision of the majority (Article 132 (4)), regardless of the fact that
it may, in the opinion of any person whomsoever, be wrong. Nor is it open to
anyone to devalue a decision of the Court on the assumption that one or more
judges "merely agree" with the opinion of another Judge. It would, for more
reasons than one, be inconvenient to a regrettable extent if a Judge, who
after due consideration of a draft submitted to him feels that he cannot
usefully add anything to a judgment of a brother Judge, may not merely say
that he agrees with his brother, without running the risk of being taunted
directly or by innuendo with mindless, mechanical behaviour.  
  
The Constitution does not provide for an appeal from a decision of one
division of the Supreme Court to another division of the Court. Numbers are of
no consequence, except that a decision of a Bench of five or more Judges
carries greater weight. What can be done by a Bench of five or more Judges can
equally well be done by a duly constituted Bench of a smaller number of
Judges. The Court acts as the Supreme Court. And the corollary of that is that
what cannot be done by the smallest number of Judges acting as the Supreme
Court in terms of the law, cannot be done by a Bench of five or more Judges.
(Cf. per Lord Greene, MR in _Young v. Bristol Aeroplane Co_., (supra) at p.
298).  
  
In _Hettiarachchi_ , _(supra)_ , at p. 296, where the Court had refused leave
to proceed in the matter of an application for the alleged infringement of the
petitioner's fundamental rights, the petitioner applied to the Court for a
"fuller Bench" to determine the matter of his appeal for a revision of the
decision of the Court. The Court observed as follows:  
  
The petitioner's motion of 30.5.94 was filed under a misapprehenÂ­sion that
other Judges of the Court or more Judges, or even all the Judges could
constitute an appellate tribunal in respect of that decision of the Supreme
Court which refused him leave to proceed under Article 126 (2). While other
Judges of the Supreme Court

**96**

might regard that decision as erroneous, and refuse to follow it when deciding
other matters, it was final as far as that case was concerned.  
  
One division of the court may, as stated in Hettiarachchi, (supra) refuse to
follow a decision of another division; however, it would be only in the most
exceptional circumstances that the court would depart from one of its own
precedents. An eminent scholar-judge, the late Justice Silberg of Israel, had
once commented that if a court departed from its own precedents frequently, it
would no longer be a "court of justice", but that it would be a "court of
judges". Justice Silberg's observations were quoted with approval in _Husaam
Haj Yihyeh v. The State of Israel_ ,(23) In that case, the issue was whether a
Bench of three judges of the Supreme Court of Israel could dissent from a
decision of a Bench of five Judges. It was held that while it was possible, it
was undesirable, unless the precedent was incorrect. If it was clearly
incorrect, it should not be followed. As Chief Justice Smoira had said:
"Between truth and stability; truth must prevail". On the other hand, if both
points of view were possible, then as Justice Barak had said, "Between truth
and truth, stability must prevail".  
  
In _Suren Wickramasinghe, (supra)_ , an application to review an order
granting special leave to appeal had been made and a "fuller Bench" had been
requested. The Court said:  
  
Apart from instances where the law expressly provides otherwise, a bench of
more than three Judges can only be constituted under Article 132 (3) of the
Constitution, and the power to do so is vested in the Chief Justice alone.
Article 132 shows, ex facie, that that power can only be exercised in respect
of a pending appeal, proceeding or matter - but not in respect of a concluded
matter. SC (SLA) Application No. 49/96 is a concluded matter. Further, in
terms of Article 132 (2) a judgment or order delivered by a bench of three
Judges is the judgment or order of the Supreme Court, and not of "some
fragmented part of the Court"; it is final (cf. Article 127 (1)), and is not
subject to appeal to another bench of the Court, even if it were to consist of
five, or seven, or nine, or even all the Judges: _Hettiarachchi v. Seneviratne
(No. 2), (supra)_ , where it was also pointed out that,

**97**

It is quite wrong to assume . . . that the power of the Chief Justice under
Article 132 (3) to direct that an appeal, proceeding or matter be heard by a
bench of five or more Judges . . . makes any difference. That provision
confers no right of appeal, revision or review.  
  
**ARTICLE 132 (3) OF THE CONSTITUTION**  
  
The learnd Solicitor-General, agreeing with the submissions of Mr. Marapana,
stated that Article 132 (3) did not confer any right of appeal, revision or
review. That was also the view of this Court in _Hettiarachchi_ , (supra), and
in _Suren Wickramasinghe_ , (supra). I find myself in agreeÂ­ment with that
view.

Article 132 (3) provides as follows:

The Chief Justice may-

> (i) of his own motion; or  
>  
>  (ii) at the request of two or more Judges hearing any matter; or  
>  
>  (iii) on the application of a party to any appeal, proceeding or matter if
> the question involved is in the opinion of the Chief Justice one of general
> and public importance,  
>  
>  direct that such appeal, proceeding or matter be heard by a Bench
> comprising five or more Judges of the Supreme Court.

Perhaps Article 132 (3) in certain respects may be capable of more than one
interpretation. It has, as far as I know, been always taken for granted that a
matter is referred to a Bench of five or more Judges by the Chief Justice,
whether of his own motion, or at the request of two or more Judges, or on the
application of a party, because the question is one of general and public
importance. The Article it seems to me has been taken to mean as follows:  
  
If in the opinion of the Chief Justice the question involved in any appeal,
proceeding or matter is one of general or public importance, he may

**98**

(i) of his own motion; or  
  
(ii) at the request of two or more Judges hearing any matter; or  
  
(iii) on the application of any party in such appeal, proceeding or matter,  
  
direct that such appeal, proceeding or matter be heard by a Bench composed of
five or more Judges of the Supreme Court.  
  
Be that as it may, there has been no doubt that Article 132 provides for the
manner in which the jurisdiction of the Court may be ordinarily exercised.
Article 132 does not confer any jurisdiction on the Court. Nor does Article
132 (3) empower the Chief Justice to refer any matter of public or general
importance to a Bench of five or more Judges. It empowers him to constitute a
Bench of five or more Judges to hear an appeal, proceeding or matter which the
Court has jurisdiction to entertain and decide or determine. The court has no
statutory jurisdicÂ­tion to rehear, reconsider, revise, review, vary or set
aside its own orders. Consequently, the Chief Justice cannot refer a matter to
a Bench of five or more Judges for the purpose of revising, reviewing, varying
or setting aside a decision of the Court. The fact that in the opinion of the
Chief Justice the question involved is a matter of general or public
importance makes no difference. In _Hettiarachchi v. Seneviratne_ ,(4)
followed in _Suren Wickramasinghe and Others v. Cornel Lionel Perera and
Others_ ,(6) it was pointed out that,  
  
It is quite wrong to assume . . . that the power of the Chief Justice under
Article 132 (3) to direct that an appeal, proceeding or matter be heard by a
bench of five or more Judges . . . makes any difference. That provision
confers no right of appeal, revision or review.  
  
To use Article 132 in that way would be to usurp legislative power, in order
to create an additional right of appeal which the ConstituÂ­tion did not
confer; and, indeed, in effect to create a right of appeal with leave from the
Chief Justice sitting alone.  
  
There have been, as far as I have been able to ascertain, at least 58 appeals,
proceedings or matters heard by Benches of five or more

**99**

Judges since 1978. It came as no surprise to find that there is no instance of
a concluded matter ever having been referred to such a Bench under Article 132
(3) for revision, review or further consideration. In _Suren Wickramasinghe
and Others v. Cornel Lionel Perera and Others,_ (supra), Fernando, J.
(Dheeraratne and Wijetunga, JJ. agreeÂ­ing) said as follows:  
  
Apart from instances where the law expressly provides otherÂ­wise, a bench of
more than three judges can only be constituted under Article 132 (3) of the
Constitution, and the power to do so is vested in the Chief Justice alone.
Article 132 shows, ex facie, that power can only be exercised in respect of a
pending appeal, proceeding or matter - but not in respect of a concluded
matter.  
  
The Court had more than enough justification for arriving at that decision.  
  
_Ganeshanatham_ (supra) is not, as it is sometimes supposed, an illustration
of a reference of a concluded matter for review or revision or reconsideration
of its decision by way of an appeal or otherwise. The petitioner in that case
was not a party in S.C. Application 20/83 _Vivienne Goonewarden v. Hector
Perera and Others_ (supra). Indeed, his complaint was that he had been found
guilty of violating Mrs. Goonewardene's fundamental rights without being made
a party to the proceedings and without being heard. It was not a case of the
same question as had been already judicially decided by a Bench of three
Judges once again being raised between the same parties before a Bench of
seven Judges.  
  
When an application was made by the petitioner in Ganeshanatham, (supra), the
matter was listed in the usual way before a Bench composed of the same three
Judges who had heard Vivienne Goonewardene's case because there was reference
in the petition to a matter that had arisen in the hearing and determination
of Ganeshanatham. The caption in Ganeshanatham was as follows: "In the matter
of an application in revision and for the exercise of the inherent powers and
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court." The three Judges, as we have seen, acting
under Article 132 (3) of the Constitution requested the Chief Justice to
determine two questions: "(1) Has the Supreme Court jurisdiction to review or
revise in any manner its own

**100**

judgment in S.C. Application No. 20/83 ( _Vivienne Goonewardene's case_ )? (2)
If so (a) on what grounds or under what circumstances can such jurisdiction be
exercised?; (b) what procedure should be followed to obtain relief?"
Accordingly, the Chief Justice, acting under the powers vested in him by
Article 132 (3), constituted a Bench of seven Judges.  
  
The Court decided that it had no jurisdiction conferred by the Constitution or
any other law to review or revise its own judgment in any matter. However, it
was held that the Court had inherent powers to revise its decisions in certain
circumstances, but that the petitioner's matter was not one in which those
powers should be exercised.  
  
In the matter before us, the 1st Respondent-petitioner prays that the Court be
pleased to (a) "revise and/or review and/or further consider the aforesaid
issue of Hansard, by referring the same for consideration by a fuller Bench,
and (b) to grant such other and further relief as to Your Lordships Court
shall seem meet." The 1st Respondent-petitioner in paragraph 16 of his
petition, stated that "the question of the use of Hansard to assess the
veracity of the affidavit of the 1st Respondent is a matter of public or
general importance and having regard to the expression of dissent by (one of
the Judges), the issue merits further consideration and/or review and/or
revision by a fuller Bench of Your Lordship's Court.".  
  
In the matter before us, the 1st Respondent-petitioner, unlike the petitioner
in _Ganeshanatham_ , was a party in a proceeding that had been finally decided
by the Court. For the reasons I have explained, the Court has no statutory
jurisdiction to revise, review or further consider all or any of the matters
that have been adjudicated upon. The fact that a matter was decided by a
majority does not assist him, for the decision of the majority, whether it be
right or wrong, is the decision of the Supreme Court in terms of Article 132
(4) of the Constitution. The importance of a matter does not, as we have seen,
make any difference. Article 132 does not confer any jurisdiction on the
Court. It merely provides for the manner in which the jurisdictions of the
Court, conferred by the Constitution or by law, may be exercised. Article 132
(3) does not empower he Chief Justice to refer any appeal, proceeding or
matter _whatsoever_ to a Bench of five or more Judges: It empowers him to
constitute a Bench to hear an appeal, proceeding or matter in which the Court
has _jurisdiction_.

**101**

**THE INHERENT JURISDICTION OF THE SUPREME COURT**  
  
Although as a general rule, no court or judge has power to rehear, review,
alter or vary any judgment or order after it has been entered, either in an
application made in the original action or matter or in afresh action brought
to review the judgement or order, yet the rule is subject to certain
exceptions.  
  
All Courts have inherent jurisdiction to vary their orders in certain
circumstances. (E.g. see Hettiarachchi, (supra) at 297; _Wijeyesinghe et al.
v. Uluwita_ (24) _Easwaralingam v. Sivagnanasunderam_ ,(25))  
  
Mr. Marapana submitted that, as far as the Supreme Court - the final Court
-was concerned, the exceptions were limited to those mentioned in
_Ganeshanatham_ , (supra), at page 377 by Rodrigo, J. I am reluctant to limit
the exceptions by any list that purports to be exhaustive, and that is the
preferable course in the consideration of matters of this kind. I see the
difficulty of defining where you are to stop. In the words of Evershed, MR in
_Meier v. Meier_ (26) "I prefer not to attempt a definition of the extent of
the court's inherent jurisdiction to vary, modify or extend its orders if, in
its view, the purposes of justice require that it should do so." The view of
the Master of the Rolls was followed by Morris, LJ in _Thynne (Marchioness of
Bath) v. Thynne (Marquess of Bath)_ , (supra) at pp.145,146). I shall, as
Morris, LJ did, without purporting to categorise, mention some illustrations
of the scope of the Court's powers.  
  
However, let me first say this: When a person invokes to exercise its inherent
powers, the Court must ask itself two questions, as Garvin, SPJ did in
_Mohamed v. Annamalai Chettiar_ ,(27):

> (a) Is it a case which comes within the scope of the inherent powers of this
> Court; and  
>  
>  (b) Is it one in which those powers should be exercised?

There is no doubt that a clerical mistake in a judgment or order or some error
arising in a judgment or order from an accidental slip or omission may be
corrected under the Court's inherent jurisdiction. (See Halsbury, Vol. 26
Paragraphs 556 and 557; cf. _Marambe Kumarihamy v. Perera_ , (supra).

**102**

For instance, in _Padma Fernando v. T. S. Fernano_ ,(28) in the matter of an
application for a writ of habeas corpus, H.N.G. Fernando, J. delivered his
judgment on the 24th of October, 1956 holding that a father's right to the
custody of his child during the subsistence of his marriage may be overridden
on the ground that if the child is permitted to continue in the custody of the
father there would be detriment to the life, health or morals of the child. In
the circumstances of the case, his Lordship directed the father to deliver
custody of the child to the mother. On October 29th 1956, H.N.G. Fernando, J.
said (at p. 264): "My attention has been drawn to provide in the above order
that the Respondent (the father) may have access to the child. I direct that
the Respondent should have the right to visit the child ................"  
  
A court has the power to vary its orders in such a way as to carry out its own
meaning and, where the language used is doubtful, to make it plain. (See per
Lord Penzance in _Lawrie v. Lees_ ,(29). In _Re Swire_ (30) Lindley, LJ. said
that ". . . if an order . . . does not express the real order of the Court, it
would, as it appears to me, be shocking to say that the party aggrieved cannot
come here to have the record set right . . . It appears to me, therefore that,
if it is once made out that the order . . . does not express the order
actually made, the Court has ample jurisdiction to set that aright, whether it
arises from a clerical slip or not."  
  
In _Paul E. de Costa & Sons v. S. Gunaratne_,(31) the decree of the District
Court was that the petitioners who carried on business under the name of "Paul
E. de Costa & Sons" should pay a sum of Rs. 60,000 from their personal and
private assets. However, according to the judgment, the sum was payable out of
the firm"s money and not out of the personal property of the partners. The
decree had been affirmed in appeal by the Supreme Court. Upon application for
revision, Manicavasagar, J. (Samerawickrame, J. agreeing) said at p. 215 as
follows:  
  
. . . the Court has the inherent power, if the judgment does not correctly
state what it actually decided and intended, to vary its judgment so as to
carry out its manifest intention. The law on this point was stated by Lord
Watson in the case of _Hatton v. Harris_ (32) and it supports the proposition
I have just stated:  
  
When an error of that kind has been committed, it is always within the
competency of the Court, if nothing has intervened

**103**

which would render it inexpedient or inequitable to do so, to correct the
record in order to bring it into harmony with the order which the Judge
obviously meant to pronounce.  
  
The Supreme Court held that the decree should be amended by the addition of
the stipulation that "the said sum of Rs. 60,000 and interest shall not be
recoverable from the personal and private assets of the petitioners save and
except to the extent of their interests in the said firm of Paul E. de Costa
and Sons."  
  
In _Raju v. Jacob_ ,(33) the petitioner, who had been sentenced to a term of
one year's rigorous imprisonment, did not appeal against the order of the
Magistrate but made an application in revision. The Supreme Court ordered that
hard labour be stayed from the 19th of July 1967 till the disposal of the
application. When the application was subsequently dismissed on the 14th of
September 1967, the Court made no order regarding the resumption of hard
labour as the fact that hard labour had been stayed was not brought to its
notice. Further, on account of the delay, through oversight, in the
communication to the authorities of the order dismissing the application in
revision, hard labour was not resumed until the 30th of October 1967. It was
contended on behalf of the petitioner that the entire period during which he
was kept in remand without hard labour should be deducted from the term of one
year's rigorous imprisonment imposed on him. There was no authority or
provision of law in regard to a similar matter in so far as applications for
revision were concerned although there was statutory provision with regard to
appeals. The Criminal Procedure Code provided that in the case of an appellant
who was in custody pending an appeal, the Supreme Court had the power to order
that the time so spent or any part thereof shall be reckoned as part of the
term of his sentence. Weeramantry, J. in granting the petitioner the benefit
of the period spent in remand said as follows:  
  
I see little distinction in principle between an appeal in which hard labour
is stayed and a revision application in which this court has made express
order to the same effect. Moreover the revision application in this case has
been filed in respect of an appealable order and I do not think it would be
correct to deny relief to the applicant on the mere technicality that what
came before this court

**104**

 was a revision application and not an appeal. If in the exercise of its
jurisdiction this court may give byway of revision the same relief it may
grant by way of appeal I see no justification for denying to an applicant in
revision, whose application has been entertained by this court, an elementary
right which is conferred on every appellant. The silence of the Criminal
Procedure Code on this matter cannot take away from the inherent powers of
this court to grant relief of the nature contemplated by section 341 (5) to an
applicant in revision. The grant of such relief is of course a matter entirely
in the discretion of the court and will always be dependent on the
circumstances of each case. In the circumstances of this case I cannot lose
sight of the fact that notice has issued upon the revision application and
that a stay of hard labour has been expressly ordered by this court. It is
also most unusual for revision applications to be filed by accused in jail and
I understand this to be the only application so filed over a long period of
time.  
  
In _Kariapperuma and Another v. D. J. Kotelawala_ ,(34) H. N. G. Fernando, CJ.
(Thamotheram, J. agreeing), allowed an appeal and dismissed the plaintiff's
action. The Chief Justice in his judgment considered the judgment of Keuneman,
J. in _Valliammai Atchi v. O. L. M. Abdul Majeed_ (35) and the decision of the
Privy Council in that case reported in 48 NLR 289. In a "Post-Script" to the
judgment, the Chief Justice explained as follows:  
  
I much regret that owing to an error in my note of the arguments in this
appeal, my judgment attributed to Counsel for the RespondÂ­ent a submission
different from that which he actually made. His submission that a trust arose
in this case did not depend on the judgment of Keuneman, J. in _Valliammai
Atchi's_ (35) case, although it happens somewhat curiously that that judgment
was of assistÂ­ance in considering the question to be decided in the present
case. But Counsel had depended instead on a judgment of the same learned Judge
reported in the same volume of the Report - _Jonga v. Nanduwa_.(36)  
  
The Chief Justice then examines the matter in the light of the decision in
_Jonga v. Nanduwa (supra)_ , and after finding that the facts of that case
were "in no way comparable", confirms the view expressed by him earlier.

**105**

**Halsbury, Vol. 26 paragraph 556 states that,  
**  
The court has inherent jurisdiction to vary or clarify an order so as to carry
out the court's meaning or make the language plain, or to amend it where a
party has been wrongly named or described unless this would change the
substance of the judgment. The court will treat as a nullity and set aside, of
its own motion if necessary, a judgment entered against a person who was in
fact dead or a non-existent company or, in certain circumstances, a judgment
in default or a consent judgment. Where there has been some procedural
irregularity in the proceedings leading up to the judgment or order which is
so serious that the judgment or order ought to be treated as a nullity, the
Court will set it aside.  
  
In _Menchinahamy v. Muniweera_ ,(37) about six weeks after an appeal to the
Supreme Court from an interlocutory decree in the District Court was dismissed
by the Supreme Court, an application was made to the Supreme Court "for
revision or in the alternative for restitutio-in-integrum by the heirs of a
party-defendant who had died before the interlocutory decree was entered but
whose heirs had not been substituted in his place before the interlocutory
decree was so entered. There was no other remedy open to the petitioner except
to move the Supreme Court for relief. Dias, SPJ (Gunasekera, J. agreeing) said
at pp. 414-415 as follows:  
  
We now come to the substantial point which has been urged in this case,
namely, that not only are there no merits in the present application of the
petitioner, but also that if we grant her the relief she seeks we will in
effect be sitting in judgment on a two-Judge decision of this Court in the
earlier appeal and which is now embodied in a decree of the Supreme Court
which has passed the Seal of the court. It was argued that the Supreme Court
by means of restitutio in integrum cannot vary its own decrees, especially
after they have passed the Seal of the Supreme Court. It was pointed out that
the powers of this Court are not unlimited. It is urged that section 36 of the
Courts Ordinance (Chapter VI) defines the jurisdiction of the court, while
section 37 only permits this Court to interfere with the judgments of an
original Court and it cannot interfere with the orders of the Supreme Court.
It is pointed

**106**

out that section 776 of the Civil Procedure Code deals with the sealing of
decrees of the Supreme Court, and that once a decree has been sealed, such
decree, if it is a judgment of two Judges of this Court, cannot be varied by
another bench of two Judges.  
  
The question, however, is whether such arguments can prevail in a case of this
kind. Let me take one example. P files a partition action against A. B and C.
A and B appear and file answer. C does not. There is a contest and a trial.
The District judge enters an interlocutory decree. There is an appeal to the
Supreme Court which affirms the judgment and decree of the District Court. The
Supreme Court judgment is sealed. Thereafter, before final decree is entered,
C comes forward and satisfies the Court by proof that there was, in fact, no
service of summons on him. It is everyday practice in a case like that for the
Court to hold that all the earlier proceedings are abortive and of no effect.
If authority is needed this is supplied by the following cases:- _Caldera v.
Santiagopillai_ ,(38) _Juan Perera v. Stephen Fernando_ ,(39) and _Thambiraja
v. Sinnamma_.(40) The last case on this point is that of _Publis v. Eugena
Hamy_ (41) which laid down that where a summons in a partition action is not
properly served on a party, such party is not bound by the final decree in the
case and it can be vacated even when the irregularity has been discovered
after final decree was entered. It is to be noted that in the present case
final decree has not yet been entered.  
  
The situation which emerges in the present case is that Saineris was a party.
He died before the trial without steps having been taken to substitute his
heirs who were, therefore, not bound by the subsequent proceedings. In giving
relief to the petitioner we are not sitting in judgment either on the
interlocutory decree or on the decree in appeal passed by this Court. We are
merely declaring that, so far as the petitioner is concerned, there has been a
violation of the principles of natural justice which makes it incumÂ­bent on
this Court, despite technical objections to the contrary, to do justice. In my
opinion, therefore, the order of this Court should be that the petitioner and
the other heirs of Saineris should be forthwith added as parties to this
action, and that after she has filed her statement of claim, the District
Judge should proceed to

**107**

adjudicate on the merits of her application. It will also be the duty of the
plaintiff to see that all the necessary parties are before the Court before
any further application is made. I would go further and say that in view of
the irregularity in not joining Saineris' heirs, in my opinion both the
interlocutory decree in this action and the subsequent judgment of this Court
in appeal are of no effect, because by reason of the non-observance of the
steps in proceÂ­dure no proper interlocutory decree was, in fact, entered in
this case ....  
  
_W. Sirivasa Thero v. Sudassi Thero_ ,(42) was not a case in which the Supreme
Court varied its own order; but it is instructive. In that case, the plaintiff
sued three other priests for a declaration that he was entitled to the office
of Viharadhipathi, incumbent and trustee of a Vihara and Pansala and to the
management and control of their temporalities. He did not ask for possession
of any property. He obtained judgment and decree as prayed for and, upon his
application to execute the decree, a writ of possession was issued in respect
of a room in the Pansala. The petitioner who was in occupation of the room was
ejected. The petitioner filed action in the District Court in respect of his
eviction, but the District Judge held that he was not in law entitled to
possession because the defendant as Viharadhipathi was entitled to control the
occupation of the Pansala. In appeal, it was held that the Court had no
jurisdiction to issue the writ of possession and the Court ordered that the
petitioner be restored to possession. Sansoni, J. (H.N.G. Fernando, J.
agreeing) said as follows at pages 33-34:  
  
Since the decree was one in respect of which, under the Code, the judgment-
creditor could not ask for, and the Court had no power to issue a writ of
possession, it seems to me that the Court was acting without jurisdiction in
issuing such a writ. The foundation of a writ of possession is a decree for
possession, and a writ of possession which is not founded on such a decree is
a nullity, because in issuing it the Court acts in excess of its jurisdiction.
Where a Court makes an order without jurisdiction, as in this case, it has
inherent power to set it aside; and the person affected by the order is
entitled ex debito justitiae to have it set aside. It is not necessary to
appeal from such an order, which is a nullity . . .

**108**

The question now arises as to what order we should make on this appeal. The
plaintiff asked the Court to restore him to possession of the room, because he
had been dispossessed of it in execution of the decree. Section 328, no doubt,
contemplates dispossession under decrees for possession of immovable property,
but this is not a matter which we can allow to stand in the way of the
plaintiff, for we must have regard to the substance rather than the form.
Justice requires that he should be restored to the position he occupied before
the invalid order was made, for it is a rule that the Court will not permit a
suitor to suffer by reason of its wrongful act. The Court will, so far as
possible, put him in the position which he would have occupied if the wrong
order had not been made. It is a power which is inherent in the Court itself,
and rests on the principle that a Court of Justice is under a duty to repair
the injury done to a party by its act: see _Rodger v. Comptoir D' Escompte de
Paris_.(43)  
  
I would, therefore, direct that the plaintiff be restored to possession of the
room . . .  
  
In _Katiramanthamby and Another v. Lebbethamby Hadjiar_ ,(44) Lebbethamby
Hadjiar was the sole beneficiary named in the last will of a Tamil lady who
died in Batticaloa leaving valuable property. He made an application for
probate of the Will. He named no respondents to his application and averred in
an affidavit that to the best of his knowledge and belief the deceased had
left only himself as her sole heir. The District Judge made order nisi
declaring the Will to be proved and directed that a copy of the Order shall be
published in the Government Gazette and in the Daily News. The order nisi was
in fact published not in the Daily News as ordered by the Court but in the
Daily Mirror. Thereafter order absolute was entered but probate of the Will
was not actually issued by the Court. Then Katiramanthamby and his brother
filed an application objecting to the grant of probate and seeking to
intervene in the testamentary proceedings. They claimed that they were the
sons of a sister of the deceased and that they were her intestate heirs. After
inquiry, the District Judge made order vacating the order absolute and
allowing the intervention of the petitioners and fixed the case for further
inquiry. Lebbethamby Hadjiar then appealed against the order of the District
Judge vacating his earlier order, and the Supreme

**109**

Court set aside the order of the District Judge on the ground that the latter
had no jurisdiction to vacate the order absolute previously made.
Katiramantamby and his brother then made an application in revision in which
they prayed that the Court set aside the order absolute and allow them an
opportunity to show cause against the order absolute being entered. They
claimed by affidavit that the Respondent was a Muslim and a complete stranger
to the deceased, and that the Respondent deliberately omitted in his original
petition to inform Court that the petitioners were the lawful intestate heirs.
It is significant that in his application for probate, the Respondent had made
no averment in terms of section 525 of the Civil Procedure Code that he "has
no reason to suppose that his application will be opposed by any person."
According to the affidavits of the petitioners, the deceased, the Respondent
and the petitioners were all residents of Valaichenai. The principal ground on
which the petitioners relied in support of their application was that section
532 of the Civil Procedure Code imperatively required the District Judge to
select a newspaper for the publication of the order nisi "with the object that
notice of the order should reach all persons interested in the administration
of the deceased's property." In the opinion of the Supreme Court the
publication of the order in the _Daily Mirror or in the Daily News_ , which
were English Newspapers, "did not suffice to reach persons in the position of
the petitioners, whose interests section 532 was intended to protect." H. N.
G. Fernando, C.J. (Weeramantry, J. agreeing) stated as follows at p. 231:  
  
I must therefore hold when the District Judge failed to select a newspaper
which would satisfy the object mentioned in section 532, he failed to comply
with a mandatory provision of law, and thus the mandatory requirement of
publication was not satisfied.  
  
The remaining question is whether our powers in revision to set aside the
order absolute cannot now be exercised, because in the previous appeal the
Supreme Court restored the Order Absolute . . . In that appeal however, the
Supreme Court only held that the District Judge should not have set aside his
own order and the judgment cites a passage from the case of _Paulusz v.
Perera_ , (45) to the effect that "the correction of all errors of fact and
law of a District Court is vested (by) the Courts Ordinance in the Supreme
Court". While no doubt the present petitioners could at that stage

**110**

have invited this Court to exercise its powers of revision in their favour,
the petitioners took substantially the same course, when within a few weeks
after the decision of that appeal, they made the present application in
revision. We must I think take into account the fact that there appear to have
been grave deficiencies in the respondent's original application for probate,
and also the fact that, _prima facie_ , this was an unusual Will.  
  
For these reasons the application of the present petitioners is allowed; the
order absolute for probate is set aside, and the petitioners will be permitted
to intervene in the testamentary proceedings . . .  
  
As pointed out in _Hettiarachchi_ , (supra) at p. 299, the head note in the
report of _Katiramanthamby_ , (supra) is misleading, for the Supreme Court did
not set aside its own order. What it was requested to do by the petitioners,
and what it did in fact, was to set aside the first order of the District
Judge which he himself could not have set aside, thereby enabling the nephews
of the deceased to intervene in the testamentary proceedings. The District
Judge was wrong and realized his mistake, but he could do nothing about it,
for, as Halsbury (Vol. 26 paragraph 557, p. 281) observes:  
  
A judgment or order will not be varied . . . when it correctly represents what
the court decided and where the court itself was wrong, nor can the operative
and substantive part of the judgment be varied and a different form
substituted . . .  
  
Halsbury (Vol 26, paragraph 560, page 285) states that  
  
A judgment which has been obtained by fraud either in the court or of one or
more of the parties may be impeached by means of an action . . . In such an
action it is not sufficient merely to allege fraud without giving any
particulars, and the fraud must relate to matters which prima facie would be a
reason for setting the judgment aside if they were established by proof, and
not to matters which are merely collateral. The court requires a strong case
to be estabÂ­lished before it will set aside a judgment on this ground, and the
action will be stayed or dismissed as vexatious unless the fraud

**111**

alleged raises a reasonable prospect of success and was discovÂ­ered since the
judgment . . .  
  
An action will lie to rescind a judgment on the ground of the discovery of new
evidence which would have had a material effect upon the decision of the
Court. It must be shown (1) that the evidence could not have been obtained
with reasonable diligence for use at the trial and (2) that the further
evidence is such that if given it would have an important effect on the result
of the trial although it need not be decisive and (3) that the evidence is
such as is presumably to be believed. (Halsbury, Vol. 26 paragraph 561). In
_Loku Banda v. Assen_ ,(46) Withers, J. affirmed the decision of the Court of
Requests. However, he ordered the record to be brought up to decide whether
there should be a new trial because an important piece of evidence in the form
of a document was reported to have been discovered in the record room of the
trial court after the Supreme Court had decided the appeal. In the
circumstances of the case, however, Withers, J. declined to vary his order
although he held that the Court had the power to review a judgment of its own
passed in appeal where it appears that fresh evidence has been discovered
since such judgment was pronounced.  
  
In _Palitha v. O. I. C. Polonnaruwa and Others_ , (13) the Supreme Court had
to decide on the alleged infringement of the petitioner's fundamental rights
guaranteed by Article 13 of the Constitution. The application had been
dismissed on the 12th of February 1993 since the Court was informed by learned
State Counsel that the petitioner was due to be released on the 30th of April
1993 after rehabilitation. However, due to a typographical error, the order
made by the Court stated that the petitioner had been so released on the 30th
of April 1992\. The petitionÂ­er's father requested the Commissioner-General of
Rehabilitation to release the petitioner on the basis of the Court's order. On
the 2nd of April, 1993 the Commissioner-General informed the Court that the
petitioner had not been sent for rehabilitation and that he was still in
custody at the Pelawatta detention camp. State Counsel confirmed that the
petitioner had not been sent for rehabilitation even after the Attorney-
General had on the 19th of February, 1993 communicated the fact that the Court
had been informed that the petitioner was due to be rehabiliÂ­tated. The
petitioner was released from the Detention Camp on the 30th of April, 1993.
The Court restored the matter and granted the petitioner

**112**

a declaration that his rights under paragraphs (2) and (4) of Article 13 had
been infringed and directed the State to pay a sum of Rs. 17,500 as
compensaton. Kulatunga, J. (Ramanathan and Wijetunga, JJ. (agreeÂ­ing) said at
p. 162:  
  
Considering the fact that the order of this Court dated 12.02.1993 was made on
wrong facts given to the prejudice of the petitioner, we set aside the said
order by way of remedying the injustice caused to the petitioner
(notwithstanding the failure of his Counsel to appear in Court though noticed,
which failure appears to be due to the short notice given to him) - vide
_Wijesinghe v. Uluwita_ (24) and _Ganeshanatham v Goonewardene_ (supra) at p.
329.  
  
Costs have been awarded to a successful party in the exercise of its inherent
powers Gratiaen, J. observing that he was resorting to the inherent
jurisdiction of the Court "especially as it is in aid of justice" :
_Karuppannan v. Commissioner for Registration of Indian and Pakistani
Residents_. (47)  
  
Whether it is in the exercise of its extraordinary inherent jurisdiction or
otherwise in the performance of its ordinary statutory duties, the Court is
obliged to keep the attainment of justice in view. _Velupillai v. The Chairman
Urban District Council, Jaffna_ ,(48) was not a case relating to the inherent
powers of the court, but the observations of the Chief Justice in that case
provide us with valuable guidance. In that case the plaintiff had a cause of
action against the Urban District Council of Jaffna. His proctor was under the
erroneous impression that the Council could not be sued and therefore action
was filed naming the Chairman of the Council as the defendant. When the
parties came to trial the preliminary issue was raised on behalf of the
defendant that the action against the Chairman was not properly instituted.
The District Judge allowed that issue. The proctor for the plaintiff moved to
amend the caption. The District Judge refused him permission to amend the
caption. Abrahams, CJ. (with whom Soertsz, J. agreed) at p. 76 said:  
  
I think that if we do not allow the amendment in this case we should be doing
a very grave injustice to the plaintiff. It would appear as if the
shortcomings of his legal adviser, the peculiarities of law and procedure and
the congestion in the courts have all combined to

**113**

deprive him of a cause of action and I for one refuse to be a party to such an
outrage upon justice. This is a Court of Justice, it is not an Academy of Law.  
  
I would allow the amendment . . .  
  
However, as we shall see, justice must be done according to law. Moreover, in
applying the law to the circumstances of a case, different conclusions may be
reached by the Judges hearing the matter. Thus in Ganeshanatham, (supra),
although the seven Judges who heard the matter were of the opinion that, as a
Superior Court of Record, the Supreme Court has inherent powers to make
corrections to meet the ends of justice (see per Samarakoon, C.J. at p. 329 -
Sharvananda, Wimalaratne, Colin Thorne and Wanasundera, JJ. agreeing -see p.
340; per Ranasinghe, J. at p. 355; and per Rodrigo, J. at p. 377), the Court
(5-2) did not think that the case was one in which the inherent powers of the
Court should be exercised.  
  
The court has consistently recognized the fact that it has inherent power to
correct decisions made per incuriam. (E.g. see _The Police Officer of Mawalla
v. Galapatta_ ,(49) P.C. Batticaloa, 8306, In Revision,(50) _The King v. Baron
Silva et al_.,(51) _Mohamed v. Annamalai Chettiar,_ (supra); _Elo Singho v.
Joseph,_ (supra); _Ranmenikhamy and Another v. Tissera and Others_ ,(52)
Ganeshanatham (supra) (Seven Judges) at 329, 355, 377; Hettiarachchi, (supra);
Senerath v. Chandraratne, CommisÂ­sioner of Excise and others, (supra) at 212,
216; _All Ceylon Commercial & Industrial Workers Union v. Ceylon Petroleum
Corporation and Another,_ (supra) at 297.  
  
Earl Jowitt in his Dictionary of English Law, (2nd Ed. 1977, Vol. 2 p. 1347)
translates the phrase to mean "through want of care". He goes on to explain
that "A decision or dictum of a judge which clearly is the result of some
oversight is said to have been given per incuriam." In _Farrell v. Alexander_
,(53) Lord Justice Scarman in the Court of Appeal translated per incuriam as
"Homer nodded". Others, however, have given the phrase a more restricted
meaning. Lord Chief Justice Goddard in _Huddersfield Police Authority v.
Watson,_ (54) said:  
  
What is meant by giving a decision per incuriam is giving a decision when a
case or statute has not been brought to the

**114**

attention of the court and they have given the decision in ignorance or
forgetfulness of the existence of that case or that statute.  
  
Lord Goddard's definition was adopted by Basnayake, J. in _Alasuppillai v.
Yavetpillai_ ,(55) and by Kulatunga, J. (G.P.S. de Silva, CJ. and Ramanathan,
J. agreeing) in _All Ceylon Commercial and Industrial Workers Union_ , (supra)
at 297. In _Hettiarachchi_ , (supra), at p. 299 the Court (Fernando,
Amerasinghe and Perera, JJ.) said that "A decision will be regarded as given
per incuriam if it was in ignorance of some inconsistent statute or binding
decision . . . "  
  
In _The King v. Baron Silva_ , (supra), the petitioners were the 3rd and 4th
accused in a case in which they were charged with agreeing with three others
to act together with the common purpose of committing the offence of extortion
and that they thereby committed the offence of conspiracy punishable under
sections 113 (b) and 373 of the Penal Code. They were convicted and the
convictions were upheld by the Supreme Court. They applied to the Court to
revise the judgment in appeal on the ground that section 113 (b) of the Penal
Code was not in force on the date of the alleged commission of the offence,
namely the 23rd of March 1924\. That section was introduced by the Penal Code
Amendment Ordinance No. 5 of 1924\. It was passed on the 20th of March 1924,
but did not receive the sanction of the Governor till the 6th of May 1924.
There was no doubt that the offence of conspiracy as defined in that amendment
was not an offence on the date the petitioners were alleged to have committed
the offence. Maartensz, J. said:  
  
Two questions arise from the application, first, whether this Court has the
power to revise its own judgment, and second, whether in the circumstances of
this case the verdict should be altered or the accused acquitted. The first
point is free from difficulty for I think that if this Court per incuriam
affirms the conviction of a man for an offence which at the time of the
alleged committal of it was not an offence under the law, the Court has
inherent power to revise its verdict. There is ample authority for this
proposition in the case of the _Police Officer of Mawilla v. Galapatha_
(supra) and in the anonymous case reported in the 2nd Volume of the New Law
Reports p. 475. In both cases it was held that the Supreme Court had power
acting in revision to vacate its own order made _per incuriam_.

**115**

The sentences were varied.  
  
In _P.C. Batticaloa, 8306 In Revision,_ (supra), in an appeal from the
decision of a Police Magistrate, Shaw, J. while dismissing the appeal on the
facts, expressed the view that the Magistrate had no jurisdiction to try the
case summarily. His attention had not been called to the change effected in
the Penal Code by Ordinance No. 31 of 1919, section 22 (b). His Lordship had
sent the case back for the Magistrate to take non-summary proceedings. "This
decision of mine was undoubtedly wrong and made pet incuriam", said his
Lordship, and varied his order taking the error into account. His Lordship
said that the case of _The Police Officer of Mawilla v. Galapata_ , (supra),
satisfactorily showed that he had the power to put the matter right in
revision.  
  
In _Young . Bristol Aeroplane Co. Ltd, (supra)_ (cited with approval by
Samarakoon, CJ. in Billimoria v. Minister of Lands, (supra) at p.14; and by
Rodrigo, J. in Ganeshanatham, (supra) at pp. 377-378), Lord Greene, MR pointed
to two classes of decisions per incuriam that did not come within the scope of
its inquiry in that case:  
  
(1) a decision in ignorance of a previous decision of its own Court or a Court
of a co-ordinate jurisdiction covering the case; and  
  
(2) a decision in ignorance of a previous decision of a higher Court covering
the case which binds the lower Court.  
  
The definition of the phrase per incuriam in Lord Goddard's terms has been
regarded as being too restrictive. In _Morelle Ltd. v. Wakeling_ (56)
(followed in _Billimoria v. Minister of Lands_ , (supra) at p.14 by
Samarakoon, CJ. and in _Ganeshanatham_ , (supra) by Ranasinghe, J. at p. 355
and by Rodrigo, J. at p. 378) Evershed, MR said as follows:  
  
As a general rule the only cases in which decisions should be held to have
been given per incuriam are those decisions given in ignorance or
forgetfulness of some inconsistent statutory proviÂ­sion or of some authority
binding on the court concerned so that in such cases some part of the decision
or some step in the reasoning on which it is based is found, on that account,
to be demonstrably wrong. This definition is not necessarily exhaustive,

**116**

but cases not strictly within it which can properly be held to have been
decided per incuriam must, in our judgment, consistently with the stare
_decisis_ rule which is an essential feature of our law, be . . . of the
rarest occurrence."  
  
There are several instances of the Court acknowledging that it had acted _per
incuriam_ in circumstances which might not have been accommodated within Lord
Goddard's definition.  
  
In the _Police Officer of Mawilla v. Galapata_ , (supra) the accused was
charged with an offence under the Excise Ordinance and convicted and sentenced
to pay a fine. At the argument of the appeal, his counsel took up the point
that the proceedings were bad ab initio, inasmuch as there was nothing to show
that the complaint or the report on which the accused was brought to Court was
made by an Excise Commissioner, a Government Agent, or an Excise officer
authorised by either of them on that behalf. Wood Renton, CJ. said;  
  
I called the attention of counsel to the fact that the prosecution purported
to be sanctioned by a signature, which I took from my own personal experience
of it, to be that of Mr Forrest. The appellant's counsel accepted my assurance
that the signature was that of Mr. Forrest, and after argument the appeal was
dismissed. The appellant now applies in revision to have the order of this
Court dismissing the appeal set aside on the ground that the signature in
question was not that of Mr. Forrest at all, or of any person possessing the
necessary status under section 49 of the Excise Ordinance . . . It appears to
me that the powers of the Supreme court are sufficiently wide to enable me to
interfere by way of revision. I set aside, as having been made per incuriam
and by what may prove to be a mistake on the part of the Court itself, the
order of 23rd July dismissing the appeal and send the case back to the Police
Court of Tangalle for further inquiry and adjudication on the question whether
the requisite authority for the institution of the proceedings was given. The
petition filed in support of the present application does not indicate whose
the signature in question is. If it should prove on further inquiry not to be
a proper authority for the report, the whole proceedings will be quashed. But
if, on the other hand, it should be shown that the

**117**

signature, whether it is that of Mr. Forrest or not, is a proper
authentication of the prosecution, the conviction and sentence will stand
affirmed.  
  
In _Mohamed v. Annamalai Chettiar_ , (supra) the Supreme Court used its
inherent powers to free an insolvent from arrest pending the decision of his
appeal to the Privy Council although there was no statutory authority for such
an order. Garvin SPJ said:  
  
I should be reluctant to subscribe to the proposition that this Court has no
powers other than those derived from express legislation. Like other courts in
the Empire and in particular Superior Courts, this Court has always been
considered to possess a certain reserve of powers which are generally referred
to as inherent powers. It has been said that these powers are equal to its
desire to order that which it believes to be just. This is perhaps too wide
and somewhat misleading a statement. No court may disregard the law of the
land or purport in any case to ignore its provisions. Where a matter has been
specifically dealt with or provided for by law there can be no question that
the law must prevail, for justice must be done according to law. It is only
when the law is silent that a case for the exercise by a Court for the
exercise of its inherent powers can arise . . .  
  
Subject to the limitations above referred to the inherent powers of this Court
would seem to extend to the making of such orders as may be necessary for the
ends of justice and to prevent abuse of the process of the Court. But these
powers must be exercised in accordance with sound legal principles and not
arbitrarily whenÂ­ever a case arises which is not provided for by legislation.  
  
. . . Is it a case which comes within the scope of the inherent powers of this
Court and is it one in which those powers should be exercised?...  
  
Must we stand by and do nothing to prevent the arrest and imprisonment of the
applicant in the interval, which may well be a long one, before the order of
the Privy Council is made known? His estate is under sequestration and no
pecuniary or other loss or

**118**

prejudice to the opposing creditors is involved in granting his prayer for
protection. It only means that their right to arrest his person and cast him
in prison for debt will be postponed until the Privy Council decides whether
he is a person who is liable to be arrested and imprisoned.  
  
For my part, I am satisfied that this is a case in which the Court has
inherent power which should be exercised to prevent what might prove to be a
grave injustice to the applicant and that in granting his application we shall
be acting on sound judicial principle and in accordance with the intention of
the Legislature manifested in parallel cases for which it has made provision.  
  
I would accordingly direct that the insolvent be granted protection until the
decision of His Majesty in Council upon his appeal is made known.  
  
In _Ranmenikhamy and Another v. Tissera and Others_ , (supra), an appeal to
the Supreme Court was rejected on the application of counsel for certain
respondents on the ground that notice of appeal had not been served on one of
the other Respondents. (It might be observed that the failure to serve notice
on a party against whom an order is made, is a serious procedural irregularity
on which the Court may set aside its order: _Craig v. Kanssen_ (57) ; _Chief
Kofi Forfie v Barima Kwabena Sheifah Kenyaschene_ ,(58) _Woolfenden v.
Woolenden_ ,(59) cf. _Katiramathamby and another v. Lebbethamby Hadjiar_ ,
(supra); Menchinahamy v. Muniweera, (supra). It was later proved to the Court
that the Respondent in question was a minor who was represented in the action
by a duly appointed guardian-ad-litem on whom notice of appeal had been duly
served. It was also conceded that the objection was raised and not resisted as
the result of a mistake common to both counsel and that there had been
substantial notice of appeal to the minor Respondent. The Court (T. S.
Fernando and Herat, JJ) set aside its order on the ground that it had acted
_per incuriam._  
  
In _Nisha Sudarshi Ganeshi Kumarasena v. Sub-Inspector Sriyantha and Others_
,(60) the presiding Judge sent his draft judgment to two other Judges who
approved it and later signed the three final copies of the judgement. The
judgment was reported in the press and was the subject

**119**

of adverse comment in the press. The presiding Judge then realized that the
two Judges who had agreed with him had not been members of the Bench that
heard the matter and submitted the judgment he had delivered as a draft to the
two Judges who heard the matter with him. One of those Judges wrote a separate
judgment, while the other agreed with the judgment of the presiding Judge. The
presiding Judge then directed the Registrar to list the matter for delivery of
Judgment and a new Judgment was delivered, the presiding Judge explaining that
the former decision of the Court had been made _per incuriam_.  
  
**IS THE MATTER BEFORE US ONE THAT COMES WITHIN THE SCOPE OF THE INHERENT
POWERS OF THE COURT?**  
  
Strictly speaking, the 1st Respondent-petitioner, unlike the petiÂ­tioner in
_Ganeshanatham_ , (supra), did not in his petition expressly invoke this Court
to grant relief in the exercise of its inherent powers.  
  
The directions of the Acting Chief Justice dated the 22nd of December 1995
make no reference to the inherent jurisdiction of the Court. Nevertheless, if,
the Acting Chief Justice, of his own motion, was as Humphreys, J. put it in
_Re a Solicitor_ ,(61) endeavouring to place the 1st Respondent-petitioner's
petition before the Court "in that most attractive form, an appeal to the
inherent jurisdiction of the Court," his Lordship, with great respect, had no
power to do so. Article 132(3), in my view, does not empower the Chief Justice
to do so. That Article, as I have stated earlier, does not confer
jurisdiction. The inherent jurisdiction of the Court is not vested in it by
any provision of the Constitution, or by Parliament in terms of Article 118
(g) of the Constitution but is a power intrinsically attached to the Court as
a superior court of record. (Cf. Article 105 (3); cf. also Article 118).  
  
Moreover, the fact that the question involved is a matter of general or public
importance has never been regarded as a ground for the exercise of the Court's
inherent powers.  
  
Be that as it may, giving a liberal interpretation to paragraphs 05 and 06
read with the prayer of the petition of the 1st Respondent-petitioner and
assuming that the 1st Respondent-petitioner did invoke this Court to grant
relief in the exercise of its inherent powers, is his case one that

**120**

comes within the inherent powers of the Court? If so, is it a case in which
those powers should be exercised?  
  
Mr Marapana submitted that the matter before us did not "even remotely" come
within the scope of the inherent powers of the Court.  
  
According to Mr. Goonesekere, the gravamen of the 1st-RespondentÂ­petitioner's
complaint is that, although he was noticed and represented by Counsel, there
was no opportunity or insufficient opportunity to deal with the matter of the
admissibility and evidentiary value of the 1st Respondent-petitioner's speech
in Parliament that was used by the majority of Judges to contradict the
averments in the 1st RespondentÂ­-petitioner's affidavit. The basis for holding
him liable was the speech in Parliament. Had it been excluded, the 1st
Respondent-Petitioner would have been exonerated. Since he had been found
"guilty" on the basis of the inadmissible speech, the 1st Respondent-
petitioner had suffered injustice.  
  
The 1st Respondent-petitioner states in his petition as follows:  
  
05\. The 1st Respondent filed his counter-affidavit dated 23rd May, 1995. The
1st petitioner annexed to his counter-affidavit dated 31.5.95 an extract of
Hansard of 7.2.95 containing a speech made by the 1st Respondent. This was
marked P 16. As the said extract was filed along with the counter-affidavit,
the 1st Respondent was unable to counter the same.  
  
06\. The question as to whether the statement made by the 1st Respondent in
Parliament was covered by Parliamentary PriviÂ­lege, was not raised in the
course of the hearing or even thereafter. His Lordship Justice Fernando, in
his judgment, stated as follows:-  
  
The second issue, as to Parliamentary privilege is one which no one even
mentioned, even in passing. Neither the 1st Respondent nor his Counsel raised
it in the pleadings, in the written submisÂ­sions or in the oral argument -
although the Court itself specifically drew the attention of Counsel to the
effect of the Hansard extracts on the reliability of the 1st Respondent's
affidavit. And they have not sought to raise it even after judgment was
reserved.

**121**

Mr. Goonesekere also drew our attention to the following passage in the
judgment of Fernando, J.:  
  
. . . Ordinarily I would hesitate to disagree with the considered opinion of
Samarakoon, CJ; especially a decision in a case which was argued for twelve
days in the Court of Appeal and for another four in this Court. More so here,
without the benefit of an iota of research, or a minute of submissions, by
Counsel, upon an issue on which we ought not to have to depend on our own
researches..  
  
Mr. Goonesekere stated that there were two incidents and that it was in
respect of the first incident that the affidavit was filed. When Mr. Marapana
who appeared for the petitioners addressed Court on the 13th of September,
1995, the Hansard extract was not submitted. Later, Mr. Musthapha made
submissions on behalf of the 16th Respondent. It was at the end of the hearing
that reference was made to the speech reported in Hansard for the first time.
Counsel for the 1st Respondent, therefore had no opportunity of responding to
the matters raised. Mr. Goonesekere submitted that the "proper course of
action" would have been to invite further argument on the matter during which
Counsel could have assisted the Court. The matter is important, because it
involves a consideration of the issue of parliamentary privilege and the Court
ought, in those circumstances, to have acted "with circumspection and
assistance". Mr Goonesekere drew our attention to Popplewell, J's observations
in Rost v. _Edwards and Others_ (62):  
  
The courts must always be sensitive to the rights and privileges of Parliament
and the constitutional importance of Parliament retainÂ­ing control over its
proceedings. Equally, as Viscount Radcliffe put it in _A-G of Ceylon v. De
Livera_ (63), the House will be anxious to confine its own or its members'
privileges to the minimum infringeÂ­ment of the liberties of others. Mutual
respect for and understandÂ­ing of each other's respective rights and
privileges are an essential ingredient in the relationship between Parliament
and the courts.  
  
In the circumstances, Mr. Goonesekere submitted, the Court ought to have
sought the assistance of the Attorney-General in deciding a matter that
impinged on parliamentary privilege. That was, he said, the

**122**

invariable practice in England, as numerous decisions of the courts of that
country showed. Mr. Goonesekere quoted the following words from the judgment
of Popplewell, J. in Rost (supra) at p 644 to illustrate his submission:  
  
It became clear after the initial submissions of counsel that the question of
parliamentary privilege might be involved and counsel agreed that the only
course open to the court was to adjourn further argument and to set out the
matters which might give rise to parliamentary privilege in writing; then to
submit those questions to the Attorney-General and the court to ask for the
assistance of the Attorney-General in resolving what might be a conflict
between the privileges of Parliament and the rights of the parties freely to
present their case in court.  
  
Accordingly that course was adopted. The court has had the advantage of
submissions by the Solicitor-General as well as helpful argument by counsel
for the two protagonists in the litigation.  
  
In the cases relating to the petition before us, Mr. Goonesekere submitted
that "counsel were not permitted to make their contribution; and the Attorney-
General who should have been heard, was also denied the opportunity of
assisting the Court."  
  
Mr. Marapana submitted that it was not correct to state that the speech in
Parliament was sprung on the respondents at the end of the argument and that
there was no opportunity of dealing with the matter. He stated that the
extract from Hansard (P 16) was annexed to the counter-affidavit of the
petitioners, dated the 31st of May 1995, in which they responded to the 1st
respondent's affidavit. The argument took place on the 13th and 27th of
September 1995 - several months after the filing of the extract from Hansard.  
  
In paragraph 05 of his petition, the 1st Respondent-petitioner himself states
that "The 1st petitioner annexed to his counter-affidavit dated 31.5.95 an
extract of Hansard of 7.2.95 containing a speech made by the 1st Respondent."

**123**

Wijetunga, J. at p. 21 of his judgment confirms this. His Lordship states as
follows:  
  
In reply to the 1st respondent's affidavit denying the remarks attributed to
him, the petitioners filed a counter-affidavit dated 31.5.95 annexing extracts
from the Hansard of 7.2.95 (P 16)...  
  
Perera, J. too confirms that position at p. 2 of his judgment. His Lordship
states as follows:  
  
In response to this denial, on the part of the 1st Respondent the Petitioners
have filed a counter affidavit dated 31.05.95, annexing extracts from the
Hansard of 07.02.95 (P 16) which is a record of the proceedings of Parliament
on that date.  
  
The 1st Respondent-Petitioner's complaint as stated in his petition was not
that the speech had been placed before the Court only at the end of the
argument, but that because it was filed with the counter-Â­affidavit of the
petitioners, he had no opportunity of refuting it. In paragraph 05 of his
petition he states: "As the said extract was filed along with the counter-
affidavit, the 1st Respondent was unable to counter the same."  
  
Why could he have not done so through his counsel?  
  
In fact, learned counsel for the 1st Respondent had addressed Court on the
matter of the speech in Parliament. Perera, J. in his judgment at p.2 states
as follows:  
  
As regards the statements attributed to the 1st Respondent in the Hansard
referred to (P 16), Counsel for the 1st Respondent has in my view, rightly
submitted that such statements must be considÂ­ered in the proper context. The
reference to the Katunayake incident in Parliament that day has been triggered
off by a statement made by a Member of Parliament based on a newspaÂ­per report
which appeared in the "Divaina". Counsel submitted that the contents of the
said report itself have been proved to be false. There was no reference
whatsoever to the 1st Respondent in that report. It was counsel's submission
that the 1st Respondent

**124**

in this instance has merely retorted or given a "fighting reply" to the jibes
as is wont to happen in the floor of the House. This he contended was not a
considered reply to an adjournment question. It is a political speech which
cannot be taken literally as an admission by the 1st Respondent or the
accuracy of what was in the newspaper or his involvements in violence on that
day. Counsel submitted that the Court should therefore not place any reliance
on the contents of P 16 and invited the Court to reject the same.  
  
In my view there is much substance in the submission of counsel on this
matter. The Petitioners' allegations against the 1st ReÂ­spondent remain
uncorroborated. I am of the opinion that it would be highly unsafe to tilt the
scales in favour of the Petitioner (s) in this case relying upon, a general
statement made by the 1st Respondent in Parliament particularly having regard
to the special circumstances in which the Respondent made the statement
attributed to him.  
  
At page 23 of his judgment, Wijetunga, J states as follows:  
  
The 1st Respondent did not deny or explain the statements attributed to him,
by means of a counter-affidavit; nor did his counsel seek to deny those
statements or take any objection to their admissibility in evidence. Learned
counsel's position was that such statements made in Parliament must not be
treated as if they were precise responses to questions; that when the matter
was raised, the 1st Respondent gave a political response, rather than a
factual response; that his observations were general and not intended to refer
to the facts of this particular incident and that such statements made in the
cut-and-thrust of debate often contain over-statements and inaccuracies.
Hence, counsel subÂ­mitted that they cannot be treated in the same way as an
averment in an affidavit filed in Court proceedings. He strenuously contended
that the 1st respondent's affidavit set out the correct position and that his
statements in Parliament should not be used to test the accuracy or
credibility of that affidavit.  
  
I am not at all attracted by this contention. An averment in an affidavit, no
less than oral evidence, can be tested by reference to a prior inconsistent
statement . . .

**125**

No question of parliamentary privilege had, it seems, been raised by learned
counsel for the 1st Respondent. On the other hand, it appears from paragraph 6
of the 1st Respondent-petitioner's petition, wherein he quotes from Fernando,
J's judgment, that the Court had "specifically" drawn the attention of counsel
"to the effect of the Hansard extracts on the reliability of the 1st
respondent's affidavit". Mr. Goonesekere in making his submissions also quoted
the passage from Fernando, J's judgment in which those words occur. Neither
the 1st Respondent Â­petitioner, in his petition and affidavit, nor Mr.
Goonesekere challenged the correctness of Fernando, J's statement. There was
an indication that the speech would be used, and learned counsel for the 1st
Respondent was conscious of that. Had he any reason to believe that the speech
would not be used, the trouble he took to explain the way in which the speech
should be considered in relation to the 1st respondent's affidavit is
inexplicable. Had learned counsel thought that parliamentary privilege stood
in the way of the use of the speech, why did he not raise it? He did not raise
the objection and then submit that should the Court hold that the speech was
admissible, then more weight should be attached to the 1st respondent's
affidavit than to his speech in Parliament, or that the speech in Parliament
should be disregarded altogether having regard to the circumstances in which
the speech was made. Learned counsel did not raise the question of relative
worth as an alternative. He tacitly accepted the admissibility of the speech
and proceeded to argue that it was the affidavit that should prevail. If it
was his view that the Attorney-General should be heard on the matter, why did
he not say so?  
  
The matter of the admissibility of the speech appears to have been raised by
Perera, J. after perusing the draft judgment of Wijetunga, J. in which
Wijetunga, J. had used the extract from Hansard. Perera, J. was of the view
that the speech should not be used. Perera, J. then wrote a separate judgment
in which he held that parliamentary privilege prevented the use of the
extract, citing the provisions of the ParliamenÂ­tary (Powers and Privileges)
Act, No. 21 of 1953 and certain decisions of the courts. Fernando, J. then
wrote a separate judgment dealing with the matters raised in Perera, J's
draft. After perusing Fernando, J.'s draft, Perera, J then responded, in the
judgment his Lordship delivered, to the comments made by Fernando, J with
regard to certain observaÂ­tions made in the draft judgment of Perera, J.
Fernando, J. complained

**126**

that his Lordship received no assistance, and explains that "for that reason I
have confined my observations to the two decisions cited by Perera, J. and the
precedents referred to therein, and refrain from comment on recent decisions
of this Court ( _Dissanayake v. Kaleel_ ,(64); _Jayatillake v Kaleel_
,(65))... But in this case we do not have to consider whether Samarakoon, C.J.
was wrong in regard to the second of the above principles, for this case is
covered by the first principle, as the use made by Wijetunga, J. of the
Hansard extracts is well within that principle."  
  
Can it be said that the judgments of the Court in S.C. Applications Nos. 66/95
and 67/95 were attributable to the Court having acted in ignorance or
forgetfulness of some inconsistent statutory provision or some authority
binding on the Court so that the decision to use the speech was demonstrably
wrong? Nothing has been placed before us to support such a position. What were
the provisions of the legislature or decisions of the Court that were
overlooked? Learned Counsel for the 1st Respondent-petitioner did not refer us
to any such matter. Lord Scarman, as we have seen, translated per incuriam to
mean âHomer nodded'. Having regard to the lively exchange of views on the
matter of parliamentary privilege in the light of the relevant legislation and
decisions of the Court that were considered by the learned Judges, I cannot
possibly say that the Court acted _per incuriam. Indigor quandoque bonus
dormitat Homerus_ , said Horace. However, there was, in my opinion, no nod on
the Judges' side of the Bar Table. I am not suggesting that there was a nod on
the other side: The strategies of counsel are, as we said in _Hettiarachchi_ ,
(supra) entirely up to them. The Court must take the case as learned counsel
deems it best presented in the interests of his client. However, once a matter
is concluded and a decision is given, that is an end of the matter.  
  
Let us assume that Perera, J. was right in the interpretation of the law and
that the majority was wrong in using the speech as it did. If so, can we
review or revise that order? We have no statutory powers to do so. May we do
so in the exercise of our inherent powers? The fact that a decision is wrong
is not a ground for the exercise of the Court's inherent powers. As
Samarakoon, CJ observed in _Billimoria v. Minister of Lands_ , (supra) at p.
15:

**127**

The Attorney-General contended that section 24 applied to stay orders as well.
This is a moot point. The Judges who made the stay order appeared to have
thought otherwise. They may be right or they may be wrong. Assuming they are
wrong - how does that make it an order _per incuriam_? If the order appealed
against is allowed to stand it will open the flood gates for one Bench of the
Court that disagrees with another's interpretation, made after due
consideration, to assume a jurisdiction that it does not have.  
  
Naturally, the Court welcomes the assistance of counsel. Indeed, as it was
pointed out in Hettiarchchi (supra), following _Jones v. National Coal Board,
(infra)_ (67), the nature of proceedings in our Courts is such that the
assistance of counsel is indispensable. I might venture to add that the
quality of justice partly depends on the degree of assistance given by the
Bar, including the "official Bar". The Attorney-General was a party to the
proceedings, the 79th Respondent in S.C. Application No. 66/95 and the 46th
Respondent in S.C. Application No. 67/95; but he was not present or
represented though noticed. When assistance is not available, or is
inadequate, the Court must nevertheless act, doing the best it can in the
circumstances.  
  
_In Billimoria's case_ , (supra), Samarakoon, CJ. at p.15 observed, with some
asperity, as follows: "The Attorney-General stated that had the Court the
benefit of a full argument it would not have made the stay order. This kind of
argument gives little credit to the Judges and undue credit to the pleader."
In the cases relating to the petition before us, the question of parliamentary
privilege in regard to the admissibility of the report of the speech received
the consideration it did in the judgments delivered because one of the Judges
raised it, supplying what some people may suppose was a gap in the case for
the 1st Respondent. However, there is nothing to show that had the matter not
been raised by Perera, J. the Court would have acted _per incuriam_.
Admittedly Wijetunga, J. in his draft judgment did not deal with the question
of parliamentary privilege; not being a contentious matter when he preÂ­pared
his judgment, he was not obliged to deal with it. It does not mean that he had
overlooked the question. When Perera, J. expressed his views, neither
Wijetunga, J. nor Fernando, J. were convinced by his Lordship's reasoning.
Perhaps, had learned Counsel dealt with the matter, he might have been more
persuasive? But does that make the

**128**

decision one that was given _per incuriam_? Halsbury (Vol. 26 paragraph 578,
followed with approval in Hettiarachchi (supra) at p. 299) states: "A decision
should not be treated as given per incuriam, however, simply because of a
deficiency of parties, or because the court had not the benefit of the best
argument".  
  
In _London Street & Tramways Co. v. London Council_,(66) where the question
was whether a decision of the House of Lords was conclusive and binding, it
was held that it was. The Earl of Halsbury, LC, at pp. 380 - 381, responded as
follows to the submission of counsel:  
  
My Lords, I only wish to say one word in answer to a very ingenious argument
which the learned counsel set before your Lordships. It is said that this
House might have omitted to notice an Act of Parliament, or might have acted
upon an Act of Parliament which was afterwards found to have been repealed. It
seems to me that the answer to that ingenious suggestion is a very manifest
one -namely, that that would be a case of a mistake of fact. If the House were
under the impression that there was an Act when there was not such an Act as
was suggested, of course they would not be bound, when the fact was
ascertained that there was not such an Act or the Act had been repealed, to
proceed upon the hypothesis that the Act existed. They would then have
ascertained whether it existed or not as a matter of fact, and in a subsequent
case they would act upon the law as they then found it to be, although before
they had been under the impression, on the hypothesis I have put, either on
the one hand that an Act of Parliament did not exist, or on the other hand
that an Act had not been repealed (either case might be taken as an example)
and acted accordingly. _But what relation has that proposition to the question
whether the same question of law can be reargued on the ground that it was not
argued or not sufficiently argued, or that the decision of la w upon the
argument was wrong? It has no application at all.  
_  
The emphasis is mine.  
  
_Hettiarachchi's_ case is not an exception to the rule that the Court will not
review or revise its judgment in the exercise of its inherent powers on the
ground that the Court had not the benefit of the best argument.

**129**

In fact, the Court, at page 299, expressly said otherwise. In that case, Mr.
Goonesekere who subsequently appeared for the petitioner and pleaded his cause
with success, unreservedly accepted the correctÂ­ness of the decision of the
Court on the two matters that had originally been argued. The petitioner's
application could not be sustained on those two grounds. Counsel who had
appeared earlier failed to respond to "several not-so-subtle indications" from
the Bench that certain relevant matters should be adverted to in support of
the application, (see page 295). The Court was unwilling to descend into the
forum and supply the deficiency. At pages 300-301, the Court explained its
position as follows:  
  
. . . should the Court have intervened to do what learned Counsel who then
appeared for the Petitioner had failed to do? That would have been quite
improper; proceedings under Article 126 are essentially adversarial in nature.
Of course, the Court has ample power to probe a matter for the purpose of
ascertaining the truth; to expedite the work of Court by suggesting the
consideration of issues of fact and law which seem to arise; and by indicating
how a submission might be clarified or refined; and by guiding an argument in
the direction of the matters of fact and law actually in issue. But it will
nevertheless leave Counsel entirely free to decide what he wishes to place
before the Court, and how he proposes to do so. The Court recognizes and
respects Counsel's right to do so. It will not encroach on Counsel's rights,
especially when he repeatedly insists on following a plan of action he appears
to have set himself and disregards suggestions from the bench as to an
alternative course that might be followed. We must take the case as Counsel
deems it best presented in the interest of his client. Moreover, the Court
must take care to guard itself against any appearance of bias which might
result from intervention, for justice must not only be done, but must be seen
to be done. As Judges, we are expected to be neutral. Therefore the Court must
refrain from entering into the arena by initiating and presenting legal and
factual submissions on behalf of a party. _In Jones v. National Coal Board_
,(67)Lord Denning said:  
  
(The judge) must keep his vision unclouded . . . let the advocates one after
the other put the weights into the scales - the nicely

**130**

calculated less or more - but the judge at the end decides which way the
balance tilts, be it ever so slightly . . . The judge's part in all this is to
hearken to the evidence, only himself asking questions of witnesses when it is
necessary to clear up any point that has been overlooked or left obscure; to
see that the advocates behave themselves seemly and keep to the rules laid
down by law; to exclude irrelevancies and discourage repetition; to make sure
by wise intervention that he follows the points that the advocates are making
and can assess their worth; and at the end to make up his mind where the truth
lies. If he goes beyond this, he drops the mantle of a judge and assumes the
role of an advocate; and the change does not become him well . . . Such are
our standards.  
  
The subsequent matter before the Court in _Hettiarachchi_ , (supra) was not an
application for review or revision. The Court had refused the petitioner leave
to proceed with his application. Although the decision of the Court was final,
the terms of its order clearly indicated that the Court was not satisfied that
all the relevant material had been placed before it. In the "exceptional
circumstances of the case", (pp. 304-305) the Court granted the petitioner
leave to proceed.  
  
Nor is _Broome v. Cassell & Co Ltd. & Another_,(68) a persuasive precedent
that might assist the 1st Respondent -petitioner. In _Rookes v. Barnard_ ,(69)
Lord Devlin, in the words of Lord Denning at p. 198 in _Broome's case_ ,  
  
. . . threw overall that we ever knew about exemplary damages. He knocked down
the common law as it had existed for centuries. He laid down a new doctrine
about exemplary damages. He said that they could be awarded in two very
limited categories but in no other, and all the other Lords agreed with him .
. .  
  
Denning, MR, quoting examples, pointed out that there had been a "wholesale
condemnation" of the new doctrine in Commonwealth counÂ­tries. His Lordship
pointed out (at pp. 198 - 200) that counsel who argued Rookes v. Barnard had  
  
. . . accepted the common law as it had been understood for centuries and did
not suggest any alteration of it. Yet the House,

**131**

without argument, laid down this new doctrine. If the House were going to lay
down this new doctrine - so as to be binding on all our courts - it ought at
least have required it to be argued. They might then have been told of the
difficulties which it might bring in its wake . . . Next I say that there were
two previous cases in which the House of Lords clearly approved the award of
exemplary damages . . .It was not open to the House in 1964 to go against
those decisions. Lord Devlin must have overlooked them, for he said that
`there is not any decision of this House approving an award of exemplary
damages'. Finally, I say that the new doctrine is hopelessly illogical and
inconsistent . . . All this leads me to the conclusion that, if ever there was
a decision of the House of Lords given _per incuriam_ , this was it.  
  
A decision of the Supreme Court, that is to say a decision of the majority of
Judges of any Bench of the Court constituted according to the provisions of
law, is the decision of the Supreme Court. Such a decision is final and
conclusive. The Supreme Court has no statutory jurisdiction to vary, review,
revise or in any way alter or amend its decision, even though it may be
alleged to be wrong. The Supreme Court as a superior court of record, however,
has a certain reserve of powers which are generally referred to as `inherent
powers' which the ConstituÂ­tion recognizes in Article 105 (3): (Per
Samarakoon, CJ. in _Ganeshanatham_ , (supra) at p. 329; cf. Garvin, SPJ in
_Mohamed v. Annamalai Chettiar_ , (supra). In the exercise of its inherent
powers, the Court may revise its decision in certain limited circumstances.
"The grant of such relief is of course a matter entirely in the discretion of
the Court and will always be dependent on the circumstances of each case". (
_Per Weeramantry, J. in Raju v. Jacob_ (supra). The exercise of the
jurisdiction of the inherent powers of a Court, including the Supreme Court,
must be in "appropriate circumstances" (Per T. S. Fernando, J. in
_Ranmenikhamy_ , (supra) at p. 215). In that connection, it must be remembered
that the jurisdiction which the Court is called upon to exercise is
"extraordinary" ( _per Kulatunga, J. in All Ceylon Commercial & Industrial
Workers Union_, (supra) at p. 296). Where it is not a matter in which a
decision has been given in ignorance or forgetfulness of some inconsistent
statutory provision or of some authority binding on it - so that it cannot be
said that it is a case in which some part of the decision or some step in the
reasoning on which it is based is, on that account,

**132**

demonstrably wrong, then, as pointed out in _Morelle Ltd_., (supra) and
followed by Ranasinghe, J. in _Ganeshanatham_ , (supra), at p. 355, an
intervention on the ground that the Court had acted per incuriam must be "of
the rarest occurrence". In deciding whether it is a case which comes within
the scope of the inherent powers of this Court, and whether it is one in which
those powers must be exercised, the Court must act "in accordance with sound
legal principles and not arbitrarily" : (per Garvin, SPJ in _Mohamed v.
Annamalai Chettiar_ ). The Court guides itself by reference to parallel
instances in legislation, (e.g. see _Mohamed v. Annamalai Chettiar_ (supra);
and _Jacob v. Raju_ , (supra)); or by decisions in analogous cases, (e.g. see
_The King v. Baron Silva_ , (supra) ; _Palitha v. O.I.C. Polonnaruwa and
others_ , (supra), and _All Ceylon Commercial & Industrial Workers Union v.
Ceylon Petroleum Corporation and another,_ at p. 297); or by reference to the
practice of the courts in comparable situations, or by a combination of such
methods (e.g. see _Menchinahamy v. Muniweera,_ (supra)), having regard to what
is appropriÂ­ate in the circumstances of the case. The Supreme Court is "a
Court of Justice" (per Abrahams, CJ in _Velupillai v. The Chairman U.D.C.,
Jaffna,_ (supra) and the Court can intervene to prevent injustice. (Cf. per
Samarakoon, CJ. in Ganeshanatham at p. 329). However, as Garvin, SPJ pointed
out in _Mohamed v. Annamalai Chettiar_ , (supra), the powers of the Court in
that regard, are not, as it is sometimes supposed, "equal to its desire to
order that which it believes to be just". No Court, much less any judicial
officer, including the Chief Justice, may disregard the law of the land or
purport for any reason whatsoever to ignore its provisions, for justice must
be done according to law: (cf. per Garvin, SPJ in _Mohammed v. Annamalai
Chettiar_ , (supra); and per _Lord Loreburn in Brown v. Deam and
Another_.(70), including the provisions of the Constitution, (and Rules made
thereunder: cf. _Young v. Bristol Aeroplane Co_. (supra) at p. 300), the
enactments of the Legislature and the inveterate practices of a Court. ( _Cf.
Suren Wickramasinghe and Others v. Cornel Lionel Perera and Others_ (supra).
The inherent powers of a Court are adjuncts to existing jurisdiction to remedy
injustice. They cannot be made the source of new jurisdictions to revise a
judgment rendered by a Court. (Per Samarakoon, J. in _Ganeshanatham_ , (supra)
at 329; per G.P.S. de Silva, CJ. in _Senerath v. Chandraratne_ (supra) at p.
216; per Kulatunga, J. in _All Ceylon Commercial & Industrial Workers Union_
(supra) at p. 297).

**133**

For the reasons stated in my judgment, this Court has no statutory powers to
rehear, revise, review or further consider its decisions in S.C. Applications
Nos. 66/95 and 67/95; and there are no grounds for holding that there are
circumstances that bring those decisions within the scope of the inherent
powers of this Court. I, therefore, reject the petition.  
  
For the removal of doubt, I declare the directions made by the Hon. Acting
Chief Justice dated the 22nd of December 1995 suspending the operation of the
decisions of the Court in S.C. Applications Nos. 66/95 and 67/95 to be of no
force or avail.  
  
There will be no costs.  
  
**G.P.S. DE SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY,J.** -I agree.  
  
_**Petition rejected.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/14.html_  

