##  Wijenaike v. Air Lanka Limited and Others - SLR - 293, Vol 1 of 1990
[1990] LKSC 14; (1990) 1 Sri LR 293 (14 March 1990)

**

293

WIJENAIKE  
v.  
AIR LANKA LIMITED AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
H. A. G. DE SILVA, J., KULATUNGA, J. AND RAMANATHAN, J.,  
S.C. APPLICATION No. 223/88,  
OCTOBER 13 AND 31, NOVEMBER 15 AND 16, 1989.

_

Fundamental rights - Termination of employment for vacation of post - Unequal
treatment and discrimination - Article 12(1) of the Constitution - Time Bar -
Breach of contract and statutory and constitutional rights - Jurisdiction.

_

**294**

The petitioner joined Air Lanka as a Cadet Pilot on 10.06.84. He left the
country on 22.12.87 with a view to employment with Gulf Air having applied on
19.12.87 for 03 years no pay leave. Leave however was refused. On 04.02.88 the
petitioner returned and on 22.02.88 applied to be rostered for duty. This was
not allowed. Air Lanka by letter dated 06.05.88 informed petitioner that he
had vacated post. The petitioner's position was that he had only prospected
for foreign employment and he had made a separate application for annual leave
(55 days) and left with the assurance of the Chief Pilot that it would be
allowed and returned before the expiry of the annual leave. He also submitted
that other officers who sought foreign employment had received favoured
treatment On his appeal to the authorities, the Chairman, Air Lanka on
23.08.99 wrote that his grievance would be looked into. On 08.11.88 the
Chairman informed the petitioner he could not be re-employed. The questions
for determination were,

(1) was the application time barred;

(2) was this only a question of breach of contract not involving statutory and
constitutional rights;

(3) has there been unequal treatment in violation of petitioner's rights under
Article 12(1).

**

Held

**

(1) (a) there is no automatic termination of services even for breach of the
condition of service CI. 12.2 which is as follows

"A first officer who continues to be guilty of unauthorised absence beyond 48
hours may be dismissed from service at the discretion of the company";

Or for breach of Cl. 15 which prohibits a first officer against employment in
any outside employment or aircraft whatsoever without prior written permission
of the company.

(b) The principles of Roman Dutch Law entitling the employer to repudiate the
contract on the ground of absence of the servant in appropriate circumstances
necessarily implies a right in the employee to give his explanation before a
final decision is taken to repudiate or revoke the contract. This principle is
acknowledged in the Establishments Code in respect of public officers.

(c) The relevant date is 08.11.88 when the Chairman refused re-employment and
hence the application to the S.C. dated 06.12.88 is not time barred.

(2) In India and Sri Lanka public officers enjoy a status and the rights and
liabilities of their employment arise from constitutional or statutory
provisions. Their relationship with the State goes beyond contract. They are,
therefore, competent to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court for the
enforcement of their right to equality before the law and equal protection of
the law under Article 12(1) of the Constitution. However, in the case of a
public corporation which is an agency of the government, a breach of contract
between an employee and the agency would not per se attract the provisions of
Article 12(1). Such an employee can complain of a violation of that Article
only if the rights and obligations under the contract of employment are
imposed by statutory provisions. This is a question that must be decided in
each case having regard to the conditions of employment and the intention of
the relevant statute. If the remedy sought arises purely from the contract
based on the consent of parties Articles 12(1) and 126 have no application in
which event the

**295**

dispute must be resolved by an ordinary suit provided by private law, even if
the dispute involves an allegation of discrimination.

Even though it may be a government agency, Air Lanka is a company duty
incorporated under the Companies Ordinance. There is no provision in that
Ordinance nor any other statute which governs the petitioner's contract of
employment with Air Lanka. The petitioner's grievance has to be resolved by a
private law remedy such as the Application he has already made to the Labour
Tribunal.

This Court has no jurisdiction to hear and determine the petitioner's
application.

**

Cases referred to:

**_

(1) Roberts and Another v. Ratnayake and Others (1986) 2 Sri L R 36._  

_

(2) Gamaethige v Siriwardena [1988] 1 Sri L R 384._  

_

(3) The Lanka Estate Workers' Union v. The Superintendent Hewagama Estate 13 L
TR/1212 decided on 15.01.69- Appeal dismissed by Supreme Court on 02.02.70
(SCM) in S.C. 7- 9/69._  

_

(4) Jayawardena v. Attorney-General FRD (1) 175._  

_

(5) Gunawardena and Others v. E. L. Senanayake and Others FRD (1) 178._  

_

(6) Rajaratne v. Air Lanka Limited [1987] 2 Sri LR 128_  

_

(7) Palihawadana v. Attorney-General and Others FRD (1) page 1._  

_

(8) Elmore Perera v. Major Montague Jayawickrema and Others [1985] 1 Sri L R
285._  

_

(9) Perera v. University Grants Commission FRD (1) 103._  

_

(10) Eheliyagoda v. Janatha Estates Development Board and Others FRD (1) 243_  

_

(11) Jayasinghani v. Union of India AIR 1967 SC 1427._  

_

(12) State of Mysore v S. R. Jayaram AIR 1968 SC 34._  

_

(13) Bal Krishnan Vaid v. The State of Himachal Pradesh and others AIR 1975
Himachal Pradesh 30._  

_

(14) Prabhakar Ram Krishna Jodh v A L. Pande (1965) 2 SCR 713._  

_

(15) C. K. Achutan v. State of Kerala AIR 1959 S.C. 490._  

_

(16) Radhakrishna Agrawal and Others v. State of Bihar and Others AIR 1977
S.C. 1496._  

_

(17) R. V. Berkshire Health Authority, ex pane Walsh 1984 3 Alf E R 425 C.A._  

_

(18) Ratnakar Visvanath Joshi and Others v. Life Insurance Corporation of
India and Others 1975 Lab. LC._  

_

(19) Abeywickrema v. Pathirana and Others [1986] 1 Sri LR 120._  

_

(20) Nanayakkara v. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka and
Others [1981] 2 Sri LR 52._  

_

(21) Akbar Ahad v. State of Orissa AIR 1971 Orissa 207.

_**

APPLICATION** for relief for the infringement of the fundamental right of
equality.

_

R. K. W. Gunasekera with Colin Senarath Nandadeva_ for petitioner.  

_

L. C. Seneviratne, P.C. with M. A. Bastiansz_ for 1st to 3rd respondents and
5th and 6th added respondents.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**296**

March 14,1990  
**KULATUNGA, J.

**

The petitioner joined the 1st respondent company (hereinafter referred to as
'Air Lanka') on 10.06.80 as a Cadet Pilot. He was appointed as a First Officer
with effect from 22.06.84. He left the country on 22.12.87 with a view to
employment with Gulf Air having made an application on 19.12.87 (P1) for 3
years no pay leave for that purpose. The petitioner claims that pending
approval of no pay leave he had been allowed annual leave for 55 days which
was available to him. However, the respondents deny this.

The petitioner's application for no pay leave was not approved and the Air
Lanka administration was considering whether his services should be terminated
for joining Gulf Air without obtaining approval therefor. At this stage, the
petitioner returned from abroad on 04.02.88 before the expiry of his annual
leave and applied to be rostered for duty. This was not allowed. Thereafter
despite the petitioner's request dated 22.02.88 to be rostered for duty (P4)
and for warded to the Manager Personnel Air Lanka by the President of the
Pilots Guild on 07.03.88 with his recommendation (1 R8) Air Lanka by its
letter dated 06.05.88 (P6) informed the petitioner that he had vacated his
employment with Air Lanka on 23.12.87 by becoming an employee of Gulf Air
without permission and being absent without obtaining prior leave. He was also
accused of gross selfishness, disloyalty and ingratitude.

By his letter dated 15.08.88 (P7) the petitioner made representations to the
Chairman and the Board of Directors of Air Lanka against the notice of
vacation of employment. Briefly his position is that he had only prospected
for foreign employment with notice to Air Lanka utilising for his purpose his
annual leave. He had made a separate application for annual leave and left
with the assurance of the Chief Pilot that it would be allowed; that he
returned before the expiry of annual leave. He also submitted that other
officers who sought foreign employment had received favourable treatment even
though their conduct had been culpable in some aspects. He denied that he had
vacated his employment with Air Lanka in that his annual leave had been
allowed as is evident, inter alia, from entries in the duty roster (P2),
Captain Ratnayake's observations (P18) and staff and telephone list (P25). He
also denied the other accusations made against him. He requested that he be
reinstated in service.

**297**

The Chairman, Air Lanka by his letter dated 23.08.88 (P8) acknowledged the
petitioner's representations and informed him that his grievances will be
looked into and a reply will be sent as early as possible. Thereafter by
letter dated 08.11.88 (P6A) the Chairman informed the petitioner that they
were unable to re-employ him for the reasons set out in the letter dated
06.05.88 (P6).

The petitioner sought to challenge the termination of his services firstly by
an application dated 01.11.88 under S. 31 B of the Industrial Disputes Act
addressed to the Labour Tribunal pursuant to which the Tribunal has called
upon Air Lanka to transmit its answer to the petitioner's application (1 R3).
In his application to the Tribunal the petitioner seeks reinstatement with
back wages on the ground of unlawful and unjust termination of his contract of
employment. Secondly, he invoked the jurisdiction of this Court by filing this
application on 06.12.88 alleging that by reason of the action taken against
him Air Lanka and its officers- the 2nd and 3rd respondents have subjected him
to unequal treatment and unjust discrimination. He prays for a declaration
that the respondents have violated his fundamental rights guaranteed by
Article 12(1) of the Constitution, and for compensation in a sum of Two
Million Rupees.

The 4th respondent - Attorney General did not participate in these
proceedings. We have heard submissions of the learned Counsel for the
petitioner and the other respondents. Air Lanka through its Chairman, the 2nd
respondent and the Chief Operating Officer, the 3rd respondent resisted the
application of the petitioner on the following grounds:

(1) that this application is time barred under Article 126 of the Constitution
in that it has not been filed within one month from the alleged infringement
or the imminent infringement of the petitioner's fundamental rights;

(2) that the remedy sought by the petitioner arises from an alleged breach of
contract not involving constitutional or statutory rights and as such the
petitioner is not entitled to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 126 on the ground of a denial of the equal protection of the law
within the meaning of Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.

(3) that if the petitioner's application is not time barred and the remedy
sought by him is within the ambit of Article 12 (1), on the facts of

**298**

this case he has not been subjected to any unequal treatment in violation of
his rights under Article 12 (1).

While the first of these grounds is a familiar one, the second ground has
hitherto not been considered in depth except perhaps in Roberts and Another v.
Ratnayake and Others (1). The question whether every act or omission of the
government or a corporate body which is an agency of the government is liable
to challenge for a denial of the right to equality before the law and equal
protection of the law guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution even if
the remedy sought is not founded upon a statutory right but arises from a
purely contractual or private right is of the utmost importance. Whilst there
are many fundamental rights the violation of which can be established in an
application under Article 126 without proof of any statutory base apart from
the constitutional provision which guarantees the right, an allegation of the
violation of rights under Article 12(1) requires proof of the denial of
equality before the law or the equal protection of the law by executive or
administrative action. The Court has, therefore, to interpret the meaning of
the word law' in Article 12(1). The Article guarantees that both at the stage
of making a law as well as at the stage of its application, the right to
equality is observed. All persons who are similarly circumstanced are entitled
to this right and are protected against unjust discrimination.

A decision on the limit of the jurisdiction of this Court in applications
based on Article 12 (1) is very necessary to ensure that the exclusive
jurisdiction vested in it by Article 126 is not exceeded. If we were to exceed
our constitutional jurisdiction, we would not only be trespassing on the
jurisdiction of other courts and tribunals administering justice but also
induce aggrieved parties to abandon their lawful and effective remedies
elsewhere and to took to this Court for resolution of disputes which, in view
of the summary procedure prescribed by Article 126 and the relevant rules,
this Court may be ill-equipped to decide having regard to the complicated
nature of the dispute and the relevant evidence which can only be assessed in
proceedings which provide for confrontation and cross examination of
witnesses.

**

Is the Petitioner's Application Time Barred?

**

Mr. Gunasekera, learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the relevant
date for computing time is 08.11.88 which is the date of the letter

**299**

of the Chairman, Air Lanka (P6A) informing the petitioner in reply to his
representations that the company was unable to re-employ him. He contended
that the notice of vacation of employment dated 06.05.88 (P6) was not final
and does not constitute the infringement of the petitioner's fundamental
rights; that as is evidenced by the Air Lanka letter dated 23.08.88 (P8) a
decision on the subject was pending even according to Air Lanka; and that the
decision which constitutes the infringement of fundamental rights is the one
contained in the letter dated 08:11.88 (P6A). In his further affidavit dated
29.05.89 the petitioner states that it is shortly after 08.11.88 that he
became aware for the first time of the action by Air Lanka that was violative
of his rights under Article 12(1) of the Constitution. Mr. Gunasekera
submitted that the decision in Gamaethige v. Siriwardena (2) has no
application to the facts and circumstances of this case.

Mr. L. C. Seneviratne, PC, learned Counsel for the respondents submitted that
on 04.02.88 when the petitioner returned and requested to be rostered for duty
the respondents took up the position that the petitioner was not in the
service of the company and could not be rostered for duty. On 04.02.88 the
petitioner had got the Crew Scheduling Officer Mr. Olagama to make a log entry
to the effect that he had reported for duty (3R20). On 09.02.88 he had sent a
telegram to the Personnel Manager, Mr. Wickremasinghe stating that he was
reporting for duty that day (1 R12). However, he was not rostered.
Subsequently, the President of the Pilots Guild interviewed the Personnel
Manager and arranged for the petitioner to make his representations dated
22.02.88 (P4) in reply to which Air Lanka informed him by their letter dated
06.05.88 that he had vacated his employment on 23.12.87 (P6).

On the foregoing facts, teamed President's Counsel submits that the petitioner
became aware of the infringement of his rights from 04.02.88 and certainly by
06.05.88. He did not protest against it but made his appeal on 15.8.88. This
was considered and refused on 08.11.88 (P 6 A). Counsel contends, that the
said appeal was made in consequence of an infringement which the petitioner
himself says had occurred much earlier; but the petitioner filed his
application only on 06.12.88 which is outside the one month prescribed by
Article 126; and that he has not explained his delay.

In his further affidavit, the petitioner takes up the position that there is
provision in the Establishments Code for an officer on whom an order of

**300**

vacation has been served to volunteer an explanation, within a reasonable time
and for the appropriate disciplinary authority to consider the explanation and
to allow or refuse permission to resume duties; Chapter V - S. 7.4; there is
further provision in the Establishments Code where an officer is so refused
permission for the officer's appeal to be referred to the Public Service
Commission within three months of the order of such refusal. Vol. 11 Chapter
XLV111 S. 27.1. Accordingly, the administrative process for the termination of
his services was completed only on 08.11.88

However, the 3rd respondent in his further affidavit has stated that the
Establishments Code does not apply to employees of Air Lanka which is a
company incorporated under the Companies Ordinance, and that these employees
are not members of the Public Service and hence are not governed by the
Establishments Code. The petitioner has not placed any material which would
establish the applicability of the Establishments Code to employees of Air
Lanka. As such, I shall proceed to consider the preliminary objection on the
footing that the Establishments Code does not apply to them.

In my view, the answer to the issue on the time bar is to be found in the
principles of law applicable to termination of employment by vacation. In
English Law, absence of an employee from his place of work in circumstances
which make the performance of the contract of employment impossible
automatically terminates the contract on the ground of frustration - Unger v.
Preston Corporation. In Roman Dutch Law, the contract of employment is not
automatically terminated by the servant's absence. Such absence only entitles
the employer to terminate the contract forthwith. However, mere absence will
not warrant dismissal in every case. See Maasdorp's Institutes of South
African Law, Vol. (3) 6th ed. pages 215-217 where it is also stated -

"The decision in each case depends on its own circumstances and amongst
others, upon the nature of employment and the length of the absence and upon
the question whether the employer was prejudiced by the absence or not".

Roman Dutch Law which is the Common Law of Sri Lanka applies to termination of
employment by vacation. S.R. de Silva Legal Framework of Industrial Relations
in Ceylon' p. 579 cites the order of the Labour Tribunal in The Lanka Estate
Workers' Union v. The Superintendent,

**301**

Hewagama Estate (3). In that case, a workman who had been in police custody
was released about two years later. On his return he reported for work but was
refused employment. The employer's position was that the workman had
abandoned. his employment or that the contract of employment ceased to exist
by the operation of the doctrine of frustration. The Tribunal held that there
was no abandonment as the workman had no intention of abandoning his
employment. S. R. de Silva cites the following passage from the order of the
Tribunal.

"Since the doctrine of frustration does not apply the arrest of the workman
and .................subsequent imprisonment may have in law entitled the
respondent to determine the contract of employment which was not been done.
The Roman Dutch Law does not recognise the involuntary frustration of contract
but acknowledges that supervening circumstances may make it impossible for the
contract to be performed in which event either party could take steps to
revoke or repudiate the contract" (S.R. de Silva pp. 579 - 580).

The above principle of Roman Dutch Law has not been excluded by the
petitioner's contract of employment and the conditions of service with Air
Lanka (3111, 3112). Thus, CI. 12.2 of the conditions of service states

A First Officer who continues to be guilty of unauthorised absence beyond 48
hours maybe dismissed from service at the discretion of the company".

It follows that the termination of employment by vacation is not automatic.

CI. 15 prohibits a First Officer against employment in any outside employment
or aircraft whatsoever without prior written permission of the company.

Breach of this condition would constitute misconduct within the meaning of Cl.
7.2. for which a First Officer "may be dismissed ..............without
notice". The services of a First Officer for breach of Cl. 15 can be
terminated only after due inquiry although in exceptional circumstances where
it is necessary in the interest of the service to do so the order of dismissal
may be made without notice. It is implicit that even in such a case the
officer would have a right to make representations on being informed of the
dismissal and to obtain relief if he can. There is thus no automatic
termination of services even for a breach of Cl. 15.

**302**

The principle of Roman Dutch Law which only entitles the employer to repudiate
the contract on the ground of the absence of the servant in appropriate
circumstances would necessarily imply a right in the employee to give his
explanation before a final decision is taken to repudiate or revoke the
contract. This is the principle which has been acknowledged in respect of
public officers by the relevant sections of the Establishments Code relied
upon by the petitioner. Even if that Code does not apply to Air Lanka
employees, the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of the principle of Roman
Dutch Law as determined above. In this view of the matter the infringement of
the petitioner's rights would arise upon the final decision dated 08.11.88
refusing to re-employ him after considering his representations.

The decisions cited by the learned President's Counsel do not raise the kind
of issue which arises here and have no application to the case before us. Thus
in Gamaethige v. Siriwardena (supra) the petitioner did not come to Court
within one month either from the date on which he was informed that his
request for restoration of his place in the waiting list for government
quarters cannot be granted or from the date on which his appeal therefrom to
the Secretary/ Ministry of Public Administration was refused. In Jayawardena
v. Attorney- General (4) the petitioner, the holder of a permit under the
Crown Lands Ordinance renewable annually came to Court long after steps to
cancel the permit were taken and only after receiving summons to appear in the
Magistrate's Court in proceedings under the State Lands (Recovery of
Possession) Act. It was held that his application was out of time in that it
had not been made within one month from the date on which he became aware of
the infringement or the imminent infringement of his fundamental rights. In
Gunawardena and Others v. E. L. Senanayake and Others (5) the allegation was
that the petitioners were not allowed lands for their children whilst similar
claims of others had been allowed. It was held that the petitioners had failed
to file their petition until long after becoming aware of such discrimination.
The application was dismissed as it had not been filed within one month from
the date of the alleged violation of the fundamental right claimed by them.

Accordingly, I hold that the petitioner has filed his application within time
and reject the preliminary objection raised in that regard. This takes me to
the second ground urged against the application.

**303**

Mr. Gunasekera concedes that there are cases in which a right with a public
corporation could be purely contractual but submits that if Air Lanka is an
agency of the Government (it has been so held in Rajaratne v. Air Lanka
Limited (6) equality follows; that Air Lanka officials are entitled to
equality at all points in their career; that Article 16 of the Indian
Constitution (which guarantees equality of opportunity for all citizens In
matters of employment or appointments to any office under the State) is built
into our Article 12 (1) ; that in order to found a violation of the right to
equality before the law or the equal protection of the law, administrative
acts of discrimination need not be referable to law in the sense of statute or
subordinate legislation; that laws, regulations, rules, schemes and any
administrative action are all caught up by Article 12 (1); that fairness of
the principle of equality must apply to all administrative action; and that
what should control administrative discretion is not the existence of a
statutory base but that it should be fair between equals. He seeks to
distinguish the decision in Roberts case (supra) on the basis that it is a
case involving the termination of a contract entered into by the Municipal
Council of Kandy (an organ of the government) with an outsider and that the
party affected was not an officer of the Council. In support of his
submissions, learned Counsel also cited dicta from several decisions of this
Court, which I shall later examine.

Mr. L.C. Seneviratne , PC, in reply cited a series of decisions and submitted
as follows :

(1) Merely because a public authority which is an organ of government (even if
established by statute) performs functions within the field of public law, it
does not per se result in its contracts of employment as falling within the
ambit of public law.

(2) It is only if those contracts are underpinned by statutory provisions that
they could be regarded as falling within the ambit of public law.

(3) Otherwise such contracts are purely private law transactions and rights of
parties are governed by contractual terms.

(4) These principles apply to all contracts -employment or otherwise.

(5) Rights arising from private contracts should not be confused with public
duties which public bodies have to perform which fall within the field of
public law.

(6) Employees of public corporations or bodies or an organ of State do not
ipso facto acquire status which government servants or

**304**

public officers acquire by reason of employment in the government service.

(7) The dispute raised by the petitioner arises from contract; it is out of
the domain of public law and hence the petitioner cannot invoke the
jurisdiction of this Court under Article 126 read with Article 12 (1).

Mr. Gunasekera referred us to several dicta appearing in certain fundamental
rights cases involving the right to equality under Article 12\. He cited
Palihawadana v. Attorney - General and Others (7) (Job Bank case) Sharvananda,
J. (as he then was) said (p.6).

"What is postulated is equality of treatment to all persons in utter disregard
of every conceivable circumstance of the difference, such as age, sex,
education and so on and so forth as may be found amongst people in general.
Indeed, while the object of the Article is to ensure that invidious
distinction or arbitrary discrimination shall not be made by the State between
citizen 'A' and citizen 'B' who answer the same description and the
differences which may obtain between them are of no relevance for the purpose
of applying a particular law or operating an administrative scheme, reasonable
classification is possible and a certain measure of inequality is permitted.
The State is permitted to make unequal laws or take unequal administrative
action if it is dealing with individuals or groups whose circumstances and
situations are different".

Wanasundera, J. said (p.27)

" In my view there is implicit in this scheme the duty on the Member of
Parliament to exercise the powers reposed in him in a fair and rational manner
so that there will be no inequality in the administration of the scheme".

The use of the expressions "scheme" and "administrative action" in the above
passages would not support the wide meaning which Mr. Gunasekera seeks to give
to the word 'law' in Article 12 of the Constitution in that the Job Bank
Scheme under attack in that case was not a mere scheme or administrative
action having no statutory force. It is a scheme which provides for the
selection of persons to be considered for appointment as public officers or as
employees of other bodies including appointments

**305**

giving rise to a status or rights and obligations imposed by constitutional or
statutory provisions.

In Elmore Perera v. Major Montague Jayawickrema and Others (8), Sharvananda,
C. J. said (pp. 301-302):

The concept of equality permeates the whole spectrum of a public servant's
employment from appointment through promotion and termination to the payment
of his pension and other benefits".

At page 321 he said

"The principle of equality before the law embodied in Article 12 is a
necessary corollary to the high concept of the Rule of Law underlying the
Constitution".

These passages which have relation to public officers who enjoy constitutional
rights as opposed to mere contractual rights do not contemplate the employees
of institutions such as Air Lanka; and hence the dicta relied upon cannot be
used to advance Mr. Gunasekera's submission on the interpretation of Article
12 (1).

In Perera v. University Grants Commission (9) Sharvananda, J. (as he then was)
said (p.111)

"Equality of opportunity is only an instance of the general rule of equality
laid down in Article 12".

This case determined an application for the enforcement of the right of
students to be considered for admission to the University by selection made in
the exercise of the powers of the University conferred by the Universities
Act, No. 14 of 1978. The remedy sought arose out of statute. As such it does
not advance the construction which Mr. Gunasekera seeks to place on Article 12
(1) of the Constitution.

In Eheliyagoda v. Janatha Estates Development Board and Others (10).
(consolidated with two other similar petitions) the petitioners challenged an
offer by the JEDB to appoint them as Asst. Field Officers in the JEDB by way
of absorbing them into the Board's service from their previous employment in
the Dehiovita Electorate Land Reform Co-

**306**

operative Society Ltd. where they held positions falling within the Executive
Grade. The position taken by the respondents was that the offer was made
pursuant to a scheme of reorganization in terms of which the petitioners have
been offered alternative employment. Wanasundera, J. said (p.249):

"................. We are not satisfied that the determinations relating to
these petitioners are based on just and reasonable criteria. The discretion
that has been exercised in these cases is one that is unfettered, unregulated
and without guidelines. There is also nothing in the material to show that the
cases of petitioners were considered on their merits and how their cases
compared with those of the others who obtained appointment and vice versa".

This judgment makes no express reference to Article 12 of the Constitution;
but it is very clear both from the subject considered and the authorities
cited that the remedy sought was on account of an alleged denial of the right
to equality before the law and the equal protection of the law under Article
12. The decision does not examine the question whether the remedy sought is
founded on law within the meaning of Article 12(1) or whether it falls purely
into the field of private law. At the same time the two decisions cited,
Jayasinghani v. Union of India (11) and State of Mysore v. S.R. Jayaram (12)
are in respect of alleged violations of Article 14 and 16 (1) of the Indian
Constitution in respect of appointments in the government service. In the
context, this decision also is of no assistance in determining the specific
issue raised before us as to the applicability of Article 12 (1).

I shall now examine the decisions cited by Mr. L. C. Seneviratne, PC. The
learned President's Counsel first cited authority for the proposition that
even within the public service there can be contracts which have no statutory
base. He cited Bal Krishnan Vaid v. The State of Himachal Preadesh and Others
(13).,a decision of the Himachal Pradesh High Court. This was a writ petition
under Article 226 of the Indian Constitution to quash an order made by the
Himachal Pradesh Government terminating a quarrying contract held by the
petitioner in terms of which the petitioner supplied sand, stone and bajri
required for a project. The grounds of invalidity urged against the order
included an allegation that the petitioners had been discriminated against in
as much as no such

**307**

action had been taken in respect of two other contractors supplying material
to the project. This allegation was based on Article 14 (our Article 12) of
the Constitution.

The issue before the Court was whether the petitioner had established a right
or obligation founded in statute or that the State had acted in the context of
law entitling the petitioner to the writ sought or it was a mere breach of
contract in respect of which the petitioner was not entitled to a writ or to
invoke Article 14.

The petitioner's claim to relief was based inter alia on the submission that
Cl. 30 of the contract which empowered its termination in the public interest
was statutory in that the contract was signed in form K as required by Rule 33
of the rules made under the Mines and Minerals (Research and Development) Act
1857. Pathak, C.J. giving reasons for dismissing the writ petition said (pp.
32, 33)

"If the term condition which creates the right or obligation is contained in
the statute then the violation of the term or condition is a violation of
statute........... But if the term or condition has legal force only when it
is incorporated in a contract between the parties, then violation of that term
or condition amounts to a mere breach of contract and that is so even if that
term or condition is required by the statute to be incorporated in a contract.
The question always is;

Does the term or condition upon which the grievance is founded, have legal
force because it is a provision of the statute or only because it is a clause
of the contract ?"

By way of illustration Pathak, C.J. cited Prabhakar Ram Krishna Jodh v. A. L.
Pande (14) in which the Supreme Court held that an order of termination of
services of the appellant, a teacher of a college affiliated to the University
of Saugar was violative of his statutory rights under Cl. 8 of the Ordinance
relating to the security of the tenure of teachers made under the University
of Saugar Act and which was part and parcel of the Teachers' Service
Conditions. The Supreme Court held that CI. 8 of the Ordinance gave the
appellant a right to apply under Article 226 for relief and the consideration
that he had entered into a contract was immaterial.

**308**

Pathak, C.J. analysed the termination clause in the case before him thus
(p.33)

"The provision for such termination is to be found in the agreement. It is not
a provision of the Act or Rules ........... To be more specific, the rules do
not mention that the contract can be terminated by the government in the
public interest. Authority for the termination of the contract on that ground
is to be found in the contract alone. It is a right founded in contract, it is
not a power issuing from the statute".

Considering the allegation of discrimination based on Article 226 Pathak, C.J.
said (p.34)

"Had the discrimination been applied in the course of granting a contract
................the discriminatory action of the Government would be referable
to its statutory authority because the statute empowers the government to
enter into such contracts. But once the contract has been concluded between
the government and an individual any action taken by the government in the
application of a term or condition of contract must be attributable to the
capacity of the government as a contracting party. When the government passes
from the stage of granting the contract to the stage of exercising rights
under it, it passes from the domain of statutory rights into the realm of
contract. And as was observed by the Supreme Court in C. K. Achutan v. State
of Kerala AIR 1959 SC 490 "(15) a contract which is held from. the government
stands on no different footing from a private party". In my view Article 14 of
the Constitution cannot be invoked by the petitioner".

The next case cited is Radhakrishna Agrawal and Others v. State of Bihar and
Others (16) which considered certain appeals concerning writ petitions under
Article 226 challenging the revision of royalty payable by the petitioners-
appellants under a lease and the subsequent cancellations of the lease. The
petitioners claimed constitutional rights based on Articles 298 and 14 of the
Constitution. Under Article 298 executive power of the Union and each State
shall extend inter alia to the making of contracts for any purpose . Counsel
for the petitioners urged that the State acting in its executive capacity,
even in the contractual field, cannot escape the obligations imposed by Part
111 of the Constitution including Article 14 which guarantees equal protection
of the laws. Beg, C.J. expressed his opinion on the Counsel's submission thus
(p. 1501)-

**309**

"Learned Counsel contends that in the cases before us breaches of public duty
are involved. The submission made before us is that, whenever a State or its
agents or officers deal with the citizen, either when making a transaction or,
after making it, acting in the exercise of powers under the terms of a
contract between the parties, there is a dealing between the State and the
citizen which involves performance of "certain legal and public duties". If we
were to accept this very wide proposition every case of a breach of contract
by the State or its agents or its officers would call for interference under
Article 226 of the Constitution. We do not consider this to be a sound
proposition at all".

The Court reiterated the position that at the threshold stage or at the stage
of granting the contract, acts of the State would be governed by
constitutional provisions but subsequent acts in the field of contract are not
so governed unless the power or obligation is statutory. Beg, C.J. said
(p.1500) - .

"At this (threshold) stage, no doubt the State acts purely in its executive
capacity and is bound by the obligations which dealings of the State with the
individual citizens import into every transaction entered into in exercise of
its constitutional powers. But after the State or its agents have entered into
the field of ordinary contract, the relations are no longer governed by the
constitutional provisions but by the legally valid contract which determines
rights and obligations of the parties inter se. No question arises of
violation of Article 14 or of any other constitutional provision when the
state or its agents purporting to act within this field perform any act. In
this sphere, they can only claim rights conferred upon them by contract and
are bound by the terms of the contract only unless some statute steps in and
confers some special statutory power or obligation on the State in the
contractual field which is apart from contract".

In Roberts and Another v. Ratnayake and Others (1.) this Court heard an
application arising from the termination of a lease of 3 stalls and 2 sites of
bare lands held by the 2nd petitioner from the Muncipal Council, Kandy. The
petitioners complained that the termination was violative of Article 12 (1).
Ranasinghe, J. (as he then was) having considered the decisions in Bal
Krishnan Vaid (13) and Agrawal (16) cases (supra) and the relevant provisions
of our Constitution said (p.44)

"On a consideration of the principles contained in the judgments referred to
above, and the provisions of both Articles 12 (1) and 170 of

**310**

the Constitution, the principles that govern the question, which calls for
determination, are, in my opinion, that the 'law', equality before which and
equal protection of which is guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the Constitution,
constitutes only those statutory provisions contained in Acts of Parliament,
and in any enactment passed by a legislature of this Island at any time before
the Constitution was promulgated in September, 1978, including all orders in
Council promulgated before the Constitution came into operation, and also
those by-laws which, as set out earlier, are also as valid and effectual as if
enacted in the main statute; that where the State enters into a contract with
a citizen in pursuance of statutory power, the State or such agency is, at the
"threshold stage" or at the stage at which such contract is being entered
into, bound by the operation of the provisions of Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution; that once such agreement is validly entered into all parties to
such agreement - the State, the state agency, and the citizen - are all
ordinarily bound only by the terms and conditions set out in such agreement;
that, if, however, there exists a statutory provision which, whether included
expressly or impliedly, as a term or condition of such agreement or not,
confers some special power even in the field of contract, then such provision
affects the rights and obligations of the parties under such agreement; that
if the term or condition, which creates rights or obligations of the parties
under the agreement, has legal force only because it is incorporated in such
agreement, then any violation even by the State amounts only to a breach of
contract, even where such term or-condition has been incorporated because a
statutory provision requires it to be so incorporated; that where the rights
and obligations of parties to such agreement have to be determined according
to the law of contract, then even the State has to be treated in the same way
as any other ordinary party to a legally binding contract; that where the
rights and obligations of the parties to such contract fall to be determined
by the ordinary law of contract, then the provisions of Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution have no application, and cannot be invoked".

Learned President's Counsel also cited certain cases dealing with employment.
I do not consider it necessary to examine all the cases cited. Of them the
case of R. v. Berkshire Health Authority, ex parte Walsh (17) (Court of
Appeal) - although it is only concerned with the question whether an order
terminating the employment of the petitioner is subject to judicial review by
the issue of a writ of certiorari - is very instructive on some

**311**

aspects which are relevant even in the field of fundamental rights guaranteed
by the Constitution. These are rights which areas much in the sphere of public
law as are statutory rights enforceable through writs.

The petitioner Mr. Walsh was employed by the East Berkshire Area Health
Authority as a Senior Nursing Officer at Wexham Park Hospital. His services
were terminated whereupon he applied to an Industrial Tribunal alleging that
he had been unfairly dismissed and seeking compensation. He also applied for
judicial review to quash the order of dismissal. The question for decision was
whether the remedy sought by Mr. Walsh arose solely out of his contract of
employment with the health authority as opposed to any public duty imposed on
the authority, the legal position being that it is only in the latter case
that a writ of certiorari could be sought.

In terms of the regulations made under the National Health Service Act
-conditions of service of nursing officers had to be negotiated by the Whitley
Counsel and approved by the Secretary of State. Such conditions were included
in Mr. Walsh's contract of employment. Hodgson, J. who decided the case in the
Divisional Court approached the question thus (p.429) -

"The public may have no interest in the relationship between the servant and
master in an "ordinary case, but where the servant holds office in a great
public service the' public is properly concerned to see that the authority
employing him acts towards him lawfully and fairly. It is not a pure question
of contract. The public is concerned that nurses who serve the public should
be treated lawfully and fairly by the public authority employing
them............. It follows that, if in the exercise of my discretion 1
conclude that the remedy of certiorari is appropriate, it can properly go
against the respondent authority".

Sir John Donaldson, M.R. disagreeing with this approach said - (p. 430) -

"Employment by a public authority does not per se inject any element of public
law. Nor does the fact that the employee is in a 'higher grade' or is an
officer. This only makes it more likely that there will be special statutory
restrictions on dismissal or other underpinning of his
employment................. It will be this underpinning and not the seniority
which injects the element of public law. Still less can I find any warrant

**312**

for equating public law with the interest of the public. If the public through
Parliament gives effect to that interest by means of statutory provisions that
is quite different, but the interest of the public per se is not sufficient".

May, L.J. said - (p. 434)

"Further, I think that at the present time, in at least the great majority of
cases involving disputes about the dismissal of an employee by his employer,
the most appropriate forum for their resolution is an industrial tribunal. In
my opinion the Courts should not be astute to hold that any particular dispute
is appropriate for consideration under the judicial review procedure provided
for by R. S. C. Ord. 53". He thought that Hodgson, J. had stated the test "in
far too wide terms" (p.435). He also said - (p.436)" I doubt however, whether
one should properly say, in the present context, that as a senior nursing
officer Mr. Walsh held a public position ......Having-regard to the detailed
terms of Mr. Walsh's contract with the authority, I do not think that
considerations which determine whether he was validly dismissed do go beyond
that contract":

Purchas, L.J. said - (p. 442)

"However, in my judgment the relationship between Mr. Walsh and the health
authority was one which fell within the category of 'pure master and servant'
although the powers of the authority to negotiate terms with its employees
were limited indirectly by statute and subordinate legislation. Any breach of
those terms of which Mr. Walsh complained related solely to the private
contractual relationship between the health authority and him and did not
involve any wrongful discharge by the health authority of rights or duties
imposed on it qua health authority".

In Ratnakar Visvanath Joshi and Others v. Life Insurance Corporation of India
and Others (18) Delhi High Court, the question was whether a scheme of
benefits for payment of special pay to employees of the Corporation was
available to the petitioners only as a -term of their contract of service with
the Corporation or whether it was available to them by Iaw. The petitioners
sought to quash the withdrawal of the scheme by the Chairman of the
Corporation by means of a writ under

**313**

Article 226 on the ground that the scheme was law or an order having the force
of law.

The Corporation was established by the Life Insurance Corporation Act 1956.
Its power included the power to make regulations. However, Deshpande, J.
observed (p. 472) "the Corporation need not wait for the framing of rules and
regulations before it can start working under the Act". In view of this and
certain regulations made by the Corporation, in particular regulation 59
relied upon by the petitioners, Deshpande, J. proceeded to state thus - (p.
472)

"It is essential for the petitioners, therefore, to show that there is a
statutory obligation imposed on the Corporation either by the Act or by the
rules or by the regulations to give the petitioner the benefit of the
scheme.......".

On the merits the Court thought that the withdrawal of the scheme by the
Chairman was invalid in that he did not have the authority of the Corporation
to do so. However, the Court held that this was a question concerning the
validity of the internal administration of the Corporation which could not be
inquired into under Article 226; that the special pay under the scheme is a
matter of grace which could not be claimed by the employees as a matter of
right; and that the withdrawal of the scheme cannot be said to have been
contrary to Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution in that it did not
discriminate against the petitioners because it did not favour other employees
of the Corporation to the detriment of the petitioners.

On the law, the Court held that the scheme is not covered by Regulation 59;
that it consisted of mere administrative instructions competent under
Regulation 27 (b) or 23 but did not constitute law or a direction having the
force of law given in the exercise of the legislative power of the
Constitution; that if it is remuneration payable to the employee for work done
by them, then the employee can enforce payment of the remuneration as a part
of the contract of service in a suit and that such conditions of service are
not enforceable by a writ petition under Article 226.

In view of its conclusion that the petitioners had no statutory rights
enforceable under Article 226, the Court found it unnecessary to decide

**314**

whether the Corporation is a State' within the meaning of Article 12. Even if
it is assumed to be a State the Court held that its employees do not obtain
the constitutional status of government employees. The following passage from
the judgment sets out the position more clearly. (pp. 470 -471).

"Under Article 310 of the Constitution an employee under government holds his
office during the pleasure of the President or the Governor. Under the proviso
to Article 309 the President or the Governor may frame rules governing the
conditions of service of the Government servants. A Government servant has,
therefore, in theory no security of tenure and no equality of position as a
contracting party. On the other hand constitutional obligations are cast on
the government by Article 311 of the Constitution. This is why a contract of
service under the Government is regarded as a status under the Constitution. A
corollary of the above position is that even it no rules are framed under
Article 309 the Government may determine the conditions of service of its
employees by executive action. The executive power of the union may be
exercised by the President under Articles 53 and 73 and by the Governor under
Articles 154 and 162. The constitutional conditions of service could be
changed by the mere exercise of such executive power".

The Court ruled on the rights of the employee of the Corporation thus - (p.
472)

" There are no provisions in the Act of 1956 or in the rules and regulations
framed there under which transform the relationship between the Corporation
and its employees into status as distinguished from contract. The result is
that the relationship between the petitioners and the Corporation is governed
either by the service contract with the Corporation for the unilateral benefit
which the Corporation may give as a matter of grace or the regulations
governing certain conditions of service framed under section 49. It is only
those conditions of service which are governed by the regulations that have
become a matter of statutory rights and obligations between the petitioners
and the Corporation. The rest of the conditions of service are not a statutory
right or obligation enforceable by a writ petition under Article 226".

In Abeywickrema v. Pathirana and Others (19) the validity of the election of
the respondent as a Member of Parliament was challenged on

**315**

the ground that at the time of his election he held public office as the
Principal of a school and as such he was disqualified for election in terms of
Article 91 (1) (d) (V11) of the Constitution. The respondent's position was
that he had resigned from his post on 21.04.83, a day before the nomination
date. The petitioner argued that the respondent's resignation was not validly
made in that he had failed to comply with the prescribed procedure for
resignation in that the letter of resignation was not addressed to nor
accepted by the appointing authority as required by s.4 Chapter V of the
Establishments Code which had been approved by the Cabinet of Ministers under
Article 55(4) of the Constitution. It was held that s. 4 of the Code has
statutory force and is binding; that a public officer acquires a status; that
his relations are governed by status and not by contract; and that in view of
non-compliance with the mandatory provisions of s.4, the respondent had not
ceased to be a public officer on the date of his election and was therefore a
person disqualified for election as a Member. Sharvananda, C.J. said - (p.143)
-

" If rules made under Article 309 of the Indian Constitution attract statutory
force, in my view by a parity of argument the rules made under Article 55 (4)
also should be held to have statutory force".

In Nanayakkara v. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka and
Others (20) in which an employee of the institute sought to challenge
disciplinary proceedings against him by certiorari, the Court of Appeal
considered the nature of the relationship between the Institute and its
employees. The Institute was established under Act No. 23 of 1959, s. 12 of
which empowered the Institute to make regulations including in respect of
disciplinary control over officers. Such regulations were contained in the
Manual of Procedure, paragraph 2 of which stipulates that they may be amended;
repealed or substituted by new regulations made by the Institute when
necessary. Thambiah, J. said- (p. 61 - 62) -

''.................The petitioner's employment has a statutory flavour, which
differentiates his employment from the ordinary relationship of master and
servant. The Manual of Procedure (R 1) gives rights to the employees and
imposes obligations on the employer, which go beyond the ordinary contract of
service.................. If an employee is dismissed for unspecified reasons
or if there is a breach of these essential principles of natural justice, then
the order of dismissal may become liable to be controlled by certiorari".

**316**

In Akbar Ahad v. State of Orissa (21) where the government terminated the
lease of the petitioner under C1.12 of the lease deed whilst in respect of
similar leasehold, resort had been made to the provisions of the Land
Acquisition Act, it was held that from the fact that on some occasions, the
State as lessor had waived its rights reserved under CI. 12 of the lease deed,
it cannot be said that the petitioners had been discriminated against simply
because the benefit of such a waiver had not been extended to them.
Enforcement of a contractual obligation against one and waiver of a similar
obligation under an independent contract in the case of another does not
amount to denial of equal protection envisaged in Article 14 of the
Constitution.

The forgoing authorities establish that in India and Sri Lanka public officers
enjoy a status and the rights and liabilities of their employment arise from
constitutional or statutory provisions. Their relationship with the State goes
beyond contract. They are, therefore, competent to invoke the jurisdiction of
this Court for the enforcement of their right to equality before the law and
equal protection of the law under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution. However,
in the case of a public corporation which is an agency of the government a
breach of contract between an employee and the agency would not per se attract
the provisions of Article 12 (1). Such an employee can complain of a violation
of that Article only if the rights and obligations under the contract of
employment are imposed by statutory provisions. This is a question which must
be decided in each case having regard to the conditions of employment and the
intention of the relevant statute. If the remedy sought arises purely from the
contract based on the consent of parties Articles 12 (1) and 126 have no
application, in which event the dispute must be resolved by an ordinary suit
provided by private law, even if the dispute involves an allegation of
discrimination.

Even though it may be a government agency, Air Lanka is a company duly
incorporated under the Companies Ordinance. Our attention has not been drawn
to any provision of that Ordinance or of any other statutory provision which
govern the petitioner's contract of employment with Air Lanka; nor have I been
able to discover any such provision. I am, therefore, of the view that the
petitioner's grievance has to be resolved by a private law remedy such as the
application he has already made to the Labour Tribunal. An inquiry by the
Labour Tribunal is also beneficial to both parties who are entitled to the
rights of an ordinary suit, of calling witnesses and of confrontation and
cross-examination of testimony at

**317**

such inquiry on all the points in dispute. I am also of the view that this
would promote the due and orderly administration of justice by Courts and
Tribunals established by law. Any other view would encourage the proliferation
of applications before the Supreme Court which are not within its jurisdiction
merely because the aggrieved parties or Counsel advising them may feel that
the remedy under Article 126 is convenient or expeditious.

Aggrieved parties may themselves not be able to distinguish the cases of
arbitrary treatment or discrimination falling within the ambit of Article 12
(1). It is therefore, the duty of Counsel to examine each case and to advise
clients accordingly and to dissuade them from coming to this Court in the hope
of obtaining relief here even in cases of doubt. This would also help in some
measure in solving the problem of laws delays. l do not agree with the
submission of the learned Counsel for the petitioner that where a person
complains of treatment violative of Article 12 (1) of the Constitution by a
body which is a government agency such as Air Lanka what should control
administrative discretion for the purpose of the exercise of our jurisdiction
under Article 126 is not the existence of a statutory base but whether the
treatment in issue has been fair between equals even if the application is
based on an alleged breach of contractual rights; and that the word law' in
Article 12 (1) should be construed accordingly to include any scheme or
administrative action. In my view such a construction is far too wide and is
not supported by the relevant provisions of the Constitution or authority.

In view of my findings above, this Court has no jurisdiction to hear and
determine the petitioner's application. As such, I do not propose to consider
the question whether the termination of the petitioner's employment with Air
Lanka is discriminatory in particular for the reason that any opinion
expressed by us on that matter can only prejudice either party, in the hearing
and determination of the dispute by the Labour Tribunal. Accordingly, I
dismiss the petitioner's application with costs which I fix at Rs. 15751/=.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J. -** I agree.

**RAMANATHAN, J. -** I agree.

_**Application dismissed.**

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1990/14.html_  

