##  Premadasa and Others v. Sabaragamuwa Development Bank and Others - SLR -
161, Vol 1 of 2005 [2004] LKSC 14; (2005) 1 Sri LR 161 (19 October 2004)

**161**

**PREMADASA AND OTHERS  
v.  
 SABARAGAMUWA DEVELOPMENT BANK  
AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
WIGNESWARAN, J.  
DISSANAYAKE. J AND  
RAJA FERNANDO, J  
SC (FR) NO. 5085/2003  
23rd AUGUST, 1ST SEPTEMBER, 2004  
  
Fundamental Rights - Fixation of salary on promotion - Invalidity of adding
increments for past service - Chapter VII of the Establishments Code -
Decision to recover increments invalidly given - Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution.  
_  
The four petitioners originally held supervisory grade III appointments in the
Regional Rural Development Bank Sabaragamuwa. They were then appointed to the
Sabaragamuwa Development Bank (1st respondent) as supervisors Grade III; but
they functional as "Executive Grade" employees and were paid a monthly
allowance of Rs. 3200/- in 2001 and 2002. They were thereafter promoted as
officers Grade I from 01. 01. 2002.  
  
The starting salary of Grade I in the new post was Rs. 11.310/- but the 1st
petitioner connived with the establishment to take into account the allowance
of Rs. 3200/- paid previously and on the basis of seven assumed increments
each Rs. 265/- The 1st petitioner had himself and the 4th petitioner placed
themselves on a salary of Rs. 13,165/- and had the 2nd and 3rd petitioner
placed on a salary of Rs. 12,900/- each.  
  
Thereafter the establishment realized that the increment is not a right but
had to be earned under sections. 10.1 and 10.9 Chapter VII of the
Establishments Code; whereupon on 12. 09. 03 the four petitioners were
informed that they had to earn the increments on the basic salary of Rs. 11,
310/- and the sums they had been paid as increments since appointment after
1.1.2002 in excess of what they were entitled to would be recovered, amounting
to about Rs. 94,515/-  
  
The petitioners complained of infringement of Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution.  
  
**Held:  
**  
1\. Increments of salary is not a right and had to be earned. As such the
decision to recover the monies paid to the Petitioners after 1.1.2202 were
invalidly paid.

**162**

2\. There was no violation of the petitiners's fundamental rights under
Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_J. C. Weliamuna_ for petitioner  
  
Sunil F. Coorey with C. Liyanage for 2nd to 7th respondents.  
  
October 19,2004  
  
**WIGNESWARAN, J.  
**  
The Petitioners were graduate employees of the Sabaragamuwa Development Bank,
Ratnapura, holding managerial posts which they alleged were Supervisory Grade
III appointments. Prior to the establishment of the said Bank on 1.1.99 the
Petitioners were employees of the Regional Rural Development Banks holding
Grade III Supervisory appointments. The Petitioners looked forward to being
appointed to an "Executive Grade" which was soon to be established in the 1st
Respondent Bank. Since functions of such a Grade were performed by them,
though the Grade had not been established, the Petitioners were paid a sum of
Rs. 3200/- as monthly allowance for the period 1.1.2000 to 31.12.2000. This
was paid in the year 2001 too.  
  
By letters dated 22. 10. 2001 (P14A to P14D) the Petitioners were informed
that they would be absorbed into the "Officer Grade I". They were told by the
same letters that the allowance of Rs. 3200/- per month continue to be paid
until the Petitioners were placed on proper scales.  
  
The Petitioners were promoted to the "Officer Grade 1" with effect from 1.1.
2002\. But their letters of appointment dated 3.12.2001 (P15A to P 15D) stated
that the allowance of Rs. 3200/- per month would not be paid after 31. 12.
2001 since the new salary payable to them had taken into account the allowance
that was earlier paid to them.  
  
From January 2002 up to August 2003, Petitioners were paid a salary which fell
within the salary scale 11310/- 16430/-

**163**

The 1 st Petitioner received Rs. 11310/- + 265 X 7 = 13165/ =, the 2nd
Petitioner 11310/=+ 265X6=12900/-, the 3rd Petitioner also Rs. 12900/= and the
4th Petitioner Rs. 13165 /-= as paid to the 1 st Petitioner.  
  
By letters dated 12.09.03 (P21A - P21D) the Petitioners were informed as
follow:  
  
i. That they were entitled only to the increments earned after 1.1.2002  
  
ii. Accordingly all excess payments amounting to about RS. 94515/-paid until
then, would be recovered.  
  
iii. That the petitioners would be placed on the basic salary of Rs. 11310/-as
at 1.1.2002.  
  
This was objected to by the Petitioners (P23A - P23D)  
  
The Petitioners came into Court thereafter alleging infringement of their
fundamental rights guaranteed to them under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution
and seeking a declaration regarding such alleged violation, an order
nullifying the decisions communicated by P21A - P21D and asking for interim
relief and other reliefs.  
  
An undertaking was given by Counsel for the 1 st to 7th Respondents on 19.11.
2003 that the purported excess salary paid to the Petitioners would not be
recovered until the determination of this application. Leave to proceed in
respect of the alleged infringement of Article 12 (1) of the Constitution was
granted on 17.02.04.  
  
This matter came up before us on 23.08.04 and written submissions were
thereafter filed.  
  
The learned attorney at - law for the Petitioners in his written submissions
has submitted as follows:  
  
"In order to implement (the) decision of the Board of Directors and to place
the Petitioners in the relevant salary step the management had to take into
account the interim allowance of Rs. 3,200/- Thus the management made the
following adjustments by way of increments in respect of each of the
Petitioners.

**164**

1st Petitioner -11,310/- + 265X7= 13,165/= (7increments) 2nd Petitioner
-11,310/- + 265X6= 13,165/= (6 increments) 3rd Petitioner -11,310/- + 265X6=
13,165/= (6 increments) 4th Petitioner-11,310/- + 265X7= 13,165/=
(7increments)  
  
It was contended by the learned Counsel for the Petitioner at the hearing that
unless they were placed at the abovesaid salary scale they would have been
deprived and denied of at least three increments due to no fault of the
Petitioners. He contended that the Petitioners were entitled to earn three
increments during the period 1999 to 2002.  
  
The learned Counsel further pointed out that it was the Board of Directors who
should determine the salaries of its employees and that precisely was what had
taken place, the letters P15A to P15D having been signed by the General
Manager. He disputed that the Petitioners could have been placed on the
initial salary step of Rs. 11310/-. He also disputed the contention that
salaries of the Petitioners should be decided by the Collective Agreement
(P13) signed between the Bank (1 st Respondent) and the Ceylon Bank Employees'
Union. He argued in the light of Section 30 (2) of the Regional Development
Banks Act, No. 6 of 1997, if the Board of Directors had decided to place the
Petitioner on a higher salary scale, then there was no basis to vary its
decision based on the Collective Agreement. In any event he said there was no
basis for the recovering of the payments duly made.  
  
The Learned Counsel made a significant plea which is also reflected in the
written submissions - 'The Petitioners were denied increments due to no fault
on the part of the Petitioners. Thus at least the salary of the Petitioners
should be Rs. 11310/- + 265 X3= 12105= as at 1.1.2002" .This shows that the
Counsel himself seems to have had reservations with regard to the adding up of
seven and six increments arbitrarily.  
  
The counter affidavit filed by the 1st Petitioner has stated that it was only
the salary scale that was to be decided according to the Collective Agreement.
The salary step had to be decided according to the provisions of Chapter VII
of the Establishments Code and the Administration and Disciplinary Hand Book
of the Bank.  
  
All these submissions would now be considered

**165**

The basic question to be answered is whether the Petitioners on promotion to
"Officer Grade I" were to be placed at the initial salary step of Rs. 11310/-
or were entitled to be placed at a salary step above the initial salary. The
rationale for placing the Petitioners at a step above the initial salary would
be that they had earned certain increments already. In this instance the
learned Counsel for the Petitioners had argued that the Petitioners were at
least entitled to increments for the years 1999 to 2002 Chapter 7 Section 10:1
and 10:9 of the Establishments Code refers to increments as follows:  
  
10:1 " An officer is not entitled to draw an increment as of right. He is
required to earn it by the efficient and diligent discharge of his duties and
by serving the incremental period in full (see subsection 10:9). A certificate
to that effect should be signed by the appropriate authority before an
increment is paid"  
  
10:9 "An increment should be granted only if the full incremental period has
been served. Any period of leave with full pay or half pay will count as
service for increments"  
  
Under the Collective Agreement (P13) there was no dispute that the Petitioners
were entitled to be placed at the salary scale for "Officer Grade" 1 which was  
  
_11310-16430  
_265X8-300X10  
  
The increments of 265X8 and 300X10 were to be earned only after an officer was
placed at the initial salary scale of Rs. 11310/-. The Petitioners were
entitled to be considered for the abovesaid salary scale of Rs. 11310/= only
from 01.01.2002 and not before that. Therefore the argument that the
Petitioners had worked during the period 1999 to 2002 and thus earned 3
increments appears untenable. There was no question of the Petitioners being
entitled to a salary scale or Rs. 11310/- in the year 1999 nor 2000 nor 2001\.
When they were placed on 01. 01. 2002 in this salary scale only could they
have earned an increment. That is, after they became entitled to receive the
new salary scale and not before it.

**166**

We are unable to accept the submission that in order to implement the decision
of the Board of Directors the management had to place the Petitioners in the
relevant salary step. The interim allowance of Rs. 3200/ was paid monthly on
account of the fact that the Petitioners performed the functions of an
executive Grade as from 1999. Nor did the Board of Directors resolve to
predate the appointment of the Petitioners to a date anterior to 01.01.2002.
They only resolved that the salary scales given in the Collective Agreement
(P13) should come into force from 01.01.2002.  
  
There seems to be truth in the submissions of the learned Counsel for the
Respondents that the 1st Petitioner who was in charge of computation of
salaries of all employees of the Bank had conveniently given himself and the
4th Petitioner 7 increments each and to the 2nd and 3rd Petitioners 6
increments each from 01.01.2002 although there seems to be no basis whatsoever
for such a course of action. Even the learned Counsel for the Petitioners only
argued for 3 increments. He placed no valid grounds before us as to the basis
of granting 7 increments and 6 increments to the Petitioners as referred to
above. There had been no decision arrived at by the Board of Directors of the
1 st Respondent Bank that any unearned increments should be paid to any
particular employee.  
  
Section 30(2) of the Regional Development Banks, Act. No. 6 of 1997 was
referred to. It has no relevance to this case. The Board of Directors did not
decide to place the Petitioners on a higher salary scale other than to abide
by the Collective Agreement by which the salary scale was determined.  
  
If for argument purposes the 7 and 6 increments allowed to the Petitioners had
been wrongly determined and say only 3 increments were payable, then the
amount paid in excess of the three increments would have to be refunded. Thus
the contention that a duly paid payment cannot be recovered would fail even if
the payment was "duly" paid could certainly be recovered. It is to be noted
that the salary anomaly in respect of the Petitioners was brought to the
notice of the Board of Directors of the 1 st Respondent Bank by P22 and
thereafter the board decided to correct the anomaly and recover over payments
which had no basis and which seem to have been obtained by the Petitioners
without a legal basis. Therefore steps to recover over payments cannot be
faulted.

**167**

We therefore find that there has been no violation of the fundamental rights
of the Petitioners under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution and that the
decisions communicated by P21 A to P21D were valid in law. We dismiss this
application fixing a sum of Rs. 10000/- as costs payable to the 1st Respondent
by the Petitioners jointly and severally.  
  
**DISSANAYAKA, J.** \- I agree  
  
**FERNANDO, J** \- I agree  
  
_**Application dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/14.html_  

