##  Rajaratne v. Air Lanka Ltd. and Others - SLR - 128, Vol 2 of 1987 [1987]
LKSC 14; (1987) 2 Sri LR 128 (3 April 1987)

**

128

RAJARATNE** **  
v.** **  
AIR LANKA LTD. AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
ATUKORALE, J. SENEVIRATNE, J. AND H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION No. 63/86.  
SEPTEMBER-16.19 AND OCTOBER 1,2,3 AND 20, 1986.

_

Fundamental Rights -Articles 12(l), 17 and 126 of the Constitution Equality-
Discrimination._

**

(Held- Seneviratne, J. dissenting):**

Although the petitioner was better qualified and more eligible for appointment
as a Flight Engineer than one Wijesinghe the latter was appointed to the post.
This amounted to discrimination.

The written test set for the petitioner was intended to belittle the
petitioner's qualifications while the written test set for Wijesinghe was one
tailor-made to suit his special aptitudes. This amounted to differential
treatment and a denial of equality of opportunity.

Air Lanka being brought Into existence for carrying out a function of great
public importance, once carried out by the government through a statutory
corporation, financed almost wholly by the government and managed and
controlled by the government through its own nominee Directors is an agency or
instrumentality of the government. In reality Air Lanka is a company formed by
the government, owned by the government and controlled by the government. The
juristic veil of corporate personality donned by the company for certain
purposes cannot, for the purposes of the application and enforcement of
fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitution, be permitted to conceal the
reality behind it which is the government The brooding presence of the
government behind the operations of the company is quite manifest. The
cumulative effect of the factors and features is to render. Air Lanka an agent
or organ of the government its action can therefore be properly designated as
executive or administrative action within the meaning of Articles 17 and 126
of the Constitution. The petitioner has established that he is entitled to
relief under Article 126(4).

**

Cases referred to:**

(1) _Perera v. University Grants Commission-_ (1980) Vol.. 1 FRD 103.  

(2) _Wijetunga v. Insurance Corporation of Sri Lanka_ -(1982)1 Sri LR l.  

(3) _Wijeratne v. The People's Bank_ -(1984) 1 Sri LR1 .  

(4) _Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India-_ AIR
1979 SC 1682.

**129**

(5) _Ariyapala Guneratne v. The People's Bank_ (1986) 1 Sri LR 338;  

(6) _Roberts v. Ratnayake -_ (1986) 2 Sri LR 36.  

(7) _Rajasthan State Electricity Board, Jaipur v. Mohanlal_ AIR 19 67 SC 1857  

(8) _Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagatram_ -AIR 1975 SC 1331.  

(9) _Ajay Hasia v Khalid Mujub Schravardi_ -AIR 1981 SC 487.  

(10) _Som Prakash Rekhi v. Union of India -_ AIR 1981 SC 212.  

(11) _Sabhajit Tewari v. Union of India_ -AIR 1975 SC 1329.  

(12) _Praga Tools Corporation v. C. V. Immanual_ -AIR 1969 SC 1306.  

(13) _Chandrasen-and Two Others v. National Paper Corporation_ (1982) 1 Sri LR
19.  

(14) _Kerpv. Enoch Pratt Free Library-_ (1945).326 U. S. 721.  

(15) _Marsh v. Alabama-_ (1946) U.S. 501.  

(16) _Heavy Engineering Mazdoor Union v. State of Bihar-_ AIR 1970 SC 82.  

(17) _Gainini Samarasinghe v. Bank of Ceylon and Another-_ (1980) Vol. 1 FRD
165\.  

(18) _Gunasena Thenabadu v. University of Colombo and Others-_ (1979) Vol. 1
FRD 63.

**

APPLICATION** for infringement of Fundamental Rights.

_

R. K. W. Goonesekera_ with _S. Nandadeva_ for the petitioner.  

_

H. L. de Silva, P.C._ with _S. L. Gunasekera_ for 1, 2 and 3 respondents.

_

Cur. adv. vult_ .

April 3, 1987.  
  
**ATUKORALE J.**

The petitioner was enrolled as a student in the Flight Engineer's Department,
Institute of Technology, Northrop University in California, U.S.A. a premier
institution providing aeronautical services approved by the Federal Aviation
Agency., U.S.A. He successfully completed the curriculum for the Boeing 727
Flight Engineer, Turbojet Rating at the said University and was, in September
1983, awarded a certificate to this effect P2. He was certified by the
Federal-Aviation Administration as having been found to be properly qualified
to exercise the privileges of a Flight Engineer for Turbojet Powered (Boeing
727) aircraft-P4. In March 1984 he applied for and obtained a Flight
Engineer's licence from the Department of Civil Aviation, Sri Lanka, with a
Boeing 727 rating-P5. In February and again in March of the same year he
applied to the 1st respondent (Air Lanka Ltd.. hereinafter referred to as Air
Lanka) for the position of a Flight Engineer-R9 and R10 respectively. He was
interviewed. but since at that time Air Lanka was concentrating on recruiting
Second Officers

**130**

rather than Engineers, it Was decided to review his application with the next
batch of recruits. This is so expressly stated by the 2nd respondent the
Chairman and Managing Director of Air Lanka-in his letter, P111 of 28.03.1986.
Then in September 1985 he re-applied for the same position He was requested to
be present for a written technical test. When he presented himself for the
test, he found that he had been subjected to the same Cadet Pilot's
examination as the other candidates, all of whom had applied for the post of
Cadet Pilot and not Flight Engineer. He protested. He Was then re-summoned to
sit for a written technical test for the post of Flight Engineer which was
compiled by the 3rd respondent, the Chief Flight Engineer of Air Lanka. He sat
for this test on 13.1.1986. According to him, he received no official
intimation of the results in consequence of which he wrote letter P10 dated
10.3..1986 to the 2nd respondent complaining, inter alia, of the unfairness of
the examination that had been set by the 3rd respondent. The 2nd respondent by
his letter P11 aforementioned replied that the petitioner had fared poorly at
both examinations and that Air Lanka could riot offer him employment.

In his application to this court he complains that he has been subjected to
unequal treatment in breach of the fundamental right guaranteed by Article
12(1) of the Constitution and invokes the jurisdiction of this court under
Article 126(1) thereof on the basis that such infringement was by virtue of
executive or administrative action. The relief he claims is an award of
damages in a sum of Rs. 1,000,000/- (One Million) for failure to recruit him
in 1984 and/or 1986.

The petitioner's complaint of unjust discrimination, as presented to us at the
hearing, revolves on the appointment of one Aruna Wijesinghe to the post of a
Cadet. Flight Engineer in Air Lanka in August 1984. 1t is founded on the
allegation that different standards or different criteria have been adopted by
Air Lanka in respect of himself and Wijesinghe in regard to, recruitment for
the same post, namely; that of Cadet Flight Engineer in Air Lanka. The
particulars furnished by Wijesinghe in his application (Y) dated 10.7.1984
(which, incidentally, also is titled as being for the post of Flight Engineer)
shows that he had been employed at Air Lanka since 11.5.1980 as an Apprentice
Aircraft Maintenance Engineer. He had, inter alia, successfully completed all
the basic courses for Apprentice Aircraft Maintenance Engineers conducted by
Singapore Airlines, all relevant Department of Civil Aviation (Singapore)
basic papers for

**131**

Licensed Aircraft Maintenance Engineers (Airframe and Engine categories).
conducted-by the DCA (Singapore) and the Civil Aviation Authority (U.K.) basic
technical examination for Flight Engineers Licence (including Air Law and
Weight and. Balance) In so far as the last technical examination is concerned,
Y1 indicates that he had passed Part 1 of the examination at two sittings in
August 1983 and May 1984. There is however, nothing to show that he had
completed Part 11 which required him to pass a CA 1180 Type Rating Flight Test
and to satisfy the Practical Engineering requirements. of 100 hours practical
experience on the type required on his Flight Engineer's Licence in the 12
months preceding the issue of the Licence The work experience gained by him
according to his application (Y) was in respect of Boeing -747 Maintenance at
Singapore. Airlines Maintenance Hangar. He had ;also worked on L1011 aircraft
in Colombo and possessed, according to him, an excellent knowledge of Boeing
747 systems and their operation. At the most Wijesinghe was thus a qualified
Apprentice Aircraft Maintenance Engineer; a Ground Engineer. He, however, did
not possess a Flight Engineer' s Licence nor had he undergone the basic
training course similar to that completed. by the petitioner in respect of
Flight Engineers. I might add that in response to an inquiry made by the
Manager, Flight Operations of Air Lanka after the filing of this application
it transpired that the petitioner had completed 35 hours experience in a
Boeing 727 simulator and only 1.3 flying hours:

In analysing the facts and circumstances relied on by the petitioner as
constituting unjust discrimination, it is necessary to refer to certain other
relevant matters. It is conceded by the 3rd respondent that the petitioner
was, in view of documents P2, P2A, P3, P4 and P5, possessed of the basic
qualifications of a Flight Engineer of a Boeing 727 aircraft, although his
experience did not qualify hire to operate solo as a Flight Engineer even on
such a plane in any, reputed airline. It is also not in dispute that Air Lanka
at the relevant time did not operate - such planes but only Boeing 747,
Lockheed 1011 and Boeing 737 aircraft, flight Engineers being required only
for the first two types of aircraft. It is further in evidence that although
the petitioner's qualifications did not entitle him to operate as a Flight
Engineer on any of the aircraft of Air Lanka, he could, nevertheless, have
qualified to do so on the successful completion of a course of training
(called transitional or conversion training) pertaining to, Boeing 747 and/or
Lockheed 1011-aircraft. According to the 3rd respondent this training would
have been of about 6 months duration including a short period

**132**

of training in Hongkong or Singapore According to the petitioner however this
would not have taken more than 2 months in view of his qualifications It is
also not denied that the applications made by the petitioner to Air Lanka,
although titled as being for the post of Flight Engineer, were treated and
considered by Air Lanka as being for the post of Cadet Flight Engineer, just
as much as Wijesinghe's application also titled as being for the post of
Flight Engineer, was treated and considered by Air Lanka as being for the post
of a Cadet Flight Engineer, to which he was subsequently appointed. It is also
conceded that at or about the time that Wijesinghe was recruited as Cadet
Flight Engineer 'that is, in August 1984, it was known to Air Lanka at the
petitioner was himself seeking the same post and that his applications made in
February and March 1984 were still pending. On a consideration of the above
facts and circumstances it appears to me that on the occasion that Wijesinghe
was tested and appointed, the application of the petitioner was not even
considered by Air Lanka. The petitioner's application was thus not considered
in relation to and . simultaneously with that of Wijesinghe's in spite of the
fact that prima facie the petitioner was better qualified and more eligible
for appointment than Wijesinghe. Learned President's Counsel for the
respondents "submitted that Wijesinghe was appointed as a Cadet Flight
Engineer for the specific purpose of filling the vacancy created by the
resignation of one Victor Hatarasinghe on 7th August 1984 who had been
recruited by Air Lanka as one of the 8 Cadet Pilots, all of whom completed
their ground school training and cockpit procedure training course
successfully, in Sri Lanka and for whom Lockheed 1011 Simulators had been
reserved in Hong Kong for the purpose of imparting to them their Simulator
training Victor Hatarasinghe left the services of Air Lanka( after completing
his ground school and cockpit procedure training but before the commencement
of his Simulator training. Since by then Wijesinghe had, it was submitted
successfully completed a course of ground school training relating to Lockheed
1011 aircraft (the course being one for Aircraft Maintenance Engineers and as
such a more detailed and comprehensive course than that designed for Cadet
Pilots and Cadet Flight Engineers) he was considered for appointment as a
Cadet Flight Engineer and was subjected to a written examination consisting of
4 papers, in all of which he fared excellently obtaining over 82% in each
paper. Wijesinghe was therefore, it was urged, appointed a Cadet Flight
Engineer to fill the vacancy, left by Victor Hatarasinghe The petitioner, it
was contended on behalf of the respondents, could not have been

**133**

even considered for appointment to the said vacancy for the reason that Air
Lanka required a Cadet Second Officer or a Cadet Flight Engineer who could
take the place of the said Hatarasinghe on the Simulator training course. for
which the petitioner was not qualified whilst Wijesinghe was.

I do not think there is much merit in this contention of learned President's
Counsel. Wijesinghe as essentially a Ground Engineer. He did of possess even
the basic qualifications of a Flight Engineer. On the contrary the petitioner
was possessed of a Flight Engineer's licence although with a Boeing 727
rating. He himself had successfully completed the ground school A raining
course designed for Flight Engineers although, perhaps, it may have been less
detailed and less comprehensive than that prescribed for Maintenance
Engineers, He had also completed 35 hours, experience in a Boeing 727
Simulator. Wijesinghe had no such experience at all in any type of Simulator.
It would thus appear that, even for the specific purpose of filling
Hatarasinghe's vacancy, the petitioner was equally, if not more, eligible for
consideration than Wijesinghe. The failure of the respondents to even
entertain his application at that stage Was therefore not one founded upon
any, relevant or rational ground and was discriminatory of him. The arbitrary
manner in, which Air Lanka has acted in the matter of selecting a candidate to
fill the vacancy created by Hatarasinghe's resignation has resulted in a
denial of equality to the petitioner which is violative of Article 12(1) of
the Constitution. Further it is apparent that although the petitioner had made
application in March 1984 and was assured that his application will be
reviewed with the next batch of recruits, yet he was not summoned for any test
until he re-applied in September 1985, in consequence of which he was asked to
sit for a test held for the recruitment of Cadet Pilots a post for which he
had never applied nor was qualified to apply Upon protesting at having been
required to sit for such a test, he was set an examination which purportedly
appertained solely to the knowledge that should be possessed by an applicant
for the post of a Cadet Flight Engineer buff which. materially differed both
in nature and content from the one set for Wijesinghe for a similar post. This
in itself was unfair and discriminatory of petitioner and supports the
submission of learned: counsel for the petitioner that this last test was
intended to belittle the petitioner's qualifications whilst the written test
set for Wijesinghe was one that had been tailor made to suit his special
aptitudes. The petitioner has thus been treated differentially from and has
been denied equality of opportunity with Wijesinghe. Such action

**134**

on the part of Air Lanka, assuming it to be executive or administrative
action, is constitutionally impermissible as it is violative of the
fundamental right guaranteed by" Article 12(1) and becomes justiciable in this
Court by virtue of Article. 126.

The sole and exclusive jurisdiction vested in this Court by Article 126 of the
Constitution to hear and determine questions relating to the infringement
(actual or threatened) of fundamental rights enshrined in Chapter 111 is
confined to those that arise out of executive or administrative action. In so
far as fundamental rights are concerned, it is only infringement or imminent
infringement by executive or administrative action which falls to be
justiciable in this Court under Article 126. The question therefore arises as
to what is meant by the expression executive or administrative action. Our
Constitution contains no definition of this expression. The trend of our
decisions, however, has been to construe this expression as being equivalent
to action of the Government or of an organ or instrument of the Government. In
Perera v. University Grants Commission (S.C. App 1:No.57/80-S.C. Mins. of
4.9:1980 Fundamental. Rights Decisions of the Supreme Court, Vol. 1,.p:103 (1)
it was observed that constitutional guarantees of fundamental rights are
directed against the State and its organs and that the expression" executive
or administrative action would embrace executive or administrative action of
the State or of its organs or instrumentalities. The University Grants
Commission established by the University Act, No:16 of. 19.78: was held by
this Court to be an organ or instrumentality of the Government since the Act
had assigned to the Commission certain functions pertaining to University
education which were held to be important governmental functions. Hence its
action in the matter of admission of students to the Universities under it was
held to constitute executive or administrative action. In Wijetunga v.
Insurance Corporation of Sri Lanka (2) it was pointed out that Article 4 (d)
of the Constitution mandated all organs of the Government to respect and
advance the fundamental rights enshrined in Chapter 111 and that "action by
the organs of the Government alone constitutes the executive or administrative
action that is a sine qua non or basic to proceedings under Article 126."
After a. consideration of the several' provisions of the Insurance Corporation
Act; No. 2 of 1961, relating in particular to the constitution of the
Insurance Corporation, the nature of its powers, duties and functions; the
degree of Ministerial control over it and its financial resources, the Court
took the view that whether the functional test or the governmental control
test is applied, the

**135**

Corporation could not be identified with the Government or be regarded as its
'alter ego' or an organ of the State. The disciplinary action taken by it
against some, of its employees was therefore held not to constitute executive
or administrative action. In Wijeratne v. The People s Bank (3) Sharvananda,
J. observed that "the cardinal question as to whether the People's Bank is
properly to be regarded as merely an instrument subservient to the State or in
truth is a commercial bank, not identifiable with the State has to be decided
by looking into the function and control of the bank Stating that there were
several factors to be considered in determining whether a corporation Js an
agency or instrumentality of the Government he cited with approval the
following passage from the judgment of Bhagwathi J. in Ramana v. International
Airport Authority of India (4) which set out some of the relevant factors,
namely, "whether there is any financial assistance given by the State, and if
so, what is the magnitude of such assistance, whether there is any other form
of assistance given by the State, and if so, whether it is of the usual kind
or it is extraordinary, whether, there, is any control of the management and
policies of the corporation by the State and what is The nature and extent of
such control, whether the corporation enjoys State conferred or State
protected monopoly status and whether the functions carried out by the
corporation are public function s closely related to governmental functions
Sharvananda, J. held that on the material before him the major role of the
People's Bank was in the commercial sphere; that it was a commercial bank,
that there was no nexus between the State and its banking activities that the
State was not involved. in the Commercial activities of the bank and that such
commercial activity of the bank did not qualify as State action. He therefore
held that the action of the bank in re organising its security services, being
a part of its commercial activities, did not amount to executive or
administrative action. In Ariyapala Guneratne v. The People's Bank (5) the
question before this Court was whether a declaratory action could be
maintained against the People's Bank for a violation of the fundamental right
guaranteed by Article 18 (1), (1) of the Republic constitution of 1972, did
not contain any provision corresponding to Article 126 of the present:
Constitution enabling a person aggrieved by executive or administrative action
to seek redress directly in this Court. In determining whether the Bank
constituted the State within the, meaning of S. 18(1) of the 1972
Constitution, Wanasundera, J. examined the corresponding provisions in
Article. 19 of the Indian Constitution the definition of the State

**136**

contained in Article 12 thereof and certain Indian decisions and observed that
the Indian courts have progressively extended the concept of the State to
embrace almost every institution performing public functions and that State
action as interpreted by Indian courts comprehended a much wider meaning than
that connoted by the expression executive or administrative action in Article
126. After pointing out that numerous provisions of the People's Bank Act; No.
29 of 1961, indicated a close nexus of the Bank With the Government and also
Government control of the Bank, Wanasundera J. distinguished Wijeratne's case
(supra) and held that the People's. Bank constituted the State or the
Government within the meaning of S. 18 of the 1972 Constitution in so far as
the matter in issue before him was concerned. He also added that in his view
even under our present Constitution the concept of State was a wider concept
than" the expression executive or administrative action. In Roberts v.
Ratnayake (6) one matter that arose for consideration was whether a Municipal
Council established under the Municipal Councils Ordinance (Chap. 252) was an
organ or agency of the Government. Tambiah, J. had no hesitation in holding
"that a Municipal Council performed functions and its action would therefore
constitute executive or administrative action within Article 126, L. H, de
Alwis, J. held that a Municipal Council was an organ or instrument of the
State both on the functional as well as the governmental control test. We were
also referred to several Indian decisions which have to be viewed in the light
of the definition of the State contained in Article 12 (Part III) of the
Indian Constitution which runs as follows

"In this Part, unless the context otherwise requries, 'the State' includes the
Government and Parliament of India and the Government a id Legislature of,
each of the States and all local or other authorities within the territory of
India or under the control of the Government of India."

In Rajasthan State Electricity Board, Jaipur v. Mohan Lal (7) the question
arose whether the Rajasthan Electricity Board. was an authority, within the
meaning of the expression 'other authorities' in Article 12.".The Electricity
Act empowered the Board, inter aria, to give directions the disobedience of
which was punishable as a criminal offence. It also invested the Board with
extensive powers of control over electricity undertakings. The judgment of the
majority (delivered by Bhagwati, J.) .held that the expression 'other
authorities' included all statutory authorities on whom powers are conferred
by law and that

**137**

the conferment of a power on a statutory authority to give binding directions
the disobedience of which entailed penal consequences was important as being
indicative that the authority was the state. The circumstance that the Board
carried on an activity. in the nature of trade or commerce would not indicate
that it should be excluded from the ambit of the state. In his concurring
judgment Shah J held that the power of the Board to make rules and regulations
and to enforce compliance with them was in substance the exercise of the
sovereign power of the State delegated to the Board and that therefore the
Board fell within the meaning of the State as defined in the Article.

In Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagatram (8) the Court considered whether the Oil and
Natural Gas Commission, the Life Insurance Corporation and the Industrial
Finance Corporation (all statutory corporations) were authorities within the
meaning of Article 12. Ray, C.J. in the course of his leading. judgment
commented that in the Rajasthan Electricity Board case (supra) "it was said
that the power to give directions, the disobedience of which must be
punishable as a criminal offence would furnish one of the reasons for
characterising the body as an authority within the meaning of Article 12. The
power to make rules or regulations and to administer or enforce them would be
one of the elements, of authorities contemplated in Article 12 " Upon an
analysis of the, provisions of the satutes creating the three corporations and
adopting the test aforementioned, the learned Chief Justice held that they
were authorities within the meaning of Article 12. Applying this same test
Mathew, J.J. in a separate judgment held that the Oil and Natural Gas
Commission was an authority within the meaning of the expression other
authorities and therefore State in so far as the other two corporations were
concerned which, according to him, had no such statutory powers, he stated
that the question whether a corporation set up by statute to carry on a
business of public importance or which is fundamental to the life of the
people is 'State' had to be decided on other considerations. After discussing
several American and Indian decisions and examining the relevant provisions of
the Life Insurance Corporation Act and the Industrial Finance Corporation Act,
which established the Life Insurance Corporation, and the Industrial Finance
Corporation respectively, and which revealed that the Central. Government had
contributed to their original capital, that a part of their, profits went to
it, that they carried on businesses of great public importance, that they
enjoyed total or virtual monopolies in their respective business fields and
that the

**138**

Central Government exercised control over matters of policies, the learned
Judge held that the two corporations were agencies or instrumentalities of the
'State' and were therefore 'State' within the meaning of Article 12.

In Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. The International Airport Authority of India
(supra) the question as to what are the other authorities referred to, in
Article 12 came up for consideration again. The Court (per Bhagwati, J.)
referred to the decision in the Rajasthan Electricity Board case (supra) and
said:

"The ratio of this decision may thus be stated to be that a constitutional or
statutory authority would be within the meaning of the expression other
authorities, if it has been invested with statutory power to issue binding
directions to third parties the disobedience of which would entail penal
consequences or it has the sovereign power to make rules and regulations
having the force of law. This test was followed by Ray, C.J., in Sukhdev v.
Bhagat Ram (AIR 1975 SC 1331) (supra), Mathew J. however, in the same case,
propounded a broader test, namely, whether the statutory corporation or other
body or authority, claimed to fall within the definition of 'State', is an
instrumentality or agency of Government: if it is, it would fall within the
meaning of the expression other, authorities and would be 'State' Whilst
'accepting' the test laid down in Rajasthan Electricity y Board v. Mohan Lal
(AIR 19 67 SC 1857) (supra) and followed by Ray, C.J. in Sukhdev v. Bhagat Ram
(supra), we would for reasons already discussed, prefer to adopt the test of
governmental instrumentality or agency as one more test and perhaps amore
satisfactory one for determining whether a statutory corporation, body or
other authority falls within the definition of 'State'. If a statutory
corporation, body or other authority is an instrumentality or agency of
Government, it would be an 'authority' and therefore 'State' within the
meaning of that expression in Article 12.

After examining the relevant provisions of "the International Airport
Authority Act, 1971 relating to the establishment of the International Airport
Authority of India by the Central Government; the composition of its
membership, the power of the Central Government to appoint I and remove the
membership, the vesting in the Authority of certain properties and assets of
the Central Government and of certain debts, obligations and liabilities
incurred by the Central Government the capital provided by the Central
Government, the obligation of the

**139**

Authority to pay, after deducting certain charges, the balance of its annual
net profits to the Central Government, the requirement- to have its accounts
audited by the Auditor General and to forward the audit report to the Central
Government for the purpose of placing the same before both Houses of
Parliament, the provision that its officers and employees are deemed to be
public officers enjoying immunity from suit, prosecution and other legal
proceedings far anything done in good faith in pursuance of the Act or any
rule or regulation there under, the power of the Central Government of
temporarily divesting the Authority in certain circumstances of its management
and of superceding the Authority, the power of the Central Government to give
written directions from time to time on matters of policy which are binding on
the Authority, the power given to the Authority of making regulations-
prescribing, inter alias that a contravention of the same would entail penal
consequences, the provision in the Act for transferring the entire department
of the Central Government pertaining to the administration of airports and air
navigation services to the Authority the Court inferred that the Authority was
an instrumentality or agency of the Central Government and therefore 'other
authority' falling within the definition of 'the State' both on the narrow
View taken by the majority in" Sukhdev's case (supra) as also on the broader
view taken therein by Mathew, J., which latter view the Court adopted as being
a more satisfactory test.

"In Ajay Hasta v. Khalid Mujib (9) the Court whilst affirming the view taken
by Mathew, J. in Sukhdev Singh's case(supra) that the Government acting
through the instrumentality or agency of corporations should be subject to the
same constitutional limitations as the Government acting through the
instrumentality or agency of natural persons approved of the tests laid down
in the International Airport Authority of India case (supra) for determining
whether a corporation established by statute or incorporated under a aw such
as, for example under the Companies Act, is an instrumentality or agency of
the Government The Court (per Bhagwati, J,) summarised these tests as follows

(1) whether the entire share capital of the corporation is held by he
Government. If so it would go a long way to indicate that the corporation is
an instrumentality or agency of the Government

(2) whether the financial assistance provided by the State is so much as to
meet almost the entire expenditure of the corporation. If so, it would be
indicative of the corporation being impregnated with governmental character.

**140**

(3) whether the corporation enjoys monopoly status which is State conferred or
State protected. If so, it would be a very relevant factor to" be taken into
consideration as being indicative that corporation is an instrumentality or
agency of the Government;

(4) whether there exists deep and pervasive State control of the corporation
which would afford an indication that the corporation is a State agency or
instrumentality ;

(5) whether the corporation performs functions of public importance and which
are closely related to governmental functions and

(6) whether the corporation is one to which a department of Government has
been transferred. If so, it would strongly support the inference that the
corporation is an instrumentality or agency of the Government.

All the above circumstances are relevant for the purpose of determining
whether a particular corporation is or is not an instrumentality or agency of
the Government. Having expressed his complete approval of the .formulation of
the above tests in the . International Airport Authority case (supra),
Bhagwati, J. said:

"We may point out that it is immaterial for this purpose whether the
corporation is created by a statute or under a statute. The test is whether it
is an instrumentality or agency of the Government and not as to how it is
created. The inquiry has to be not as to how the juristic person is born but
why it has been brought into existence. The corporation may be a statutory
corporation created by a statute or it may be a Government company or a
company formed under the Companies Act, 1956; or it may be a society
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, or any other similar
statute. Whatever be its genitival origin, it would be an "authority" within
the meaning of Article 12 if it is an instrumentality or agency of the
Government and that would have to be decided on a proper assessment of the
facts in the light of the relevant factors. The concept of instrumentality or
agency of the Government is not limited to a corporation created by a statute
but is equally applicable company or society and in a given case it would have
to be decided, on a consideration of the relevant factors, whether the
company, or society is an instrumentality or agency of the government so as to
come within the meaning of the expression "authority" in Article 12."

**141**

Having regard to the Memorandum of Association and the rules of the society
made there under, the Court concluded that the Society registered under the
Jammu and Kashmir Registration of Societies Act, 1898, which established and
managed the Regional Engineering College, Srinagar, was an instrumentality or
agency of the State. In reaching this conclusion the court took into
consideration the fact that the society's composition was dominated by
representatives appointed by the Central Government as well as certain State
Governments with the approval of the Central Government, that the Central and
State Governments provided the entire monies required for running the
colleges, that other monies could be received by the society only with the
approval of the Central and State Governments, that the rules of the society
required prior approval of such Governments; that accounts of the, society had
to be submitted to them for their scrutiny and satisfaction; that the State
Government had the power to appoint a person to review the working and
progress of the society, that the State Government was empowered to give
directions and take such action as it may consider necessary in consequence of
such person's report which the society and the college was obliged to comply
with that the society was not competent to dispose of any of its immovable
property without the approval of both Governments that the Board of Governors
in charge of the general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs
of the society and of its income and property was largely controlled by
nominees of both Governments. All these factors disclosed that both
Governments had a deep and pervasive control of the working of the society,
which was merely a 'projection' of the Central and State Governments. The
society was therefore held to be an instrumentality or agency of the Central
and State Governments.

In Som Prakash v. Union of India (10) the Burmah Shell Oil Storage Ltd. was
statutorily taken over by the Central Government by virtue of the provisions
of the Burmah Shell (Acquisition of Undertakings in India) Act, 1976. The
Central Government then by notification, made in terms of the Act, vested the
Undertaking in the 2nd respondent, a government company registered as a
company under the Indian Companies Act. The question that arose was whether a
writ will lie under Article 32 of the Indian Constitution against the 2nd
respondent which was neither a government department nor a statutory
corporation but just a company registered under the Companies Act.

**142**

After adverting to certain. passages in the judgment of Mathew, J. in
Sukhdev's Case (supra), Krishna lyer, J. delivering the judgment of the
majority, stated

"There is nothing in these observations to confine the concept of State to
statutory corporations. Nay, the. tests are common to any agency, or
instrumentality, the key factor being the. brooding presence of the State
behind. the operations of the body, statutory, or other.

A study of Sukhdev's case (supra) (1975 3 SCR 619: AIR 1975 SC 1331) (a
Constitutional Bench decision of this Court) yields the clear result that' the
preponderant considerations for pronouncing an entity as State agency or
instrumentality are (1) financial resources of the State being the chief
funding source, (2) functional character, being governmental in essence, (3)
plenary control residing in Government, (4) prior history of the same activity
having been carried on by the Government and made over to the new body and (5)
some element of authority or command. Whether the legal person is a
corporation created by a statute, as distinguished from under a statute, is
not an important criterion although it may be an indicium."

Stating, that the Airport Authority of India case (supra) was consistently and
correctly decided and applying the criteria propounded therein on a cumulative
basis, Krishna lyer, J. held that the 2nd respondent which was clothed with
certain rights and duties by virtue of the provisions of certain sections in
the Burmah Shell (Acquisition of Undertakings in India) Act, 1976, was an
instrumentality of the Central Government and an "authority" and therefore
"state" within the meaning of Article 12 and a writ will lie against it under
Article 32. From a perusal of the recent Indian decisions cited above it would
be clear that the test formulated by Mathew, J. in Sukhdev Singh's case
(supra), namely, whether the corporation is an agency or instrumentality of
the Government, has been accepted and adopted as the most reliable test for
determining whether it is "State" for the purposes of Part III of the Indian
Constitution. If the corporate body is an instrumentality or agency of the
Government then Part III will trammel its operations and actions. To ascertain
whether it is an instrumentality or agency of the Government the cumulative
effect of all the relevant factors have to be evaluated.

**143**

Learned counsel for the petitioner invited us to adopt this test of
governmental agency or instrumentality propounded in the recent Indian
decisions aforementioned as being a more rational and realistic test for
determining whether the acts of a corporation, created by or under a statute;
constitute executive or administrative action for the purpose of amenability
to constitutional jurisdiction under Article 126. He pointed out that whilst
this test has not been expressly considered in any of our decisions; its
validity and cogency appear to be reflected in the decision of this court in
Wijeratne v. People's Bank (supra). Learned President's Counsel for the 1st to
the 3rd respondents submitted that in determining the question whether a legal
entity or body of persons with a distinct legal personality and an existence
separate from the Government is amenable to the special jurisdiction under
Article 126, the constitutionally correct approach would be to ascertain
whether in the discharge of its functions or duties or in the exercise of its
powers such entity or body has been endowed by law with any of the special
powers, rights, privileges or immunities which are ordinarily attached to or
enjoyed by the State The presence of such special characteristics in such a
legal entity or body, not merely in its organisational structure but also in
the very modes of action, would it was submitted, render a citizen, in so far
as its acts are concerned, to the same degree of vulnerability in respect of
his fundamental rights as to acts of the State itself. Accordingly the
necessity would arise for the protection of Court to safeguard these
fundamental rights against the acts of such an entity or body for which
purpose the citizen is granted a special remedy under Article 12. Learned
President's Counsel therefore contended that the inquiry must be directed to
ascertaining whether the legal, persona shares with the State any of the
attributes arising out of the tatter's sovereign status thereby distinguishing
it from any other legal entity or body engaged in a similar undertaking. The
possession of any such unique characteristics or attributes by a legal persona
would impress its acts with the character of executive or administrative
action within the contemplation of Article 126\. Learned President's Counsel
submitted that this was the decisive test for determining whether a legal
entity or body is within the sphere of State agencies engaging in executive or
administrative action. The other tests would not be appropriate. He maintained
that Air Lanka did not possess or enjoy any special power conferred on it by
law enabling it to alter the legal rights of others by its unilateral action
such as, for instance, the power of compulsory acquisition or quasi judicial
powers. Nor did it have, any special privileges granted to it bylaw such

**144**

as, for instance, a right of franchise or monopoly in a field of activity
which would otherwise be within the area of private enterprise or an exclusive
right or monopoly of the State. Nor did it enjoy any special immunity such as
immunity from taxes or rates or other impositions by the State not enjoyed by
others engaged in the same activity. He also stressed that Air Lanka had no
power to make regulations or by laws affecting persons generally other than
those transacting business with it and capable of enforcement through legal
proceedings. It was not subject to Parliamentary control in regard to its
accounts through the Auditor-General. Nor was it subject to control by the
executive by virtue of a statutory provision to issue general or special
directions vested in the Minister in charge of the subject of aviation.
Learned President's Counsel submitted that in so far as the 'control test' was
concerned, what was relevant was the existence of de jure control and not mere
de facto control. Judged by the de jure control test Air Lanka was, he
submitted, a fully autonomous body and its action did not constitute executive
or administrative action. The de jure control test is the most important
criterion and is itself a decisive test and had to be distinguished from de
facto control exercised by extra legal modes. He further stressed that there
were no features in Air Lanka's organisational structure which reveal any
integral connection with the State, for instance, its designation as the agent
of the State-like the Monetary Board of the Central Bank. The very existence
and origin of Air Lanka. it was pointed out, was not the outcome of State
action. It is not a creature of the statute deriving there from its very
constitution, powers, duties and functions but was set up by agreement in
accordance with the provisions of the Companies Ordinance and as such was not
an agency of the State. Learned President's Counsel, whilst maintaining that
Indian decisions though helpful should be viewed with caution in view of the
fact that the lndian definition of 'State' embraces the entire gamut of State
action and not merely executive or administrative action, placed reliance on
the dissenting judgment of Alagiriswami J. in Sukhdev Singh's case (above) and
certain decisions referred to therein, e.g., Sabhajit Tewari v. Union of India
(11) and Praga Tools Corporation v. C. V. Immanual (12). These later decisions
have all been examined fully and distinguished both in Ajay Hasia's case as
well as Sore Prakash's case and l do not think it necessary for me to burden
this judgment by referring to them. The burden of learned President's Counsel
argument can therefore be summarised as follows: If the legal entity against
whom the complaint bf infringement of fundamental rights is made is shown to
be charged

**145**

with duties of a public nature and for that purpose such entity is conferred
special rights, privileges or immunities, which are ordinarily not
characteristic of a person or entity engaged in the same activity, and these
characteristics have been conferred on the entity through legislative action
of the State, then the act complained of may properly be described as
executive or administrative action for the purposes of Article 126. The most
practical and useful approach, according to him, is to ascertain whether the
infringement has been caused by a body which is endowed by law with some part
of the coercive power or special privileges enjoyed by the State. This
approach has found no approval in the recent decisions of the Indian courts
above-mentioned, which have consistently adopted the broader view taken by
Mathew J. in Sukhdev Singh's case. "The concept of State has undergone drastic
changes in recent years. Today state cannot be conceived of simply as a
coercive machinery wielding the thunderbolt of authority. It has to be viewed
mainly as a service corporation" per Mathew J. in Sukhdev Singh's case.
Learned President's Counsel was not able to cite any local decision in support
of the sovereign power test advanced by him.

The expression 'executive or administrative action' has not been defined in
our Constitution. It excludes the exercise of the special jurisdiction of this
court under Article 126 in respect of the acts of the legislature or the
judiciary. Article 4 of the Constitution mandates that the fundamental rights
enshrined in Part III 'shall be respected, secured and advanced by all the
organs of the government.' An examination of our decisions indicate that this
expression embraces actions not only of the government itself but also of
organs, instrumentalities or agencies of the government. The government may
act, through the agency of its officers. It may also act through the agency of
juridicial persons set up by the State by, under or in accordance with a
statute. The demands ,and obligations of the modern welfare State have
resulted in an alarming increase in the magnitude and range of governmental
activity. For the purpose of ensuring and achieving the rapid development of
the whole country by means of public economic activity the government is
called upon to embark on a multitude of commercial and industrial
undertakings. In fact a stage has now been reached, when it has become
difficult to distinguish between governmental and non-governmental functions.
This distinction is now virtually non-existent. The rigid and tardy procedures
commonly associated with governmental departments and the red tapism inherent
in such slow motion procedures have

**146**

compelled the government to resort to the device of public corporations to
carry on these numerous commercial and industrial undertakings, which require
professional skills of a highly specialised and technical nature. But by
resorting to this device of the corporate, entity the government cannot be
permitted to liberate itself from its constitutional obligations in respect of
fundamental rights which it and its organs are enjoined to respect, secure and
advance. In the circumstances I am of the opinion that the expression
'executive or administrative action' in Articles 17 and 126 of the
Constitution should be given a broad and not a restrictive construction. I am
therefore inclined to adopt the test of governmental agency or instrumentality
propounded in the later decisions of the Indian courts as being a more
rational and meaningful test than the sovereign power test' relied upon by
learned President's Counsel. On the application of the former test it would
follow that, although the presence of any sovereign characteristics or
features in the corporate body would be strongly indicative of it being an
organ or agency or instrumentality of the government, yet the absence of any
such characteristics or features would not by itself deprive the body of such
character if it exhibits other indicative indicia enumerated in the later
Indian decisions.

Having reached this conclusion l shall now proceed to examine whether Air
Lanka exhibits any factors or indicia which would show that it is an organ or
agency of the government always bearing in mind the matters urged by learned
President's Counsel to the contrary. Air Lanka is a company incorporated under
the provisions of the Companies Ordinance (Cap. 145)-vide R7. The subscribers
to the Memorandum of Association (R8) consist of 7 persons of whom 4 are
individuals and the other 3 are corporations. Three of the individuals are
those who at the time held the offices of the Secretary of the Cabinet, the
Secretary to the Ministry of Finance and Planning and the Secretary to the
Treasury, all of whom in their official capacities represented the Government.
The 3 corporations are the Bank of Ceylon; the Ceylon Shipping Corporation and
the People's Bank, which are semi-government organisations. According to the
Memorandum of Association the primary object for which Air Lanka was
established is to carry on the business of a local and international airline
and" to operate air transport services for passengers and cargo in the
Republic of Sri Lanka or any part of the world and/or to and from the Republic
of Sri, Lanka to any part of the world. According to its Articles of
Association (which constitute its regulations) the share capital of the

**147**

company is Rs. 500,000,000 (five-hundred million) with power to increase or
decrease the same. The shares in the capital of the company for the time being
are, unless otherwise directed by it at a general meeting, to be at the
disposal of the. Board of Directors but the Board is, enjoined to ensure that
in the disposal or allotment of the shares the total holding of shares in the
capital of the company by or on behalf of the Government of Sri Lanka shall
not at any time be less than 60% of the issued capital for the time being. The
first Directors of the company are appointed by the Government, i.e. by the
Minister in charge of aviation. The Directors shall not be less than 5 nor
more than 7 in number, of whom 2 shall be elected. So long as the Government
holds (whether directly or through any government institution or company) not
less than 60% of the issued capital for the time being it is entitled to
nominate and have on the Board a majority of the Directors, referred to as
nominee Directors. Such a Director may at any time be removed from office by
the Government (the Minister) and another person nominated in his place to
fill the vacancy. A nominee Director (unlike an elected Director) cannot be
requested in writing by his co-Directors to resign nor can he be removed from
office by resolution of the company. The Chairman of the Board is appointed by
the Government (the Minister). The business of the company is managed by the
Board. These provisions reveal the legal and pervasive character of control
which the Government exercises over the company through its nominees. The
authorised capital of the company has, by 2 special resolutions, been
increased from 'five hundred million to five thousand million rupees divided
into 50,000,000 shares of Rs 100 each. Out of this amount , 32,650,005 shares
have been issued as set out in the annual return of the company dated 2.1.1986
(X). Of these latter shares the Secretary to the Treasury holds 32,350,000
whilst the People's Bank and the Bank of Ceylon hold 150,000 shares each. Thus
more than 99% of the issued share capital is held directly by the Government
whilst the other two semi-government institutions hold virtually the balance.
As pointed out by learned counseI for the petitioner, it is also significant
that in this country the operation of air, transport services was earlier a
function that was envisaged to be carried on by the Government under the name
of Air Ceylon through the Department of Civil Aviation. Subsequently Air
Ceylon Ltd., a company established under the Air Ceylon Act. (Cap. 280),
commenced to carry on air transport services. S. 30 of this Act vested all the
assets of the air undertaking of Air Ceylon in Air Ceylon Ltd. from the date
of

**148**

commencement of the latter's business. Air Ceylon Ltd., just as much as Air
Lanka, was empowered and authorised to operate air transport, services, both
local and international. In fact the objects of Air Lanka and Air Ceylon Ltd.
are substantially the same. A close scrutiny of the provisions of the Air
Ceylon Act point unmistakably to the fact that Air Ceylon Ltd: is an organ of
the Government vide sections 3 (4), 4, 4A, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11 (a), 12, 14,
21,' 22, 24, 27 (later repealed), 28, 29, 30 and 32. Hence historically the
airline transport service is a function that was assigned to and an activity
that was carried on by or on behalf of the Government. Air Ceylon Ltd., though
its corporate shell still exists, has virtually ceased to function.

It is also relevant to note that the Air, Navigation (Special Provisions) Act,
No. 2 of 1982, empowered the Minister, by order published in the Gazette, to
appoint "as an Agent of the Government, a company registered under the
Companies Ordinance, being a company of which 95% of the shares are held by
the Government, and the balance shares are held by the Corporation or the body
or company which operates the national airline" for certain purposes specified
in the Act. "National airline" is defined in the Act as the airline for the
time being designated as the national carrier of Sri Lanka. This is obviously,
a reference to Air Lanka which carries the national flag. This provision
itself recognises a company, incorporated under the Companies Ordinance being
an agent of the government for certain specified purposes.

All the above circumstances enumerated by me show that Air Lanka is no
ordinary company. It has been brought into existence by the government,
financed almost wholly by the government and managed and controlled by the
government through its own nominee Directors. It has been so created for the
purpose of carrying out a function of great public importance which was once
carried out by the government through the agency of a statutory corporation.
In reality Air Lanka is a company formed by the government, owned by the
government and controlled by the government. The juristic veil of corporate
personality donned by the company' for certain purposes cannot, for the
purposes of the application and enforcement of fundamental rights enshrined in
Part III of the Constitution; be permitted to conceal the reality behind it
which is the government. The brooding presence of the government behind the
operations of the company is quite manifest. The cumulative effect of all the
above factors and features would, in my view, render Air Lanka an agent or

**149**

organ of the government. Its action- can therefore properly be designated as
executive or administrative action within the meaning of Articles 17 and 126
of the Constitution. The petitioner has thus established that he is entitled
to relief under Article 126(4).

The only other matter that remains for consideration is the nature of the
relief that should be granted to him. Article 126(4) empowers this court to
grant a petitioner such relief as it may deem just and equitable in the
circumstances. There is no doubt that the petitioner in this case has suffered
grave financial loss, particularly by way of the heavy expenditure incurred by
him in obtaining his qualifications and training abroad. His hopes and
aspirations of obtaining employment in the national carrier have proved
abortive. I think an award of Rs. 200,000 (two hundred thousand) would be
reasonable compensation to him in the circumstances of this case. I therefore
make order directing the 1st respondent (Air Lanka Ltd.) to pay to the
petitioner the said sum of Rs. 200,000. He will also be entitled to a further
sum of Rs. 5000 as costs from the 1st, 2nd and the 3rd respondents.

**

SENEVIRATNE, J.**

The petitioner K. M. N. D. Rajaratne has obtained qualifications as a Flight
Engineer in. Air Crafts Boeing 727 from Northrop University Institute of
Technology of the United States of America, an Institution approved by the
Federal. Aviation Agency of the United States of America. On these
qualifications the petitioner has obtained a Flight Engineer's Licence in
respect of Boeing 727 Aircraft, issued by the Director of Aviation, Sri Lanka
under the relevant regulations of the Air Navigation Act No. 15 of 1970. By
applications of March, 1984 and September 1985 the petitioner on his own
applied for a post of Flight Engineer in Air Lanka Limited the 1st respondent
to this application. While the petitioner's application in March 1984, on
which application he was also interviewed by the 1st respondent, was pending,
in August 1984, the 1st respondent. Air Lanka Limited recruited as a Cadet
Flight Engineer Aruna Wijesinghe, who was a trainee Ground Engineer in Air
Lanka Limited. In this petition the petitioner states that the "non offer" of
employment to the petitioner, who was qualified for recruitment as Flight
Engineer was discriminatory and in, violation of the petitioner's fundamental
rights that all persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equal
protection of the law" as

**150**

guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution. In this application made
under Article 126 of the Constitution the petitioner prays, inter alia

(a) for an order declaring that the fundamental rights enshrined in Article
12(1) have been violated,

(b) to direct he respondents to recruit the petitioner to the post of Flight
Engineer; and

(c) for an award of damages as claimed.

I will first consider the claims of the petitioner to be appointed as a Flight
Engineer in Air Lanka Limited. The petitioner in his application made in March
1984 (R10), and the later application of 17.9.85 (P6) has applied for a post
of Flight Engineer at Air Lanka". It is accepted that the 1st respondent Air
Lanka treated this application as one, only, for a post of Cadet Flight
Engineer for the reason that the petitioner as admitted by the 1st respondent
had the basic qualifications as a Flight Engineer, but did not have the
qualifications to be a Flight Engineer in the type of Air Craft then operated
by Air Lanka to wit

(a) Boeing 747,

(b) Lockheed 1011,

(c) Boeing 737.

Further, in, the course of the petition filed the petitioner admits. that he
would have qualified for a post of Flight Engineer only after a short course
of what he called "Transitional Training".

The petitioner had passed the G.C.E. (Ordinary Level) Examination and in 1974,
he had undergone a course of training in, Flying at the Ratmalana Airport. In
1976 he had passed a technical examination and obtained a private licence. A
private licence is in contra distinction to a Commercial Pilot's Licence,
which kind of licence is imperative to be a Pilot in a Commercial Air Line. In
1983 the petitioner has enrolled for a Course of Training as a Flight
Engineer, in the Northrop University Institute of Technology in California,
United States of America, and on completion of the Course he has been awarded
a Certificate dated 17th September, 1983 (P2). Having "successfully completed
the curriculum of Flight Engineer", the petitioner has also received a
Certificate dated 15.9:83 (P2A) from the Flight. Engineer Instructor, Northrop
University, certifying that he has "successfully completed the Flight
Engineering Programme". The

**151**

petitioner has obtained further certificates-Federal Aviation Administration,
U.S.A. School Graduation Certificate dated 17.6.83 (P3); the Federal Aviation
Agency Certificate Flight Engineer (P4), and the Flight Engineer's Licence
issued by the Department of Civil Aviation Sri Lanka in March 1984 (P5).

At times relevant to this application Air Lanka had not formally called for
applications for post of Cadet Flight Engineer or Flight Engineer, and both
applications for post of Flight Engineer made by the petitioner referred to
above have been voluntarily made by him, motivated by the desire pf a young
man to obtain a post suitable for his specialised field of training. When the
petitioner made the first application in March 1984, he has been called for an
interview, and according to the petitioner he was informed that he was fully
qualified for the post, but Air Lanka was not recruiting Flight Engineers at
the time, and assured that the application will be considered on a later date.
The 3rd respondent Sarath Jayasuriya Chief Flight Engineer and the Flight
Engineer Instructor of the 1st respondent, who has filed the main affidavit
relied on by the 1st respondent has affirmed that it is most unlikely that the
petitioner would have been informed that he was fully qualified, because he
was not fully qualified.

In the Sunday Observer of 15.9.85 the 1st respondent by advertisement called
for applications in respect of the vacancies for Cadet Pilots in Air Lanka.
The notice calling for applications sets out the qualifications necessary, and
terms of appointment. The notice particularly states "candidates will be
required to pass a written test and flying test to prove their ability"
(underlined by me for the reason that he petitioner has protested that a
written test was held in respect of his application for post of Flight
Engineer, whereas it was not the practice of the 1st respondent Air Lanka
earlier to hold a written test, and as against this the 3rd respondent in his
affidavit has affirmed as to why Air Lanka began to hold written tests for the
applicants at this relevant time.) At about the time the Air Lanka advertised
for applications for Cadet Pilots which appeared in the press, the petitioner
by his application dated 17.9.85 voluntarily applied for "a post of Flight
Engineer at Air Lanka". There is no evidence which reveals whether the
petitioner was aware or not aware of the notice calling for applications for
post of Cadet Pilots. But this strange coincidence between the notice calling
for applications for post of Cadet Pilots, and the application by the
petitioner for a post of Flight Engineer has led to

**152**

unwarranted complications and confusion, on which the petitioner bases his
main claim that he was discriminated in the selection. Though the notice (P8)
called for applications for Cadet Pilots, and the application (P6) by the
petitioner was for a post of, Flight Engineer, the petitioner received a
communication from the Air Lanka Limited dated 2.12.85 (P7) with the caption
"post of a Cadet Pilot", and requested the petitioner -"reference to your
application for the above post call over at Flight Operations Department for a
technical test on Friday 6th December, 1985". It is this particular letter
(P7) that has created complications and problems which has mainly led to this
application. Here, the 1st respondent Air Lanka Limited is calling an
applicant for a post of Flight Engineer for a technical test in respect of the
applications received for the post of Cadet Pilot, in response to the paper
advertisement.

The grievance of the petitioner which has resulted from the above confusion or
complication is the one set out by the petitioner at length in this
application. The petitioner states that in response to the letter (P7) of
2.12.85; he, presented himself for the technical test on.6.12.85, and the exam
held was in respect of Cadet Pilots, for which post he did not apply. As such
it was unfair by the petitioner; and also it was a wrong done to the
petitioner. The 3rd respondent has further confused and complicated the matter
by affirming in his first affidavit dated 5.6.86 that the "petitioner
presented himself for the said technical test along with the other applicants
for the post of Cadet Pilot without any protest. The 3rd respondent has
further affirmed that it was neither wrong nor unfair to subject the
petitioner to the same test, as the other applicants for the post of Cadet
Pilot, because the petitioner could have answered a total of 19 of the said
questions which related solely to the basic knowledge of an applicant for
appointment as Cadet Flight Engineer and obtained a total of 86 marks. Had the
petitioner answered the said questions satisfactorily he could have been
appointed a Cadet Flight Engineer". This is a fantastic explanation for a
blunder made by the 1st respondent, Air Lanka, to explain how and why an
applicant for the post of Flight Engineer was permitted to present himself for
a post in respect of Cadet Pilots, which in the field of aeronautics are two
widely different fields. The 3rd respondent further affirmed that at that test
the petitioner answered only 9 questions and obtained only 19 marks, and the
implication is that as such he could not be recruited as a Cadet Flight
Engineer. These affirmations are made in paragraphs 8:1, 8:2

**153**

and 8:3 in an attempt for irresponsible justification of a patent blunder by
the 1st respondent, whereas the 1st respondent should have frankly admitted
that it was an administrative blunder in respect of this test and that when
the petitioner pointed out this blunder and the wrong done to the petitioner,
the position was corrected by holding a second test meant for a Cadet Flight
Engineer in respect of only this petitioner. After the petitioner pointed out
that he was called for a test for Cadet Pilots, the 1st respondent remedied
this position by calling the petitioner by letter dated 1.1.86 (P9) to present
himself for a written examination on 13.1.86 for post of Cadet Flight
Engineer. The petitioner's case for discrimination against him by the 1st
respondent is heavily based on this second test. Firstly, the petitioner's
case is that he should not have been' required to sit far a written
examination for recruitment as a Cadet Flight Engineer because he had the
necessary academic qualifications for such a post. Secondly the petitioner
states that the paper contained 63 questions to be answered in 78 minutes. The
petitioner has further stated that "it was a totally unfair paper and set for
the purpose of belittling the qualifications possessed by the petitioner and
intended to cover-up the mistake made in requiring the petitioner to sit for
the Cadet Pilots paper earlier. The petitioner has become aware that it was
the 3rd respondent, who had set the paper and was also the invigilator at the
test. The result of this examination was not conveyed to the petitioner, and
the petitioner wrote to the 2nd respondent inquiring about the results of the
examination and complaining about the type of the paper set by his letter
dated 10.11.86 (P 10). To this letter (P 10) the 2nd respondent replied by his
letter dated 28.3.86 (P11) that the examination comprised 53 questions and not
63 as stated by the petitioner, and the time given was 75 minutes, i.e. one
minute and thirty seconds for each question, and further an additional 5
minutes was granted to the petitioner on his application. The petitioner was
also informed by (P11) that he had got only 39% of the marks and if marks were
deducted for the mistakes the aggregate marks would have been 24%. Further the
2nd respondent by letter of 28th March, 1986 (P11) informed the petitioner
that "Air Lanka cannot offer you employment. The examination for the
petitioner held on 13.1.86 has become a very contentious matter, and a good
portion. of the 3rd respondent's affidavit and the counter affidavits of the
petitioner and the 3rd respondent deal with this contentious matter.

**154**

The 3rd respondent in his affidavit dated 5.6.86 has affirmed that
notwithstanding the petitioner's poor, performance at the first examination
for Cadet Pilots held on 6.12.85 it was decided to subject him to a second
test pertaining solely to the knowledge that should be possessed by, an
applicant for appointment as a Cadet Flight Engineer". The 3rd respondent has
also affirmed J hat the paper contained 53 not, 63 questions to be answered in
75 minutes, and further that at the petitioner's request a further additional
5 minutes were given to him. The questions set could have been answered with
ease within the time set as they were mainly multiple choice questions, and
the answers required no longer than 1 or 2 sentences. The 3rd respondent has
produced the script of the, petitioner marked (R4), and a copy of the paper
set with model answers marked (R5). The 3rd respondent, has denied that it was
an "unfair paper", and that it was "set for the purpose of belittling the
qualifications possessed by the petitioner, and intended to Cover up for the
mistake in requiring the petitioner to sit for the Cadet Pilots paper
earlier". The petitioner obtained only 39% of the maximum number of marks
without deductions for wrong answers on multiple choice questions. The minimum
number of pass marks was 70%.

The petitioner in the counter affidavit filed dated 13.6.86 contests the
affirmations of the 3rd respondent regarding the paper set for the second
examination held on 13, 1.86, and also contests the answers given in the model
answers marked (R5) with reference to some. American Publications. The 3rd
respondent has denied knowledge of those publications and further stated that
in any event, on the face of them, the Publications are not from an
authoritative source. The 3rd respondent admits the error in respect of one
answer in the model answers (R5), and has stated that that error would not
have materially affected the total marks received by the petitioner at this
test. In his counter affidavit the petitioner has reiterated that he had
qualifications as a Flight Engineer to be recruited as a Cadet Flight Engineer
in Air Lanka, and what he needed was only a short training, which is described
as a "Transitional Training" in order to operate as a Flight Engineer in the
type of Aircraft operated by the 1st respondent. The 3rd respondent in his
counter affidavit admits that the petitioner had the basic qualifications to
be considered for selection for training as a Cadet Flight Engineer. The 3rd
respondent has contested the petitioners affirmation that what he required was
only a "Transitional Training" and explained that the petitioner was not
qualified to

**155**

undergo such "Transitional Training" . In paragraph 6:1 of the counter
affidavit the 3rd respondent states "in terms of the normal practice followed
by Air Lanka Limited.................... and by all other reputed
International Air lines, "Transitional Training", which is also known as
"Conversion Training", is the training given to Flight Engineers, who have
both completed their initial training on a particular type of aircraft and
gained substantial experience operating 'Solo' as Flight Engineers, on such
type of Aircraft, in order to qualify them to operate as Flight Engineers on
another type of aircraft". In paragraph 6:3 of the counter affidavit the 3rd
respondent affirms as follows: "since the petitioner did not have any previous
experience operating 'Solo' as a Flight Engineer on any type of aircraft or
Air Lines (international or otherwise) and had only 1.3 Flying Hours to his
credit, he was not qualified, to, receive "Transitional Training". "The 3rd
respondent has further affirmed that the Regulations of the Federal Aviation
Administration of U.S.A. for licensing crew members of an air craft had no
application whatsoever to the 1st respondent Company as the said Company, was
bound by the, Air Navigation Act of Sri Lanka, and the Regulations made
thereunder.

The petitioner's case of discrimination is that while his application, that of
an applicant qualified as a Flight Engineer in, respect of Boeing 727 and one
who needed only a short "Transitional Training" was pending, one Aruna
Wijesinghe, who has had all training in Air Lanka Limited as Ground Engineer
was recruited to a post of Cadet Flight, Engineer in August; 1985. The acts of
discrimination alleged by the petitioner are as follows

(1) In March, 1984 the, petitioner made an application for a post of Flight
Engineer, which application has been considered as one for Cadet Flight
Engineer, and while that application was pending Aruna Wijesinghe an
Apprentice Aircraft, Ground Engineer in Air Lanka Limited was selected for the
post of Cadet Flight Engineer in August; 1984. Arising from this the
petitioner has made three points:

(1) That Aruna Wijesinghe did not possess a Flight Engineer's Licence with a
type rating (a technical term defined in the Regulation 3 made under the Air
Navigation Act 15., of 1950).

**156**

(2) That Aruna Wijesinghe did not sit for a Flight Engineer's Examination.

What is meant seems 16 be one held by Air Lanka Limited; as will 6e shown
later, this statement No.2 above is an error.

(3) than with the qualifications of the petitioner only a short term training
course under Air Lanka would have been necessary for the petitioner to extend
his Flight Engineers Licence in respect of the type of Aircraft operated by
Air Lanka..

I have set out above the allegations of discrimination made by the petitioner
in paragraph 17 of his affidavit. In course of the argument the learned
Counsel for the petitioner developed the following further grounds of
discrimination. The arbitrary selection of Aruna Wijesinghe indicates
unfettered discretion of Air Lanka" Limited to select personnel which was a
negation of equal rights". The petitioners case is that these acts of
discrimination brought the case of the petitioner within the terms of Article
12 (1) of the Constitution, which is as follows:-"All persons are equal before
the Law and are entitled to the equal protection of the law. The petitioner's
case is that Air Lanka Limited is art "organ of Government". He has made this
application under Article-17 of the Constitution as his fundamental rights
under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution have been infringed by the executive
or administrative action of Air Lanka Ltd. an organ of the Government.

I will now deal with the reply of the 1st respondent to this allegation of
discrimination made by the petitioner in respect of the appointment of Aruna
Wijesinghe. One of the main acts of the discrimination alleged is factually
incorrect is the allegation that Aruna Wijesinghe was recruited without a
test. Perhaps the petitioner was not aware that a test Was held for Aruna
Wijesinghe until the 3rd respondent filed his affidavit. The 3rd respondent
has affirmed that a written examination was held for Aruna Wijesinghe before
he was considered for appointment as a Cadet Flight Engineer, and has produced
3 answer scripts of Wijesinghe, (R3A), (R6A) and (R6B), and has affirmed that
Wijesinghe faired excellently and obtained 82% in each paper.

**157**

The 3rd respondent has affirmed to the special circumstances under which Aruna
Wijesinghe came to be appointed as Cadet Flight Engineer in August 1984. In
mid 1984 the 1st respondent had appointed 8 Cadet Pilots. These Cadet Pilots
had completed their Ground School Training Course and Cockpit Procedure
Training Course successfully and Lockheed 1011 Simulators had been reserved in
Hongkong for the purpose of imparting to these Cadets their. Simulator
Training" in aeronautical terminology. A "Simulator" is a "Computer Controlled
Machine, which is almost identical to the Cockpit of the relevant type of
aircraft and simulates almost exactly the said type of aircraft in flight".
One of the Cadet Pilots Hatharasinghe left the services, of the 1st respondent
having completed the Courses of training mentioned above; but before the
commencement of simulator training. As such the 1st respondent was at that
time in urgent need of a Second Officer for Lockheed 1011. Aircraft. The 3rd
respondent has affirmed that Cadet Pilots employed by the 1st respondent were
trained for appointment as Second Officers on Lockheed 1011 Aircraft. The
duties and functions of such Second Officers are identical to those of Flight
Engineers. The 3rd respondent has affirmed that Aruna Wijesinghe had been
appointed as an Apprentice Air Craft Maintenance Engineer on 6.2.1980, and had
been in training up to March 1984, and had already completed successfully a
course of Ground School Training relating to Lockheed 1011 Aircraft. The said
Ground School Training Course successfully completed. by Aruna Wijesinghe was
a Course for Aircraft Maintenance Engineers and was consequently amore
detailed and comprehensive Course than the Ground School Training Course
designed for Cadet Pilots and Cadet Flight Engineers.

Aruna Wijesinghe had submitted an application dated 10.7.84 (X-1V) for the
post of Flight Engineer Para 3: of this application (X-1V) sets our among the
qualifications. of Aruna Wijesinghe that he has "successfully completed Civil
Aviation Authority (U.K.) Basic. Technical Examination for Flight Engineers
Licence (including Air. Law and Weight and Balance)". This statement is
certified by the Certificate dated 7th September 1983 from. Civil Aviation
Authority (U.K.) document (Y3). The papers filed show that Aruna Wijesinghe
had acquired some qualifications as a Flight Engineer. I must state that the
petitioner has been taken unawares by these documents, because these documents
including Aruna Wijesinghe's application for post of Flight Engineer were
filed in the course of the hearing. I have already

**158**

referred to two such documents, the application dated 10.7.84(X4) and
Certificate dated 7th September 1983 (y3). I now refer to another document
dated 24:5.84 from the Civil Aviation Authority (U.K.)-(Y1), the results of
the Flight Crew Technical Examination, which states that he -has passed in the
following subjects Load Aviation Law (Flight Engineers) Part ll. The 1st
respondent has also produced a letter received by Aruna Wijesinghe from the
Civil Aviation Authority, (U.K.) dated 25.4.83 stating that he has qualified.
himself for entry to the Flight Engineers Licence Technical Examination.
Ultimately the 3rd respondent has affirmed that although the petitioner had
already tendered an application for appointment as a Flight Engineer, at the
time Aruna Wijesinghe was appointed a Cadet Flight Engineer to fill the
vacancy created by the resignation of one Hatharasinghe, the petitioner could
not have even been considered for appointment to the said vacancy, because; at
that time, the 1st respondent required a Cadet Second Officer or Cadet Flight
Engineer to take the place on the Simulator Training Course, of the said
Hatharasinghe who had resigned, and the petitioner was not qualified to do so,
while Aruna Wijesinghe was.

Thus, it is clear that the 1st respondent has taken up two positions as to why
the petitioner was not selected as a Cadet Flight Engineer I must state that
one material point that has to be taken into account, is that Air Lanka
Limited did not call for any applications for post of Cadet Flight Engineers,
If that was done this Court would have had the 1st respondent's criteria for
selection of Cadet Flight Engineers and the competing claims of the petitioner
and Aruna Wijesinghe could have been judged on that basis. The above
observation is clarified by the Notice (P8) of 16th September, 1983 calling
for applications for vacancies for Cadet Flight Pilots, which Notice (P8)
gives the basic qualifications required. In this instance the problem for the
petitioner has arisen by the fact that no vacancy was advertised setting out
the necessary qualifications and the petitioner quite understandably as a
young man qualified as a Flight Engineer with a desire to take to Flying and a
young man's dream of being a member of the Aircraft Crew of Air Lanka Limited;
in his enthusiasm... applied for a post of Flight Engineer in Air Lanka
Limited. The 3rd respondent in the affidavit has explained that up to this
time Air Lanka had not called for applications for posts of Cadet Flight
Engineers or even Flight Engineers. The mode of appointment has been as
follows. The 3rd respondent has affirmed that at the inception the 1st
respondent's

**159**

Company recruited as Flight Engineers fully qualified and experienced Flight
Engineers from the former Air Ceylon and from foreign Air Lines. It also
recruited as Cadet Flight Engineers the former employees of Air Ceylon who had
the basic qualifications to be Flight Engineers, and who would have been
thrown out of employment with the liquidation of Air Ceylon, had they not been
recruited by the 1st respondent. There was no need to hold written
examinations for the said Cadet Flight Engineers as their personal files
indicated their training l must at this stage state that the 1st respondent
has also explained why in 1984 the 1st respondent for the first time decided
to hold written examinations. The 1st respondent had taken a batch for
training as Cadet Pilots without a written examination and found that such
trainees proved to be unsatisfactory and had to be discontinued. This is borne
out by the advertisement (P8) of 15.9.85 calling for applications for Cadet
Pilots, which states "Candidates will be required to pass a written and flying
test to prove their ability". In, fact the Regulations framed under the Air
Navigation Act No.15 of 1950 for extension of Flight. Engineers Licence
(Regulation 56(6)) provide in Regulation 65 that the applicants will undergo a
test for aeronautical knowledge,. experience and skill practical test Schedule
1 Regulation 3:2:5 Flight Engineers provides that "an applicant for extension
of Air Craft rating of a licence ............. at the discretion of the
Director would be required to undergo all or any part of the technical
examination". Further the 3rd respondent has affirmed that there was no rule
or law which set out the criteria to be followed and the methods to be adopted
in selecting personnel Cadet Pilots or Cadet Flight Engineers. The 1st
respondent had a right to lay down its own criteria for and methods of
selection, and was the sole judge of the suitability or otherwise of any
candidate for appointment as a cadet Pilot or Cadet Flight Engineer in its
services. The 1st respondent owned a duty to its passengers and all who sought
its services to ensure that its Aircraft are operated by highly skilled and
competent personnel The 1st respondent was under a necessary duty to exercise
the greatest care and caution in the selection of personnel to operate its
Aircraft as Pilots and Flight Engineers. Ultimately, the 3rd respondent has
affirmed that the petitioner did not have the necessary qualifications for
appointment as a Flight Engineer or Cadet Pilot.

As for the technical aspects of the matters that are in dispute in this
application, i.e. the nature of the papers set for the second examination for-
which the petitioner sat, and the technical aspect of

**160**

the competence, that is required, the most competent person to speak to these
matters in respect of this application is the 1st respondent, who has placed
these matters before Court through the 3rd respondent. As against the opinion
of the 1st and 3rd respondents is that, of the petitioner as averred in his
petition and counter affidavit. There is no other independent view placed
before this Court by the petitioner. Undoubtedly it is the duty of and the
burden is on the petitioner to prove his case of discrimination by the 1st
respondent. There has been no third independent view placed before this Court.
In this situation the court has to act on the opinion expressed by the 1st
respondent through its agent the 3rd respondent a highly qualified, competent
and experienced, person who can express opinions on the technical matters in
issue.

On the facts placed before this Court I cannot hold that the 1st respondent
has acted in a discriminatory or unjust manner in not appointing the
petitioner as a Cadet Flight Engineer in preference to the said Aruna
Wijesinghe. As such the case of discrimination and unjust or unequal treatment
made by the petitioner is not factually proved and fails. The above finding on
facts is sufficient to conclude this application. However, I propose to record
the legal issues raised, and the submissions made by learned Counsel for both
parties as the submissions were both far reaching and illuminating. Counsel
for the Petitioner submitted that this Court should widen the frontiers of the
law pertaining to the interpretation of Articles 4(d) and 17 of the
Constitution. Learned President's Counsel for the Respondents invited the
Court to reconsider the basis of the decisions' in the leading cases on this
subject.

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that the main legal issue
arising in this application, was whether Air Lanka Limited was an organ of
Government, and whether the discriminatory action of the 1st respondent
Jayasuriya was executive or administrative action. The difficulty arises when,
as in this instance, actions of persons who are not strictly State Officers
are in issue that is whether such actions are state actions or individual
actions. Further the learned counsel for the Petitioner submitted that so far
this Court has considered the Articles of the Constitution pertaining to
fundamental rights only in respect of bodies which are statutory bodies. Such
leading cases are Wijesinghe v. Insurance Corporation and another (2)
Chandrasena and two others v. National Paper Corporation and two others (13)
heard together with (2) above, Wijeratne and another v. The People's Bank and
another

**161**

(3) (Divisional Bench of Five Judges), Gunaratne v. People's Bank (5)
(Divisional Bench of Five Judges), which reconsidered the position in the
earlier People's Bank case and distinguished and explained that case. (Pages
354 -356), Perera v. University Grants Commission (1), Roberts v. Kandy
Municipal Council. (6).

Learned counsel for the petitioner. submitted that this was the first occasion
this Court has to decide whether an incorporated body a Company performing
commercial functions in this instance, Air Lanka Ltd., was an organ of
government. It is in this context that the learned counsel for the petitioner
urged this Court to consider the extension of the frontiers of the law to
cover such bodies as Air Lanka Ltd. In support of this theory to extend the
law to cover such bodies, the learned counsel for the petitioner relied
heavily on American Authorities; both texts and decided cases. Learned counsel
referred to several texts Civil Liberties and the Constitution by Paul G.
Kauper (Page 155). which is as follows: "We now consider the second category
of situations where we have actions taken by persons or associations or
organisations that may be regarded as private in character but whose
relationship, to State by reference to, special privileges enjoyed property
used, or position in the State's regulatory scheme, may raise questions as to
whether their actions are to be identified with the State for the purpose of
the Fourteenth Amendment Restrictions.... This category embraces several types
of enterprise which serve public purposes but are not publicly owned or
operated. Civil Liberties under the Constitution by M. Glenn Abernathy, (Page
78) onwards, Cases on Constitutional Law by Barret, (Page 12) Fourteenth
Amendment to the Constitution. Learned Counsel for the petitioner also relied
on several Judicial decisions in the States Kerr v. Enoch Pratt Free Library
(14), Marsh v. Alabama (15). Learned counsel submitted that on the authorities
cited above, in the States

(a) Incorporated bodies,

(b) Private Groups of persons, incorporated or not have been held to be State
Bodies.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the real test, whether a
body exercises State or Government power depends not on how it was created but
as to why it was created and its functions. For this proposition learned
counsel cited the case of Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Schravardi and others,
(9). In considering the decisions of the Supreme Court of India, it has to be
noted and borne in mind that

**162**

our Constitution has not defined the term "organ of government" in Article,
4(d), and the term "executive and administration action " in Article 17 of the
Constitution whereas the, Constitution of India Part 1.11 Fundamental Rights
Articles 12-25 refers to State Action, and Article 14 has defined the term
"State" widely "In this part unless the context, otherwise requires. "the
State" includes the Government and Parliament of India and the Government and
the Legislature of each of the States and all Local, or other authorities
within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of
India".

Learned counsel for the petitioner directed the attention-of Court to several
provisions in the Memorandum and Articles of Association of Air Lanka Ltd, a
Company formed under the Companies Ordinance, which showed the involvement of
the State/Government, inter alia, the contribution. of 60% of the capital by
the State, appointment of the First Directors by the Government, and the
Government to have the majority of Directors nominated, appointment of the
Chairman by the Government, aria such other features. Learned counsel for the
petitioner submitted that Air Navigation was a State subject and a State
function. In the Company Air Lanka Ltd., the government has employed a device
to perform the functions of the government. Air Lanka Ltd., was an instrument
of government performing airline business. "A Company" was only a facade. In
fact it is the government which controls Air Lanka Ltd. On these submissions
learned counsel for the petitioner urged the Court to consider Air Lanka Ltd.;
as an organ of government in terms of Article 4(d) of the Constitution.

The respondents to this Application have raised a preliminary objection to the
effect that the 1st respondent Air Lanka Ltd., was, not an organ of the State
performing governmental functions, and that the acts of the 2nd and 3rd
respondents do not constitute executive or administrative action, and are not
justiciable in terms of Article 126 of the Constitution" Para.14:4 of the
affidavit of the 3rd respondent. The submission made by the learned
President's counsel for the respondents as to which kind of body was 'an organ
of government" was widely divergent from that of the learned counsel for the
petitioner. The learned President's counsel submitted that the 1st respondent.
Air Lanka Ltd., was a commercial body formed under the Companies Ordinance,
the Articles of the Company bind the internal administration of the Company
and the fact that the government contributed capital, appointed Directors as
such did not make it an organ of government. For a body to be an organ of
Government/State,

**163**

it must be a body created by statute to which some attribute of
State/Sovereign power has been conferred by statute. The Air Lanka Ltd is a
Company. No State power has been conferred on it. This submission that for a
body to come within the terms of Articles4 (d) and 17 of the Constitution it
must be created by statute and must conferred with some state of sovereign
power went beyond the decisions of this Court cited earlier, and as to what
are the attributes or tests of State Power. This Court has used as tests the
functional test and the government controlled test. Learned President's
-counsel submitted in relation to the Supreme Court decision in Wijetunge v.
Insurance Corporation and another (referred to above) that the functional test
applied in the case was not a safe test, but conceded that the conclusion in
the case was correct. Learned President's counsel got support for this, thesis
from certain leading Indian cases Rajasthan State Electricity Board, Appellant
v. Mohanlal and others, respondents(7) Shah, J. (Pages 1862-1864), Heavy
Engineering Mazdoor Union v. State of Bihar (16), Sukhdev Singh and others,
Appellants v. Bhagatram and another, respondents (8), Judgment of Aligirisamy,
J., Somprakash Rekhi, Pet. v. Union of India and another respondents (10)
Learned President's counsel for respondents summed up his submissions as
follows that the issue of fundamental rights arises in respect of that kind of
body which shares State power, and can infringe on public rights:

I have made a summary and a record of the submissions made as they were
illuminating and. went away from the decided cases, and had a new look at
Articles %4 (d) and 17 of the Constitution. But in view of my finding in
respect of the factual position re the allegation of discrimination by the
petitioner, it is unnecessary for me to make a ruling on the above for
reaching submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner and the
respondents. I regret to take this course of action. There are precedents of
this Court on this matter, which in these circumstances, I will follow. The
Application Gamini Samarasinghe v. Bank of Ceylon and another (17) was one
made under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution-right to equality. While denying
the allegations made by the petitioner the respondent bank had also taken- the
preliminary objection "that the 1st respondent is not an organ of the
government, nor does it exercise the executive or administrative power of the
State. This Court per Weeraratne, J. held that it was satisfied that the
respondent Bank had not violated Article 12(1) of the Constitution, and
further held that due to this finding, the

**164**

Court does not express an opinion on the validity of the objections. The
Application of Gunasena Thenabadu v. University of Colombo and others (18) was
one under Articles 12 (1) and 12 (2). of the Constitution pertaining to the
denial of equality before the Law language rights. This Court per Samarakoon,
C.J. held that the petitioner has failed to prove the allegation made in the
petition against the respondents. Having come to this conclusion the Court
further held as follows "Counsel for the respondents took up a preliminary
objection that the allegations in the pleadings of the petitioner did not
disclose infringement of a fundamental right of the petitioner by executive
or, administration action", and that the action of the respondents was not "an
act of executive or, administrative action by some organ of government".
Having made this observation this Court ruled as follows. "We heard
interesting arguments on this point by both counsel, but we do not propose to
make any comments on this point because of the view that we have formed on the
other objections of counsel for respondents". In the Application Wijetunge y.
Insurance Corporation, and another (referred to above) application made under
Articles 14 (1) (a) and 14 (1) (d) of the Constitution, the respondents took
up the preliminary objection that the, alleged violation of these rights by
the Insurance Corporation did not amount to infringement by executive or
administrative action as it was not an, organ of the government. In the
Application decided on the same day Chandrasena and two others v. National
Paper Corporation and two others (supra) application was made under Article 12
(2) of the Constitution: In this Application also preliminary objection had
been taken that that action of the respondents did not amount to executive or,
administrative action as it was , not an organ of government. Sharvananda,
A.C.J., who delivered the judgments. upheld the preliminary objections in,
both these Applications, and further held, that as such it was not necessary
to go into the factual merits of the petitioner's complaint.

I have followed these precedents of this Court. The Application is therefore
refused, and in the circumstances of this case it is refused without costs.
The Application is dismissed. No costs.

After l had formulated my judgment I received. the judgment of my brother
Atukorale, J. I do not agree with the judgment.

**

165

H.A. G. de. Silva, J.**

I have had the advantage of reading the judgments of both my brothers,
Atukorale, J. and Seneviratne, J. I agree with the reasons and conclusions
given in the judgment of Atukorale, J. on both matters that arise for decision
in this case. I therefore agree with the order he has made allowing the
Application with costs and awarding the sum stated by him as compensation to
the petitioner.

_Application allowed._

_Compensation awarded._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1987/14.html_  

