##  Visuvalingam and Others v. Liyanage and Others - SLR - 311, Vol 2 of 1983
[1983] LKSC 14; (1983) 2 Sri LR 311 (1 July 1983)

#  311

**  VISUVALINGAM AND OTHERS**

**v.**

**LIYANAGE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT

WANASUNDERA, J., RATWATTE, J., SOZA, J., RANASINGHE, J. AND RODRIGO, J.

S.C APPLICATIONS NOS. 47/83. 53/83 And 61/83

24, 25, 26, 27, 28 AND 31 OCTOBER 1983 AND

1, 2, 3, 7, 8 AND 9 NOVEMBER 1983.



    Fundamental Rights - Emergency Regulations (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) under Public Security Ordinance \- Prohibition by Competent Authority to print, publish and distribute newspaper called Saturday Review - Closure of press - Violation of fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 14(1) (a), (c) and (g) and 12(1) and (2) of the Constitution - Locus standi of a company.



New Era Publications Ltd., a company along with its shareholders and directors
in case No. 47/83 complained of infringement of their fundamental right of
freedom of speech and expression including publication set out in Article
14(1)(a) and to the right of freedom to engage by themselves or in association
with others in any lawful occupation, profession, trade, business or
enterprises set out in Article 14(1)(g). The 1st to 6 petitioners are citizens
of Sri Lanka and are seeking to vindicate their own fundamental rights as
citizens and have merely utilised the institution of a company (7th
petitioner) to exercise their fundamental right of freedom of speech including
publication (Article 14(1)(a) and the fundamental right of freedom to engage
with one another in the newspapers business (Article 14(1)(g). In case No.
53/83 and 63/8 the same petitioners complain of the infringement of their
fundamental rights guaranteed to them under Articles 14(1)(a), 14(1)(g) and
12(1) and 12(2) of the Constitution. Only citizens are endowed with
fundamental rights under Articles 14(1) and 12(2) but Article 12(1) guarantees
equality before the law and equal protection of the law to all persons.



The 1st respondent made order in terms of Regulation 14 of the Emergency
Regulations that no person shall print, publish or distribute or in any way be
concerned in the printing, publication or distribution of the newspaper
**_Saturday Review_** and also that the printing press where the **_Saturday
Review_** was printed be closed. The petitioners allege:



(i) that the orders were made _mala fide_ and in abuse of the powers conferred
by Regulation 14(3) and not for a legal purpose but for an ulterior purpose;



(ii) that they were made mechanically, perfunctorily, unreasonably and without
addressing his mind to the relevant facts and circumstances;



(iii) the orders were made with the object of masking the true purpose which
was to prevent the publication of news and views which may lead to criticism
of aspect of government policy despite the fact that much criticism as had
been Published were made _bona fide_ in respect of public affairs.



#  312



**Held -**



Although the freedom of speech and expression is an essential prerequisite for
the purpose of successfully preserving democratic institutions and the freedom
of the press embraces the freedom to propagate a diversity of views and ideas
and the right of free and general discussions of all public matters including
matters not palatable to the Government or to the majority of people in the
country, the **_Saturday Review_** carried material that must necessarily
attract the attention of the authorities at a time when there are unsettled
conditions in the country as today. It highlights the atrocities and excesses
of the police and the armed services. In general, editorial policy inclines
towards the radical groups waging a struggle against the State and, if not
explicitly at least implicitly eulogises the terrorists and praises the
sacrifices they have made. In the present contexts it cannot be said that the
competent authority (1st respondent) was so unreasonable or wrong when he said
that the impugned orders were made as the editorial policy of the paper was
extremely prejudicial to the security and safety of the country and its
citizens.



The fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution cannot by their very
nature be interpreted as being absolute rights. There are well recognised
restrictions and exceptions to the exercise of these rights. Freedom of
speech, press and assembly are dependent upon the powers of Constitutional
government to survive. If it is to survive it must have the power to protect
itself against unlawful conduct and under certain circumstances against
incitements to commit unlawful acts.



Apart from a fatal prohibition and ban on certain topics offensive to society
and orderly government, freedom of speech in other matters may be
circumscribed by time, place and circumstances. What is permissible at one
place and time may not be permissible at another place or time.



In dealing with an emergency situation, courts have always been prepared to
give the executive sufficient leeway in making decisions affecting the safety
of the people and the security of the country. These decisions have to be made
rapidly and in the light of information then available and under the
constraint of available resources. It is not for the Court to substitute its
opinion for that of he competent authority where the court is satisfied that
the material before him was reasonably capable of supporting the view and
opinion formed by him.



(2) **Held further** (Wanasundera, J. and Ratwatte, J., dissenting)



The 7th petitioner-company is not merely an institutional device functioning
as an agent or trustee for the shareholders. This is not a case where the
shareholders' right of publication in association with others is directly
affected The party directly affected is the company. The company and its
shareholders are in law and even in fact two distinct entities. The company
must be treated like any other independent person with rights and liabilities
approprite to itself.



#  313

**  **

The impugned orders directly affect the right of speech and expression and
publication of the 7th petitioner-company who is seeking compensation for the
loss sustained by it only for itself. The impugned orders at most affect the
1st to 6th petitioners indirectly. Any rights of the 7th petitioner-company
that may be affected are not fundamental rights recognised and enforceable
under the provisions of our Constitution. Hence the applications complaining
of infringement of the fundamental rights guaranted by Articles 14(1)(a), (e)
and (g) and 12(2) are not maintainable for want of competence.



Cases referred to:



1. _Bennect Coleman & Co., Ltd., v. Union of India, _AIR 1973 SC 106. 



2\. _The Express Newspapers Ltd., v. Union of India_ AIR 1958 SC 578.



3\. _Sakal Papers Ltd., v. Union of India_ AIR 1962 SC 305.



4\. _R. C. Copper v. Union of India_ (1970) 35 CR 530 AIR 1970 SC 564 ( _Bank
Nationalisation case_ ).



5\. _Gedhra Electricity Co., v. State of Gujerat_ AIR 1975 SC 32.



6.  _State Trading Corporation of India Ltd., v. the Commercial Tax Officer and others_ AIR 1963 SC 1811.



7\. _Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co., Ltd, v. State of Bihar_ (Telco Case)
AIR 1965 SC 40.



8\. _Termini ello v. Chicago_ (1949) 93 US Lawyers Edn. 1151.



9\. _American Communication Association v. Dodds_ (1950) 339 US 312, Lawyer
Edn. 927.



10\. _State of Gujarat v. Shri Ambica Mills_ AIR 1974 SC 1300.



11. _Colonial Bank v. Whinney_ 11 AC 426\. 



12. _Tunstall v. Steigmann_ 1962 All ER 417.



13\. _Gramaphone &Typewriter Ltd, v. Stanley_ 1908 2 KB 89, 98.



14\. _R. v. Chief Immigration Officer, Heathrow Airport, Ex parte Bibi_ 1976 I
WLR 979.



15\. _R. v. Secretary for the Home Department ex parte Fernandes_ Times Law
Report of November 20, 1980.



#  314



16. _Farima Neld_ v. _European Communities Commission_ (1974) 2 CMLR 338. 



17\. _Neville Fernando and others v. Liyanage and others_ \- Janatha Press
Case S.C. Application No. 134/1982 (S.C. Minutes of 9.2.83.)



18. _Neville Fernando v. Liyanage_ \- S.C. Application No. 116/82 S.C. Minutes of 14.12.82.       



19\. _Saloman v. Saloman & Co., Ltd.,_ 1897 AC 22



20. _Short v. Treasury Commissioner_ 1948 1 KB 116.



21\. _Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food_ 1968 AC 997.



22\. _Associated Provincial Picture House Ltd., v Wednesbury Corporation_ 1948
1 KB 223.



23. _Secretary of State for Education and Science v. Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council_ 1976 3 WLR 641.



24\. _Hirdaramani v. Ratnavale_ 75 N LR 67.



25. _Siriwardena and Others v. Liyanage and Others_ (Aththa Case) \- S.C. Application No. 120/82 - S.C. Minutes of 27.1.1985.



26. _In re W. (An Infant)_ 1971 AC 682, 700. 



27. _Secretary of State for Employment v. ASLEF_ (No. 2) (1972) All ER 949 967 (1972) 1 WLR 1370.



28\. _Liversidge v. Anderson_ (1942) AC 206, 239.



29. __ G _unasekera v. Ratnavel_ 76 NLR 316.



30. _Ras Behari Lal v. King Emperor_ (1933) 60 Indian Appeals 354. 361.



31\. _Anisminic Ltd., v. Foreign Compensation Commission_ \- (1969) 1 All ER
208.



32\. _I.R.C. v. Rossminster Ltd._ 1980 1 All ER 80'.



33\. _Nakkuda Ali v. Jayaratne_ 1951 AC 66.



34\. _A.G. of St. Christopher v. Reynolds_ 1979 3 All ER 129 (P.C.)



35\. _A.G. of Canada v. Hallet & Cary Ltd. _1952 AC 427.



#  315

**  **

**APPLICATIONS** complaining of infringement of fundamental rights.



_S. Nadesan. Q.C_ with _S. Mahenthiran_ and _S. H. M. Reeza_ for petitioners.



_M. S. Aziz Deputy Solicitor General_ with _Parakrama Karunaratne_ State
Counsel for respondents.



## Cur. adv. vult



18 November, 1983.

  
WANASUNDERA, J.

  
The "Saturday Review" is a weekly newspaper in English and was originally
published by a Company called Kalai Nilayam. This Company was formed in
January 1982 and had the objects broadly described in the publication brochure
P1 issued by the Company-



1. to establish a two-way communication between all persons and nationalities in this country;



2.to stand up against injustice, acts of discrimination and the violation of
the rights of human rights and freedom.



Mr. Nadesan stated that the "Saturday Review" devoted itself to both political
and cultural matters concentrating mostly on the developments and events in
the Northern peninsula. A brief survey of its back numbers shows that its
material which is varied and of a fairly high standard would have catered to
the English speaking intelligentsia of this country.



In August 1982 the "Saturday Review" was bought by the Company called New Era
Publications Ltd., the 7th petitioner. The shareholders, directors, and the
New Era Company are, it is alleged, motivated by the same considerations set
out in the brochure referred to, in the conduct of this newspaper. The New Era
Publications Ltd., is a limited liability company without a share capital but
with its liability limited by the guarantee of its members. It consists of
seven shareholders, the 1st to 6th Petitioners and one Mr. K. Kandasamy, who
is at the moment abroad and not made a party to this application. These seven



#  316



members also constitute the sole directors of the Company. All of them are
citizens of Sri Lanka.



The Company has its registered office at No. 118, Fourth Cross Street, Jaffna,
but the printing of the paper has been entrusted, on a commercial basis, to
the St. Joseph's Catholic Press, which functions at another address in Jaffna
and has no other connection with New Era Publications Ltd.



As a general background to the facts of this case, it should be mentioned that
on the 18th of May 1983 a state of Emergency was declared by the Government
under the Public Security Ordinance. With the declaration of Emergency, there
was brought into operation from the same date a set of Emergency Regulations
valid for a period of one month, but which could be renewed after debate in
Parliament from month to month.



The 1st respondent, who is the Secretary, to the Ministry of State, has been
appointed Competent Authority under the provisions of the Emergency
Regulations (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulation Nos. 1, 2 and 3
of 1983, for the purpose of the Regulations. The 2nd respondent is the
Inspector General of Police and the 3rd respondent is the Attorney-General.



On the 1st of July 1983, the 1st respondent, acting in terms of Regulation 14
of the said Regulations, made order (P2) that-



(a) no person shall print, publish or distribute or in any way be concerned in
the printing, publication or distribution of the newspaper " Saturday Review "
for a period of one month from the date of the order.



(b) the printing press in which the said newspaper was printed shall, for a
period of one month from the date of the order, not be used for any purpose
whatsoever.



The Inspector General of Police, acting under and in pursuance of the
authority granted by this order, thereupon sealed the



#  317

**  **

office of the " Saturday Review " where only the editorial and administrative
work takes place. The printing press, namely the St. Joseph's Catholic Press,
was however not sealed. Similar orders have been made every time with the
renewal of the Emergency.



Mr. Nadesan mentioned two infirmities in connection with this order to show
that it had not been duly made by the Competent Authority as he had not
brought his mind to bear on the matter before him. First, as regards the
period concerned. Since the Emergency operates from the 18th of one month to
the 17th of the succeeding month, the Competent Authority erred when he made
an order on 1st July 1983 to operate for a period of one month from that date.
The second complaint is as regards the order for the closure of the printing
press where the " Saturday  Review " was printed. It does not appear that the
-Competent Authority was aware that the printing was being done on a
commercial basis by another organisation at the St. Joseph's Catholic Press.
This mistake was apparently discovered later and, as stated earlier, the St.
Joseph's Catholic Press was not closed and it continued to attend to whatever
other business it had. These mistakes however do not sufficiently establish
that the Competent Authority did not give his mind to the need to ban the
publication of this paper.



The petitioners claim that their fundamental rights guaranteed by Article
14(1) (a), (c) and (g) are violated by the above orders of the Competent
Authority. The respondents however have denied that these orders and acts are
illegal and have also taken up, by way of defence, two rulings of this Court
to the effect that the petitioners lack _locus standi_ and are precluded from
coming into Court and obtaining relief. They are the judgments of Sharvananda
J. in S.C. 116/82 (S.C. Minutes of 14.12.1982) and S.C. 134/82 (S.C. Minutes
of 7.2.1983). Each of these judgments is a judgment of a bench of three
judges. The very fact that the Chief Justice has referred this matter to this
larger bench for decision, at the request of counsel, is precisely for the
reason that the matter should be reconsidered. Although I myself was a member
of the bench in S.C. 134/82, I found that the issue in that case had already
been



#  318



decided in the earlier application which involved the same parties and the
same subject-matter. I was therefore of the view that S.C. 134/82 could be
decided on the ground of _res judicata_ alone. In that view of the matter the
legal question that is now before us was not considered by me. The present
larger bench has specifically assembled to reconsider this matter and, because
I had left the issue before us open for future decision, I am now at liberty
to give my mind to this matter.



The petitioners allege that their fundamental rights under Article 14 have
been violated. The relevant provisions, Article 14(a), (c) and (g) are worded
as follows: -



14\. (1) Every citizen is entitled to -



(a)  the freedom of speech and expression including publication ;



(c) the freedom of association;



(g) the freedom to engage by himself or in association with others in any
lawful occupation, profession, trade, business or enterprise;"



Mr. Nadesan drew our attention to certain significant differences between the
above provisions and the corresponding provisions of the Indian Constitution,
particularly to the words " in association with others " in Article 14(1) (g)
and their absence in India, which makes our provisions much larger in content
than the corresponding Indian provision. This item is of the greatest,
significance in this case.



Relying on the provisions of Article 14(1) (a), (c) and (g), Mr. Nadesan
submits that every citizen in this country has freedom of association, namely
to freely associate with one another and to organise themselves in such a way
as to enable them to engage in any lawful business or enterprise. In this case
this right is the carrying on in association with others the business or
enterprise of a newspaper in furtherance of the fundamental right of freedom
of speech and expression, including publication,



#  319

**  **

guaranteed by Article 14(1) (a). The petitioners in their capacity as citizens
of this country are exercising their fundamental right through the
institutional device of a company which they were entitled in law to bring
into existence. This freedom, they say, has been eroded by the closure of the
Saturday Review by executive or administrative action. Mr. Nadesan stressed
particularly the right of a citizen to use an institutional device to enjoy or
exercise the fundamental rights involved in this case. The Constitution, he
says, permits the exercise of such rights in association with others. The
position here is even stronger than the legal position obtaining in India.



In this case they have utilised the institution of a company, since it gave
them certain advantages. For example, their liability is limited, they cannot
be sued for the debts of the company, and they are not liable to pay taxes due
from the company in respect of its profits. It cannot therefore be said that
the petitioners, by resorting to this device, intended to forego their rights
as citizens when on the other hand they have resorted to this device for the
better exercise of their fundamental rights. By their acts they did not intend
to transfer, nor have they transferred, their fundamental rights of freedom of
speech to the company which is in law not entitled to enjoy such a right.



Mr. Nadesan further submitted that, since the Constitution enjoins all State
organs to secure and advance these fundamental rights, the artificial and
purely civil law concepts associated with company law, agency or partnership
law which had taken shape due to the exigencies of trade, commerce and
business should not be interposed to prevent the full operation and the
realisation of a fundamental right guaranteed to a citizen by the
Constitution. On the contrary, he submits that since "in fact" (in
contradistinction to "in law") a company is only a fictitious person and its
own rights and interests are in truth owned by and exercised for the benefit
of actual human beings who are its shareholders, there should be no difficulty
in the way of a court which wishes to give full effect to these fundamental
rights from acting accordingly. Mr. Nadesan rightly stressed that we are here
dealing with one of the most important of the fundamental rights, namely the
right of free speech and



#  320



expression, including publication. It embraces not only a natural instinct
involving the basic need of man to express himself but also equally important
social and political interests, namely the exchange of Information and ideas
and free discussion between members of the community for the welfare of
society. This would be especially necessary in a Parliamentary democracy.
Bruce -" The American Commonwealth ", page 274 - observes in this connection:



" The more completely popular sovereignty prevails in a country so much the
more important is it that the organs of   opinion should be adequate to its
expression, prompt, full and unmistakable in their utterances .... The press,
and newspaper press, stands by common consent first among the organs of
opinion .....The conscience and commonsens of the nation as a whole  keep down
the evils which have crept into the working of the constitution and may in
time extinguish them .... That which, carrying a once famous phrase we may
call the genius of universal publicity, has some disagreeable results, but the
wholesome ones are greater and more numerous. Selfishness, injustice, cruelty,
tricks and jobs of all sorts, shun the light; to expose them is to defeat
them. No serious evils, no rankling sore in the body politics, can remain long
concealed, and when disclosed it is half destroyed. So long as the opinion of
a nation is sound, the main lines of its policy cannot go far wrong."



The decisions of both the U.S. and Indian Supreme Courts are studded with
quotations and statements expressing similar sentiments. It is unnecessary to
refer to all those authorities. But Mr. Nadesan brought to our notice two
documents - one, the Manifesto of the United National Party, and the other, a
booklet published by our present President Mr. J. R. Jayewardena when he was
the Leader of the opposition and Leader in the National State Assembly of the
United National Party. This booklet constitutes the written submissions which
he and his lawyers submitted to the Constitutional Court on behalf of the
party when the Sri Lanka Press Council Bill was being



**  321**



considered by the Constitutional Court under the previous Constitution. This,
Mr. Nadesan submitted, was a most illuminating and useful document, thoroughly
researched, containing references to most of the leading cases including the
_Bennet Coleman's case_ (1), which is quoted with approval. Having regard to
its accuracy and comprehensiveness, Mr. Nadesan said, it relieved him of the
necessity of searching for or referring to other sources. This publication and
the Manifesto provided the background for the drafting of the present
constitutional provisions relating to fundamental rights.



Mr. Nadesan relied strongly on the first six paragraphs, namely paragraphs 1.1
to 1.6 set out below which he said contained as full a statement as one can
make of the nature and width of the fundamental right of free speech and
expression guaranteed by our Constitution :



1\. _The Freedom of thought and expression and the freedom of the Press_



1.1 The freedom of the Press is the essence of liberty and this is the source
of all other liberties. If this freedom is suppressed, restrained or
controlled, then the foundation for autocracy is laid. Freedom of speech is
the basis of freedom of thought. Speech is the institution by which man gives
expresion to his right to think freely. If therefore the freedom of speech is
affected, it would equally affect the freedom of thought. In such a context an
examination of the structure of the Press would show that it is an institution
created by a developed society to convey the thoughts of the people. It also
provides the material for other people to think and form their own opinion.
This is of fundamental importance. By the expression "Press" is meant every
media such as newspapers, books, magazines and the radio by which the thoughts
of the people and the factual data which forms the basis of human thinking is
conveyed to the people.



1.2 It is submitted that there are two priorities involved in the concept of
freedom of speech, namely-



(a)   the source from which the communication issues, and



(b) perhaps the more important one, the recipient of the communication.



#  322



     The freedom to express one's thoughts is confined to a few compared to the wider circle to which freedom of expression is extended in so far as the recipient is concerned, namely the community.



1.3  It is in the freedom of the recipient that public opinion has its birth.
The Press provides the data by which such opinions find their fullest
expression. Therefore it is man s right as the recipient of information to
look to as many sources of information as he likes; and it is equally the duty
of the Press which provides the information to seek it from as many sources as
possible. If, however, the sources of information become concentrated in one,
or restricted to a few bodies, then the formation of ideas is limited. It is
in such circumstances only proper that the sources of information available to
the public should be enlarged rather than restricted; therefore there can be
no justification for interference with the freedom of the Press.



1.4 Freedom of speech requires courage. If a person who gives information is
timid or is reluctant to give facts then the formation of public opinion is
restricted. The placing of any restrictions on the communication of data and
opinion as hitherto communicated to the public is a matter which merits the
closest attention of any tribunal.



1.5 It is submitted that in a system of government based on universal suffrage
both the issues and recipient of information express themselves through the
ballot. In such a system there is always a tendency on the part of those in
power who wish to maintain their position of power to control the publication
of data and opinion, because it might ultimately affect their tenure.
Therefore, it is not uncommon to see those in power hedging themselves in with
restrictions on the publication of data which would be the basis for the
formation of public opinion.



1.6 It is submitted that in a free society the victory of persuasion over
force could be ensured and achieved only by permitting public discussion. A
Constitution that seeks to express the aspirations of the people and ensures
certain



#  323

**  **

fundamental rights must therefore be interpreted not only against the
background of the intentions of the framers of the Constitution but the
mandate given by the people to such persons. It is submitted therefore that
the fundamental rule of interpretation especially of constitutional documents
is to examine the thoughts which guided the enactors of the fundamental law,
the motives and reasons which prompted the draftsmen of the particular
Constitutional instrument. A reference therefore to the United Front Manifesto
which was claimed to be the basis upon which the Constituent Assembly received
a mandate from the people to frame a Constitution ......"



An independent newspaper would, to a large extent, fulfil the sentiments and
aspirations spelt out in the above passages. The role of such newspapers is to
inform the public, to criticise persons and matters deserving criticism, and
also to give an opportunity to the public for the free expression of public
opinion. In the recent contempt case against the Editor of the Ceylon Daily
News, the judgments of both the majority and the minority were to the effect
that the freedom of speech is a most vital and valuable asset and that it does
not admit of limitation, save in the most exceptional cases permitted by the
law.



For a proper appreciation of this fundamental right, Mr. Nadesan said it would
have to be examined in the context of the Preamble and Articles 3 and 4 of the
Constitution. He showed us that the fundamental rights are part and parcel of
the rights of the People reserved by them to themselves. He drew our attention
to the fact that those rights shall not be abridged, restricted or denied by
any organ of Government, but on the contrary there is an injunction that they
should be secured and advanced by them. Article 4(d).



I am of the view that there is substance in Mr. Nadesan's submission that the
conjoint effect of Article 14(1) (a), (c) and (g) is to enable the petitioners
to act in association with others to carry on the business of publishing the
Saturday Review in the exercise of their fundamental right of free speech,
expression and publication. Unlike under the Indian Constitution, they can
continue to act in association, notwithstanding the formation of the Company.
Although the Company is, in the eye of the law a



#  324



separate juristic person (with whom they have the closest contact being not so
much associated but actually integrated), if we have to give effect to the
fundamental, right, then we must necessarily regard that company as the medium
or vehicle through which they are exercising their fundamental rights.



This is adequate to dispose also of the argument that if we were to allow
shareholders of a company to claim relief to which the company itself is
disentitled since it is not a citizen, would we not be allowing something to
be done indirectly which the law has prohibited from being done directly? That
argument would be valid in a case where the shareholders are allowed to make a
claim on behalf of the company. In such a case the shareholders can only
succeed if the court is prepared to " lift the veil " and look behind the
corporate structure. The present case is different and is based on the
distinction drawn in the Indian cases between shareholders who claim relief on
behalf of the company which is impermissible and shareholders who claim in
their capacity as citizens by virtue of a fundamental right vested in them in
their own right. There is no reason why shareholders claiming in their own
right should be denied relief if the guarantee of freedom of expression is to
be protected and advanced.



An examination of the Indian cases would be helpful at this stage. In _Bennett
Coleman & Co. Ltd. v. Union of India _(1), a number of corporations plus the
shareholders, the editors and publishers challenged the Import Policy for
Newsprint for 1972-­73, declared by the Union Government as being violative of
Article 19(1) (a) - freedom of speech and expression  and Article 14 dealing
with the equal protection clause. The Additional Solicitor-General appearing
for this Union pleaded _Inter alia_ that " the petitioners were companies and
therefore they could not invoke fundamental rights "



The Indian Supreme Court, after referring to two previous decisions, - _The
Express Newspapers Ltd. v. Union of India_ (2), and _Sakal Papers Ltd. v.
Union of India_ (3), said that in those cases relief had been granted to
petitioners as shareholders or



**  325**

**  **

editors of newspaper companies. The court then proceeded to state as follows:
-



" In the present case, the petitioners in each case are in addition to the
company the shareholders, the editors and the publishers. In the _Bennett
Coleman_ group of cases one shareholder, a reader of the publication and three
editors of the three dailies published by the Bennett Coleman Group are the
petitioners. In the _Hindustan Times_ case a shareholder who happens to be a
Deputy Director, a shareholder, a Deputy Editor of one of the publications,
the printer and the publisher of the publications and a reader are the
petitioners. In the _Express Newspapers case_ the company and the Chief Editor
of the dailies are the petitioners. In the _Hindu_ case a shareholder, the
Managing Editor, the publisher of the company are the petitioners. One of the
important questions in these petitions is whether the shareholder, the editor,
the printer, the Deputy Director who are all citizens and have the right to
freedom under Article 19(2) can invoke those rights for freedom of speech and
expression, claimed by them for freedom of the press in their daily
publication. The petitioners contend that as a result of the Newsprint Control
Policy of 1972-73 their freedom of speech and expression exercised through
their editorial staff and through the medium of the publication is infringed.
The petitioners also challenge the fixation of 10 page ceiling and the
restriction on circulation and growth on their publications to be not only
violative of but also to abridge and take away the freedom of speech and
expression of the shareholders and the editors. The shareholders, individually
and in association with one another represent the medium of newspapers through
which they disseminate and circulate their views and news. The newsprint
policy exposes them to heavy financial loss and impairs their right to carry
on the business of printing and publishing of the dailies through the medium
of the companies.



" In _R. C. Cooper v. Union of India_ (4), which is referred to as the _Bank
Nationalisation case_ Shah, J. speaking for the majority dealt with the
contention raised about the maintainability of the petition. The petitioner
there was a shareholder, a Director and holder of deposit of current accounts
in the Bank. The locus



#  326



standi of the petitioner Was challenged on the ground that no fundamental
right of the petitioner there was directly impaired by the enactment of the
Ordinance and the Act or any action taken thereunder. The petitioner in the
_Bank Nationalisation case,_ (supra) claimed that the rights guaranteed to him
under Articles 14, 19 and 31 of the Constitution were impaired. The
petitioner's grievances were these. The Act and the Ordinance were without
legislative competence. The Act and the Ordinance intefered with the guarantee
of freedom of trade. They were not made in the public interest. The President
had no power to promulgate the Ordinance. In consequence of hostile
discrimination practised by the State the value of the petitioner's investment
in the shares is reduced. His right to receive dividends ceased. He suffered
financial loss. He was deprived of the right as a shareholder to carry on
business through the agency of the company".



" The ruling of this court in _Bank Nationalisation case_ (4), was this:



A measure executive or legislative may impair the rights of the company alone
and not of its shareholders. It may impair the rights of the shareholders and
not of the Company; it may impair the rights of the shareholders as well as of
the company. Jurisdiction of the Court to grant relief cannot be denied, when
by State action the rights of the individual shareholder are impaired, if that
action, impairs the rights of the Company as well. The test in determining
whether the shareholder's right is impaired is not formal; it is essentially
qualitative; if the State action impairs the right of the shareholders as well
as of the Company, the Court will not, concentrating merely upon the technical
operation of the action, deny itself jurisdiction to grant relief'.



"In the _Bank Nationalisation case,_ (supra) this Court held the statute to be
void for infringing the rights under Article 19(1) (f) and 19(1) (g) of the
Constitution. In the _Bank Nationalisation case_ (supra) the petitioner was a
shareholder and a director of the company which was aquired under the statute.
As a result of the _Bank_



#  327

**  **

_Nationalisation case_ (supra) it follows that the Court finds out whether the
legislative measure directly touches the company of which the petitioner is a
shareholder. A shareholder is entitled to protection of Article 19. That
individual right is not lost by reason of the fact that he is a shareholder of
the company. The _Bank Nationalisation case_ (supra) has established the view
that the fundamental rights of shareholders as citizens are not lost when they
associate to form a company. When their fundamental rights as shareholders are
impaired by State action their rights as shareholders are protected. The
reason is that the shareholders' rights are equally and necessarily affected
if the rights of the company are affected. The rights of shareholders with
regard to Article 19(1) (a) are projected and manifested by the newspapers
owned and controlled by the shareholders through the medium of the
corporation. In the present case, the individual rights of freedom of speech
and expresion of editors, Directors and shareholders are all exercised through
their newspapers through which they speak. The press reaches the public
through the newspapers. The shareholders speak through their editors. The fact
that the companies are the petitioners does not prevent this Court from giving
relief to the shareholders, editors, printers who have asked for protection of
their fundamental rights by reason of the effect of the law and of the action
upon their rights. The locus standi of the shareholder petitioners is beyond
challenge after the ruling of this Court in the _Bank Nationalisation case_
(supra). The presence of the company is on the same ruling not a bar to the
grant of relief ".



It would be observed that the Supreme Court relied to a great extent on an
expression of opinion on this precise matter in _R. C. Cooper v. Union of
India_ (4), popularly called the _Bank Nationalisation case. Seervai_ in his
_Constitutional Law of India (2nd Edn) criticises that decision. At page 670
Mr. Seervai states:_



"It is clear that the rights of the banks were decided in their absence and
without their being heard. The petitioner



#  328



came to court expressly stating that he did not challenge the Act as violating
the Banks' fundamental rights but as violating his aim and the court ended up
by deciding that the Act violated the Bank's fundamental rights under Articles
14, 19 and 31 ".



Probably Mr. Seervai overlooks the express statement contained in paragraph 14
of that case where it is stated that an executive or legislative measure "may
impair the rights of the shareholders as well as of the company" and on that
ruling it was perfectly legitimate for the Indian Supreme Court to arrive at
the conclusion it did.



Furthermore the bench in the _Bennett Coleman case,_ which sought to explain
the judgment of the _Bank Nationalisation_ case on this issue, included three
of the judges who sat on the previous bench and two of the judges had actually
participated in the earlier judgment. They are probably in a better position
than Mr. Seervai to interpret their own judgment.



The rulings on this point, both in the _Bank Nationalisation_ case and the
_Bennett Coleman_ case were again referred to and followed in _Godhra
Electricity Co. v. State of Gujarat_ (5). This was decided by Ray C. J. and
Mathew J. Ray J. had not expressed an opinion on this matter in the _Bank
Nationalisation_ case (4) though he wrote the leading judgment in the _Bennett
Coleman case_ (1). Similarly, Mathew J., who did not express an opinion on
this question in the _Bennett Coleman_ (1) case, now quoted both the above
cases with approval in his judgment. So that we find that in India there is a
consistent line of authority in support of the principle contended for by Mr.
Nadesan.



In _Godhra_ case the 1st appellant was a company. The 2nd appellant was a
shareholder and its Managing Director. The appellants challenged the validity
of a notice issued by the Gujarat Electricity Board whereby it purported to
exercise the option of purchasing the electrical undertaking of the 1st
appellant under section 6 of the Indian Electricity Act. The appellants sought
a declaration that the provisions of sections 6, 7 and 71 of the Act violated
the fundamental rights contained



#  329

**  **

in Articles 14, 19(1) (f) and 19(1) (g) and 31 of the Indian Constitution.



Mathew, J., delivering the order of the court said-



" The undertaking, no doubt, belonged to the 1st appellant, a corporation. Not
being a citizen, it has no fundamental right under Article 19. The 2nd
appellant is a shareholder and the Managing Director of the Company. If his
right to carry on the business through the agency of the Company is taken away
or abridged, or, his right to a divisible share in future of the property of
the company is diminished or abridged in taking delivery of the undertaking
without payment of the purchase price, there is no reason why he should be
disabled from challenging the validity of the sub-section ".



He concluded by stating :



" We think the second appellant is entitled to challenge the validity of the
sub-section on the ground that it abridged his fundamental right under Arts.
19(1) (g) and 19(1) (f) ".



In S.C. 116/82, my brother Sharvananda, J., has chosen to take a different
view of this matter. After holding that a company cannot take advantage of the
provisions of Article 14, he addressed himself to the question as to whether
the shareholders of a company can come forward and ask for relief when the
Competent Authority had sealed the printing press and prevented the company
from carrying on business. The answer to this question my brother said depends
on a proper appreciation of the relationship in law of shareholders to the
company. His conclusion was in the following words: -



" I cannot subscribe to the concept that the shareholders carry on business
through the agency of the company ".



This conclusion, as stated earlier, overlooks the vital distinction referred
to earlier appearing in the law in the _Bank Nationalisation_ and the _Bennett
Coleman_ cases as against the situation in the _State Trading Corporation_
case (6) and the _Tata_



#  330



_Engineering & Locomotive Co._ (7) case where the shareholders claimed only on
behalf of the company. My brother proceeded as follows: -



" I agree with Mr. H. M. Seervai that the decision in the _Bennett Coleman_
case with respect to shareholders' rights vis-a-vis the act against the
company is erroneous (vide Constitutional Law of India (2nd Edn.) Vol. 1 at
page 685) "

In the interview

I have already dealt with the criticism of Mr. Seervai and shown that it
arises from a misunderstanding of a distinction the Indian Supreme Court has
drawn between the case of a shareholder coming forward on behalf of the
company and seeking relief for and on behalf of the company and one where a
shareholder petitions court in his own right as a citizen for a violation of
his own fundamental right. The failure to grasp this distinction has
apparently led this eminent jurist to conclude that the _Bank Nationalisation_
case __ and the _Bennett Coleman_ case __ had purported to overrule the _State
Trading Corporation_ case and the _Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co. _ case.



Mr. Nadesan, who had undertaken a searching analysis of those cases,
demonstrated to us that the two later cases have in no way affected the two
earlier cases. The learned Deputy Solicitor General himself confessed that he
found it difficult to follow Mr. Seervai's reasoning on this matter although
he agreed with Mr. Seervai's general conclusions. The Indian Supreme Court has
in the two latter cases proceeded on the basis of the validity of the two
earlier cases and quite rightly held that, because the _State Trading
Corporation_ case and the _Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co. _ case dealt with
a different aspect of this same matter, they had no controlling effect on the
later cases. The _Bank Nationalisation_ case and the _Bennett Coleman_ case
contain a refinement or further development of the principle laid down in the
_State Trading Corporation_ case and the _Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co._
case. The later cases proceed on a different legal and factual basis. The
reference to property rights in the Indian cases is only incidental and has no



#  331

**  **

controlling effect on those decisions. They deal with more than one
fundamental right and my brother Sharvananda J. erred when he made the
existence of a property right in India the basis for distinguishing the Indian
cases. In my opinion the rulings in S.C. Application No. 116/82 and S.C.
Application No. 134/82 are erroneous and should be overruled.



Turning to the merits, Mr. Nadesan claimed that the articles published in the
Saturday Review were innocuous and should not have drawn the intervention of
the Competent Authority. The State however challenges this statement. In the
affidavit by the Competent Authority, he states that the Saturday Review is a
political newspaper advocating the cause of dividing the country and the
establishment of a separate State to be called Eelam. Many of the articles and
items that have been published suggested that the publishers had eschewed
democratic processes based on non-violence as a means of resolving the
problems facing the Tamil people and openly encouraged the adoption of force
and terrorism. The newspaper had also given ample publicity to the acts of the
terrorist movements operating in the North, particularly of the terrorist
organisation called the Tamil Eelam Liberation Front, and often eulogised such
conduct with a view to encouraging the growth of that movement and to
countenance the use of force against the lawfully established Government of
this country. Finally, the Competent Authority says that the Saturday Review
is blatantly communalistic and constantly highlighted alleged grievances and
injustices committed against the Tamil community which were capable of
arousing communal feelings among this community and encouraged conduct
prejudicial to the maintenance of public order and security. To Mr. Nadesan's
statement that this paper also carried articles of cultural and artistic
interest, the learned Deputy Solicitor-General submitted that interspersed
among the political artices, articles of undoubted artistic and cultural value
are sometimes found and this has been done advisedly as a "sugar coating", to
use his own words, or to disguise the highly tendentious material contained in
the paper so as to give the newspaper the appearance of a paper that is
balanced and



#  332



moderate in its views. Mr. Aziz also referred to the fact that this newspaper
was directed to the intelligentsia, which included the student population who
were in the forefront of this agitation. The newspaper appeared also to have
large support from Tamil subscribers abroad. In fact, it has been suggested
that the Saturday Review serves as a sort of medium of communication between
the various well-organised expatriate groups of Tamils abroad, keeping them
posted with the news and developments in this country and operating as their
mouth-piece for disseminating radical views.



It would appear to me that, for the most part, the publishers have tried to
live up to the objects, and ideals set out in the brochure P1. Making due
allowance for the regional interest and approach of the publication, the
publishers have tried to be as objective as possible and have sought to
produce a weekly newspaper, which appears to be a cut above the average
newspaper judged by journalistic standards.



I am in agreement with Mr. Nadesan when he says that the freedom of speech and
expression is an essential prerequisite for the purpose of successfully
preserving democratic institutions and the freedom of press embraces the
freedom to propagate a diversity of views and ideas and the right of free and
general discussions of all public matters. Barring the exceptions contained in
Article 15(2) and (7), the object of freedom of speech and expression is " to
foreclose public authority from assuming a guardianship of the public mind
through regulating the Press and speech; it rests on the assumption that the
widest possible dissemination of information from diverse and antagonistic
sources is essential to the welfare of the public

_Termini ello v. Chicago_ (8).



Some of the material in the Saturday Review may not be palatable to the
Government or to the majority of people in this country, but that by itself is
no reason for imposing a sanction on this paper if the fundamental freedom of
free speech has any worthwhile meaning. Unfortunately there has also crept
into this publication some material that must necessarily attract the



#  333

**  **

attention of the authorities at a time when there are unsettled conditions in
the country as today. Mr. Nadesan himself admitted that one of the objects
followed by the publishers was to high­light the grievances of the Tamil
people by laying bare the atrocities and excesses of the police and the armed
services. It is apparent that full rein has been given to this object. It
cannot also be gainsaid that this publication, being intimately concerned with
the aspirations of the Tamil community and under pressures from public opinion
in the North, has in its general editorial policy, found that it could not but
help incline towards the radical groups waging a struggle against the State.
It has at times, if not explicitly, at least implicitly eulogised the
terrorists and praised the sacrifices they have made.



Whether or not this material would pass muster in normal times need not
concern us now. But in the present context I cannot say that the Competent
Authority was so unreasonable or wrong when he was of the view that-



" this editorial policy, was, in the context of the circumstances prevailing
in the country at the time the two impugned orders were made and to date,
extremely prejudicial to the security and safety of the country and its
citizens ".



The fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution cannot by its very
nature be interpreted as being absolute rights. There are well-recognised
restrictions and exceptions to the exercise of this right. One of the cases
relied on by Mr. Nadesan - _American Communication Association v. Dodds,_ (9)
- brings this out clearly: -



"Freedom of speech, press and assembly are dependent upon the powers of
Constitutional Government to survive. If it is to survive, it must have power
to protect itself against unlawful conduct and under certain circumstances
against incitements to commit unlawful acts. Freedom of speech does not
comprehend the right to speak on any subject at any time."



#  334



 Apart from a total prohibition and ban on certain topics offensive to society
and orderly government, freedom of speech in other matters may be
circumscribed by time, place and circumstances. What is permissible at one
place may not be appropriate at another. What is considered apposite to one
time may not be so to a different time or period. A statement may be allowed
in the context of a particular set of circumstances, but may be considered
undesirable in different circumstances. This order was made by the Competent
Authority under Regulation 14(3) of the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions
and Powers) Regulations No. 5 of 1983. This provision enables the Competent
Authority to make the order he has made, if he-



"is of opinion that there is or has been or is likely to be in any newspaper,
publication of matter which is, in his opinion, calculated to be prejudicial
to the interests of national security or the preservation of public order or
the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the life of the
community or matter inciting or encouraging persons to mutiny, riot or civil
commotion ........"



The Deputy Solicitor-General also submitted that, while a state of Emergency
had been declared as early as 18th May, no action was taken to restrict
publication of news until 1st July 1983. Just prior to this date, the
terrorist group, Tamil Eelam Liberation Front, had called a Hartal and this
led to large-scale violence in "I the North resulting in serious loss and
damage to property. We were also told that an order similar to this has been
made against one other Tamil newspaper. A censorship however had been' imposed
on all other newspapers. Subsequent to the order made against the petitioners,
in late July there had been an outbreak of Communal violence, which is
unprecedented in recent history and these subsequent events seem to confirm
the wisdom of the timely action taken by the Competent Authority.



In dealing with an Emergency situation, courts have always­ been prepared to
give the Executive sufficient leeway in making decisions affecting the safety
of the people and the security of the country. The decisions have to be made
rapidly and in the light of information then available and under the
constraint of the



**  335**

**  **

available resources. While some of the Emergency Regulations permit the
authorities to apply a system of graduated pressure and restrictions on an
errant newspaper, I am not in agreement with Mr. Nadesan when he says that
these provisions preclude the Competent Authority from directly resorting to
the provisions of Regulation 14(3) in a fit case. In the result, I hold that
the fundamental rights of the 1st to 6th petitioners have not been violated by
any executive or administrative action.



I would therefore dismiss all three petitions without costs.



**RATWATTE, J.** I agree



SOZA, J.



New Era Publication Ltd., who is the 7th petitioner in application No. 47/83
filed on 22nd July, 1983, and in No. 53/83 filed on 25th August, 1983 and the
5th petitioner in application No. 61/83 filed on 13th October, 1983, is a duly
registered private limited liability guarantee company without a share capital
engaged in the publication in the English language of the newspaper "Saturday
Review". The 1st to 6th petitioners in cases Nos. 47/83 and 53/83 along with
one Kandiah Kandasamy who was unable to join as a petitioner as he was away
from Sri Lanka are the sole shareholders and sole directors of the 7th
petitioner-company. Only the 1st, 3rd, and 5th and 6th petitioners in cases
Nos. 47/83 and 53/83 were able to join as the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th
petitioners respectively in case No. 61/83 owing to the absence of the others
from the Island. The 1st to 6th petitioners, among whom are the 1st to 4th
petitioners in case No. 61/83, are citizens of Sri Lanka. They are persons of
considerable wealth and men of high standing in public life. They are now
engaged in social service and do not belong to any political party. The income
and property of the company were applied solely towards the objects of the
Company and no dividends, bonuses or profits were payable to its members.



The " Saturday Review " was first published in January, 1982, by a company
called Kalai Nilayam Ltd. The objects of the paper



#  336



were to disseminate news and views and information on men and matters, to
stand up for human rights and freedom, to provide a forum for free comment and
expression of opinion by members of the public, to reflect the ethos and life
of the people around Jaffna, to enlighten non-Tamils on Tamil culture and
establish a two-way communication between all peoples and nationalities and
break down the barriers of prejudice and emotional antipathies which had built
up over the years, to foster the humanities and to serve as a link between Sri
Lankans here and abroad. The paper was independent and non-partisan - see
brochure P1.



On 9th August, 1983, the New Era Publications Ltd. whose objects accorded with
those of Kalai Nilayam Ltd. became the owners of the "Saturday Review", and
from 2nd October 1982, were responsible for its continued publication. The new
owners employed the necessary staff and continued with the earlier arrangement
to have the paper printed at St. Joseph's Catholic Press, Jaffna, on a purely
commercial basis. It may be noted that S. Sivanayagam who is the 2nd
petitioner in Cases No. 47/83 and No. 53/82 is according to P4 the editor of
the "Saturday Review" and in receipt of a monthly salary of Rs. 3,500/-.



            Don John Francis Liyanage, Secretary to the Ministry of State appointed as Competent Authority under the Emergency Regulations, Rudra Raiasingham, Inspector-General of Police and the Attorney-General are the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents respectively in all three applications. All three applications raise similar questions of law and fact but there are differences of which notice would be required. It was agreed that all three applications could be dealt with in one judgment.



Application No. 47/83.



I will take Application No. 47/83 first. The grievance here that on 1st July,
1983 the 1st respondent acting under the powers vested in him by Regulation 14
of the Emergency



#  337

**  **

(Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations promulgated on 18th June,
1983, made order P2-



(a) that no person shall print, publish or distribute or in any way be
concerned in the printing, publication or distribution of the " Saturday
Review " for a period of one month from the date of the order, and



(b) that the printing press in which the said newspaper was printed shall for
a period of one month from the date of the order not be used for any purpose
whatsoever;



(c) that the Inspector-General of Police is authorised to take such steps
(including the taking possession of the printing press or of any part of such
printing press or premises) as appear to him to be necesary for ensuring
compliance with the order.



The second respondent Inspector-General of Police thereupon sealed the office
of the " Saturday Review " where the editorial and other work in connection
with the publication of this newspaper was being done and where the documents
and papers including the books of accounts were kept. The 2nd respondent,
however, took no steps to prevent the commercial printing press in which the "
Saturday Review " was printed from being used for its commercial purposes.



On the expiry of the Emergency Regulations of June, 1983, Emergency
Regulations were promulgated afresh on 18th July, 1983, and in pursuance of
these Emergency Regulations a fresh order P3 dated 18th July, 1983, was made
by the 1st respondent, the Competent Authority, in terms identical with the
order P2. The 2nd respondent took action similar to what he did on the first
occasion and the closure of the " Saturday Review " was thus continued. The
basis on which the first respondent has acted is that he is of opinion that
there has been published and is likely to be published in the "Saturday
Review" matter calculated to be prejudicial to the interests of national
security, the preservation of public order, the maintenance of supplies and
services essential to the life of the community and matter inciting and
encouraging persons to mutiny, riot and civil commotion.



#  338



 The petitioners state that they are entitled to the fundamental rights
embodied in Article 14(1) of the Constitution of Sri Lanka, more particularly
to the fundamental right of freedom of speech and expression including
publication set out in Article 14(1) (a) and to the right of freedom to engage
by themselves or in association with others in any lawful occupation,
profession, trade, business or enterprise set out in Article 14 (1) (g). The
two orders P2 and P3 of 1st July, 1983, and 18th July, 1983, respectively and
the acts of the second respondent and his subordinate police officers violate
these fundamental rights of the petitioners. The two orders are unlawful and a
nullity. They have been made by the 1st respondent-



(a)mala fide and in abuse of the powers conferred by Regulation 14(3) of the
Emergency Regulations and not for a legal purpose but for an ulterior purpose
;



(b) mechanically, perfunctorily, unreasonably and without addressing his mind
to the relevant facts and circumstances as will be seen from the following
considerations :



(i) The impugned Orders are a verbatim reproduction of Regulation 14 (3), the
only changes being the substitution of the conjunctive "and" for every
disjunctive "or" except one, appearing in the Regulation;



(ii) The commercial printing Press at which the "Saturday Review" was printed
was ordered to be closed for one month without any regard to the fact that the
regulations then in force were to lapse on the 18th July and that this Press
was engaged in other commercial printing not deemed to be obnoxious;



(iii) At no time had there been any publication of any matter which
constituted an offence even after the Emergency Regulations came into force
nor was any matter calculated to be prejudicial to the interests of



**  339**



national security or the preservation of public order or maintenance of
supplies and services essential to the life of the community or inciting or
encouraging persons to mutiny, riot or civil commotion ever published;



(ii) Being on his Own admission unaware of the constitution, objects and other
relevant factors pertaining to the 7th petitioner-company and the standing of
its members, and the fact that at no time had the editor or publisher of the
paper been charged with the commission of any offence and that no complaint
had been made against them to the Press Council barring one for which there
was an adequate defence and not having had the time to verify them, the 1st
respondent was not possessed of all the information material to a fair
assessment of the exact situation concerning the paper to enable him to form
the opinion he says he formed;



(v) There was no material at all to justify making the orders;



(vi) The Emergency was declared on 18th May, 1983, and there were Emergency
Regulations in force from that date prescribing stringent punishments for
contraventions, yet no charge was preferred or prosecution launched in respect
of any alleged transgression by the "Saturday Review" nor even was the
unlikelihood of the petitioners or the Press itself courting the risk of
incurring the dire penalties and sanctions prescribed for contraventions,
taken into account.



(c) with the object of masking the true purpose which was to prevent the
publication of news and views which may lend to criticism of aspects of
Government policy despite the fact that such criticism as had been published
were made bone fide in respect of public affairs.



#  340



 As a result of the closing down of the "Saturday Review" the petitioners have
suffered financially - loss of revenue from advertisements and payments to
staff. The petitioners seek a declaration that the said orders of the 1st
respondent are null and void and/or contravene the Constitution and the issue
of a direction to the 2nd respondent to hand back the office together with the
equipment, papers, documents and books of account and an award of Rs. 23070/-
per month as compensation from 1st July, 1983, in favour of the 7th
petitioner.



Although every front page of the " Saturday Review " carries the legend, " The
only regional newspaper in Sri Lanka " the circulation of the paper is not
confined to the North of Sri Lanka. It is read in Colombo also and even in the
deep South and beyond our shores. The paper, however, will appeal only to the
English educated elite who constitute only a very small proportion of the
people. Its object is to bring matters of public interest to the notice of the
President and the authorities and to mould public opinion among a responsible
readership not likely to resort to violence.



The 1st respondent admits he made the orders P2 and P3 but denies he made them
mala fide or for an ulterior purpose or that he acted unreasonably or failed
to give his mind to the facts and circumstances relating to the publication of
the " Saturday Review " before making the orders in question. He denies too
that his object was merely to stifle criticism of Government policy. He had on
the other hand examined the contents of the " Saturday Reviews " from 30th
January, 1982 to 25th June 1982, and he was satisfied :



(a) That it was a political newspaper advocating the cause of dividing the
country and the establishment of a State known as Eelam for the Tamils in the
North and East of the country,



(b) That the tenor of the articles and news items was blatantly communalistic
and the alleged grievances and injustices committed against the Tamils were
constantly being



#  341

**  **

highlighted and the editorial policy was in the context of the circumstances
prevailing capable of arousing communal feelings among the Tamils, and
encouraging conduct which would be prejudicial to the maintenance of public
order and security, and imperilling the safety of the country and its
citizens,



(c) That many of the articles and items published in the newspapers suggested
that its publishers eschewed democratic processes, negotiations and campaigns
based on non-violence as a means of resolving the problems facing the Tamils
of Sri Lanka and that they openly encouraged the adoption of force and
terrorism by giving prominent publicity to and eulogising the acts of
terrorist movements operating in the North, particularly those of the Tamil
Eelam Liberation Front ;





(d) The conduct of the law enforcement agencies and military authorities and
excesses alleged to have been committed by them were given prominent coverage
sometimes in grossly exaggerated form in an endeavour to arouse communal
passions among the people.



Immediately prior to the making of order P2, a Hartal sponsored by the Tamil
Eelam Liberation Front led to large-scale violence in the North resulting in
serious loss and damage to property. The sealing of the "Saturday Review" and
another paper in Jaffna was necessary to prevent the further escalation of
violence. In fact, the recent communal disturbances were motivated, inter
alia, by resentment of the population in the Sinhalese areas to the separatist
tendencies in the North which the " Saturday Review" was openly espousing. The
1st respondent has annexed as IR1 to IR14 random extracts of articles and news
items which appeared in the "Saturday Review"



The main questions arise for our determination :



(1) Is this Petition (No. 47/83) maintainable?



(2) If this question is answered in the affirmative, do the facts justify the
making of the orders P2 and P3 and the action taken in pursuance of them ?



#  342



**Maintainability**



The 1st to the 6th petitioners are seeking in this application to vindicate
their own fundamental rights guaranteed to them under Articles 14(1) (a) and
14(1) (g) of the Constitution, and not of the 7th petitioner-company. The 1st
to 6th petitioners have merely utilised the institution of a company, here the
7th petitioner, to exercise their fundamental right of freedom of speech and
expression including publication (Article 14(l) (a)) and the fundamental right
of freedom to engage with one another in the newspaper business (Article 14(1)
(g)). The 1st to 6th petitioners are citizens of Sri Lanka and they did not
intend to forego their fundamental rights when they decided to opera e through
the institutional device of a company.



The argument advanced on behalf of the petitioners goes thus:



In law a company is a fictitious person and an entity different to its
shareholders. But this does not mean that the 1st to 6th petitioners cannot
utilise it as an institutional device to exercise their fundamental rights. In
a matter of fundamental rights the Courts should adopt a liberal attitude and
approach the question from the angle of the factual relationship between the
company and its shareholders. The factual approach is jurisprudentially
warranted. Salmond supports this approach in his work on Jurisprudence (7th
Edition, 1924).



Although the 7th petitioner-company owns the " Saturday Review " in fact it
owns the paper as a trustee for or otherwise on behalf of actual human beings,
namely, the shareholders who are citizens of Sri Lanka.



In the way of the petitioners, however, are the two judgments of Sharvananda,
J. in the applications filed in the Supreme Court by _Dr. S. N. A. Fernando
and Others against D. J. F D. Liyanage and Others_ (18) and S.C. Application
No. 134/82 (17) In the first proceeding, Dr. S. N. A. Fernando and the other



**  343**

**  **

shareholders of Janatha Finance and Investments Ltd., a duly incorporated
company which was the 6th petitioner in the case, complained of infringement
of the fundamental right of freedom of speech and expression including
publication guaranteed under Articles 14(1) (a) and of the fundamental right
of freedom to engage in any lawful occupation, profession or trade by himself
or in association with others guaranteed by Article 14(1) (g) of the
Constitution. In the second application the same petitioners sought a review
of the judgment in the first application on the grounds that it had been made
per incuriam and that their fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 12(1),
12(2), 13(2), 13(5), 14(1) (a), 14(1) (b) and 14(1)(c) of the Constitution had
been infringed.



The facts relevant to the question of maintainability of the applications were
that the 6th petitioner, Janatha Finance and Investments Ltd., was the owner
of the business and of the press which had been sealed in pursuance of orders
made under Regulation 14(7) of the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions &
Powers) Regulations No. 2/82. The other petitioners were shareholders of the
6th Petitioner-company.



In case No. 116/82 Sharvananda J. pointed out that in Chapter 3 dealing with
Fundamental Rights our Constitution draws a distinction between persons and
citizens. He pointed out that Articles 10 to 13 deal with fundamental rights
guaranteed to all persons while Article 14 enumerates fundamental rights
guaranteed to citizens. Perhaps a slight correction is necessary here because
Article 12 (2) deals with fundamental rights guaranteed to citizens. But there
is no gainsaying that the inference is clear that a distinction is drawn
between persons and citizens in the provisions of Chapter 3 of our
Constitution. Although a corporate body occupies an important place in the
economic life of society and is a legal person, it is not a citizen and cannot
claim the fundamental rights guaranteed in Article 14 of our Constitution. A
similar view has been taken by the Supreme Court of India interpreting Article
19 of the Indian Constitution which, with certain differences, corresponds to
our Article 14 - see the cases of _State of Gujerat v. Shri Ambica Mills,_
(10), _Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co. Ltd. v. State of Bihar_ (generally
referred to as the



#  344



_Telco_ case) (7) _R. C. Cooper v. Union of India_ (generally referred to as
the _Bank Nationalisation Case_ (4) and _Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. v. Union
of India _(1).



I might add that even in America, the corporation is not treated as a citizen
- see American Jurisprudence, Vol. 13, paragraph 13, p. 168. This proposition
then admits of no dispute. In fact, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners
readily conceded that a corporation is in law a separate entity and although
it is a legal person it is not a citizen and cannot, therefore avail itself of
the fundamental rights constitutionally guaranteed by Article 14.



Sharvananda, J. proceeds (in case No. 116/82) to point out that in accordance
with the provisions of Articles 17 and 126 of our Constitution the Court will
grant relief only if the infringement is by executive or administrative action
and the complainant is directly affected by the infringement. A complainant
cannot seek relief because someone else in whom he is interested is affected
by the act complained of. Sharvananda J. formulated the problem before him as
follows in the case (supra) :



"An answer to the question whether the 1st to the 5th petitioners qua
shareholders of the 6th petitioner-company, can maintain the application
depends on a proper appreciation of the relationship in law of shareholders to
the company"



Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners contended that this formulation is
wrong. The Court should have considered the relationship _in fact_ (and not in
law) of the shareholders to the company. When fundamental rights are concerned
the Court should adopt a liberal attitude and approach the question not from
the angle of the law, but from the angle of the facts. In fact the company is
the agent or trustee of the shareholders. The terms 'agent' and 'trustee' are
used in a popular but jurisprudential sense. There is warrant for such use in
the high authority of the great jurist John Salmond and of successive editors
of his work on Jurisprudence.



#  345

**  **

In the seventh edition (1924) which was the last edition, Salmond himself
edited, he had this to say on corporate personality at page 343 :



" A corporation, having neither soul nor body, cannot act save through the
agency of some representative in the world of real men. For the same reason it
can have no interests, and therefore no rights, save those which are
attributed to it as a trustee for or otherwise on behalf of actual human
beings ".



It is apposite at this stage to consider the validity of the contention of
learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners. I will first take the statement of
Salmond that a company can have no interests and, therefore, no rights save
those which are attributed to it as a trustee for or otherwise on behalf of
actual human beings. To begin with, Salmond himself was not without misgivings
about the accuracy of his statement and appended the following footnote to it
by way of qualification :



" The relation between a corporation and its beneficiaries may or may not
amount to a _trust_ in the proper sense of the term. A share in a company is
not the beneficial ownership of a certain proportion of the company's
property, but a benefit of a contract made by the shareholder with the
company, under which he is entitled to be paid a share of the profits made by
the company, and of the surplus assets on its dissolution. A share is a chose
in action - an obligation between the company and the shareholder. _Colonial
Bank v. Whinney,_ 11 A. C. 426" (11).



Salmond's view that a corporation can have no interests, and, therefore, no
rights, save those which are attributed to it as a trustee for or otherwise on
behalf of actual human -beings has not, as far as I have been able to gather,
been adopted by any other writer on jurisprudence. In fact, Paton points out
to some confusion is Salmond's approach to the nature of legal personality.
Salmond said:



" So far as legal theory is concerned, a person is any being whom the law
regards as capable of rights and duties. Any



#  346



being that is so capable is a person, whether a human being or not, and no
being that is not so capable is a person, even though he be a man".
(Jurisprudence, 12th Ed. p. 299).



And yet a little later Salmond said :



"A legal person is any subject matter other than a human being to which the
law attributes personality. This extension, for good and sufficient reasons,
of the conception of personality beyond the class of human beings is one of
the most noteworthy feats of the legal imagination ......" ibid. p. 305.



Paton commenting on these two passages says as follows:



"Here are the seeds of confusion. In one passage _person_ refers to anything
recognized by the law as capable of bearing rights and duties whether human or
not, in the other human beings are _persons_ with _personality_ but non­-human
beings may be _legal persons_ ". (Paton on Jurisprudence, (1972) 4th Ed. pp.
391-392).



On the basis of Salmond's view, I would like to point out that a trustee-
Company is a fictitious owner having neither soul nor body. But the fact is
that the so-called trustee's ownership of the company is far from fictitious.
It is real apart from being legal. It exists like human beings, plants,
rivers, books, ideas, rules - see Wolff _"On the Nature of Legal Persons" -_
54 Law Quarterly Review, pp. 494-505.



Even if in a popular sense the company can be said to carry on business for
and on behalf of its shareholders, we must not overlook the fact that the
corporate capacity for action depends on the majority voting strength of the
directors and, may be ultimately, of the shareholders. But what of the
corporate capacity of action which is disapproved by the minority
shareholders? Their liberty cannot involve a right to paralyse that common
action. Further, what if the shareholders of the company are themselves
companies? We will then have fictitious trustee for fictitious beneficiaries
or a fictitious agent acting for a number of fictitious shareholders. The use
of the popular notion of agency or trusteeship will not help. M. Hauriou, the
French Jurist, was prepared to concede to corporate



**  347**

**  **

institutions a personality in fact as well as in law - see the discussion of
Hauriou's approach to the nature of corporate personality by Hallis in his
book " The Corporate Personality," p. 223. Hallis himself put his own view
thus at page 240 :



The concept of corporate personality expresses a juristic reality, that is, a
reality from the juristic point of view, nothing more and nothing less. While
it is not simply descriptive of an observable fact, its reality is,
nevertheless, rooted to the world of empirical fact ".



On this question, we were referred by the learned Deputy Solicitor-General to
the decision of the Court of Appeal in England in the case of _Tunstall v.
Steigmann_ (12). This case involved the application of Sections 24(1) and
30(1) (g) of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954. Under Section 24(1) of the Act,
a tenant of premises applied for a renewal of his tenancy at the termination
of his tenancy. The landlord could resist this application under Section 30(1)
(g) if he intended to occupy the building for the purposes of a business
carried on by him. In the case however, there was a problem about the identity
of the landlord. The landlord at the time was a company in which a Mrs.
Steigmann held all the shares save two held by her nominees. The business was
at one time Mrs. Steigmann's and she assigned it to the company for some
reason which she considered to be an advantage to her. In this case, Ormerod
L. J. explained the position thus :



"It may be that in practice the landlord will continue to carry on the
business as it has been carried on in the past when she was undoubtedly the
proprietor of it. It may be that she will derive a profit or otherwise from
the business as she has done in the past. But the fact remains that she has
disposed of her business to a limited company. It is the limited company that
will carry on the business in the future, and, if she acts as the manager of
the business, it is for and on behalf of the limited company. In my judgment
the fact that she holds virtually the whole of the shares in the limited
company and has complete control of its affairs makes no difference to this
proposition... . She cannot say



#  348



that in a case of this kind she is entitled to take the benefit of any
advantages that the formation of a company gave to her, without at the same
time accepting the liabilities arising therefrom ".



In the same case Willmer L.J. said as follows at page 423:



"Here the landlord and her company are entirely separate entities. This is no
matter of form; it is a _matter of substance and reality._ Each can sue and be
sued in its own right; indeed, there is nothing to prevent the one from suing
the other. Even the holder of one hundred per cent of the shares in a company
does not by such holding become so identified with the company that he or she
can be said to carry on the business of the company.



This clearly appears from _Gramaphone & Typewriter, Ltd. v. Stanley_" (13). As
was pointed out by Fletcher Moulton, L.J. control of a company by a corporator
is wholly different _in fact_ and law from carrying on the business himself
... This being so, I do not see how it is possible for the landlord in the
present case to assert that she intends to occupy the holding for the purpose
of a business to be carried on by her. Her intention, as has been made plain,
is that the company which she controls shall carry on its business on the
holding ". (emphasis mine)



Senior Counsel for the petitioners submitted that on incorporation the
liability of the shareholders became limited. They were not liable for any
breach of contract of the company; they could not be sued for the debts of the
company, nor were they liable to pay any taxes in respect of profits made by
the company. What Ormerod L.J. said in _Tunstall's_ case (supra) becomes very
apposite. The 1st to 6th petitioners cannot then say they are entitled to take
the benefit of any advantages that the formation of the company gave them
without at the same, time accepting the liabilities arising therefrom. Their
intention was that the company should exercise its own right of speech and its
own right to engage in the newspaper business. But our Constitution has not
elevated these rights of companies to the class of fundamental rights. Only
citizens enjoy these rights as fundamental rights. It is clear that unless we
treat corporate personality as a real thing and apply the fact of that reality
as a basic principle, we will find ourselves in an illogical and chaotic
muddle.



#  349

**  **

It is only in exceptional and special circumstances that the Court will lift
the veil of corporate personality. The cases reveal no consistent principle as
to when the Courts will lift the veil beyond a refusal to apply the logic of
the principle of corporate personality where it is too flagrantly opposed to
justice, convenience or the interests of the revenue. But as Wolff has said:



"The persons veiled by corporate personality are, as a rule, not allowed to
pierce the veil themselves ". (ibid. p. 520)



I would add that this statement accords with logic and sound sense.



The fact that we are dealing with a question of fundamental rights will make
no difference. The Court no doubt will be liberal in favour of the citizen
when called upon to uphold and protect fundamental rights guaranteed to him by
our Constitution. Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners pointed out that
the fundamental rights set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
(December 10, 1948) as a common standard of achievement for all people and all
nations have largely influenced the enunciation of fundamental rights in our
Constitution. Article 19 of the Declaration states, inter alia, that "everyone
has the right to freedom of opinion and expression ", and Article 22 states
"everyone shall have the right of freedom of association with others,
including the right to form and join trade unions for the protection of his
interests." To give effect to the Declaration the United Nations adopted two
International Covenants: the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
These two Covenants are completed by an Optional Protocol to enable complaints
to be made by persons whose rights have been violated. The two Covenants and
Protocol came into force in 1976. Sri Lanka has signed the Declaration and the
two Covenants but not the Protocol. The Court will respect the Declaration and
the Covenants but their legal relevance here is only in the field of
interpretation. So far as our municipal law goes, they have not the force of
law. England, for example, is a signatory to the European Convention on



# 350



Human Rights but the Court of Appeal has held that the Convention did not have
the force of law in England - see the cases of _R. v. Chief Immigration
Officer, Heathrow Airport, Ex parte Bibi_ (14) and _R. v. Secretary for the
Home Department, Ex. parte Fernandes_ (15).



So much of the Declaration and the two Covenants as have been written into our
Constitution alone have the force of law in Sri Lanka. So far as the
Declaration is concerned Dennis Lloyd in his " The Idea of Law " (1979 revised
reprint) p. 181, described it as "little more than a resounding statement of
principle, useful, perhaps, in influencing public opinion, but not likely to
have than a marginal effect so far as individual grievances are concerned."



The fundamental rights declared and recognised in our Constitution and set out
in Chapter 3 must, no doubt, evoke he special concern of this Court. Yet even
fundamental rights fall under the panoply of legal rights. Fundamental rights
form an integral part of the principles of law which the Court enforces- see
the case of _Firma Neld v. European Communities Commission_ (16) (extract
reproduced in Lloyd on Jurisprudence (1979) 4th ed. pp. 161 to 164). The test
of a legal right is a simple one - is the right recognised and protected by
the legal system itself? (Paton - ibid p. 284). There is nothing special in
the nature of fundamental rights to justify a departure from the usual
approach which the Court would adopt in enforcing a legal right. In fact, it
should be observed that Article 16 (1) of our Constitution makes all existing
written law and unwritten law valid notwithstanding any inconsistancy with
Articles 10 to 15 and this includes even fundamental rights.



Several Indian cases were cited to us, but in applying them we must remember
that the basic norm of our Constitution is that Sovereignty is in the People
and is inalienable. Sovereignty includes the powers of Government, fundamental
rights and the franchise. Most of the powers of Government of the Sovereign
People are exercised by Their delegates: the President and a Parliament. The
judicial power of the People is exercised by



#  351

**  **

Parliament through Courts, Tribunals and Institutions but Parliament is
empowered to exercise judicial power directly in matters relating to its own
privileges, immunities and powers and those of its members. Fundamental rights
constitute an integral part of the Sovereignty of the people. Those
fundamental rights which are declared and recognized by the Constitution must
be secured and advanced by all organs of government and may not be abridged,
restricted or denied except in the manner and to the extent provided in the
Constitution.



Our Constitution of 1978 was enacted by utilising the legal framework for
amendment provided in the first Republican Constitution of 1972. The first
Republican Constitution was a truly autochthonous Constitution rooted entirely
in Sri Lanka's own native soil. In the enactment of the Constitution, the
legal and constitutional link with the past was completely severed though
Westminister traditions are still being drawn on as background material. The
1972 Constitution effected a break in legal continuity, a legal revolution as
it has been called. This Constitution was structured on the basic norm of the
Sovereignty of the people.



The Indian Constitution does not postulate any such principles of Sovereignty
and distribution of power as does our Constitution of 1978\. There is thus a
fundamental difference in the Constitutional edifice of the Constitutions of
the two countries and this must be borne in mind when applying interpretations
of the Indian constitutional provisions. Further, in formulation, the
fundamental rights recognised in Article 19 of the Indian Constitution are not
cast in terms exactly identical with those spelt out in our Article 14 which
corresponds to it. Add to this the fact that the Indian Constitution
recognizes fundamental rights to property which our Constitution does not and
then it will be realised that there is every need to be circumspect in
adopting the interpretations found in the Indian decisions.



Of the Indian cases cited I will take first the case of _State Trading
Corporation of India Ltd. v. The Commercial Tax Officer_



#  352



_and Others_ (6). The case first came up on a reference before the Supreme
Court for determination of two preliminary point :



(1) Whether the State Trading Corporation is a citizen within the meaning of
Article 19 and could ask for the enforcement of fundamental rights ;



(2) Whether the State Trading Corporation is, notwithstanding the formality of
incorporation, in substance a department or organ of the Government of India
and hence whether it could claim to enforce fundamental rights.



The first question was answered by Sinha, C.J. who delivered the judgment of
the majority in the negative. It is not necessary to discuss the reasons he
gave because so far as the instant case is concerned, the parties concede that
a corporation is not a citizen and is not, therefore, endowed with the
fundamental rights set out in Article 14 which corresponds to Article 19 of
the Indian Constitution. In view of his answer to the first question, Sinha,
C.J. did not proceed to consider the second question, Hidayatullah, J.
answered both questions against the State Trading Corporation, but Das Gupta
J. answered both questions in favour. Shah J. answered the first question and
the first part of the second question in the negative. The second part of
their second question he answered as follows :



"Even if the State Trading Corporation be regarded as department or organ of
the Government of India, it will, if it be a citizen, be competent to enforce
fundamental rights." On the basis of the majority decision the case was sent
back to be heard on the merits.



The decision on the second hearing is reported as _Tata Engineering &
Locomotive Co. Ltd. v. State of Bihar _(referred to generally as the _Telco_
case) (7). There were three petitions. The first was that of Tata Engineering
& Locomotive Co. Ltd., the second of Automobile Products of India Ltd., and
the third was that of the State Trading Corporation of India Ltd. The
petitioners'



#  353

**  **

grievance was that a Sales Tax was being levied against them in respect of
transactions protected by Article 286 (1) (a) which grants immunity from Sales
Taxes in respect of the sale or purchase of goods outside the State. This, it
was alleged, constituted a breach of their fundamental right under Article 31
(1). The majority of the shareholders of the second petitioner were citizens
of India and one of them was impleaded as a petitioner. The shareholders of
the third petitioner were the President of India and two Additional
Secretaries, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, one of whom joined the
petition. It was argued on behalf of the petitioners that, though the Company
or the Corporation may not be an Indian citizen, in substance it is no more
than an instrument or agent appointed by its Indian shareholders. Two
preliminary objections were raised one of them being that the principle that
the State Trading Corporation is not a citizen necessarily means that the
fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 19 cannot be claimed by such a
corporation. The petitioners, however, contended that when fundamental rights
are involved the Court should disregard the doctrinaire approach which
recognises the existence of companies as separate juristic or legal persons
and should not hesitate to look at the substance of the matter. Where the
shareholders of the petitioning Companies are Indian citizens, the Court
should look at the substance of the matter by lifting the veil of corporate
personality and " give the shareholders the right to challenge that the
contravention of their fundamental rights should be prevented ".
Gajendragadkar C.J. observed that while it is true that the Court as the
guardian of the fundamental rights of the citizens will always attempt to
safeguard their fundamental rights, yet if the Court upholds the petitions
before it, " it would really mean that what the corporations or the companies
cannot achieve directly, can be achieved by them indirectly by relying upon
the doctrine of lifting the veil. If the corporations and companies are not
citizens, it means that the Constitution intended that they should not get the
benefit of Art. 19 ". (p. 48).



A second argument was also advanced on behalf of the Petitioners. Under
paragraph (c) of Article 19 (1) citizens were



#  354



guaranteed the right " to form associations or unions" while paragraph (g)
guaranteed the right " to practise any profession, or to carry on any
occupation, trade or business ". It was argued that the distinction between
the two rights enables the Court to lift the veil because by looking at the
substance of the matter the Court would really be giving effect to two
fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 19 (1). Article 19 (1) (c) enables
the citizens to choose their instruments or agents to carry on the business
which it is their fundamental right to tarry on. The Court rejected this
argument because the fundamental right to form an association cannot in this
manner be coupled with the fundamental right to carry on any trade or
business. The respective rights cannot be combined but must be asserted each
in its own way and within its own limits ". (p. 48). As soon as citizens form
a company, the right guaranteed to them by Article 19 (1) (c) has been
exercised and no restraint has been placed on that right and no infringement
of that right is made. Once a company or a corporation is formed, the business
which is carried on by the said company or corporation is the business of the
company or corporation and is not the business  of the citizens who get the
company or corporation formed or incorporated; and the rights of the
incorporated body must be judged on that' footing and cannot be judged on the
assumption that they are the rights attributable to the business of individual
citizens ". (p. 48). The Court then upheld the preliminary objection and the
writ petitions were dismissed as being incompetent.



Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners has submitted that, this decision
is correct because Sales Tax or Income Tax is imposed by law on transactions
of the Company. The shareholders are not called upon to pay these taxes. But
this was not the ground on which the petitions were dismissed. The case never
got that far because the suit was dismissed on a preliminary objection. The
Court held that the shareholders cannot get behind the fact that the company
is not a citizen and not endowed with fundamental rights. Although dividends
of the shareholders are affected by erroneous taxation, it affects them only
indirectly and will not amount to an infringement of their fundamental rights.



#  355

**  **

In our Constitution, too, the freedom of association (Article 14(1)(c) is
distinct from the freedom to engage in business alone or in association with
others (Article 14(1)(g)). The terminology is not identical with that in the
Indian formulation. Our right extends to the carrying on of business in
association with others. But it is obvious that a shareholder of a company
cannot be said to be carrying on business in association with his own company
unless he is in partnership with it. The difference in language will not
affect the applicability of the principles enunciated in the Indian decision
to the case before us.



I will now discuss the case of _R. C. Cooper v. Union of India_ (commonly
referred to as the Bank Nationalisation Case (4)). In this case, R. C. Cooper,
an Indian citizen, was the first petitioner. He held shares in four banks and
in addition deposit and current accounts in all of them. Further, he was a
member of the Board of Directors in one of the banks. Cooper filed two
petitions and one T. M. Gurubaxani filed two others. Seven Indian States
joined as interveners. The Union of India was named as respondent in all the
petitions. New legislation, (the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer
of Undertakings) Ordinance No. 8 of 1969 and the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act No. 22 of 1969) had been
enacted. The effect of the legislation was to transfer the undertaking of each
named bank and to vest it in the corresponding new bank controlled by the
Central Government and its entire capital was vested in and allotted to the
Central Government. Fourteen banks including the four with which Cooper was
concerned were to be nationalised in this way. Payment of compensation was
provided for.



The petitioner (Cooper) claimed that by the Act and Ordinance the rights
guaranteed to him under Articles 14, 19 and 31 of the Constitution were
impaired. He complained that the acquisition was not for a public purpose and
the Act and the Ordinance were invalid because the subject-matter of the Act
and Ordinance was partially at least within the State List and because they
vest the undertaking of the named banks in new corporations without a Public
purpose. Further, there were no settled principles for the payment of
compensation. He also complained, inter alia, that in



**  356**

**  **

consequence of the hostile discrimination practised by the State the value of
his investment in the shares was substantially reduced, his right to receive
dividends had ceased, and he had suffered great financial loss. He was
deprived of his rights as a shareholder to carry on business through the
agency of the Company. In respect of the deposits, the obligations of the
corresponding new banks not of his choice were being substituted without his
consent.



Article 14 of the Indian Constitution stipulates that the State shall not deny
any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within
the territory of India. Article 19 (1) guarantees to all citizens the right to
acquire, hold and dispose of property and to practise any profession or to
carry on any occupation, trade or business while Article 31 (2) provided that
no property shall be compulsorily acquired save for a public purpose and save
by the authority of a law.



By way of defence the contention put forward on behalf of the Union of India
was that the petition was not maintainable because the undertaking that had
been taken over was not an undertaking belonging to Cooper. No fundamental
rights of the petitioner were directly impaired.



Shah J. who delivered the majority judgment enunciated the principles
applicable thus:



"The shareholder of a Company, it is true, is not the owner of its assets; he
has merely a right to participate in the profits of the Company subject to the
contract contained in the Articles of Association. But on that account the
petitions will not fail. A measure executive or legislative may impair the
rights of the Company alone, and not of its shareholders; it may impair the
rights of the shareholders as well as of the Company. Jurisdiction of the
Court to grant relief cannot be denied, when by State action the rights of the
individual shareholder are impaired, if that action impairs the rights of the
Company as well. The test in determining whether the shareholder's right is
impaired is



#  357

**  **

not formal; it is essentially qualitative; if the State action impairs the
right of the shareholders as well as of the Company, the Court will not,
concentrating merely upon the technical operation of the action, deny itself
jurisdiction to grant relief ". (1970) A.I.R. Vol. 57 p. 585)



A single act may be violative of the rights of the shareholder, but not of the
Company; or it may be violative of the rights of the Company, but not of the
shareholder, or it may be violative of the rights of both the shareholder and
the Company. In this connection, three principles must be emphatically noted
as applicable:



(1)It is the violation of the shareholder's fundamental right that must be
established regardless of whether the Company is also affected or not. It must
be a violation separate and distinct from the violation suffered by the
Company ;



(2) The act in question must be directly violative of the shareholder's
fundamental right ;



(3)  Violation of property rights does not amount to a violation of a
fundamental right in Sri Lanka.



It is not without interest that in this case Ray J. wrote a dissenting
judgment and dismissed the petitions. In regard to Shah J's judgment,
Sharvananda J. who points out very appropriately that although Cooper claimed
relief on the ground that his own fundamental rights had been violated, and
Shah J. held he had locus standi to maintain his petition, the ultimate
finding of the Court was that the Bank's fundamental rights had been violated
under Articles 14, 19 and 31. This finding had been reached without any
discussion respecting the validity of Cooper's claim that his fundamental
rights under Articles 14 and 19 (1) (g) had been impaired.



Shah J. appears to have treated the Nationalisation Act and Ordinance as
having had an adverse impact commercially on the



**  358**

**  **

shareholders' right to property. As Sharvananda J. said in the case of
_Neville Fernando and others v. Liyanage and others_ (17) -the decision does
not support the proposition that when the Company is nationalised, the
shareholder is deprived of his right to carry on business through the agency
of his Company.



I will turn now to the case of _Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. v. Union of India
_(1). Three petitions were filed in this case and among the petitioners were a
shareholder, a reader, three editors and the company itself. The Import Policy
for newsprint for the year April, 1972, to March, 1973, and some provisions of
the Newsprint Control Order 1962 were impeached as an infringement of the
fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed by Article 19
(1) (a) and the right to equality guaranteed by Article 14 of the Indian
Constitution. Ray J. who delivered the majority judgment in the case said as
follows at page 115 :



"As a result of the _Bank Nationalisation case_ (supra) it follows that the
Court finds out whether the legislative measure directly touches the company
of which the petitioner is a shareholder. A shareholder is entitled to
protection of Article 19. That individual right is not lost by reason of the
fact that he is a shareholder of the company. The _Bank Nationalisation case_
(supra) has established the view that the fundamental rights of shareholders
as citizens are not lost when they associate to form a company. When their
fundamental rights as shareholders are impaired by State action their rights
as shareholders are protected. The reason is that the shareholders' rights are
equally and necessarily affected if the rights of the company are affected.
The rights of the shareholders with regard to Article 19 (1) (a) are projected
and manifested by the newspapers owned and controlled by the shareholders
through the medium of the corporation. In the present case, the individual
rights of freedom of speech and expression of editors, Directors and
shareholders are all exercised



#  359

**  **

through their newspapers through which they speak. The press reaches the
public through the newspapers. The shareholders speak through their editors.
The fact that the companies are the petitioners does not prevent this Court
from giving relief to the shareholders, editors, printers who have asked for
protection of their fundamental rights by reason of the effect of the law and
of the action upon their rights. The locus standi of the shareholder
petitioners is beyond challenge after the ruling of this Court in the Bank
Nationalisation case (supra). The presence of the company is on the same
ruling not a bar to the grant of relief.



The rulings in _Sakal Papers case_ (3), and _Express Newspapers case_ (2) also
support the competence of the petitioners to maintain the proceedings ".



In the first place, the manner in which Ray J. interpreted the decision in the
_Bank Nationalisation_ case does not appear to be justified. In the _Bank
Nationalisation_ case Shah J. considered the decisions in the _State Trading
Corporation case_ and _Telco_ case as not having any bearing on the case
before him and naturally in that view of the matter did not purport to
overrule them. What Shah J. said in the _Bank Nationalisation Case_ is that
where the rights of a company are infringed, it does not necessarily follow
that the shareholders' rights are also infringed. In fact, Shah J. himself
said as follows at page 565 :



"A shareholder, a depositor or a director may not therefore be entitled to
move a petition for infringement of the rights of the Company, unless by the
action impugned by him, his rights are also infringed ".



The interpretation of Ray J. that " shareholders " rights are equally and
necessarily affected if the rights of the company are affected" must be
confined to the particular facts of the case before Court. As they stand, the
words represent too sweeping a generalisation which Shah J. obviously did not
intend. Ray J.



#  360



apparently failed to appreciate that the infringement of a citizen
shareholder's rights and the infringement of a company's rights are two
separate and distinct matters to be evaluated and assessed separately.
Moreover, there was no finding in law or fact by Shah J. on the concept of a
shareholder carrying on business through the medium or agency of a company.



Further, Ray J.'s statement that _Sakal_ and _Express Newspapers_ support the
competence of the petitioners to maintain the proceedings is incorrect. In
these two cases the question of whether a company not being a citizen is
entitled to fundamental rights was not raised and, therefore, those two cases
cannot be treated as authority for such a proposition.



Seervai in his well-known work on the Constitutional Law of India (1975) 2nd
Ed. Vol. 1 pp. 634 to 636 takes the view that Bennett Coleman was wrongly
decided. Learned Senior Counsel disputed the validity of the reasons Seervai
gives for his view. The reasons Seervai gives are anchored to the doctrine of
stare decisis. I am unable to agree that these reasons are irrelevant or
invalid.



In his decision in the case of _Neville Fernando v. Liyanage_ (18) Sharvananda
J. did not accept the correctness of _Bennett Coleman._ On that occasion, I
agreed with Sharvananda J. and even now I do not see any ground on which I
could take a different view. I might add that the petitioners in Application
No. 116/82 made a second application (Application No. 134/82 -S.C. Minute of
9.2.83) inviting the Court to treat the earlier decision as one given per
incuriam. Sharvananda J. then wrote a second judgment discussing the _Bank
Nationalisation case_ in detail. In his second judgment, Sharvananda J.
affirmed his earlier view. In my opinion, both decisions of Sharvananda J. are
correct.



In a case involving fundamental rights, the Court, no doubt, will be liberal
in its interpretation, but this does not mean that it should abandon the legal
approach in favour of a factual approach. Such a course can be fraught with
danger it could result in uncertainty and even confusion.



#  361

**  **

In the first case of _Neville Fernando v. Liyanage_ (18) Sharvananda J. quite
rightly considered the question before him on the basis of the relationship in
law of the shareholders to the company and supported himself will some very
apt dicta from the case of _Saloman v. Saloman & Co. Ltd _ (19) and _Short v.
Treasury Commissioner_ (20), which it is not necessary to reproduce.



I am unable to agree that the 7th petitioner-company is merely an
institutional device functioning as an agent or trustee for the shareholders.
This is not a case where the shareholders' right of publication in association
with others is directly affected. The party directly affected is the company.
The company and its shareholders are in law and even in fact two distinct
entities. The company must be treated like any other independent person with
rights and liabilities appropriate to itself. The objects and designs of the
shareholders in incorporating are irrelevant in discussing what those rights
and liabilities are.



In the instant case, the impugned orders P2 and P3 directly affected the right
of speech and expression and publication of the 7th petitioner-company who, it
must be reiterated, is seeking compensation for the loss sustained by it only
for itself. The impugned orders at most affect the 1st to 6th petitioners
indirectly. Any rights of the 7th petitioner that may be affected are not in
any event fundamental rights recognised and enforceable under the provisions
of our Constitution. Hence, the application (No. 47/83) is not maintainable
for want of competence.



In view of my conclusions on the question of maintainability, it is not
necessary to go into the question of whether the impugned orders P2 and P3 and
the action taken in pursuance of them are justified.



For the reasons I have given, application No. 47/83 must be dismissed. I so
order.



I will now turn to consider application No. 53/83 and No. 61/83 where the
infringements complained of cover a wider ground.



#  362



#### Application No. 53/83 and No. 61/83



            In these two cases the petitioners complain of infringement of their fundamental rights guaranteed to them under Articles 14(1) particularly 14(1) (a), 14(1) (g) and 12(1) and 12(2) of the Constitution. Only citizens are endowed with fundamental rights under Articles 14(1) and 12(2) of the Constitution. In these circumstances what I have already said on the question of competency applies with equal force to the question of maintainability of these two applications also insofar as relief under Articles 14(1) and 12(2) are concerned.



There remains however for consideration the question whether there has been an
infringement of the fundamental right guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the
Constitution. This Article reads as follows :



"All persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equal protection
of the law ". " By equal protection of the law " of course is meant the
protection of equal laws, that is, laws that operate alike on all persons
under like circumstances.



A company is a legal person and hence has locus standi to claim the
fundamental right of equality guaranteed under Article 12(1). By virtue of the
provisions of Article 15(7) the exercise and operation of the fundamental
right declared and recognized by Article 12(1) are subject to such
restrictions as may be prescribed by law (including regulations relating to
public security) in the interests of national security, public order and the
protection of public health or morality, or for the purpose of securing due
recognition and respect for the right and freedoms of others, or of meeting
the just requirements of the general welfare of a democratic society.



The first respondent seeks to Justify his action and in the circumstances of
these cases it is preferable to examine the question whether the first
respondent has established his plea of justification rather than to embark
upon on analysis of Article 12(1) with a view to ascertaining whether there
are grounds for a complaint under that Article.



#  363

**  **

The first respondent placed before this Court random extracts of news and
views that were published in the " Saturday Review ". Learned senior counsel
for the petitioners has very kindly made available to this Court copies of all
the issues of the "Saturday Review" and also copies of all the editorials that
appeared in this paper.



I will first examine the extracts tendered by the 1st respondent:



1R1 : This presents the views of the Nava Lanka Sama Samaja Party that the
actions of the Government have made Eelam a fait accompli but if the
liberation of the Tamil speaking people takes place with a revolutionary
change in the South, then separation would not be necessary. This is
interpreted as meaning that the liberation of the Tamils and revolutionary
change in the South should go hand in hand and then separatism would not be
necessary.



1R3: Bold headlines announce Massachusetts State Legislature support for Eelam
and the Sri Lankan Tamils. The news item opens with the comment . " The Tamil
Eelam lobby in the United States of America scored another triumph this week
".



1R4:On this page of the issue of 18.6.1983 there are two Articles. One is
captioned " Appearances are dangerously deceptive in Sri Lanka " and is by a
Hindu reader from Ooty. It decries the fact that the identity of the Tamils
as a separate ethnic, cultural and linguistic minority and their right to live
with dignity and self­ respect as equal citizens with the Sinhalese is
jeopardised by the Enoch Powells of the Sinhalese ruling clique.



Hinduism has suffered as a result of Buddhism being elevated as the state
religion. Even the famous Muruga at Kataragama has been converted into a
Sinhales deity.



#  364



The second article is on " Cultural Racism in Vavuniya ". It describes
cultural racism as being a recognized technique of oppression. Statues of the
Tamils are demolished, libraries are burnt, temples set on fire, Buddha
statues are erected and cultural museums are built in their homelands.



1R5 : An article by one Ariyadurai speaks of change in the Tamil mood. Ahimsa,
satyagraha and Gandhian style leadership has not moved the hearts of the
Pharaohs. The army stationed in the North has unleashed a campaign of terror,
persecution and intimidation.



1R6 :This is a letter to the editor written by one Samudran from Tokyo. A
caption has been provided for it: " State Terrorism and TULF opportunism ". It
refers to a display of barbarism and savagery by the Army in attacking
Kantharmadam. It accuses the TULF of political impotence.



1R7 : This is the front page of the issue of 11.6.1983. It refers to bomb-
throwing, violence and armed attacks at Trincomalee despite the curfew being
on. Another news item refers to posters coming up in Jaffna calling upon the
people to take up arms.



1R9:From the issue of June 11, 1983, N. Sanmuganathan is reported as having
said that the new law which enables the disposal of bodies without an inquest
amounts to a declaration of war against the Tamils. On the same page there is
a report of 4 Tamils killed 'in racial violence. Another report speaks of the
fact that the Tamil Eelam cause was being canvassed at an international
conference in Paris.



1R10: This publication emphasises the futility of non­violence. Bhagavat Singh
who shot a cruel white Superintendent of Police was called a courageous man by
Gandhi himself.



Another news report describes the death of Sivakumaran was a turning-point in
the Tamil liberation struggle.



#  365

**  **

Navaratnarajan was killed in the Army camp and the body of Sriskandarajah was
brought by Army personnel to the hospital. Both were cases of homicide.



1R11 : (1) Bold headlines - Armed forces attack Gandhiyam farm:



Vavuniya-shops burnt.



(2) Sabaratnam Vadivel a young van driver of Valvettitural Army Camp shot
dead, and an Army truck driven over his body.



1R12: An anonymous Post Card from Sri Kotha address demands that the Tamils
should leave all the nine provinces of Sinhala Sri Lanka soon and go back to
their traditional homeland - Tamil Nadu. A civil war to drive away the Tamil
menace is threatened.



1R13 : Report of support in Australia for Tamil Eelam.



1R14 :  Editorial comment that failure of the Government to solve the Tamil
problem has resulted in a movement of militant youth rooted in the soil of
Jaffna and nourished by material frustration, a feeling of humiliation and
bitterness.



_Issue of 6.2.1982:_ The editorial comment poses a rhetorical question in the
penultimate paragraph:



" Where is the logic in talking of Tigers and bemoaning the spectre of Eelam
when the Government appears not to be concerned about the needs of one section
of its own citizens ? "



At page 3 a staff writer gives a grim account of the Army attack at the Cement
Factory.



#  366



At page 7 a foreign correspondent's views are published. The demand for
separation is the final rung on a ladder of steadily escalating demands. The
"extremist Sinhalas" including those at various levels in the administration,
are unwittingly strengthening the case for Eelam. Too little has been given,
too late.



At page 12 of this issue there appears news of an Eelam Declaration in New
York and the text of the unilaterel declaration.



The foreign correspondent also states:



" A Tamil intellectual in state service (assured of anonymity) told the
REVIEW: " We may finally agree to remain part of Sri Lanka but nothing short
of a separate administration complete with flag and national anthem is going
to satisfy our people". One of the secessionist leaders, interviewed
separately, remarked: " If only 10,000 of our young men can be trained abroad
militarily, we can chase out of the northern and eastern provinces not only
the police but also the army which we consider as an army of occupation.



# "FOREIGN SUPPORT



There have been charges made already in parliament that some Tamil youths are
training abroad. "



Issue of May 21, 1983: Refers to the Army running amok. About 64 houses, 3
mini buses, 9 cars, 3 motorcycles and 36 bicycles were set on fire by the Army
on rampage at Kantharmadam. A 100 strong gang in civils who were trying to set
fire to the Jaffna Co-operative Stores opposite the Jaffna General Hospital
suddenly turned their fury on the hospital itself when they realised that they
were being observed from the House Officers' quarters. They fired wildly in
the air and at the hospital building and in the process a pump operator
attached to the hospital got wounded in the thigh. Both the House Officers'
quarters and the administration block were shot at, while doctors and other
staff scampered for safety.



#  367

**  **

Issue    of January 1, 1983: The editorial says a wrong move on the part of
the Army Commanders and intelligence officers could ignite a fuse that could
leave behind a chain-effect of cumulative damage, and accelerate a historical
process that could change the face of this country's history.



Issue    of May, 7, 1983: Publicity is given to a report in the Times of India
that tension is again mounting in the mainly Tamil Northern parts of Sri Lanka
in the wake of surprise attacks by militant youths who have put the security
forces on the defence. The freedom fighters have launched a new phase in their
struggle for independence for the Tamils from the major Sinhalese community.



Issue    of 25th June, 1983: A front page article with a bold headline reading
" Regional autonomy as an alternative to Tamil Eelam " states -



A draft plan for a form of regional autonomy as an alternative to TAMIL EELAM
is being given the final touches by a 3-man Ministerial team.



 The trio-Fisheries Minister Festus Perera, Trade Minister Lalith
Athulathmudali and Transport Minister M. H. Mohamed - will submit their
proposals to the Cabinet when it meets on the 28th of this month, after
President Jayewardene's return.



 The TULF MP for Vaddukoddai, Dr. Neelan Tiruchelvam, is believed to have been
in constant touch with the 3 Ministers drafting the proposals.



 The regional autonomy move comes against a backdrop of peace feelers being
put out in various quarters. A U.S. based group of Sri Lanka expatriates, both
Sinhalese and Tamils, has formulated a 12-point peace plan (see Page 2) and
TULF Secretary General A. Amirthalingam is



#  368



 reported to have told SUN'S Ranil Weerasinghe that the TULF is ready to go
before the Tamil people and seek its mandate for a 'genuine alternative'.



The concluding portion reads thus:



"Whether the Ministers' draft proposals envisage revamped District Development
Councils with more 'teeth' or are more far-reaching is still not known. A key
issue in any regional autonomy plan is colonisation: the TULF has all along
stressed this. This issue could prove a stumbling block to any negotiated
settlement.



Militant Tamil youths have yet to make known their stand on these peace plans
and regional autonomy moves. So far the only reaction has been from the THAMIL
EELAM LIBERATION ARMY (TELA). This group, believed to be aligned to Kuttimani
and Thangathurai, distributed a 4-page pamphlet on Thursday (23 June)
categorically declaring its opposition to any peace talks which rule out Tamil
Eelam. The TELA pamphlet is also critical of Amirthalingam, who had hush-hush
talks with Kuttimani. Thangathural and Jegan at Welikade Prison about a
fortnight ago ".



It was submitted that the fact that the " Saturday Review" enjoys a
circulation only among a small circle of the English educated elite should
have been taken into consideration in assessing its potential for mischief and
harm. On this it must be remembered that terrorist groups count in their ranks
a sizeable percentage of University educated intelligent young men and women.
This is so specially in Jaffna. They employ very modern sophisticated
techniques which often baffle the law enforcement authorities. It must be
expected that this paper has a circulation among the educated youth bent on
wrecking the establishment. Terrorism thrives on propaganda and publicity and
high morale. The news of acceptance of Eelam by groups in the great capitals
of the world and the reports of successful terrorist activities in



#  369

**  **

the Jaffna district, no doubt, can be regarded as serving as an encouragement
to the terrorist youth.



 I will now take up the submission that the Competent Authority has chosen the
most oppressive line of action when less oppressive action might have served
just as well. The control of publications is dealt with by Regulation 14 of
the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations.



Under Regulation 14 (1), the Competent Authority may take much measures and
give such directions as he may consider necessary for preventing or
restricting the publication of matter which would or might be prejudicial to
the interests of national security or the preservation of public order or the
maintenance of supplies and services essential to the life of the community or
of matter inciting or encouraging persons to mutiny, riot or civil commotion,
and the directions may contain such incidental and supplementary provisions as
appear to the Competent Authority to be necessary or expedient.



The Competent Authority can act in terms of Regulation 14 (1) if he is of the
view that the publication will produce the result contemplated in the
Regulation. He can act even if the publication might produce such a result.
That is, even if he has doubts, he can avoid the risk of such result. He could
impose a precensorship to ensure the deletion of prejudicial matter before
publication. Other newspapers have been subject to censorship and the same
step could have been taken in regard to the " Saturday Review ".



Contravention of a direction given under Regulation 14 (1) is an offence
(Regulation 14 (2) (a) and can be dealt with in two ways (Regulation (2) (a)
and (b) :



(1) If any person is convicted of such an offence by reason of his having
published a newspaper, the President may by order direct that, during such
period as may be specified in that order, that person shall not publish any
newspaper in Sri Lanka - Regulation 14 (2) (a),



#  370



(2) If the contravention is in respect of any publication in any newspaper,
the Competent Authority may, after issuing one or two warnings as he may
consider reasonable, order-



(i) that no person shall print, publish or distribute or in any way be
concerned in the printing, publication or distribution of such newspaper for
such period as may be specified in the order; or



(ii) that the printing Press in which such newspaper was printed shall, for
such period as may be specified in the order, not be used for any purpose
whatsoever or only for such purpose as may be specified in the order.



The term 'newspaper' as used in Regulation 14 includes " any journal,
magazine, pamphlet or other publication " \- Regulation 14 (13) (c). It was
submitted that the words 'other publication' are wide enough to include a book
or other single publication. In fact, 'pamphlet' also refers to a single
publication. In my view, the words " other publication " must be interpreted
euisdem generis. They will not refer to a single publication like a book, but
rather to a periodical publication. So also I do not think the expression
"pamphlet" is used in the sense of a single publication. Pamphlets are a well-
known literary medium and have been used very effectively for exposition and
criticism, for pungent invective and trenchant rejoinder as, for example,
during the Martin Marprelate controversy of old or in more modern times during
Bernard Shaw's agitation for alphabet reform. Perhaps, it is not inappropriate
to mention that during the Marprelate controversy even the seizure of the
Puritan press failed to abate the flow of pamphlets. Pamphlets in a series are
common literary form. As I understand it, the expression " pamphlet " and "
other publications " as used in the definition refer to periodical
publications. To say that the expression "newspaper" in paragraph (2) of
Regulation 14 refers to newspapers strictly so called and so to argue that as
the freedom of the press is



#  371

**  **

involved action against a newspaper should be taken only under paragraph 2 (a)
or (b), but not under paragraph 3 of Regulation 14 would be to ignore the
definition given in paragraph 13 for application throughout the Regulation.
The fact that the Competent Authority acted under Regulation 14 (3) rather
than under Regulation 14 (2) by itself does not support any inference of
failure on his part to give his mind to the nature of and justification for
the order he had to make.



Regulation 14 (3) empowers the Competent Authority by order to direct that no
person shall print, publish, distribute or in any way be concerned in the
printing, publication or distribution of a newspaper for the period specified
in the order when he is of the opinion that there has been or is likely to be
in any newspaper, publication of matter which is, in his opinion, calculated
to be prejudicial to the interests of national security or the preservation of
public order or the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the life
of the community, or matter inciting or encouraging persons to mutiny, riot or
civil commotion. The order may direct that the printing press in which such
newspaper was printed shall, for the period specified in the order not be used
for any purpose whatsoever or only for such purpose as is specified in the
order. He may also authorise any person specified therein to take such steps
(including the taking possession of any printing press with respect to which
the order is made or of any premises in which it is contained or of any part
of such printing press or premises) as may appear to him (the person
authorised) to be necessary for securing compliance with the order.



Alternatively, the Competent Authority may make an order as provided in
paragraphs (1) and (2) of Regulation 14, as for example, censorship.



The Competent Authority had the discretion and the choice of other courses of
action. But it is complained, he chose the most oppressive course of action.



#  372



 It was well established that judicial review of the exercise of a discretion
is permissible, but within limits. Ranasinghe J. has dealt with this question
fully in his judgment In the case of _Janatha Finance and Investments Ltd. v.
Liyanage and Others_ (17)- and his decision constitutes the latest
pronouncement on the subject.



In England, the House of Lords has rejected the theory of unfettered and
uncontrolled discretion. When a discretion is vested in a statutory body, it
is never unfettered. It must be exercised according to law. The statutory body
must be guided by relevant considerations and exclude from consideration
matters that are irrelevant. (See _Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food_ (21) and _Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v.
Wednesbury Corporation_ (22). The Court will assert its powers to scrutinise
the factual basis upon which discretionary powers have been exercised. The
decision must be found to be reasonable, that is, one that can be supported
with good reasons or one which a reasonable person might reach - _Secretary of
State for Education and Science v. Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council_
(23); see also _Hirdaramani v. Ratnavel_ (24); and the case of _Siriwardena
and others v. Liyanage and others_ (commonly known as the Aththa case) (25).



Wade in his work on Administrative Law (1977 - 4th ed.) after pointing out
that a statute which confers a variety of discretionary powers may confer a
wider or a narrower discretion according to the context and the general scheme
of the Act, adds at p. 344:



" Translated into terms of the traditional rule that powers must be exercised
reasonably, this means that the standard of reasonableness varies with the
situation. The pitfalls which must always be avoided are those of literal
verbal interpretation and of rigid standards ".



#  373

**  **

Equally it has to be borne in mind that in reviewing the exercise of
discretion, the Court must not usurp the discretion of the public authority.
If the decision is within the bounds of reasonableness, it is not part of the
Court's function to look further into the merits - Wade (ibid) p. 348. Lord
Hailsham explained how the Court should approach the question in the case of
_In Re W (An Infant)_ (26):



" Two reasonable parents can perfectly reasonably come to opposite conclusions
on the same set of facts without forfeiting their title to be regarded as
reasonable ........ Not every reasonable exercise of judgment is right, and
not every mistaken exercise of judgment is unreasonable. There is a band of
decisions within which no Court should seek to replace the individual's
judgment with his own ".



In the _Tameside_ case (supra), Lord Salmon cited the above dictum of Lord
Hailsham with approval while Lord Diplock in his speech observed as follows at
page 681:



" The very concept of administrative discretion involves a right to choose
between more than one possible course of action upon which there is room for
reasonable people to hold differing opinions as to which is to be preferred ".



When the _Tameside_ case was before the Court of Appeal, Lord Denning said at
page 652:



"No one can properly be labelled as being unreasonable unless he is not only
wrong but unreasonably wrong, as wrong that no reasonable person could
sensibly take that view".



At times of crisis, the question of reasonableness must be evaluated against
the subject-matter dealt with and the circumstances of the situation in which
the authority is called upon to act and to act quickly. This aspect of the
matter was considered



**  374**

**  **

by Lord Denning in the case of _Secretary of State for Employment v. ASLEF
(No. 2) (N.I.R.C.)_ (27). At page 1390 he said as follows:



"What is the effect of the words " If it appears to the Secretary of State "?
This, in my opinion, does not mean that the Minister's decision is put beyond
challenge. The scope available to the challenger depends very much on the
subject-matter with which the Minister is dealing. In this case I would think
that, if the Minister does not act in good faith, or if he acts on extraneous
considerations which ought not to influence him, or if he plainly misdirects
himself in fact or in law, it may well be that a court would interfere; but
when he honestly takes a view of the facts or the law which could reasonably
be entertained, then his decision is not to be set aside simply because
thereafter someone thinks that his view was wrong. After all, this is an
emergency procedure. It has to be set in motion quickly, when there is no time
for minute analysis of facts or of law. The whole process would be made of no
effect if the Minister's decision was afterwards to be conned over word by
word, letter by letter, to see if he has in any way misdirected himself. That
cannot be right ".



As de Smith points out in his book "Judicial Review of Administrative Action "
(1980) 4th Ed. p. 349, the scope of review is determined by practical
realities, the nature of the subject-matter and the surrounding circumstances,
as for example, the necessity for taking quick action for the preservation of
public order. In dealing with a newspaper the effect on the reader's mind must
receive the highest consideration. Further, what is not obnoxious at one time
may be obnoxious at another time. It would be difficult for anyone but the
repository of power to form an opinion as to the occasion for its exercise. He
is entrusted with the maintenance of public security. He has a better "feel"
of the crisis with the intelligence services at his command than anyone else.
When is public order that is involved, the authority should not afterwards be
blamed if it is found he has committed an error of judgment or erred on the
side of being over-cautious.



#  375

**  **

As Lord _Atkin_ said __ in _Liversidge v. Anderson_ (28), " If there are
reasonable grounds, the judge has no further duty of deciding whether he would
have formed the same belief ". I might add that this was the test adopted by
Ranasinghe J. (Sharvananda J. and Victor Perera J. agreeing) in the case of
_Janatha Finance Investments Ltd. v. Liyanage and others_ (17).



I have already  referred to some of the matters that had appeared in the "
Saturday Review ". It is reasonable to expect that the 1st respondent was
aware of what was being published in this newspaper over a period of time. It
is not suggested that he read the issues of this newspaper only immediately
before making his first order P2. No doubt, the Competent Authority was
unaware of the constitution of the " Saturday Review " and details of the
internal arrangements pertaining to it or the status of the Directors. To do
his duty, it was sufficient for him to be conversant with the contents of the
newspaper.



The fact that no action was taken against the newspaper earlier or even after
the Emergency Regulations came into force on 18th May, 1983, is hardly
relevant. The Government, too, undoubtedly values the freedom of the Press and
believes that democracy will sustain itself best, as has been said, in the
free market of ideas, and when the channels of communication are left open,
the newspapers give ideas. The newspapers give people the freedom to find out
what ideas are correct. The Courts, too, will always uphold the freedom of
speech and expression and publication enshrined in the Constitution.



But at times of national crisis, the safety of the nation becomes paramount
and some inroads have of necessity to be made into the freedom of the Press.
This is provided for in the Constitution itself.



I will turn to the argument that the Competent Authority should have addressed
his mind to the fact that the severity of the punishments prescribed would
make it unlikely that any responsible newspaper will run the gauntlet of the
punitive restrictions imposed during the Emergency. Dire penalties, however,
are no bar to those fighting for a cause. The



 376



"Saturday Review" was fighting the cause of the Tamils. The paper highlighted
the grievances of the Tamils. Of cause, no one will deny them that right. But
at times when ethnic hatreds are mounting, curbs become necessary. At times of
grave national emergency headline exposure of Army and Police atrocities will
not help the cause of peace and public security. It can cause deep resentment,
fan passions, provoke defiance. It can set off a chain-reaction of violence.
And violence begets violence. It happened before our very eyes. There are very
few issues of the "Saturday Review" which do not carry some grim account of
Army or Police brutality. The object may have been to mould public opinion and
get the authorities to take remedial action. But in the context of race
dissensions, it could be counter- productive. Prominent coverage was given to
the activities of the Eelamists. News of the' activities of supporters of the
Eelam movement in foreign countries appeared regularly. One issue carried news
of an unilateral declaration of Eelam. Surveys of opinions were published in
several issues. A Tamil intellectual in State service had said that nothing
short of a separate administration complete with flag and national anthem
would satisfy the Tamils. Another secessionist leader felt a force of 10,000
young men trained abroad militarily would suffice to rid the North and East of
the Army and Police. One cannot fault the Competent Authority if he thought
these publications inflammatory especially after the Hartal. The very last
issue of the "Saturday Review" carries the bold headline " Regional Autonomy
as an alternative to Tamil Eelam " ? ". The preposition is posed as a
question, but the article that follows ends on a pessimistic note. The issue
of colonisation could prove to be a stumbling - block to any negotiated
settlement and in any event the militant Tamil Youth of the Thamil Eelam
Liberation Army (TELA) " will settle for nothing less than Eelam - no peace
talks without Eelam. Although the paper advocates Regional Autonomy, between
the lines it is possible to discern a definite tilt towards, the Eelam cause.
The Competent Authority was not being unreasonable if he took such a view. The
reasons he gives in his affidavit are borne out by the contents of the paper.



No doubt, the first order P2 contains an error when it was made operative for
a month. But that does not mean that



#  377

**  **

clamping down the paper was unjustified or that the order was made without due
consideration. There is also the complaint that the order is a mere verbatim
reproduction of the Regulation. Perhaps, the Competent Authority may have said
the same thing in different words. It would then be a question of semantics.
On the other hand the form in which the order is drawn could also show that
the Competent Authority gave his mind to the requirements of the Regulation
and it was only on being satisfied that the requirements were strictly
fulfilled that he made his order.



Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners submitted that censorship would
have sufficed. But even with censorship, newspapers have been known to publish
matter that could be harmful. More than one newspaper in this country had
occasion to publish apologies for violating the censor's directions. It is
true transgressions of censorship could be visited with extreme sanctions. But
the object is to prevent and not to punish. The paper always devoted a very
large proportion of its column to spotlighting the hardships and the
discrimination which the Tamil people were being forced to endure. No doubt
these were garnished with articles covering a wide range of subjects: the fine
arts, literature, science and agriculture. But the Competent Authority may
have felt, not unreasonably, that censorship was inadequate to deal with a
newspaper whose editorial policy was such that accounts of the harassments and
indignities suffered by the Tamil people filled most of its pages. At times of
tension and strife, much publications can be very damaging and provocative.
Therefore, one cannot say that the Competent Authority was unreasonable n
deciding to act under Regulation 14 (3) of the Emergency Regulations. He acted
on grounds that were reasonable.



On the facts, therefore, there has been no infringement. Applications No.
47/83, No. 53/83 and No. 61/83 are therefore, dismissed without costs.



#  378



**RANASINGHE J. -**



I agree. Even after further consideration, I am of opinion that the views
expressed by Sharvananda J. in the case of _Dr. S. N. A. Fernando and others
v. Liyanage and others_ (18), with which I have concurred, are correct.



RODRIGO, J.



I join in the opinion of my brother Soza, J. whose judgment I have seen in
draft that this application should be dismissed for the reasons that he has
expressed but I would add a few words my own on account of the injection of
wide issues of law into the submissions. This judgment comes in the third lap
of the course of this application in its pursuit of a just and equitable order
relating to the clamp down put under the Emergency Regulations promulgated in
the recent phase of domestic violence, on the "Saturday Review" which, it is
said, and not wholly without justification is a forum for intellectual
dialogue and exchange on, among others stated in an admirable brochure, the
ethnic political problems that simmer and sometimes erupt into violence. I
shall return to this later. For a start I wish to take a second look at s. 8
of the Public Security Ordinance and Regulation No. 2(2) of the Emergency
Regulations No. 3 of 1983, now in force, for the reason that the view I took
in the _" Aththa "case _(25) in line with the views expressed by Fernando, CJ
and Alles, J. in their leading judgments expressing the majority view of these
provisions in _Hirdaramani's_ (24) and _Gunasekera's case_ (29) respectively,
it is said, is now out of line with the present trends of judicial thinking on
the subject. In the Hirdaramani case the matter was formulated as follows: -



"1.Where a power cannot be exercised unless certain physical facts exist. In
such a case if the validity of the exercise of the power is disputed, then the
executive must prove that the requisite facts actually existed.



#  379

**  **

2.Where a power may be exercised by some authority if he is satisfied of the
existence of certain facts. In such a case a Court can inquire into the
circumstances, in order to ascertain whether it was reasonable for the
authority to be satisfied of the existence of the facts.



3.Where, as in the instant case, the power can be exercised merely because of
an opini on that it is necessary to exercise it. In such a case the mere
production of the instrument ex facie valid whereby the power is exercised,
concludes the matter, unless good faith is negatived.



Section 8 of the Public Security Ordinance reads: -



"No emergency Regulation, and no order, rule or direction made or given
thereunder shall be called in question in any Court."



Emergency Regulation 2(2) reads: -



"The Interpretation Ordinance shall apply to the interpretation of an
emergency regulation and of any orders or rules made thereunder as it applies
to the interpretation of an Act or Ordinance or Law: "



The relevant section, that is, s. 22 of the Interpretation (Amendment) Act No.
18 of 1972 states:



"22.Where there appears in any enactment whether passed or made before or
after the commencement of this Ordinance, the expression "shall not be called
in question in any Court" or any other expression of similar import whether or
not accompanied by the words "whether by way of writ or otherwise" in relation
to any order, decision, determination, direction or finding which any person,
authority or Tribunal is empowered to make or issue under such enactment, no
Court shall in any proceeding and upon any ground whatsoever have jurisdiction
to pronounce upon the validity or legality of



#  380



such order, decision, determination, direction or finding, made or issued in
the exercise or ..... exercise of the power conferred on such person,
authority or Tribunal."



The leading judgment in the _Aththa case_ (supra) expressing its view on these
provisions, has stated :



"Section 8 of the Public Security Ordinance ordains that no emergency
regulation, and no order, rule or direction made or given thereunder shall be
called in question in any Court, The effect of such finality clause has been
stated as follows:-



The Courts have made it a rule that such clauses cannot hamper operation of
judicial control . . . there is a firm judicial policy against allowing the
rule of law to be undermined by weakening the powers of the Courts. Statutory
restrictions on judicial remedies are given the narrowest possible
construction sometimes even against the plain meaning of the words. This is a
sound policy since otherwise administrative authorities and tribunals would be
given uncontrollable power which could violate the law at will.' Finality is a
good thing but justice is a better " quoting Lord Atkin in _Ras Behari Lal v.
King Emperor_ (30) - Wade, Administrative Law (4th Ed.) 566. I am of the view
that the above section 8 does not prevent the petitioners from obtaining
relief if they are entitled to any ".



The judgment delivered in the _Janatha Press case_ (17) has these paragraphs:
-



"In times of grave emergency it is unlikely that the theoretical judicial
control will be able to come to play as the ingredient of policy is so large
by comparison with the", ingredient of ascertainable and relevant fact 
_Wade_  (supra) pp. 375-6."



#  381

**  **

It continues :-



"In regard to the exercise of a discretion In an emergency situation Lord
Denning M. R. expressed himself in _Secretary of State v. ABLEF_ (27) as
follows: -



" But .......  when he honestly takes a view of the facts or the law which
would reasonably be entertained then his decision is not to be set aside
simply because thereafter someone thinks that his view is wrong. After all
this is an emergency proceeding. It has to be set in motion quickly. Where
there is no time for minute analysis of fact or of law the whole process would
be made of no effect if the Minister's decision was afterwards to be conned
over word by word, letter by letter to see if he has in any way misdirected
himself. That cannot be right. Take this very case. He has made a mistake in
... but, that, in my opinion, was not sufficient to invalidate the application
or the basis on which he acts."



Then in the majority judgments (Bench of 9 Judges) in Revision Application
APN/GEN 10/74 - D.C. Kandy -L/ 10569 et cetera - S.C. Minutes of 3rd
September, 1974, a case which dealt with prohibition on Courts to grant
injunctions against the State introduced by s. 24 of the Interpretation
(Amendment) Act No. 18 of 1972, the view expressed by Lord Reid in the case of
_Anisminic Ltd._ (31) when he said,



"I would have expected to find something more specific than the bald statement
that a determination shall not be called in question in any Court of law.
Undoubtedly such a provision protects every determination which is not a
nullity but I do not think that it is necessary or even reasonable to construe
the word 'determination' as including everything which purports to be a
determination but which is in effect no determination at all and there are no
degrees of nullity. There are a number of reasons why the law will hold a
purported decision to be a nullity . . . I have come without



#  382



hesitation to the conclusion that in this case we are not prevented from
inquiring whether the order of the Commission was a nullity"



was adopted with approval.



Again in _I. R. C. v. Rossminster Ltd._ (32) Lord Diplock observed:



"The words which he has reasonable cause to believe' appearing in the statute
do not make conclusive . . . that he has reasonable cause for the prescribed
belief. The grounds on which the officer acted must be sufficient to induce in
a reasonable person the required belief ... This was affirmed in _Nakkuda Ali
v. Jayaratna_ (33) a decision of the Privy Council in which Lord Radcliffe
writing for the Board expressed the view that the majority speeches in
_Liversidge v. Anderson_ (28) - in which a contrary construction had been
placed on similar words ... should be regarded as an authority for the meaning
of that phrase in that particular regulation alone. For my part, I think the
time has come to acknowledge openly that the majority of this House in
_Liversidge v. Anderson_ were expediently and, at that time, perhaps excusably
wrong and the dissenting speech of Lord Atkin was right. "



Having said this, however, Lord Diplock continues later,



"The decision-making power is conferred by the statute on the officer of the
Board. He is not required to give any reasons for his decision and the public
interest immunity provides justifications for any refusal to do so. Since he
does not disclose his reasons there can be no question of setting aside this
decision for any error of law on the face of the record and the only ground on
which it can be attacked on judicial review is that it was ultra vires because
the condition precedent to its forming the belief which the statute
prescribes, viz. that it should be based on reasonable grounds was not
satisfied. Where Parliament has designated a public officer as decision-maker
for a particular class of decision, the High Court, acting as a



#  383

**  **

reviewing Court ........... is not a Court of Appeal. It must proceed on the
omnia praesumuntur rite esse acta until that presumption can be displaced by
the applicant for review on whom the onus lies of doing so. Since no reasons
have been given by the decision-maker and no unfavourable inference can be
drawn for this fact because there is obvious justification for his failure to
do so, the presumption that he acted intra vires can only be displaced by
evidence of facts which cannot be reconciled with there having been reasonable
cause for its belief ....."



Then in _A-G of St. Christopher v. Reynolds_ (34) Lord Salmon in the Privy
Council stated: -



"The facts and background of the _Tameside case_ (23), _Liversidge v.
Anderson_ (28) the _Nakkuda Ali case_ (33) and the present case are, of
course, all very different from each other. This is why their Lordships have
reached their conclusion as to the true construction of reg 3(1) of the
Emergency Powers Regulations 1967, in reliance chiefly on the light shed by
the Constitution rather than on such light as may be thrown on that regulation
by the authorities to which reference has been made. "



While some challenge therefore can be offered in the first and second
situations formulated above what is the worthwhile challenge that can be made
in the third situation applying the maxim _omnia praesumuntur rite esse acta_
and that male fides cannot be made out on affidavit evidence alone without
cross­-examination of the respondents, an opportunity which is not permitted?
In _Nakkuda Ali's_ case (supra) Lord Radcliffe had this to say: -



"If the question whether the condition had been satisfied is to be
conclusively decided by the man who wields the power then the value of the
intended restraint is in effect nothing. No doubt he must not exercise the
power in bad faith, but the field in which this kind of question arises is
such that the reservation for the case of bad faith is hardly more than a
formality."



#  384



So that when the passages quoted above from Lord Radcliffe, Lord Denning, Lord
Diplock and Lord Salmon are read, the passage in _Wade_ (supra) at pages
375-6. "In times of grave emergency it is unlikely that the theoretical
judicial control will be able to come to play as the ingredient of policy is
so large by comparison with the ingredient of ascertainable and relevant fact
" is amply borne out. In judicial practice, therefore, the preposition " that
the orders of the competent authority are not justiciable if they are ex facie
valid and that the Court is precluded from considering the only possible issue
which can be raised when a detention order valid on the face of it is produced
before the Court, namely the issue of good faith "still holds good when
construing emergency law provisions in the third situation formulated above
not because the statutory injunction is considered a letter on Courts but
because it is the only practical way of deciding the whole matter. The liberty
claimed and asserted by the Courts to look behind the order is only
theoretical.



In this instance, however, Counsel for the respondents has placed material
before Court upon which he says the Competent Authority reached his opinion
and invited us to test the reasonableness of his opinion. I, therefore,
express my view on that aspect of the matter but later in the judgment.



The substantial point of law argued in this application is that the
shareholders of a limited liability company - the 7th petitioner is an
incorporated company limited by guarantee and the rest are shareholders -
continued to be engaged in doing the selfsame business in fact that the
company has been formed and incorporated to do in law so that when the
company's business closed down by order of the competent authority the
selfsame business of the shareholders was also closed down. That is to say,
the prohibition of the publication of the 'Saturday Review' is not only a
prohibition imposed on the company but: also a prohibition imposed jointly and
severally on the petitioners from publishing the newspaper. Support for this
is sought by reliance



#  385

**  **

on _Bennett Coleman & Co. v. Union of India_ (1) and the order delivered on
representations against the Press Council Bill in 1973 by the then
Constitutional Court of Sri Lanka. It is sufficient for me to refer to the
judgment of Sharvananda, J. delivered in this Court in _Dr. Neville Fernando's
case_ (18) and the connected application No. S.C. 134/82 (2) - and 11.2.83
(17) respectively - wherein Sharvananda J. has expressed the view for the
reasons given by him that he cannot accept the reasoning of Ray, J. in the
_Bennett Coleman case_ that the shareholders carry on business through the
agency of the company and that the shareholders' rights are equally and
necessarily affected if the rights of the company are affected. Sharvananda,
J. was mindful that there is in India a difference in the fundamental rights
of a shareholder from that of a shareholder in Sri Lanka in as much as the
fundamental right of a shareholder in India includes a right to acquire, hold
and dispose of property and it is enacted there that no person shall be
deprived of his property save by the authority of law. He reached the
conclusion that the fundamental right of the petitioners therein, like here,
to engage in business by themselves or in association with others, is not in
any way infringed by the closure of the press of which they are shareholders.
I respectfully agree with the reasons given therein and add a few words here,
since it is submitted that the decision of Sharvananda, J. on both those
applications is an erroneous interpretation of the Constitution. It is argued
that the rights of a shareholder of a company viewed only from the angle of a
company as a legal person, a concept founded on the principles of common law
of England cannot be equated to the fundamental rights of a shareholder viewed
from the angle of our Constitution and that the systems of common law
obtaining in England, America or India afford no correct guide. The two
Articles of the Constitution invoked to support this argument are Art. 12(1)
and Art. 14(1) (g) read with Art. 14(1) (a). It is Art. 14(1) (g) that is
pressed into argument. When distilled, Counsel's argument is that it is the
factual position of the shareholders that is protected. To appreciate the
factual position, It is said, one



#  386



must keep in mind that a shareholder is an " alter ego " or the "head and
brains" of the company and that in fact it is the shareholders who pull and
control the strings as real visible human beings. Such human beings are
citizens of this country. It is said that the petitioners are also Directors
of this company and the physical fact that it is they who are that there is no
gainsaying running this newspaper.



 What is contended for here is the Realist theory of jurisprudence \- the
group-person. Paton says :



"With a little skill (and a lack of scruple) we can reach any practical result
from any particular theory; so complicated are the issues that arise."



But the judicial approach to the problem in English Common Law is exemplified
by _Solomon v. Solomon & Company_ (19) and the _Gramophone and Typewriter
Company Ltd. v. Stanley._ (13) _Solomon v. Solomon & Co. _(19) can be
reconciled, Duff suggests, with any theory but is authority for none. " While
theories have provided shells for the attack, the decision as to where the
ammunition was to be shot has been the result of the economic and social
desires of those who use the artillery. " See Paton on Jurisprudence (3rd Ed.)
367. See also M. Wolff - 54 L.Q.R. (1938) 496\. No doubt the Articles invoked
Art. 12(1) and Art. 14(1) (a) (g) - are Constitutional provisions designed to
protect the personal rights therein declared to be fundamental rights of Sri
Lankan citizens and these Articles are also declared subject to all existing
written and unwritten laws, which in the event of inconsistency, prevail over
the Articles. Judge made law is unwritten law and the legal rights of
shareholders, in any case, vis-a-vis the company are settled by Judge made
law. This is not disputed. Did they have any rights by reason of shareholding
other than those that are rights of the company per se. Authority and
principle are against a view that they have such rights. To say that they have
such rights independently of the rights of the company is a dangerous
doctrine, to borrow the language of Ormerod, L.J. in _Tunstally v. Strigmann_
(12) a case which is



**  387**



destructive of the arguments of the petitioner's Counsel. In that case, the
company and the landlord were one in the realistic sense. The landlord held
all the shares of the company barring two held by nominees and she had the
sole control of the company. In an application under the Rent Acts a
preliminary point was decided against her that though she in fact intended to
occupy the premises to do her business she was not entitled to occupy it as
the business in law was that of her company. All the artillery of the Realist
theory was pressed into service but to no avail. The submissions of Cousel for
landlord in that case are identical with the submissions that have been made
here. To quote from Ormerod, L.J: -



" It has been contended in this case that a realistic view should be taken
into consideration. It is submitted that any person in the street would say
that the business was the landlord's business, notwithstanding that it was
being carried on by the limited company."



He continues:



"It has been argued in the course of this case that there had been a number of
departures from the principle of _Solomon v. Solomon & Co. Ltd, _(19) in order
that the Courts may give effect to what has been described as the reality of
the situation and it is submitted in these circumstances that the Court should
look at the realities of the situation and that those realities that the
business will in future be carried on by the landlord as it has been carried
on in the past.



Then he continues:



"Whilst it may be argued .........that the Courts have departed from a strict
observation of the principle laid down in _Solomon's case,_ it is true to say
that any departure, if indeed any of the instances given can be treated as a
departure, has been made to deal with special circumstances when a limited
company might well be a facade concealing the real facts. "



#  388



In the same case Willmer, L.J. had this to say :



"The business was in substance her business, the company being a mere piece of
mechanism to enable the landlord's business to be carried on. This, it is said
was the reality and we were invited to look at the reality and substance of
the proposed occupation rather than at its form. As relevant to this argument
I ventured to direct attention to _Leonard's Carrying Company Ltd. v. Asiatic
Petroleum Co., Ltd._ and some reliance was placed on what was said by Lord
Haldane in that case. He described the managing director of the appellant
company as one who was " really the directing mind and will of the
corporation, the very ego and centre of the personality of the corporation ".



Willmer, L.J. has later observed:



" I have certainly felt the force of the argument on behalf of the landlord
but in the end I am satisfied that it cannot prevail. There is no escape from
the fact that a company is a legal entity entirely separate from its
corporators - see _Solomon v. Solomon & Co. Ltd._ (19) Here the landlord and
the corporation are entirely separte entities. This is no matter of form. It
is a matter of substance and reality .... Even the holder of 100 per cent of
the shares in a company does not by such holding become so identified with the
company that he or she can be said to carry on the business of the company.
The individual corporator does not carry out the business of the corporation.



Danckwerts, L.J. having endorsed what had been said earlier by his brothers
said this: -





" As Ormerod, L.J. pointed out, if persons choose to conduct their operations
through the medium of a limited company with the advantages in respect of
responsibility for debts thereby conferred, they cannot really complain if
they have to face some disadvantages also. "



#  389



As I have said already the Articles in question must be read subject to
existing law. In my judgment therefore the shareholder - petitioners have no
rights in the circumstances of this case independently of the company's that
can be said to have been infringed by the order or orders that are impugned.



On the facts - We have been invited to review the order on the material placed
before us. Virtually all the issues of the " Saturday Review " from its
inception to the date of the first order have been placed before us.



The test to be applied as found in judgments in reviewing an executive order
is,



(a) whether grounds exist which are capable of supporting the order or
decision, and,



(b) whether the executive has misdirected himself on the law in arriving at
his decision.



This test really is applied where an executive is required to be satisfied of
the existence of a condition precedent to his making a decision. But where the
order could be made merely on the opinion of the executive the test is less
exacting. For instance, where an executive is empowered to make an order where
he " deems it necessary " to make such order, it has been held that such words
give the executive the amplest possible discretion in the choice of method.
See _A-G of Canada v. Hallet & Carry Ltd._ (35) per Lord Radcliffe,; _A-G of
St. Christopher v. Reynold_ \- per Lord Salmon (supra).



The Competent Authority has averred in his affidavit justifying his order that
:-



16.Many of the articles and items published in the newspaper suggested that
its publishers eschewed democratic processes, negotiations and campaigns based
on non-violence as a means of resolving the problems facing the Tamils of Sri
Lanka and that they openly encouraged the adoption of force and terrorism as
the only means.



#  390



17.The said newspaper gave prominent publicity to the acts of terrorist
movements operating in the North, particularly to those of the movement which
called itself the Tamil Eeelam Liberation Front (T.E.L.F.) and often eulogised
such conduct with a view to encouraging the growth of such movements and the
use of force against the lawfully established Government.



18.The conduct and excesses alleged to be committed in the North by the law
enforcement agencies and military authorities was given prominent coverage
(often in bold type) and efforts were made to describe such conduct in detail
in an endeavour to arouse communal passions and to create unrest among the
populace. In some instances grossly exaggerated versions of certain incidents
were given to serve a similar objective.



20.I also wish to bring to the attention of Your Lordship's Court that
immediately prior to my order of 1st July 1983' an Hartal sponsored by a
terrorist movement referred to above, namely Tamil Eelam Liberation Front, led
to large-scale violence in the North resulting in serious loss and damage to
property. I was of the view that the sealing of the 'Saturday Review' (and
another newspaper in Jaffna) was a measure which was necessary to prevent
further escalation of the violence.



21.I state that the two orders made by me were made bona fide and on being
satisfied that upon a consideration of the contents of the " Saturday Review "
newspapers published prior to the date of order of 1st July 1983 that they
contained matter which was calculated to be prejudicial to the interest of
national security, preservation of public order and matter likely to encourage
or cause unrest, communal disharmony and civil commotion in the country.



23.I annex hereto marked " 1R1 " to " 1R14 " random extracts of articles and
news items which appeared in the Saturday Review in its recent publication
prior to its orders dated 1.7.83 and 18.7.83 by me.



#  391



The petitioners in their petition denied in advance the averments of the
respondents-petitioners, particularly in paragraph 24. In paragraph 35 thereof
they have stated that " Saturday Review " has been critical of some aspects of
government policy. These criticisms were made bona fide in respect of public
affairs. In Paragraph 36 they say that the order of the Competent Authority is
a cover and a sham to achieve the purpose of preventing the " Saturday Review
" in carrying views and news which may lead to criticism of the actions of the
Government.



Counsel for the petitioners was at pains to satisfy us that a daily censorship
of the offending news, if any, could have met the exigencies of the moment and
the closure of the newspaper outright was apart from it being an infringement
of Art. 12(1) was an act done in excess of jurisdiction in the circumstances.



I have already cited passages from judgments which lay down that it is not for
a Court to substitute its opinion for that of the Competent Authority where
the Court is satisfied that the material before the Competent Authority was
capable of supporting the views and the opinion formed by the Competent
Authority when making the order. All the issues of the newspaper have been
placed before us and I have gone through practically every one of them and I
find it difficult to take the view that the orders impugned are so
unreasonable that no reasonable person in the shoes of the Competent Authority
could reasonably have acted otherwise in the circumstances of grave domestic
disorder against which such orders had been made. I must, however, confess
that this newspaper in its earlier issues had more or less approximated to the
laudable objectives of the brochure which it had published as its philosophy.
It will be tedious to give excerpts of the news items and articles that must,
in their impact, provoke and incite the readers to violence as also to give
excerpts of articles and editorials which looked at the problems from an
intellectual angle suggestive of reaching solutions to those problems. It has
been said that this is an English newspaper and its readers are not drawn from
the mob.



#  392



It is clear, however, from the paper itself that undergraduates in the
Universities in the North and the East are some of the intended readers, and
it is common knowledge that they are very agitated over these problems.



In all the circumstances, it is my view that the petitioners have failed to
satisfy the legal test required by judgments to be sufficient to set aside the
impugned order made during an Emergency in the exercise of our jurisdiction to
review such orders.



I, therefore, dismiss these applications without costs.



Applications dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/14.html_  

