##  Abdul Lathif v. Deputy Inspector General of Police, Nuwara-Eliya and
Others - SLR - 22, Vol 1 of 2005 [2003] LKSC 14; (2005) 1 Sri LR 22 (5
December 2003)

**22**

**ABDUL LATHIF  
V  
DEPUTY INSPECTOR GENERAL OF POLICE,  
NUWARA-ELIYA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO. J.  
YAPA, JAND  
JAYASINGHE. J  
S. C. APPLICATION NO. FR 244/2002  
7 TH JULY, 26TH SEPTEMBER AND 29TH OCTOBER, 2003  
  
Fundamental Rights - Malicious arrest and detention on an allegation of
cheating \- Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the constitution.  
  
_The petitioner was the Chairman of S. F. (Pvt) Ltd. engaged in manufacturing
garments. The company had executed an order of garments for BIF (Pvt) Ltd. to
the value of Rs. 10 Million at which stage there commenced an acute industrial
action at the petitioner's company. The petitioner was threatened by the
workmen allegedly on the instigation of a powerful politician. The petitioner
complained to the 2nd respondent SSP, Nuwara - Eliya where upon he was
directed to appear at the Nuwara -Eliya Police station. DIG, Nuwara Eliya (1st
respondent) SSP (2nd respondent) the ASP (3rd respondent) HQI Nuwara Eliya
(4th respondent) and his subordinates at the Nuwara Eliya Police station were
made parties to this application besides the IGP and the Attorney -General.  
  
At that stage, the petitioner had also obtained an interim order from the
District Court against the workmen creating disorder at the factory. On 03.
04. 2003 when the petitioner appeared at the Police Station, he was informed
that there was a charge of cheating againts him. The charge was that a cheque
which he had issued to BIF (Pvt) Ltd. had been dishonored. It happened as it
had been presented prematurely against instructions. An attorney-at-law
representative of the complainant company met the 4th respondent and informed
that it was a civil matter which had been since settled.  
  
The 4th respondent said that the petitioner will be produced before the
Magistrate the next day. But the petitioner was produced before the Magistrate
at 8.00 p.m. on the same day with a misleading report and was remanded until
04. 04.

**23**

2002\. The next day the attorney-at-law for the virtual complainant and the
complainant Ramani Weeraratne appeared and informed court that the matter had
been settled and sought to withdraw the complaint. The petitioner even
complained to the Prime Minister for help.  
  
The petitioner's version was also supported by the affidavit of his attorney -
at - law and Ramani Weeraratne's statement to the court.  
  
**Held:  
**  
1\. The 4th respondent HQI Nuwara - Eliya had arrested and produced the
petitioner before the Magistrate on false grounds. There were no objective
grounds of suspicion against the petitioner.  
  
2\. By such arrest and consequent detention, the 3rd and 4th respondents and
the State infringed the petitioner's rights under Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2)
of the Constitution.  
  
3\. The 3rd and 4th respondents were personally liable for payment of
compensation on the ground of such infringements in addition to the liability
of the State.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1.Senaratne V A Punya de Silva (1995) 1 Sri L R. 272  
  
2.Channa Peiris V Attorney \- General (1994) 1 Sri LR 1  
  
3.Faiz V Attorney - General (1995) 1 Sri LR 372  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
Chandana Premathilake for petitioner.  
  
_K. A. P. Ranasinghe_ , State Counsel for 2nd to 6th respondents.  
  
December 5, 2003. **  
  
JAYASINGHE. J.  
  
**The Petitioner is the Chairman Smart Fashion (Pvt.) Ltd., of Nanu Oya. At
all times material to this application Smart Fashion (Pvt.) Ltd. had

**24**

executed an order of garments for Bairdwear Inter Fashions (Pvt.) Ltd. to the
value of Rs. 10 million and was awaiting dispatch to Bairdwear Inter Fashions
(Pvt) Ltd. At or about this time the workers of Smart Fashion (Pvt.) had
resorted to industrial action over the delay in the payment of wages and
anticipating the industrial action taking dangerous and life threatening
proportions, the petitioner sought protection from the Nanu Oya Police. Since
the Police took no steps the Petitioner brought to the notice of the Prime
Minister the situation prevalent and also the fact that despite the 2nd and
3rd respondents being informed of the situation, Nanu Oya Police had refused
even to record his statement (P2). The Petitioner states that the Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Industries had referred his complaint addressed to the
Prime Minister (P2) to the Secretary of Defence for necessary action. Further
Police Head Quarters too had referred P2 to the 1st Respondent for appropriate
action. However no action was taken by Nanu Oya Police. The Petitioner also
complained that a powerful politician was behind the unrest created at Smart
Fashion (Pvt) Ltd. Since some of the employees were preventing Smart Fashion
(Pvt.) Ltd. the Petitioner obtained an interim order restraining the offending
employees from interfering with the management of Smart Fashion (Pvt.) Ltd.
The Petitioner states that on 03. 04. 2002, when the Petitioner went into a
hotel in Nuwara Eliya after attending the District Court, a group of employees
who were Defendants in the said application came in and threatened him.
Thereupon the Petitioner complained to the 2nd Respondent on the telephone and
subsequently three police officers from the Nuwara Eliya Police Station met
him and informed the Petitioner that the 4th Respondent had requested him to
report to the Nuwara Eliya Police Station. The Petitioner accordingly went to
the Nuwara Eliya Police Station around 2.00 p. m. on the same day and instead
of recording his complaint he was informed after a lapse of about 2 hours that
a complaint of cheating has been made against him and that he will be
arrested. It was alleged that a complaint has been made by Bairdwear Inter
Fashions (Pvt.) Ltd. that a cheque drawn by the Petitioner has been dishonored
by the bank. The Petitioner explained to the 4th Respondent that he has
settled all his dues with Bairdwear Inter Fashions (Pvt.) Ltd. and therefore
there was no basis for the police to arrest the Petitioner and requested the
police to cross check with Bairdwear Inter Fashions (Pvt.) Ltd. whether or not
all dues have been settled. Nevertheless the 4th Respondent was in no mood to
ascertain the factual position as he was acting at the behest of a powerful
politician.

**25**

The Petitioner thereupon contacted his attorney - at - law and Bairdwear Inter
Fashions (Pvt.) Ltd. and requested them to come to the police station and
appraise the 4th Respondent in an endeavour to have him released. Accordingly
attorney- at - law Mr. Rajapaksa and 3 officers from Bairdwear viz. Ramani
Weeraratne, Loganathan Asokkumar and Sellamuttu appeared at the station and
informed the 3rd and 4th Respondents that the Petitioner had settled all the
outstanding dues and sought to withdraw the complaint made regarding the
dishonorered cheque. The Petitioner says that the 4th Respondent refused the
request. The 4th Respondent produced the Petitioner before the Magistrate
around 8.00 p.m. who remanded him till 04. 04. 2002. The Petitioner complains
that the Respondents have by their conduct violated the Petitioner's
fundamental rights enshrined in Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) and seeks
compensation in a sum of Rs. 100,000/- from the 1st to 7th Respondents. The
Petitioner is also seeking an order from this court directing the 7th and 8th
Respondents to initiate a departmental inquiry and/or criminal proceedings
against the 1st to 6th Respondents for the alleged violation.  
  
The 4th Respondent filed objections ; stated that a complaint of cheating was
made by one Ramani Weeraratne on 15. 03. 2002 that a cheque for R. 392, 868
drawn by the Petitioner in favor of Bairdwear Inter Fashions (Pvt.) Ltd. has
been dishonoured. Not once but twice; that the Petitioner could not be found
during the investigations either at Smart Fashion (Pvt.) Ltd. or his residence
and was evading arrest; that the Petitioner had not paid the salaries and that
the factory was closed; that while investigations were proceeding the
Petitioner had come hurriedly to the Nuwara Eliya Police Station in order to
escape a group of employees who had accosted him in the town; that having
realized that he was the person who was wanted in connection with the
complaint of cheating the 4th Respondent proceeded to arrest him. The 4th
Respondent denies that the three persons referred to above by the Petitioner
or attorney at law Mr. Rajapakse ever met him on that day or informed that the
Petitioner had settled all the monies due from the Petitioner and therefore
wished to withdraw the complaint against the Petitioner. The 4th Respondent
contends that there was reasonable suspicion that the Petitioner had committed
a congnizable offence which warrants the arrest of the Petitioner. He denies
violating any of the fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution.

**26**

The Petitioner alleges that the 4th Respondent acted maliciously and without
due cause in arresting him and thereafter in seeking a remand order from the
Magistrate.  
  
The Petitioner contends that since the Petitioner had settled all his dues to
Bairdwear Inter Fashions (Pvt.) Ltd. there was no cause for the 4th Respondent
to arrest the Petitioner unless he was actuated by malice. Petitioner says
that the cheque was issued to Bairdwar Inter Fashions (Pvt.) Ltd. With
instructions not to deposit the said cheque for payment till the 22nd October
as the necessary funds would be available only after that date. However
Bairdwear Inter Fashions (Pvt.) Ltd. in violation of the instructions had
chosen to credit the cheque on the 9th which was consequently dishonoured. The
Petitioner says that the 3rd and 4th respondents rejected the contention of
the Petitioner's attorney that no criminal proceedings could be instituted in
the absence of any material to show dishonest intention especially in view of
P11 and that it was prima facie a civil transaction. The 4th Respondent denies
that any of the persons referred to by the Petitioner or any one from
Bairdwear Inter Fashions (Pvt.) Ltd. informed him that all the monies due from
the Petitioner has been settled. The 4th Respondent also denies that Ramani
Weeraratne or any one else informed him that they wish to withdraw the
complaint against the Petitioner. Mr. Rajapaksa in his affidavit P9 has
averred that he explained to both the 3rd and 4th Respondents that there was
nothing due from the Petitioner and that it was for that reason the complaint
was sought to be withdrawn. The 4th Respondent had declined the request by
Ramani Weeraratne. When the Petitioner was produced before the learned
Magistrate in open court on the following day (04.03.2002) attorney - at - law
for Bairdwear Inter Fashions (Pvt.) Ltd., Ms. Tilaka Herat had informed court
in the presence of the virtual complaint, Ms. Ramani Weeraratne that all dues
have been settled by the Petitioner and that she wishes to withdraw the
complaint. The Petitioner has on 03.04.2002 when he was produced before the
Magistrate also told the Magistrate that Bairdwear Inter Fashions (Pvt) Ltd.
had sought to withdraw the complaint which the police had refused. This
position is supported by P4. Since Mr. Premathilake was vehement in his
assertion that the complainant sought to withdraw the complaint before the
police and which request the police declined this court called for an
affidavit from Ramani Weeraratne the virtual complainant. The said affidavit
has been tendered to court and filed of record marked X. The said Ramani
Weeraratne has averred that she went to the police

**27**

station on 03.04.2002 between 4.00 p.m. and 6.00 p.m. on being informed by the
Operations Manager of the company that the petitioner has been taken into
custody, with the intention of withdrawing the complaint as the Petitioner has
paid the amounts due to the company on the 30th March. She has averred that
neither the 4th Respondent nor the police officer who recorded her statement
were available at the police station and hence she was unable to withdraw the
complaint and left the police station thereafter. It seems that the said
Ramani Weeraratne has carefully worded her affidavit to prevent any
transgression on the version disclosed by the police. The uncontradicted fact
is that Ramani Weeraratne intended to withdraw the complaint. It appears
therefore that the position of the Petitioner that the complainants sought to
withdraw the complaint is not altogether unfounded. The 3rd Respondent
submitted to court that even though the monies have been paid yet the police
intended to pursue the prosecution against the Petitioner. The arrest of the
Petitioner in the circumstances seemed unnecessary unless actuated by external
considerations.  
  
The Petitioner also complains that the 4th Respondent in order to persuade the
Magistrate to remand the Petitioner, sought to mislead the Magistrate into the
belief that the Petitioner had been absconding; that the Petitioner had on
previous occasions too given similar cheques without funds and had committed
financial frauds on the employees of Smart Fashions (Pvt) Ltd.; that he was
yet to record complaints regarding those incidents and that the investigations
were yet continuing.  
  
In the first instance the 4th Respondent's assertion that the Petitioner was
evading arrest is not tenable. According to the Petitioner there was in the
Petitioner's factory in March 2002 when the industrial action commenced,
finished products to the value of Rs. 10 million and plant and machinery worth
20 million. There was a threat of arson and the Petitioner suspected a hidden
hand behind the unrest. The Petitioner has been in touch with the Nanu Oya
Police ever since the industrial action commenced and sent PI to O. I. C, Nanu
Oya and P 2 to the Prime Minister pleading for help. The Petioner consulted
his attorney - at- law Mr. Rajapakse who addressed a complaint P3 to O. I. C
Nanu Oya. The Petitioner sought an interim order from the District Court of
Nuwara Eliya against a group of employees from interfering with the management
of Smart Fashions (Pvt.) Ltd., 4 R3 relied upon by the 4th Respondent is proof
of such interference. The Petitioner complains that the Police refused to
record his complaint but proceeded to record 4R3 relating to

**28**

the labor dispute. The Petitioner says that on 03. 04. 2002 when the
Petitioner went into a Hotel in Nuwara Eliya after having attended Court, some
of the employees who are Defendants in the said case threatened him and he
consequently contacted the 2nd Respondent regarding the threats and thereafter
three police of officers from Nuwara Eliya Police Station met him and required
him and the Defendants to meet the 4th Respondent at the police station. The
Petitioner went to the Nuwara Eliya Police Station at about 2 p.m. to make a
complaint regarding the incident that took place in the Hotel. Police arrested
him on an allegation for cheating.  
  
The complaint of cheating against the Petitioner was made by Ramani Weeraratne
on 15. 03.2002 P5. The Petitioner states that only when he reported to the
Nuwara Eliya Police station to lodge a complaint regarding the incident that
took place at the hotel in the Nuwara Eliya town earlier on the same day that
he was told that he would be arrested on a complaint of cheating. Until that
moment no police officers had come looking for him and had no notice of the
complaint (P5)  
  
If the 4th Respondent says that 6th Respondent went looking for him it was
false. The entries of the 6th Respondent are self serving and are designed to
mislead the Magistrate to obtain a remand order.  
  
I am satisfied that the 4th Respondent misled the Magistrate into making a
remand order by his allegation that the Petitioner had on previous occasions
too given similar cheques without funds in the account and that investigations
into such complaints are being continued. There is no material placed before
court to support the 4th Respondent's contention that the Petitioner has
committed similar offences. The allegation that the petitioner was evading
arrest and investigations into other matters are continuing must also fail.  
  
The position taken up by the 4th Respondent there was no application to
withdraw the complaints is palpably false and unworthy of a police officer on
whom the responsibility of acting fairly reasonably and honestly has been
discharged and his audacity to blatantly lie before this Court demands that
this Court take serious congnizance of his conduct. The attitude of 3rd and
4th Respondents clearly demonstrates that they were being led from behind the
stage. Malice cannot be negatived.

**29**

In _Senaratne Vs. Punya de Silva and others_ (1)Amerasinghe, J. laid down the
test to be followed when an arrest is sought to be made without warrant. His
Lordship stated: "Were circumstances, objectively regarded-the subjective
satisfaction of the police officer making the arrest in not enough - that
should have induced the 1st Respondent to suspect that the Petitioner was
concerned in the commission of those offences?.........................the
suspicion must not having been of an uncertain and vague nature, but of a
positive and definite character providing reasonable grounds for concluding
that the Petitioner was concerned in the commission of the
offences....................it is of importance that no one should be arrested
by the police except on grounds which the particular circumstances of the
arrest justified entertainment of the reasonable suspicion." In _Channa Peiris
Vs. Attorney General and Others_ (2) Amerasinghe, J. stated that reasonable
suspicion may be based upon matters within the officer's knowledge or upon
credible information furnished to him, or upon a combination of both
sources..................a suspicion does not become reasonable merely because
the source of the information is credit worthy. If he is activated by an
unreliable informant the officer making the arrest should as matter of
prudence act with great circumspection than if the information had come from a
credit worthy source." Amerasinghe, J. went on to state "Article 13 (1) could
be violated not only by the act of first depriving a person of his liberty in
violation of procedure established by law, but also by holding any person in
custody of the law during any period unless perhaps the detention is extremely
brief and momentary so as to be of a de _mininus_ nature when he is deprived
of his liberty contrary to the procedure established by law he is under
arrest.  
  
In _Faiz vs. Attorney General_ (3) the Petitioner was arrested at about 6.30
p.m. 26.04.1991 and produced before the Magistrate on the following evening
within the prescribed 24 hour maximum period, and remanded till the 29th and
released on bail. Fernando and Perera, J J. held that 13 (2) was violated.
Fernando, J. explained that in the circumstances of the case the detention was
unnecessarily prolonged. In this case the Petitioner complains that the 4th
Respondent induced the attorney at law Mr. Rajapaksa to leave the police
station on the pretext that the Petitioner would be produced on the following
day and sought to produce him before the Magistrate at his bungalow around
8.00 p. m. This is clearly a violation of 13 (2).

**30**

It is my view that the 4th Respondent could not have arrested the petitioner
and produced him before the Magistrate especially in view of the fact that he
has repeatedly been told that the transaction between the Petitioner and
Bairdwear was of a civil nature that in any event the money due has been paid.
In those circumstances the question of reasonable suspicion or the credibility
of the source did not arise. It appears that the Petitioner was detained at
the police station from 2.00 o' clock until he was produced before the
Magistrate at his bungalow around 8.00 p. m. There is no cogent reason
considering all attendant circumstances that transpired to discount the
Petitioner's allegation that the 4th Respondent misled both the Petitioner and
his counsel that the Petitioner would be produced before Court on the
following day, but sought to produce him after attorney-at-law had departed
from the police station. Attorney-at -law, Mr. Rajapaksa in his affidavit P9
has stated that he inquired from the 4th Respondent when the Petitioner would
be produced before the Magistrate so that he could make representations to
secure his release.  
  
On a consideration of all the material disclosed before court, I am of the
view that the 3rd and 4th Respondents have acted in violation of the
Petitioner's rights as enshrined in Article 13(1) and 13 (2).  
  
Accordingly the 3rd Respondent shall personally pay the Petitioner a sum of
Rs. 25,000/- as compensation.  
  
The 4th Respondent shall also personally pay the Petitioner a sum of Rs.
40,000/- as compensation.  
  
I also order the State to pay a sum of Rs. 20,000/- as costs.  
  
The 3rd and 4th Respondents and the State shall deposit the above amounts on
or before 31. 03. 2004 with the Registrar of the Supreme Court.  
  
I also direct the National Police Commission in consultation with Inspector
General of Police to initiate disciplinary proceeding against the 4th
Respondent upon charges of misleading the Magistrate into making a remand
order and also stating to this court matters in his affidavit which he knows
are not true.  
  
**FERNANDO. J** -l agree.  
  
**YAPA. J.** -I agree.  
  
_**Relief granted.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/14.html_  

