##  Amarasena and Another v. Jayaratnem, Officer In Charge, Mt. Lavinia Police
Station and Others - SLR - 385, Vol 1 of 2003 [2002] LKSC 14; (2003) 1 Sri LR
385 (11 September 2002)

**385**

**AMARASENA AND ANOTHER**

**v.**

******JAYARATNEM, OFFICER-IN-CHARGE, MT.LAVINIA POLICE**

**STATION AND OTHERS** ****



SUPREME COURT

S. N. SILVA, CJ.

BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND

EDUSSURIYA, J.

SC (FR) APPLICATION NO. 290/2002

11TH SEPTEMBER, 2002



Fundamental Rights - Attempt by police officer to apprehend petitioners on a
complaint given by mistake - Resistance by the petitioners \- Articles 11,
13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution - Prohibition on police against detaining
a suspect for an unreasonable period without producing him before Magistrate._

_ _

The 1st and 2nd petitioners were proceeding in a three wheeler to the
Telecommunications office, Ratmalana when the police attempted to arrest them
on information given by a person that they were concerned in an offence. It
appeared that the informant was misled as to the identity of the petitioners.
When a police officer attempted to apprehend them, the 1st petitioner became
violent and bit off a portion of the police officer's ear lobe. The 2nd
petitioner also got involved in the fray. They were both arrested for
obstructing the police officer from discharging his functions and for causing
grievous hurt to a constable. They were arrested at about 1.00 p.m. on
04.05.2002, detained overnight at the police station and produced before a
Magistrate at noon the next day. The police had to use reasonable force in
arresting them. Medical evidence disclosed an abrasion on the 1st petitioner.



**Held :**



The alleged infringement of Articles 11 and 13(1) were not established on the
facts of the case. However, the arrest of the petitioner for obstruction and
causing grievous hurt did not warrant the detention of the petitioners at the
police station overnight. Such detention was unreasonable. Investigations
could have been concluded swiftly and the petitioners produced before the
Magistrate on the same day. There was a duty to produce the petitioners before
a Magistrate within a reasonable time not exceeding 24 hours.

386

2\. In the circumstances there was an infringement of the petitioners' rights
under Article 13(2) of the Constitution.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_J.C. Weliamuna_ with _Lavangi Weerapana_ and _Charika Samarakoon_ for
peti­tioners.

_N. Srikantha_ with _C. Jeya Devi Royappu_ and _K.S. Balakrishnan_ for 1st,
2nd, 3rd and 4th respondents.

_Viveka Siriwardene de Silva,_ State Counsel for Attorney-General.

_Cur. adv. vult._

April 4, 2003

**SARATH N. SILVA, C.J.**



The 1st petitioner is an Electrical Superintendent, employed in the Ceylon
Electricity Board and the 2nd petitioner is a person who is working under him
in a private capacity. The petitioners have been granted leave to proceed in
respect of alleged infringement of their fundamental rights, guaranteed by
Articles 11,13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution.



The incident, which is the subject matter of this application took place on
4.5.2002. The 1st petitioner finished his work at a location in Wattala and
came with the 2nd petitioner who is working as a cleaner in a lorry owned by
him, to the Liberty Plaza Shopping Complex at Colpetty, at about 12 noon to
get a switch key cut for the lorry. Thereafter he went to the Billing Centre
at the Telecom office at Ratmalana. That being a Saturday, the Billing Centre
was due to close at 1.00 p.m. and the petitioner had to rush to that place. He
states that after parking the vehicle when he was walk­ing hurriedly towards
the gate of the Telecom office, a tri-shaw that was heading towards Moratuwa
slowed down and a person asked whether he signalled before parking. He
identified the 2nd respon­dent Sgt. Ediriweera as the person who spoke to him
in this

387



manner. He claims that he answered the respondent saying that he did in fact
signal and rushed towards the Telecom office. Before he could reach the gate
of the Telecom office, he was apprehended by the 2nd respondent. At this stage
he stated that he bit the ear of the 2nd respondent to free himself and the
1st and 3rd respondents came and assaulted him.



The version of the respondents presents a different aspect. The 1st respondent
being the Officer - in - Charge of the Intelligence Unit of the Mt.Lavinia
Police, has stated that he was engaged in an investigation to apprehend two
suspects, namely Asiri Fernando and 'Army Jagath', who were wanted in
connection with a number of robberies of motor vehicles. He received
informa­tion that these two persons have been sighted and he set off together
with the 2nd and 3rd respondents in a 3 wheeler to appre­hend them. Whilst
going along Galle Road they met the informant who stated that a person
resembling the said Asiri Fernando was seen at the Liberty Plaza a short while
earlier and was seen getting a key cut. The informant gave the number of the
vehicle in which the wanted suspects were alleged to be travelling as 58-3264.
When they were proceeding further along Galle Road, they saw the vehicle
bearing that number near the Telecom office at Ratmalana.



The 3rd respondent signaled the driver to stop the vehicle but he did not heed
the signal. They overtook the vehicle and stopped ahead of it. According to
the 1st respondent, a person whom he subsequently identified as the 1st
petitioner hastily got down from the vehicle and rushed towards the Telecom
office. They pursued the 1st petitioner. Then the 2nd respondent asked him to
stop, which was ignored by the 1st petitioner. Then the 2nd respondent caught
him by the hand and showed his official identity card. According to the
respondents the 1st petitioner grappled with the 2nd respondent, biting off a
portion of the left ear lobe of the 2nd respondent and spitting it out.



The 1st respondent states that at that point he delivered a blow on the 1st
petitioner and since he was behaving violently used force to bring him under
control. He explained to the 1st petitioner that he is being arrested for the
offence of voluntarily obstructing a public servant in the discharge of his
public functions. The 2nd peti­tioner who joined in the fray was also arrested
on the same charge



388



and they were brought to the Mt. Lavinia Police Station in the three-wheeler.



According to the petitioners none of the police officers were in uniform.
However, according to the police, the 3rd respondent being a police constable,
was in uniform and others being officers of the Intelligence Unit were not
clad in uniform.



The 1st and 2nd petitioners were produced before the Acting Magistrate on the
following day and were released on bail around 1.30 p.m.



The hospital ticket R2 issued by a doctor at the Police Hospital and the
Medico Legal Report Examination form 2R1 issued by a doctor at the Colombo
South Hospital disclose that the 2nd respon­dent had a cartilage laceration on
his left ear and that a portion of an ear lobe was missing. The injury is
described as been grievous. The Medico Legal Report P10 in respect of the 1st
petitioner reveals that he had one abrasion of 1/2 centimeter over the lateral
aspect of the left upper neck, probably caused by a finger nail. The
Consultant's opinion noted in the report is that the 1st petitioner suf­fered
acute stress reaction due to assault. The medical report P10 does not support
the allegation of the 1st petitioner that he was severely assaulted in the
three wheeler and later at the police sta­tion, causing him to bleed from the
nose and mouth.



The facts presented above disclose a misapprehension on both sides. The 1st
petitioner had legitimately engaged in his chores and was rushing towards the
Billing Center of the Telecom office to get there before closing time. The
1st, 2nd and 3rd respon­dents being officers of the Intelligence Unit were
checking on infor­mation that had been received about 2 persons who were
wanted in connection with several robberies of vehicles. It is probable that
the informant was misled by the fact that the 1st petitioner got a key cut and
hurriedly went towards Ratmalana.



The 1st respondent and the other officers had reasonable information to
apprehend the 1st petitioner to check his identity. The 1st petitioner on the
other hand being innocent of any offence was rushing towards the Billing
Center and would very probably have brushed aside the police officer in plain
clothes, who was try­ing to apprehend him. However, from that point onwards
the reaction

389



 of the 1st petitioner descends to a level of being inhuman. His biting off of
the ear lobe of the 2nd respondent and spitting it out in the manner
graphically described by the respondents is something that can not be
condoned. If he paused for a while and revealed his true identity, subsequent
events could have been avoided. Police officers should in the discharge of
their duties take every step to detect offences and apprehend persons who have
committed such offences. In this instance, it is clear that the officers of
the Intelligence Unit had been following the information given by one of their
informants. Considering the type of offences that were being investigated they
could not possibly have used normal police vehi­cles or been clad in uniform.
They had to take action swiftly, for which they cannot be faulted.



In the circumstances I am of the view that the 1st and 2nd respondents had
reasonable grounds to arrest the petitioner. Admittedly, at the time of arrest
the 2nd respondent had suffered a grievous injury which had been inflicted
when they were discharg­ing their official duties. There is no basis to doubt
the version of theist respondent that the petitioners were informed of the
reasons for the arrest. In the circumstances I am of the view that there has
been no infringement of the fundamental right guaranteed by Article 13(1) of
the Constitution.



As regards the infringement of Article 11, the allegation of the 1st
petitioner is that he was assaulted severely at the place of the arrest, in
the trishaw and thereafter at the police station. On the other hand the
respondents have stated that they used force only at the place of arrest and
that too after the 2nd respondent suffered injuries. The medical report P10 as
noted above reveals only one injury, an abrasion 1/2 centimeter in the region
of the neck which could have been caused by finger nails. This is supportive
of the fact that the respondents used reasonable force to apprehend the 1st
petitioner.



The opinion of the consultant that the 1st petitioner suffered acute stress
due to assault does not take into account the fact that the 1st petitioner
himself had bitten off a portion of the police officer's ear. That by itself
is totally irrational behaviour. The mental stress referred to in the report
is probably the cumulative result of the entire incident in which the 1st
petitioner caused the more serious injury. In

390



the circumstances I am inclined to accept the version of the respon­dents
regarding the injury that was inflicted on the 1st petitioner in the course of
the arrest. There is no basis to come to any finding as to an infringement of
Article 11 of the Constitution.



I have now to deal with the alleged infringement of Article 13(2) of the
Constitution. Article 13(2) guarantees to every person held in custody the
fundamental right to be brought before the Judge of the nearest competent
court according to the procedure established by law. The procedure established
by law is contained in section 37 of the Criminal Procedure Code Act, No. 15
of 1979, which reads as follows:



"Any peace officer shall not detain in custody or otherwise confine a person
arrested without a warrant for a longer period than under all the
circumstances of the case is reasonable, and such period shall not exceed
twenty-four hours exclusive of the time nec­essary for the journey from the
place of arrest to the Magistrate."



The petitioners were arrested at 1.00 p.m. and were brought before the
Magistrate at about noon on the next day. They were detained overnight at the
police station. When the facts relevant to the arrest and detention are
objectively viewed, it is seen that the 1st petitioner was apprehended by the
1st respondent to verify his identity on the basis of information received
with regard to a want­ed suspect. However, the arrest was in connection with
the offence of obstructing a public servant in the discharge of his public
func­tions. In addition there is the offence of causing grievous hurt in view
of the injury suffered by the 2nd respondent. It would have been obvious to
the respondent that the initial apprehension was on the basis of mistaken
identity. Therefore the subsequent deten­tion is warranted only for the
purpose of investigating the offences under sections 183 and 316 of the Penal
Code.



These offences are alleged to have been committed in respect of police
officers and the investigation could have been concluded swiftly. The limit of
24 hours laid down in section 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is the
maximum period of detention. However, the section clearly provides that a
person should not be detained in custody for more than the period that is
reasonable under the cir­cumstances of the case. In this instance, as noted
above, the

391



 investigation did not involve any ramifications and should have been
concluded within a few hours. The petitioners could then have been produced
before the Magistrate on the same day. It appears that the respondents have
exceeded this period and kept the peti­tioners in custody overnight at the
police station. This in my view amounts to an infringement of the fundamental
right guaranteed to the petitioners under Article 13(2) of the Constitution
and I grant a declaration to that effect. Considering the facts and
circumstances of the case and in particular the conduct of the 1st petitioner
referred to above, I am of the view that the petitioners are not enti­tled to
any compensation in the matter. Further considering the fact that the 1st to
3rd respondents have acted in the lawful discharge of their functions and the
nature of the infringement in respect of which a declaration is granted, I
have to place on record that the granting of the declaration by itself will
not affect the careers of the 1st to 4th respondents.



The State will pay a sum of Rs. 5000/- as costs to the peti­tioners.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.  
**EDUSSURIYA, J.** \- I agree. _  
Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/14.html_  

