##  Gunaratna v. People'S Bank and Others - SLR - 381, Vol 1 of 2001 [2001]
LKSC 14; (2001) 1 Sri LR 381 (25 July 2001)

**381**

**GUNARATNA  
v.  
PEOPLE'S BANK AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
S.N. SILVA, CJ.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
SC APPLICATION NO. 514/99  
06TH DECEMBER, 2000  
  
Fundamental rights - Termination of services - Different punishments imposed
in disciplinary proceedings - Article 12(1) of the Constitution.  
  
_The 1st respondent Bank after due inquiry, took disciplinary action against
five employees including the petitioner on the basis of certain irregular
transactions. The services of the petitioner and three other employees were
terminated, while the services of one Rajendra, who was on extension of
service was terminated by the refusal of further extension for him.  
  
**Held :  
  
**The inequality to offend the principle of equality must be actually and
palpably unreasonable and arbitrary.  
  
_Per_ Bandaranayake, J.  
  
"Although charges laid against two persons are the same, where there is a
discretion in imposing punishment, the degree of culpability of each person
should be considered and different punishments may be imposed. This is a
permissible and valid differentiation being in no way inconsistent with the
equal protection of the law guaranteed by Article 12(1)"  
  
**Cases referred to :  
  
**1\. _Wijesinghe v. The Attorney-General_ (1978-79-80) Sri LR 102  
  
2\. _Ceylon Paper Sacks Ltd. v. Janatha Estate Development Board_ (1993) BALD
Law Reports Vol. V Part I Pg. 6  
  
3\. _Ratnayake v. The Attorney-General_ (1997) 2 SRI LIZ 98  
  
4\. _Perera v. Montague Jayawickrama_ (1985) 1 Sri LR 285 at Pg. 300  
  
5\. _Jayasinghe v. Attorney-General_ (1994) 2 A Sri LR 74382 Sri Lanka Law
Reports " [2001] 1 Sri LR 74

**382**

6\. _Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Justice Tendolkar_ AIR (1958) SC 538  
  
7\. _Lachman Das Kewal Ram v. State of Bombay_ AIR (1952) SC 235  
  
8\. _Arkansas Gas Co. v. Railroad Commission_ 261 US 379 at 384  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Romesh de Silva, P.C_. with _Geethaka Gunawardena_ for petitioner.  
  
_Gomin Dayasri_ with _Ms. Mali Jinadasa_ for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

July 25, 2001.  
  
**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
  
**The Petitioner was a career officer of the 1st respondent Bank. He joined
the Bank in 1962 as a Clerk and later was promoted to the position of
Assistant Regional Manager of the Bank. In November 1993, while he was serving
in the post of Assistant Regional Manager, he was served with a charge sheet
containing nine charges (A). In March 1996 he was served with an amended
charge sheet containing 10 charges (F). By letter dated 10. 07. 1996, the
petitioner was placed under interdiction without pay, on the alleged grounds
of irregularities committed by the petitioner in granting overdraft facilities
to one Translanka Investments Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as TIL) (H). Along
with the petitioner four other officers were also served with charge sheets.
However, according to the petitioner, only two of those officers were
interdicted. Although all five officers had given explanations, they were not
accepted by the Bank and formal inquiries were held against all of them.  
  
The petitioner alleges that the charge sheet served on V. Rajendra, Regional
Manager (Inspection and Branch Supervision) contained identical charges as
that of the amended charge sheet served on the petitioner. However, according
to the petitioner, the said Rajendra was not interdicted. At the inquiry the
petitioner was found guilty of

**383**

four charges out of ten whereas the said Rajendra was found guilty of seven
out of ten charges. The 1st respondent Bank thereafter dismissed the
petitioner by letter dated 17. 05. 1999, with effect from 10. 07. 1996, but
the said Rajendra was allowed to retire from service with all retirement
benefits. Although the petitioner had requested an opportunity to make
representations to the Board of Directors regarding his dismissal, his
services were terminated without granting this opportunity.  
  
The petitioner submitted that he was 57 years of age with an unblemished
career at the 1st respondent Bank for 34 years, at the time of his termination
of services. He alleged that he had not received equal protection of the law,
due to the following reasons :  
  
1\. the petitioner was interdicted without pay, while the said Rajendra was
not interdicted, but allowed to continue in service until he was 56 years of
age;  
  
2\. the petitioner was interdicted without pay contrary to the provisions of
the Disciplinary Code of the 1st respondent Bank;  
  
3\. while the petitioner was dismissed from service, the said Rajendra was
allowed to retire with all retirement benefits even though he was found guilty
of seven charges;  
  
4\. although the General Manager of the 1st respondent Bank was of the view
that the petitioner should not be dismissed from service, the petitioner was
dismissed contrary to the provisions of the Disciplinary Code;  
  
5\. the recommendations of the Inquiring Officer had not been taken into
consideration by the 1st respondent and/or the 2nd to 11th respondents.  
  
The petitioner accordingly alleges that by the said action of the 1st
respondent Bank, his fundamental rights guaranteed

**384**

under Articles 12 and 14 of the Constitution and more particularly by Article
12(1) had been violated.  
  
This Court granted leave to proceed in respect of the alleged infringement of
Article 12(1) of the Constitution.  
  
The grievance of the petitioner is that he has been subjected to unequal
treatment by the 1st respondent Bank. The basis of the petitioner's complaint
is that at a time when the petitioner and Rajendra were 'similarly
circumstanced', the petitioner was treated unequally, in violation of Article
12(1) of the Constitution.  
  
The charges against the petitioner are in respect of transactions conducted at
the Queens Street Branch of the 1st respondent Bank and relate to the period
01. 01. 1993 to 09. 07. 1993. The 1st respondent Bank claims that the said
transactions caused a loss of Rs. 72.85 million.  
  
It is the position of the petitioner that the relevant transactions relate to
two companies, namely TIL and Radhika Enterprises. TIL maintained two Bank
accounts at the Queens Street Branch and was given Bill purchasing facilities.
Cheques drawn by TIL were presented through the clearing system to the account
of the said Company. At the time the cheques were presented, there was no
money in the account, but the Bank Manager permitted the cheques to be
realised as was the practice which was prevailing on the basis that TIL would
deposit all monies to cover the said cheques prior to the end of the day. In
keeping with this practice, TIL deposited money to cover all cheques prior to
the end of the day.  
  
In these circumstances, it was apparent that,  
  
a. each cheque presented was a request for an overdraft;  
  
b. the Bank Manager had the discretion to permit such an overdraft which in
fact he had permitted; and

**385**

c. the Bank account of TIL was never overdrawn at the end of the day.  
  
The respondents have made comprehensive submissions on the transactions of TIL
with the 1st respondent Bank. According to the respondents, the cheques drawn
by TIL which were presented to the Bank were paid in the morning without
sufficient funds in the respective accounts. Randika Enterprises cheques were
deposited to the TIL account and purchased after Banking hours so that those
cheques could not be presented for clearing on the same day. The only
signatory of the cheques drawn by Randika Enterprises on Seylan Bank of Old
Moor Street Branch was the Commercial Manager of UL and one of the authorised
signatories of the Current Accounts maintained with People's Bank, Queens
Street Branch. The Branch Manager of the Queens Street Branch purchased the
cheques from Randika Enterprises exceeding the limit of Rs. 15,000,000/- drawn
in favour of TIL on Seylan/Sampath Bank cheques. By this transaction UL
received immediate credit before the cheques were realised. The cheques drawn
by TIL which were presented to the Bank were paid in the morning without
sufficient funds. Randika Enterprises cheques were despatched to the TIL
account and purchased in the evening so that cheques could not be purchased
for clearing on the same day.  
  
A report dated 21. 07. 1993 was sent by an Inspector (Branches) to Assistant
General Manager (Inspection) through the Chief Inspector (Branches) on the
purchase of cheques to TIL at People's Bank Queen's Streets Branch. In this
report, which runs into 23 paragraphs, the following observations were made :  
  
" **. . .** According to the reports **. . .** majority of the cheques drawn
by M/S Translanka Investments Ltd., on both accounts (A/C 1140202379 and
1140202642) didn't have sufficient funds. At this stage the Branch Manager
should

**386**

take a decision to either honour those cheques by granting temporary
overdrafts or to dishonour those cheques.  
  
The branch has not dishonoured the cheques, but retained the cheques without
creating an overdraft to the accounts under special passwords from the
Manager.  
  
Settlement clearing should reach the S.L.A.C.H before 12.00 noon. In majority
of the cases the drawer (i.e. M/S Translanka Investments Ltd.) didn't make any
deposits (i.e. cheques or cash) to enable the branch to honour such cheques.  
  
Since no deposits had been made by the drawer, and the branch had not
dishonoured the cheques, it is considered that the branch had paid those
cheques under unauthorised temporary overdraft, although it has not been
reflected in the current account ledger print out.  
  
**. . .** The mode of this operation is purely for the purpose of obtaining
credit without any adequate security. This operation had started on a small
scale in January 1993 (somewhere on the 27th) and they were able to increase
the credit up to Rs. 86,114 million as at 1993. 07. 09 as at the day of our
inspection. Now the amount unpaid is Rs. 83,739 million (R2)."  
  
It is common ground that in respect of these irregular transactions, the 1st
respondent instituted disciplinary proceedings against five employees of the
1st respondent Bank. These five employees included the Manager and the second
officer in charge of the Queens Street Branch, the Regional Manager of the
Colombo Inner Region (Credit and Administration), the Regional Manager of the
Colombo Inner Region Inspection and Branch Supervision and the petitioner, who
was the Assistant Regional Manager Colombo Inner Region. Rajendra was the
Regional Manager Colombo Inner Region (Inspection and Branch Supervision).
According to the

**387**

respondents, the 1st respondent Bank, after a due inquiry, took disciplinary
action against all five employees who were found guilty. This included the
petitioner as well as the said Rajendra. The services of the petitioner and
the other three employees were terminated while the services of Rajendra, who
was on extension of service, was terminated by the refusal of a further
extension for him.  
  
The petitioner as the Assistant Regional Manager (Colombo Inner Region) was
responsible for the supervision of the credit facilities of the Queens Street
Branch during the period the said irregular transactions took place. These
transactions in question related to the irregular and improper granting of
credit facilities which ultimately led to the loss of Rs. 83,739 million. The
five officers of the 1st respondent Bank who received charge sheets relating
to the said transactions were closely connected to the functions of the Bank
Branch and the transactions in question. The alleged transaction took place
during a period of seven months, spanning from January to July 1993. It was
the position of the respondents that the services of all those employees who
were directly responsible and involved during the entire period of seven
months the alleged transactions took place, on an almost daily basis, were
terminated by the 1st respondent. This clearly included the petitioner.  
  
The position taken up by the 1st respondent Bank is that Rajendra's duties as
Regional Manager (Colombo Inner Region - Inspection and Branch Supervision)
consisted of Inspection and Branch Supervision in the Branches of Colombo
Inner Region. The respondents claim that the granting of credit facilities to
TIL did not fall within the purview of Rajendra's substantive post and
therefore he was not directly involved in the transaction in question, except
for a brief period of 15 days out of a period of 7 months, where he acted for
the Regional Manager (Colombo Inner Region - Credit and Administration).
Nevertheless, it is to be noted that the 1st respondent Bank took disciplinary
action against Rajendra.

**388**

At the time this incident occurred, Rajendra who was on his 1st extension, was
not granted an extension of service and was made to retire.  
  
It is also common ground that the petitioner was functioning as the Assistant
General Manager (Colombo Inner Region) and was responsible for the supervision
of the credit facilities of the Queens Street Branch. His duties included the
supervision of granting of credit facilities to customers of the Banks falling
within his region. Throughout the period these irregular transactions took
place, via., from January 1993 to July 1993, the petitioner was functioning in
the said post. There is no evidence to show that the petitioner had at any
stage prevented these irregular transactions from taking place or detect any
of these irregular transactions. Rajendra, who was the Regional Manager
(Colombo Inner Region - Inspection and Branch Supervision) had acted for the
Regional Manager (Colombo \- Inner Region - Credit and Administration) only
for a brief period during May and June 1993. Due to the limited period he
acted, Rajendra could not have been in a position to obtain knowledge of the
transactions carried out by TIL.  
  
Learned Counsel for 1st to 11th respondents submitted that in the context of
this case where a difference in treatment is alleged, in order to establish a
violation of Article 12(1) of the Constitution, the petitioner must not only
prove that he has been adversely affected, but also that he has been treated
less favourably than those who are similarly circumstanced without any
reasonable or rational basis.  
  
In support of this contention, the learned Counsel relied on  
  
_Wijesinghe v. The Attorney General_ ,(1) _Ceylon Paper Sacks Ltd., v. Janatha
Estate Development Board_ ,(2) _Ratnayake v. The Attorney General_ ,(3)
_Perera v. Montague Jayawickrama_ ,(4) and _Jayasinghe v. The Attorney
General_ ,(5) In _Jayasinghe v. The Attorney General_ (supra), the Court held
that,

**389**

"It is not enough for the petitioner to show that he has been denied the
protection of the law. He must also show that he has been denied equal
protection-that he was treated less favourably than others similarly
situated."  
  
Discussing the provisions in the Indian Constitution and the principles
applicable to situations where equal treatment is in question, Jain Kagzi is
of the view that,  
  
"The equals should not be placed unequally; and at the same time unequals
should not be treated as equals in matters of promotion, retirement benefits
etc., The equal opportunity requires that men placed similarly should be
treated similarly. The subjection of unequals to the same rules for
appointment through promotion and the payment of gratuity and pension should
not be `per se' discriminative. Equal opportunity is for equals, that is to
say, those who are similarly circumstanced in life. (The Constitution of
India, 5th edition, Pg. 238)."  
  
Article 12(1) of the Sri Lankan Constitution guarantees equal protection of
the law. It requires that all persons similarly circumstanced shall be equally
treated. However, this does not imply that each act of different treatment
amounts to an infringement. A classification or a differentiation based on
reasonable grounds would be lawful and valid. In _Ram Krishna Dalmia v.
Justice Tendolkar_ ,(6) and _Lachman Das Kewal Ram v. State of Bombay_ ,(7) it
was stated that, 'for a classification to be good and valid and not arbitrary,
it should always be founded upon some differentia. For this purpose, two
conditions will have to be satisfied, viz:  
  
a. the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which
distinguish persons that are grouped in from others who are left out of the
group; and  
  
b. that the differentia must bear a reasonable, or a rational relation to the
objects and effects sought to be achieved.

**390**

In _Arkansas Gas Co. v. Railroad Commission_ ,(8) it was said that,  
  
"Inequality per se does not violate equal protection, for every selection of
persons for regulation pronounces inequality in some degree. The inequality to
offend the principle of equality must be actually and palpably unreasonable
and arbitrary."  
  
In these circumstances, I am of the view that the petitioner has not made out
that he and Rajendra were similarly situated or equally circumstanced. Nor has
the petitioner shown that he has been differently treated from Rajendra
without any reasonable basis. Rajendra and the petitioner have been found
guilty of acts of misconduct constituting a breach of discipline. The
difference in treatment is clearly referrable to the degree of culpability in
relation to their respective acts and omissions. Although charges laid against
two persons are the same, where there is discretion in imposing punishment,
the degree of culpability of each person should be considered and different
punishments may be imposed. That is a permissible and valid differentiation
being in no way inconsistent with the equal protection of the law guaranteed
by Article 12(1). The petitioner has failed to establish a violation of
Article 12(1) of the Constitution. This application is accordingly dismissed,
but in all the circumstances without costs.  
  
**S.N. SILVA, CJ. -** I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J -** I agree.  
  
_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/14.html_  

