##  Mahanama Tilakaratne v. Bandula Wickramasinghe, Senior Superintendent of
Police and Others - SLR - 372, Vol 1 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 14; (1999) 1 Sri LR
372 (21 July 1999)

**372**

**MAHANAMA TILAKARATNE  
v.  
BANDULA WICKRAMASINGHE,  
SENIOR SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.,  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 595/98  
MAY 25 AND 28, 1999.

Fundamental rights - Offences under sections 300, 141 and 316 of the Penal
Code - Issue of warrant for arrest of suspect - Section 124 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Code Act - Arrest after the cancellation of warrant and
release of suspect on bail - Validity of arrest and detention of suspect in
police custody - Arrest under section 32 (1) (b) of the CCRP Act - Articles 13
(1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution._

On 11.06.1998 officer in charge (OIC) of the Kahatuduwa Police Station filed a
report at the Kesbewa Magistrate's Court informing the Magistrate that he
investigated into a complaint made on 01.06.1998 by one Somachandra that he
had been assaulted on that day with clubs by three persons including the
petitioner's son and that an offence under section 316 (grievous hurt) has
been disclosed. The OIC obtained a date namely, 10.09.1998 to file a further
report after completing investigations.

On 10.09.1998, Sub Inspector Rodrigo of the CID filed a further report in the
same case at the Kesbewa Magistrate's Court. Relying on the statement of one
Eugine Padmini, (which statement was not tendered to the Supreme Court) that
report implicated the petitioner in the assault on Somachrandra and further

373

alleged that the petitioner had fired four shots in the direction of
Somachandra who was lying fallen, offences punishable under sections 300, 141
and 316. In his report Rodrigo stated that on the advice of the Attorney-
General he was moving for warrants to search the petitioner's house and to
arrest the suspects.

The Magistrate expressed misgivings about the warrants sought when Rodrigo and
the 2nd respondent (Superintendent of Police, CID) met the judge in chambers.
Whereupon, a Senior State Counsel appeared assisted by the 1st respondent
(Senior Superintendent of Police) and persuaded the Magistrate to issue the
warrants asked for on the ground, which the Magistrate recorded namely, the
warrants were asked for 'because the suspect is a High Court Judge and the
Magistrate must assist the Police`. The warrants were apparently sought and
issued under section 124 of the CCRP Act. The Magistrate also directed the
police that he be kept informed of the arrest and the suspects be produced
before him the following day itself. The same day, the petitioner surrendered
to the Kesbewa Magistrate whereupon the Magistrate cancelled the warrant for
his arrest and enlarged him on bail, and directed the Registrar to notify the
CID the orders made. The Registrar addressed a letter to the Director, CID, in
compliance with the Magistrate's direction. The same information was also
conveyed to the CID by telephone which message was received by a woman sub
Inspector named Fonseka. Before leaving the Court, the petitioner obtained
certified copies of the Magistrate's order and the Registrar's letter
addressed to the Director, CID.

That evening the petitioner was at his residence with his lawyers when several
persons in civilian clothes who identified themselves as CID officers arrived
and sought to arrest the petitioner on a warrant. The 2nd respondent who was
among them was shown the copy of the Magistrate Court proceedings and the
letter addressed to the CID. The 2nd respondent then contacted the 3rd
respondent (DIG Police) over his cellular telephone and proceeded to search
the petitioner's home on the search warrant. At about 7.30 pm the 1st
respondent arrived. He refused to see the Court documents and arrested the
petitioner saying that he had the order of the Attorney-General and the 3rd
respondent to arrest the petitioner even without a warrant. No other reason
for the arrest was given. The petitioner was taken to the CID headquarters and
interrogated till 2.30 am. Lawyers were not allowed to make representations.
They were told that petitioner will be produced that morning at the
Magistrate's Court, Kesbewa.

On 11.09.1998 SI Rodrigo produced the petitioner before the Chief Magistrate,
Colombo, in breach of the direction given by the Kesbewa Magistrate the
previous day and on the false ground that due to unrest prevailing at Kesbewa
there was a danger to the petitioner's life. The 1st respondent was also
present in Court

374

and a State Counsel submitted to the Magistrate on instructions that the
warrant of arrest of the petitioner was not recalled and the petitioner was
not released on bail.

In proceedings before the Supreme Court, the 4th respondent (Attorney-General)
denied that he gave instructions to any Police officer to arrest anyone and
that when he learnt that the 1st respondent had made a note of alleged
instructions, he brought it to the notice of the President.

**Held:**

1\. The purpose of issuing process of Court is to obtain the appearance of a
person in Court and not to secure his presence in any police station or the
CID headquarters. Thus, process may issue in terms of section 124 of the CCRP
Act to compel a suspect to attend Court for an identification parade, and to
assist investigators by requiring the suspect to provide handwriting, finger
prints, samples of hair, fingernails or blood for investigating a crime.

_Per_ Dheeraratne, J.

"Issuing a warrant is a judicial act involving the liberty of an individual
and no warrant of arrest should be lightly issued by a Magistrate simply
because a prosecutor or an investigator thinks it necessary."

2\. Unless a warrant of arrest is issued for the failure to obey summons,
recording of evidence is a sine qua non before issuing a warrant of arrest of
a suspect whether investigations are completed and proceedings are instituted
in the Magistrate's Court under S. 136 (1) (b) of the CCRP Act or the
investigations are incomplete and no proceedings are instituted in Court. The
Magistrate must before issuing a warrant against the offender, record evidence
on oath substantiating the allegation.

3\. On the basis of the 1st respondent's representations to the Chief
Magistrate, the petitioner was arrested on the authority of the warrant and no
other. If that warrant was otherwise legally valid, the 1st respondent could
not have arrested the petitioner as the warrant was directed to SI Rodrigo,
and SI Rodrigo had not endorsed the warrant to another peace officer as
required by section 52 (3) of the CCRP Act; nor was there any justification
for the 1st respondent to have arrested the petitioner in terms of section 32
(1) (b) of the Act, as he was not involved with the investigations of the
alleged offences.

375

4\. The defence that the 1st respondent was acting purely on the orders of his
superior the 3rd respondent and that as a police officer he was bound to do so
is untenable. The arrest under those circumstances was illegal.

5\. The arrest and the detention of the petitioner in police custody were not
in accordance with the law and the 1st and 3rd respondents violated the
petitioner's fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of
the Constitution.

**Cases referred to:**

1. _Faiz v. Attorney-General and others_ \- (1995) 1 Sri LR 372.  
  
2. _Attorney-General v. Jayasinghe_ \- (1949) 50 NLR 203.  
  
3. _Wills v. Sholay Kangany_ \- (1915) 18 NLR 443.  
  
4. _Gunasekera v. De Fonseka_ \- (1972) 75 NLR 246.  
  
5. _Muthusamy v. Kannangara_ \- (1951) 52 NLR 324.  
  
6. _Christy v. Leachinsky_ \- (1947) AC 583.  
  
7. _Corea v. The Queen_ \- (1954) 55 NLR 457.  
  
8. _Senaratna v. Punya de Silva and Others_ \- (1995) 1 Sri LR 272.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Ranjith Abeysuriya, PC_ with _Geethaka Gunewardena_ and _Ms. Priyadarshinie
Dias_ for petitioner. _  
  
__Denzil Gunaratne_ with _Buddhika Jayasinghe_ and _Udayanthi Seneviratne_ for
1st, 2nd, and 3rd respondents.

_K. C. Kamalasabayson, PC, SG_ with _Jayantha Jayasuriya,_ SSC Uditha
Egalahewa, SC for 4th and 6th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult.  
  
_**276**

July 21, 1999.  
**  
DHEERARATNE, J.**

**Introduction**

This is a case teeming with several unusual and strange features, perhaps
unheard of in the annals of our judicial history. The petitioner was admitted
and enrolled as an Advocate in May, 1968. In September, 1978, he joined the
Sri Lanka Judicial Service and served at several places in the Island as a
Magistrate and a District Judge. In January, 1994, he was appointed a High
Court Judge. At the time material to this application, he was officiating as
the High Court Judge, Colombo, sitting in High Court No. 7 and was residing
with his family at Thalagala, Kiriwaththuduwa, a place falling within the
Kahathuduwa Police Station area. The petitioner complains to this Court that
his arrest by the 1st respondent on 10th September, 1998 and his detention
thereafter were violative of his fundamental rights guaranteed under the
Constitution. At the time material to this action, the 1st respondent was a
Senior Superintendent of Police, the 2nd, a Superintendent of Police attached
to the Criminal Investigations Department (CID), the 3rd, a Deputy Inspector-
General of Police (CID), the 5th, the Inspector-General of Police. Besides,
making the Chief Law Officer of the State the Attorney-General, nomine officii
a party to this case (6th respondent) as required statutorily, the petitioner
has also made him a party (4th respondent) personally and by name. The basis
of the alleged complicity of the 2nd and 3rd respondents with the alleged
violations, was that they acted together in concert and collusion with the 1st
respondent in taking the petitioner into custody unlawfully; while that of the
4th respondent was that, by his inaction he facilitated the unlawful arrest.
For the concept of facilitating a violation by inaction, learned counsel for
the petitioner placed much reliance, among other cases, on the case of _Faiz
v. Attorney-General and others_ (1).

377

_The 1st report filed in the Kesbewa Magistrate's Court Case No. BR 653/98_

On 11th June, 1998, the officer-in-charge (OIC) of the Kahathuduwa police
station filed a report at the Kesbewa Magistrate's Court, informing the
Magistrate that he investigated into a complaint made on 1st June by one Uyana
Hewage Niroshini Somachandra of Thalagala. The report stated that according to
the complaint, Uyana Hewa Somachandra was assaulted about 5.40 am with clubs,
at the byroad situated near the house of the petitioner, by petitioner's son
Padmika, a servant of his household named Sena, and a boy working at a smithy
close by called Upul; the incident was said to have occurred when Somachandra
was attempting to put his son Piyum Kalyana into a school van. The report
further said that Piyum Kalyana too made a statement to the effect that the
three persons named earlier assaulted his father with clubs and that he ran
away from that place; when he was running he heard some shots being fired. The
report further said that the injured Somachandra has made a statement while
being warded in the General Hospital Colombo; that an offence punishable under
section 316 (grievous hurt) has been disclosed; that while the statements of
Padmika, Sena and Upul were recorded, the petitioner had volunteered to make a
statement. A summary of the petitioner's statement was given in the report.
The OIC moved the Court by his report, to grant him a date to file a medical
report from the General Hospital, Colombo, and to file a further report having
investigated the matter further. The Court fixed 10th September as the date
for further report. No summons or warrant was requested to be issued by Court.

On 9th September on a motion filed by an AAL on behalf of suspect Padmika, the
case was called and he was bailed out on a personal surety bond of Rs. 1,000.

378

The 2nd report filed in the Kesbewa Magistrate's Court case No. BR 653!98 and
issuance of the warrant to arrest the petitioner

On 10th September, 1998, Sub Inspector Rodrigo of the CID, filed a further
report in the same case at the Kesbewa Magistrate's Court, making the
petitioner the first suspect. Rodrigo, for some reason, wanted to shroud his
report in a veil of secrecy; for, his report was prefaced by a somewhat
startling statement of law, that, in accordance with the case of _Attorney-
General v. Jayasinghe_ (2), the Magistrate should treat his report as a
confidential document; that it should not only be kept in the personal custody
of the Magistrate, but also that no other party should be permitted to inspect
or read the same. I may mention here that Jayasinghe's case, decided nearly
fifty years ago, does not reflect the law as it stands today and was
determined at a time when subsection 122 (3) of the repealed Criminal
Procedure Code was in force, which absolutely prohibited any statement
recorded in the course of a chapter XII enquiry from being seen by or
disclosed to an accused person or his agents. It is a matter of surprise to us
that this unwarranted and obsolete preface either escaped the attention of
learned Senior State Counsel who appeared in support of the relief claimed for
in Rodrigo's report; or, if he did observe it, he took no steps to get it
promptly expunged. Rodrigo stated in this report that he investigated into a
complaint made by K. V. I. Padmini on 11.8.1998 regarding causing grievous
hurt by beating with clubs and shooting; that after the injured person
Somachandra's wife K. V. I. Padmini sent a petition to Her Excellency the
President, the CID was now in the process of making investigations. I may
pause here to mention that in the petition sent by Padmini to Her Excellency,
a copy of which was produced by the 3rd respondent, there is absolutely no
reference to an incident which had occurred on 1st June, 1998; but among some
other allegations made against the petitioner, she has stated that she had
come to know that the petitioner has "ordered" several police stations not to
entertain any statement from her about throwing stones and firing at

379

her house. Rodrigo reported that according to the statement made by K. V.
Eugine Padmini, a sister of K. V. I. Padmini, who now lives at Hingurakgoda,
she had stated that when she was residing with her sister K. V. I. Padmini at
Thalagala, on the night of 25th March, 1998, some stones were thrown and some
shots fired from the direction of the petitioner's house; that she came to
know that on 30th March 1998 the petitioner had fired some shots in the air
and threatened her brother-in-law Somachandra; that in addition she saw on the
morning of the 1st June, 1998, with the aid of a torch light, the petitioner's
son Padmika, his servant Sena and several others assaulting Somachandra with
clubs; that she saw the petitioner giving a club which was in his hands to his
son Padmika saying "kill him, finish him off; that she saw the petitioner
firing three or four shots in the direction of Somachandra who was lying
fallen. Although various other statements and notes were quite readily
submitted to us by 1st to 3rd respondents, Eugine Padmini's statement was not
tendered to us for our perusal. The report did not say that the allegation of
any shots having being fired was found to be true on an examination made at
the spot.

Rodrigo's report further stated that according to the medical report filed
therewith, the injuries on Somachandra were grievous (the medical report
revealed no injury caused by a firearm); and that offences punishable under
sections 300, 141 and 316 were disclosed against the suspects. Rodrigo stated
in the report that on the advice obtained from the Attorney-General, he was
moving Court to issue a search warrant to search the petitioners residence and
to issue a warrant to arrest the suspects, to be in force between 10.9.98 and
17.9.98.

Before Rodrigo filed the report, the 2nd respondent along with Rodrigo, met
the learned Magistrate in his Chambers and discussed about the report they
were intending to file that day and the learned Magistrate expressed certain
misgivings about issuing the warrants of arrest asked for. Thereafter,
according to the 2nd respondent he went to the Piliyandala Police Station and
informed the 3rd respondent

380

over the telephone about the "developments". The 3rd respondent asked him to
prepare a motion and further informed him that he was sending the 1st
respondent and a named Senior State Counsel to the Piliyandala Police Station.
On the same day, that is the 10th of September, about 1pm Rodrigo's report was
filed. Learned Senior State Counsel assisted by the 1st respondent appeared in
open Court, moved that the matter be taken up, and succeeded in persuading the
Court to issue the warrants asked for. It is recorded with laconic brevity
that the warrants were asked for and were issued "because the suspect is a
High Court Judge and that the Magistrate must assist the police". This is a
non sequitur. It was not submitted to the Magistrate that the petitioner was
either avoiding to make a statement or was avoiding arrest by the
investigators. It was not stated why the Magistrate's assistance was required
for the investigation by the arrest of the petitioner and others. However, the
learned Magistrate whose conscience was apparently troubled, took the
precaution to order that he be promptly informed of taking the suspects into
custody and that they be produced before him without delay. The learned
Magistrate recorded the fact that the 1st respondent gave an undertaking to
produce the suspects the following day itself. The Sinhala word "hetama" seems
to suggest that what the Magistrate was made to believe was that the arrest
will be made on the following day and. the suspects will be produced the same
day. The Sinhala letter "ma" conveys no other meaning.

Although no arguments were addressed to us on the manner in which the warrants
were issued for the arrest of the petitioner and others, yet I think it is my
bounden duty to express my view on that all important matter, which involves
the liberty of the subject, so as to prevent any abuse of process even in the
future. As at date on which the warrants of arrest were asked for, proceedings
had not been instituted against the suspects in terms of section 136 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure (CCRP) Act. Had proceedings been instituted against
them in terms of section 136 (1) (b), and if the Magistrate were to issue
warrants of arrest because the report disclosed an offence in respect of which
a warrant

381

shall be ordinarily issued in the first instance according to the first
schedule of the CCRP Act, it would have been obligatory on the Magistrate (he
shall), before issuing the warrants, to "examine on oath the complainant or
some material witness or witnesses" (section 139 (1)). In the instant case the
investigations were said to be proceeding and warrants of arrest were
apparently asked for and issued in terms of section 124 of the CCRP Act to
assist the investigations. Section 124 reads

"Every Magistrate to whom application is made on that behalf shall assist the
conduct of an investigation by making and issuing appropriate orders and
processes of Court and may, in particular hold, or authorize the holding of,
an identification parade for the purpose of ascertaining the identity of the
offender, and may for such purpose require a suspect or other person to
participate in such parade, allow a witness to make his identification from a
concealed position and make or cause to be made a record of such parade."

It must be primarily borne in mind that the purpose of issuing process of
Court is to obtain the appearance of a person in Court and not to secure his
presence in any police station or the CID headquarters. In addition to a
suspect being compelled to attend Court for the purpose of an identification
parade, as section 124 itself indicates, there may be several other reasons
why a suspect's presence will be required in Court to assist the conduct of
the investigations; for example, the investigators may require the suspect's
handwriting, fingerprints or samples of hair, fingernails, and blood for
investigation of a crime.

If for the assistance of the conduct of an investigation, process of Court by
way of issuing a warrant of arrest is required, the Magistrate must proceed to
issue such warrant in terms of chapter V of the CCRP Act titled "of process to
compel appearance". Section 50 under that chapter provides that "every warrant
of arrest issued under this Code **. . .** shall be in the prescribed

382

form". The prescribed form is form No. 4 of the second schedule to the Code.
The form provides the following words in addition to specifying the offence
"and oath being now made before me substantiating the matter of such
complaint. "(cf Form No. 3 - Warrant of Arrest in default of appearance to
summons; Form No. 6 - search - Warrant).

Issuing a warrant is a judicial act involving the liberty of an individual and
no warrant of arrest should be lightly issued by a Magistrate simply because a
prosecutor or an investigator thinks it is necessary. It must be issued as the
law requires, when a Magistrate is satisfied that he should do so, on the
evidence taken before him on oath. It must not be issued by a Magistrate to
satisfy the sardonic pleasure of an opinionated investigator or a prosecutor.

Recording of evidence is a sine qua non, before issuing a warrant of arrest of
a suspect, unless that warrant is issued for the failure to obey summons. To
hold otherwise would mean that, in connection with an allegation of a
commission of an offence in respect of which a warrant of arrest could be
issued in the first instance, if investigations are completed and proceedings
are instituted in the Magistrate's Court, the Magistrate is obliged, before
issuing a warrant against the offender, to record evidence on oath
substantiating the allegation; but in connection with an allegation of similar
nature, were investigations are incomplete and no proceedings are instituted
in Court, the Magistrate can issue a warrant for the arrest of the offender
without recording evidence on oath substantiating the allegation. There can be
no justification for making such a distinction.

I think I cannot do better than to echo the words of Sampayo, J. where in a
similar situation he observed : "The issue of a warrant is a serious matter,
and the Magistrate should exercise his own independent judgment on the facts
before he does this judicial act. In every case it is the duty of the
Magistrate to see that the complainant or other person, when giving what
purports to be oral evidence, gives it consciously and with due sense of his
own

383

responsibility, and that he not merely adopts general statements already
printed and furnished to him by the proctor. The Magistrate should himself
record that evidence from the witness's own mouth, and should in no case
recognize printed matter contained in forms which the proctor may keep in
stock. I think the practice followed in this case is reprehensible, and I hope
not to see another instance of it". See _Wills v. Sholay Kangany_ (3).

_The petitioner's surrender and recall of the warrant of arrest_

On the 10th of September, 1998, the petitioner went on the Bench in the
performance of his judicial functions and he adjourned the Court about 12.45
pm. Soon thereafter, some lawyers brought to the notice of the petitioner,
that at the instance of the CID and on an application made by Senior State
Counsel, the Magistrate, Kesbewa, has issued a warrant for his arrest and a
search warrant in relation to his house. In view of this information, the
petitioner proceeded to the Magistrate's Court, Kesbewa, accompanied by a few
lawyers and surrendered himself. The Magistrate thereupon cancelled the
warrant of arrest and released the petitioner on bail on a personal bond for
Rs. 1,000. The Magistrate directed the Registrar of his Court to take steps to
inform the CID over the telephone that, on the petitioner surrendering to
Court, the warrant issued for his arrest was cancelled. Before leaving the
Kesbewa Magistrate's Court, through an abundance of caution, the petitioner
obtained a certified copy of the order made by the Magistrate enlarging him on
bail and a letter by the Registrar addressed to the Director, CID, informing
him, that as the petitioner appeared before Court on 10th September, 1998, the
warrant issued for his arrest should not be executed and returned to Court.
The petitioner was informed, before he left the Magistrate's Court, Kesbewa,
by the Registrar of that Court, that the telephone message was conveyed to the
CID and was received by a woman Sub Inspector named Fonseka.

384

_Arrest of the petitioner.  
_  
Having left the Kesbewa Magistrate's Court, the petitioner proceeded to his
residence with his lawyers. At the gate of his residence, about 5 pm he was
confronted by several persons in civilian clothes who identified themselves as
police officers attached to the CID, who had come to take him into custody on
a warrant issued for his arrest. One of that group who identified himself as
the 2nd respondent Premaratne, was then shown the certified copy of the
proceedings of the Magistrate's Court, Kesbewa, enlarging the petitioner on
bail and the letter addressed to the Director, CID, obtained from the
Registrar of the Magistrate's Court certifying to that effect. Although the
2nd respondent denies having been shown the certified copy of the Magistrate's
Court proceedings, I hold that it is more probable that the petitioner's
lawyers had that certified copy with them and both documents were shown to the
2nd respondent at that stage.

The petitioner states that the 2nd respondent refused to accept the letter as
it was addressed to the Director, CID. On the 2nd respondent's own admission,
having read the letter addressed to the Director, CID, he stated that he would
not take the petitioner into custody. The petitioner and his lawyers were
thereafter permitted to enter the petitioner's residence. The 2nd respondent
then contacted the 3rd over his cellular telephone and informed him that the
warrant of arrest has been recalled. The 3rd respondent had informed the 2nd
that he was sending the 1st respondent to the residence of the petitioner. The
2nd respondent thereafter informed the petitioner and his lawyers to await the
arrival of the 1st respondent.

Meanwhile, the 2nd respondent executed the search warrant with the consent of
the petitioner. According to the 2nd respondent 'when the house of Mahanama
Tilakaratne was being searched by me, he informed me that his pistol is in the
almirah and he gave me the same with two magazines and nine live ammunitions
and a valid permit to possess same". About 7.30 pm the 1st respondent arrived
at the petitioner's premises with a large posse of Police

385

officers, some in civilian clothes and some in uniform. According to the
petitioner, when his lawyers attempted to show the 1st respondent the
certified copy of the Magistrate's Court proceedings and the letter addressed
to the Director, CID, the 1st respondent shouted,: "damned with the orders; I
do not want to see that. Ignore that. I can arrest him whatever the Magistrate
has ordered. I have got a cut and dry order from the Attorney-General and the
DIG. Even without a warrant I can arrest him. We obtained the warrant because
he is a Judge".

I accept the version of the petitioner that this was the manner in which he
was arrested. The 1st respondent was presenting a false front that he got
orders from the Attorney-General, as according" to the 4th respondent he was
informed of the arrest about 8.00 pm by the 3rd respondent. The 1st respondent
admits having arrested the petitioner by placing his hand of the petitioner.
Although the 1st respondent states that he gave reasons for his arrest, on the
totality of the evidence before us, I hold that he gave no reasons; he came
storming into the residence of the petitioner on the order given by the 3rd
respondent and arrested the petitioner. The petitioner was, thereafter, taken
to the CID headquarters in a police vehicle about 9.30 pm. Petitioner's
lawyers were not permitted to meet the 3rd respondent so that they could show
the documents in their possession to prove that the warrant was recalled and
petitioner was bailed out. The petitioner's statement was recorded till 2.30
am of 11th September, 1998. In the morning of the 11th the petitioner's
lawyers were refused permission to have access to the petitioner and they were
informed by the officers of the CID that he will be produced that morning at
the Magistrate's Court, Kesbewa.

_Production of the petitioner before the Chief Magistrate, Colombo_

In the morning of the 11th September petitioner's lawyers were anxiously
waiting at the Kesbewa Magistrate's Court anticipating the production of the
petitioner from the custody of the CID.

386

About 12.45 pm, in desperation, petitioner's lawyers brought to the notice of
the Magistrate, Kesbewa, that the petitioner was still being kept in the
custody of the CID, in spite of the order made enlarging him on bail. The
Magistrate, Kesbewa, recorded the submissions of the lawyers and made a
further order to release the petitioner.

Meanwhile, SI Rodrigo of the CID, filed a motion before the Chief Magistrate,
Colombo and produced the petitioner before him about 1.00 pm. The motion
stated that the petitioner was arrested the previous night about 7.30 pm in
accordance with a warrant issued by the Magistrate, Kesbewa. This warrant was
produced along with the motion. The motion further stated that according to a
reliable confidential information, there was grave unrest in the area around
Kesbewa Magistrate's Court in connection with the offence committed by the
petitioner and the production of the petitioner before the Magistrate's Court,
Kesbewa, would be imminently dangerous to the life of the petitioner.

I am of the view that the story of unrest at Kesbewa and the imminent threat
to the petitioner's life was dishonestly concocted by Rodrigo and the 1st
respondent to hide, from the Magistrate, Kesbewa, their actions taken in
defiance of the order made by him recalling the warrant of arrest. It is
passing strange that the 1st respondent and Rodrigo obtained confidential
reliable information about the restive crowd at Kesbewa but got no information
of the receipt of the telephone message conveyed to their office informing of
the withdrawal of the warrant of arrest. Moreover, despite the undertaking
given by the 1st respondent to the Magistrate, Kesbewa, he failed to inform
him promptly about the arrest of the petitioner; and for that reason as well,
he preferred not to face the Magistrate, Kesbewa. A State Counsel, different
from the one who appeared to obtain the warrant of arrest, appeared before the
Chief Magistrate when the petitioner was produced before him. It appears that
this unsuspecting State Counsel was led by his nose by the 1st respondent who
transfigured him to a mere mouthpiece. The learned State Counsel vehemently

387

submitted that his instructions were that the warrant of arrest of the
petitioner was not recalled and the petitioner was not released on bail, when
the Magistrate was told otherwise. The Chief Magistrate pointedly put this
position to the 1st respondent who was present in Court and recorded -
"Director, CID, states that he does not know and further he had not been
informed". This conduct of the 1st respondent is most reprehensible. The Chief
Magistrate did what the learned State Counsel should have done in the interest
of justice. Having adjourned the Court, he telephoned the Kesbewa Magistrate
who confirmed that the warrant was recalled and the petitioner was released on
bail.

The conduct of the 1st respondent in the Chief Magistrate's Court
unequivocally suggests the he represented to the Chief Magistrate \- (1) that
the petitioner was arrested on the warrant issued by the Magistrate, Kesbewa,
which warrant was returned to the Chief Magistrate; (2) that he was unaware
that the warrant was recalled at that stage and that no one has so informed
him and (3) that the petitioner was arrested on the authority of the warrant
and of no other.

The first opportunity the 1st respondent got to inform a Court of justice
regarding the circumstances under which the petitioner was arrested, was when
the petitioner was produced before the Chief Magistrate, Colombo. The 1st
respondent had this to state in his affidavit submitted to the Supreme Court
relating to the circumstances under which the petitioner was arrested : "on
the same day (ie 10th) at 17.30 hrs at Deputy Inspector-General/CID office the
2nd respondent telephoned the DIG and informed him that the aforesaid warrant
had been recalled by the Magistrate, Kesbewa. At that stage the DIG/CID (3rd
respondent) contacted the Hon. Attorney-General and informed me that Hon.
Attorney-General had granted approval for the arrest of the- petitioner under
normal law in terms of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and directed me to
appraise the lawyers present at the High Court Judge's house the approval of
the Hon. Attorney-General. He further directed me

388

to proceed to Thalagala, Kiriwaththuduwa, in the Kahathuduwa police area and
to arrest the petitioner and the other suspects'. (para 8).

If the above statement is correct, why did the 1st respondent refrain from
saying so to the Chief Magistrate, Colombo? It would appear also that the 1st
respondent gave the plaint State Counsel instructions which he knew to be
false that he did not know of the withdrawal of the warrant arrest. This false
position of the 1st respondent is also supported by the 3rd respondent in his
affidavit. The 4th respondent denies that he ever gave instructions to any
Police Officer to arrest anyone. At para 22C of his affidavit, the 4th
respondent states : "when I learnt of the note alleged to have been made by
the 1st respondent and reproduced in the subparagraph "O" of paragraph 91 of
the petitioner's affidavit, I immediately brought to the notice of the
additional Solicitor-General in charge of the subject and suggested him to
summon the 3rd respondent to ascertain the basis on which such an incorrect
note has been made. After the discussion with the 3rd respondent, I brought to
the notice of Her Excellency the President being the Minister of Defence, that
an incorrect note has been made by the 1st respondent which had led to protest
by certain members of the Bar against Attorney-General's Department. Her
Excellency assured me that she would call for a report from the IGP and take
action in this matter **. . .** '.

I accept the version given by the 4th respondent and observe that his reaction
to the note made by the 1st respondent, which he calls incorrect, is the
natural reaction of anyone in his position. The mastery of the 1st respondent
in the art of prevarication is amply demonstrated by the following averments
he has made in his affidavit." **. . .** I admit that I informed the learned
State Counsel that I was unaware that the petitioner has already being granted
bail by the Magistrate's Court, Kesbewa, on 10.9.98 and wished to add that the
petitioner nor his counsel produced any document to substantiate this fact and
that the learned Chief Magistrate, Colombo, was constrained to adjourn Court
in order to telephone the Magistrate of Kesbewa to ascertain as to

389

whether in fact the petitioner had been granted bail. And wished to add that
if the petitioner did in fact show me, as stated in his affidavit, a certified
copy of the said order granting bail, I cannot imagine as to why it was not
produced in Court on this occasion" (para 34). This statement is made by a man
who knew very well that producing the petitioner before the Chief Magistrate,
Colombo, was something he craftily manoeuvred, knowing well that the
petitioner's lawyers were awaiting his production at the Kesbewa Magistrate's
Court:

_Is the arrest of the petitioner according to procedure established by law?_

As stated earlier it is admitted that the arrest of the petitioner was made by
the 1st respondent. To the learned Chief Magistrate, Colombo, he represented
that the petitioner was arrested on a valid warrant issued by the Kesbewa
Magistrate. Even if this warrant was otherwise legally valid, the 1st
respondent could not have arrested the petitioner on that warrant in view of
subsection 52 (3) of the CCRP Act which states :

"when a warrant is directed to a peace officer by name it shall not be
executed by any other peace officer unless endorsed by him by name."

The warrant was directed to U. E. C. Rodrigo, Sub Inspector of Police, and
only he could have arrested the petitioner on that warrant. Rodrigo has not
endorsed the warrant to enable another peace officer to execute it. This was
probably why the 1st respondent abstained from signing the warrant as the one
who executed it, when he produced that to the Chief Magistrate, Colombo. It is
surprising that learned State Counsel who appeared when the petitioner was
produced before the Chief Magistrate, Colombo, overlooked these important
matters of law and was content to swallow the instructions given to him by the
1st respondent hook, line and sinker.

390

If the petitioner was not arrested on the warrant of arrest issued by the
Magistrate, a peace officer could only have arrested him in terms of
subsection 32 (1)(b) of the CORP Act, on the allegation of his having
committed offences punishable under section 300 and 141 of the Penal Code
which are cognizable offences, in the circumstances mentioned in that
subsection. That subsection reads :

"Any peace officer may without an order from the Magistrate and without a
warrant arrest any person who has been concerned in any cognizable offence or
against whom a reasonable complaint has been made or credible information has
been received or a reasonable suspicion exists of his having been so
concerned."

Learned Solicitor-General who appeared for the 4th respondent, with his
customary fairness, submitted that it is settled law that the arresting
officer should be able to justify an arrest on one or more of the grounds set
out in subsection 32 (1) (b) and that in the instant case there did not appear
to be any justification for the 1st respondent to arrest the petitioner.
Admittedly, the 1st respondent was not involved with the investigations of the
alleged offences said to have been committed by the petitioner and the 1st
respondent does not claim to have acted under subsection 32 (1) (b).

It appears to me that both the 1st and 3rd respondents cooked their notes
after the petitioner was produced before the Chief Magistrate, Colombo. It is
stated in the written submissions filed on behalf of the 1st to 3rd
respondents that "the position taken up by the 1st respondent was that at all
times he was acting purely on the orders of his superior the 3rd respondent
and that as a police officer he was bound to do so".

The 1st respondent states in his affidavit : "on the same day at 19.30 hrs. I
arrived at the house of the petitioner where I found the 2nd respondent
present along with the petitioner and four Attorneys at-law. Mr. Premaratne
informed me that the warrant of arrest of the

391

petitioner had been recalled and he had also recovered a weapon suspected to
have been used by the petitioner to commit an offence. The 2nd respondent
further informed me that the petitioner had obtained ammunition from various
police officers in order to test his revolver. I am aware that ammunition is
an inventorized item, the obtaining of such ammunition was illegal and
required further investigations under the Public Property Act' (para 9). "I
then explained the charges of attempted murder and unlawful assembly committed
by the petitioner and further informed the DIG/CID (3rd respondent) about the
discovery of the weapon and received orders to arrest the petitioner" (para
10).

There is nothing to indicate that the 1st respondent gave his independent mind
to bear on the arrest of the petitioner : he executed the orders given by his
superior the 3rd respondent. The arrest under those circumstances is illegal.
See _Gunasekera v. De Fonseke_ (4); _Muthusamy v. Kannangara_ (5); _Christy v.
Leachinsky_ (6) and _Corea v. The Queen_ (7); I am of the view that the 1st
and 3rd respondents have falsely stated that they got the approval of the 4th
respondent to arrest the petitioner and further that he was informed of the
arrest after the event. The British Statesman, Herbert Henry Asquith, once
observed, that the War office kept three sets of figures ; one to mislead the
public, another to mislead the Cabinet and the third to mislead itself.
Similarly, I would say it is quite probable that the CID kept three sets of
facts on the issue of the arrest of the petitioner; one to mislead the Chief
Magistrate, another to mislead the Supreme Court and the third to mislead
itself.

**Conclusion**

I hold that the arrest of the petitioner is not in accordance with the law.
Further, the petitioner was unnecessarily and unreasonably detained at the CID
office at least from 2.30 am to 12.45 pm on 11th. Vide - _Senaratne v. Punya
de Silva and others_ (8). There is

392

no complicity of the 4th/6th respondent and the 2nd respondent in the illegal
arrest. I hold that the 1st and 3rd respondents have violated the fundamental
rights of the petitioner guaranteed under Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the
Constitution by the unlawful arrest and detention of the petitioner. I order
the 1st and 3rd respondents to pay the petitioner personally a sum of Rs.
50,000 each as compensation; in addition, I direct the State to pay the
petitioner a sum of Rs. 200,000 as compensation and a sum of Rs. 50,000 as
costs. The petitioner will thus be entitled to in total, a sum of Rs. 350,000.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/14.html_  

