##  A. E. M. G. Fernando v. People's Bank And Others - SLR - 215, Vol 1 of
2006 [2005] LKSC 15; (2006) 1 Sri LR 215 (8 July 2005)

**215**

**A. E. M. G. FERNANDO  
  
VS  
  
PEOPLE'S BANK AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J  
UDALAGAMA, J AND  
DISSANAYAKE, J  
SC APPLICATION (FR) 283/2004  
28TH JANUARY AND 1ST AND 2 ND  
MARCH, 2005

Fundamental Rights-Failure to grant extension of services-Abrupt termination
of services-failure to give reason for premature termination of services
beyond 28.06.2004-Legitimate expectation of   extensions-Article 12(1) of the
Constitution._

The petitioner was the Chief Manager of the Internal Audit Department of the
People's Bank. On reaching 55 years age, he was given three extensions in
terms of Circular No. 323/2001. His last extension was from 28.06.2003 to
28.06.2004. On 16.06.2004, twelve days before his 58th birthday, the letter P
18 was received (from the Bank) informing that his services will not be
extended beyond 28.06.2004. No reasons were given for that decision.  
  
The justification for the termination of services is contained in R4 filed
with the objections of the Deputy General Manager. This appears to be a report
by an officer albeit unsigned.

**HELD:**

(1) The sudden termination of services by P 18 at short notice and without
reasons was violative of Article 12(1) of the Constitution.  
  
(2) The petitioner had a legitimate expectation of receiving extensions up to
the 60th year, in normal circumstance which expectation had been denied
without adducing any reasons.

**Case referred to :  
**1. _Surangani Marapona vs Bank of Ceylon and Others_ (1997) 3 Sri L. R. 156

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Saliya Peiris with C. Madanayake_ for petitioner.

**216**



_Wijedasa Rajapaksa, P. C., with Sasika Dissanayake_ for respondents

Cur.adv. vult

8th July, 2005  
  
UDALAGAMA, J.

Admittedly the petitioner as at the date of this petition was the Chief
Manager of the Internal Audit Department of the People's Bank and on his
reaching the age of 55 years was granted  extensions of service for the past 3
years. The last extension of service for one year was granted from 28.06.2003
to 28.06.2004.

It is the contention of the petitioner that he had satisfied all the
requirements regulating the granting of  extensions as set out in circular No.
323/2001 and complains that on 16.06.2004, 12 days before his 58th birthday
that he received the impugned letter marked and filed of record as P18
informing him that his services will not be extended beyond 28.06.2004.  
  
Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that vide regulations as found in
the aforesaid circular No. 323/2001 referred to above, which also admittedly
regulates the granting of extensions, declares that the age of retirement of
Bank employees shall be 55 years, but however that extensions of service of a
Staff grade employee would be granted at the discretion of the management for
a specific period beyond 55 years of age and up to 60 years. Vide the contents
of the  same circular the General Manager or the Chief Executive Officer of
the Bank is tasked with. the discretion to grant such extention taking  into
consideration factors enumerated in the said circular.  
  
Paragraph 10 of the circular inter-alia deems it necessary in the event the
applicant's application for an extension is unsuccessful, to be notified of
such refusal of extension of service, affording him an opportunity to reapply
for a service extension for a further  period in terms of the said circular.
The failure of the unsuccessful candidate to have done so would be deemed to
have shown that such applicant was not interested to further serve the
aforesaid Bank.  
  
Paragraph 12 of the circular specifies the requirement that in the event of an
applicant's extension of service not been recommended that a

**217**



separate report stating the reasons of such non recommendation be sent
directly to the Deputy General Manager of the respondent Bank.  
  
Apparently there appears to be no evidence that such steps had in fact been
taken.  
  
The learned President's Counsel for the 1st to 9th respondents in his written
submissions to this court has referred this court to items Nos. 1-4, and 6 and
7 of the aforesaid circular No. 323/2001 and has further submitted that the
1st respondent institution being a business entity engaged in a highly
competitive field of banking activities is vested with full powers and
discretion in recruitment, transfers, promotions and the granting of
extensions of services to its employees.  
  
However, the respondent Bank is an institution of the State. Hence I am of the
view that this court in the circumstances need to examine the complaint of the
petitioner that the petitioner's fundamental rights guaranteed by Article
12(1) of the Constitution have been violated consequent to the acts of the
respondent Bank. Besides discretion in my view need to be exercised properly
and reasonably.  
  
That no adequate and specific reasons for the non recommendation of the
petitioner's application for an extension of service are forthcoming in
respect of the petitioner's application, is patent.  
  
R4 filed with the objections of the Deputy General Manager appears to be a
report made out by an officer, albeit unsigned, to be the basis of the non
recommendation and contains no reasons for such non recommendation.  
  
P8 the impugned order refusing the petitioner's application for extension of
service is bereft of any reasons for such refusal. Besides P8 is dated
14.06.2004 and same being an adverse recommendation and undoubtedly delayed, I
am of the view that the said impugned notification clearly contradicts the
provisions of the said circular No. 323/2001.  
  
The absence of a separate report giving reasons for the refusal of an
extension which had to be submitted to the Deputy General Manager without
delay, is also contrary to the provisions of the aforesaid circular

**218**

As submitted by the learned Counsel for the petitioner the decision of this
Court in _Surangani Marapona V5. Bank of Ceylon and others._ (1)held that 4
months delay to decide an application for an extension of service "had been an
inordinate delay".  
  
In the instant case the delay to refuse the petitioner's application, vide the
impugned P8, left the petitioner barely 14 days to retire from the Bank.
Importantly no reasons for such delay were also forthcoming. The necessity to
give reasons for its decision to refuse an application for an extension was
also emphasized in _Surangani Marapona Vs. Bank of Ceylon_ (supra) when this
court held that, "there should be sufficient reasons to support such decision
beyond doubt".  
  
I would also agree with the submissions of the learned Counsel for the
petitioner that the latter had a legitimate expectation to serve the
respondent Bank on annual extensions of service up to the age of 60 years and
that the petitioner is entitled to be apprised of the reasons to justify the
denial of the aforesaid legitimate expectation of the petitioner to serve the
Bank until the petitioner reached the age of 60 years.  
  
In the aforesaid circumstances and subsequent to careful scrutiny, I am of the
view that inter alia the inordinate delay in determining and notifying the
refusal of the petitioner's application and having failed to give reasons for
the refusal of an extension the management of the respondent Bank has violated
the fundamental rights guaranteed to the petitioner under Article 12(1) of the
Constitution and this court would make order quashing P8 and further that the
management of the respondent Bank grant to the petitioner an extension of
service from 28.06.2004 to 28.06.2005. No costs.

**BANDARANAYAKE,J. - I** agree.  
  
**DISSANAYAKAJ:- I** agree.  
  
_Relief granted._



* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2005/15.html_  

