##  Gunaratne and Others v. Sri Lanka Telecom and Others - SLR - 109, Vol 1 of
1993 [1992] LKSC 15; (1993) 1 Sri LR 109 (24 August 1992)

**109**

**GUNARATNE AND OTHERS** **  
v.** **  
SRI LANKA TELECOM AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO, J., KULATUNGA, J. AND  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
SC APPLICATION NO. 70/92.  
15 JUNE, 1992.

_     Fundamental Rights - Scheme of Recruitment and Promotion - Favoured
treatment to graduate clerks- Classification of graduate clerks
-Discrimination - Article 12 (1) of the Constitution._

Upon the enactment of the Sri Lanka Telecommunications Act, No. 25 of 1991 the
petitioners along with other officers who were in the service of the
Telecommunications Department opted to become employees of the 1st respondent
Corporation (Sri Lanka Telecom) under section 28 of the said Act. In terms of
section 31 of the same Act they were entitled to terms and conditions not less
favourable than those on which they had been employed in the Department of
Telecommunications. On 03.01.1992 the Corporation adopted new schemes of
recruitment to staff posts. The question for decision was whether the
classification of the graduate clerks for preferential treatment in the new
schemes was reasonable, the test of permissible classification being that it
must be founded upon an intelligible differentia having a rational relation to
the object sought to be achieved.

**Held** ** :**

1\. (a) If a scheme is prima facie non-discriminatory, it cannot be challenged
in limine on the ground of possible discrimination in its application. In such
a case, relief may be sought only upon the occurrence of discrimination.

(b) If however a scheme affecting promotions in an existing service is
inherently discriminatory, as is alleged here, the right to relief accrues
immediately upon the adoption of such scheme and prospective candidates for
promotion under such scheme may apply for a declaration that such scheme is
invalid on the ground that it constitutes an infringement or an imminent
infringement of their rights under Article 12 (1).

2\. (a) A variation of schemes of recruitment or preparation of a fresh scheme
not violative of Article 12 (1) and dictated by the needs of the service, is
permissible.

3\. In the impugned schemes of recruitment -

(a)     the express requirement of special ability and merit as a principle of
promotion has been deleted.

110

(b) emphasis is placed on the requirement of a _specific period of service_
with preferential treatment to graduate clerks.



(c) the new schemes whilst giving preferential treatment to graduate clerks,
impose more stringent conditions on others by imposing a requisite period of
service for promotion different from what is prescribed by the previous
schemes.



(d) possession of a degree gives a clerk a preferential right to promotion
without any consideration as to whether such degree is relevant to the duties
of the higher post.



(e) the new schemes of recruitment have been prepared primarily with the
object of alleviating the social grievances of under- employed graduates. In
doing so the legitimate expectations of non- graduate clerks counting 20 to 30
years' of service have been disregarded.



(f) the new schemes are unreasonable because they are not based on criteria
having a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved namely the
efficient functioning of the Telecommunications Service.



(g) if it is desired to give preferential treatment to the graduate clerks in
the interest of the service and for utilising their skills, the Corporation
could do so on the basis of relevant qualifications, with reasonable notice to
those affected and without prejudicing the legitimate expectations of clerks
who are on the verge of promotion under the previous schemes.



**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.



_R. K. W Goonesekera_ with _Peter Jayasekera, Suranjith Hewamanna_ and C.
_Swarnadhipathy_ for the petitioners.



_Asoka de Silva, D.S.G._ with _A. Jinasena, S.C._ for the respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

August 24, 1992.

**KULATUNGA, J.**



The petitioners are Clerks, Class 1 in the Clerical Service of "Sri Lanka
Telecom" (the 1st respondent) which is a public corporation established on
06.02.90 by an Order under s. 2 of the State Industrial Corporations Act, No.
49/1957 (P7). All of them had originally joined the Clerical Service of the
former Posts and Telecommunications Department. Thereafter, when the
Telecommunications Department was established as a separate Department, they
continued in the Clerical Service of that Department, and were governed by the

111

Minutes on the Telecommunications Clerical Service (P1) ; and upon the
enactment of the Sri Lanka Telecommunications Act, No. 25 of 1991 they, with
other officers, opted to become employees of the 1st respondent Corporation
("The Corporation") under s. 28 of the said Act. In terms of s. 31 thereof,
they were entitled to terms and conditions not less favourable than those on
which they had been employed in the Department of Telecommunications.



The petitioners complain that the revised schemes for recruitment to Staff
Grade posts in the Corporation afford more favoured treatment to graduate
clerks. They were granted leave to proceed in respect of Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution. In their application the petitioners also sought relief against
a decision to appoint 6 graduate clerks to the Staff Grade, acting outside the
scheme of recruitment. However, the learned Deputy Solicitor- General for the
respondents informed us that the said decision will not be implemented. As
such, the relief claimed by the petitioners is now limited to a declaration
that the aforesaid revised schemes for recruitment are violative of their
rights under Article 12 (1) and consequential reliefs. In addition to the
Corporation, the petitioners have joined as parties to this application, the
2nd, the 3rd and the 4th respondents, being the Managing Director and the
General Manager (Human Resources Development) of the Corporation, and the
Secretary, Ministry of Posts and Telecom- munications, respectively.



Originally, entry into the Clerical Service was through the Central Clerical
Examination held by the Department of Examinations for candidates, the
requisite educational qualification being the Senior School Certificate or the
General Certificate of Education (Ordinary Level). From 1968, recruitment was
by interview of eligible candidates. Under the Service Minute P1 which
continues to apply even after the establishment of the Corporation, the
Clerical Service consists of Class II (with a cadre of 752) and Class I (with
a cadre of 125). Initial recruitment is to segment B of Class II. Officers are
promoted to segment A upon passing a qualifying examination after 4 years' of
service. Their next promotion is to Class I on the basis of seniority and
merit. A clerk in Class I is eligible upon selection by examination and
interview to be appointed to the post of Examiner of Accounts which post forms
an integral part of the Clerical Service. The cadre of Class I Clerks and
Examiners of Accounts is 125.

112



Staff Posts in the Telecommunication Service and the cadre in each grade
consist of -

(a) Administrative Assistant (07)  


(b) Assistant Administrative Secretary/Assistant Superintendent (Commercial)
being posts carrying the same salary scale, (24 and 15 respectively).  


(c)  Administrative Secretary (04)  


(d) Commercial Superintendent (01)  


(e) Senior Administrative Secretary (01).



Until 1988, vacancies in the post of Administrative Assistant were filled by
promoting Class I Clerks/Examiners of Accounts on the basis of seniority and
merit. The promotion of Administrative Assistants to the post of Assistant
Administrative Secretary/Assistant Superintendent (Commercial) was also on the
basis of seniority and merit.



On 06.06.88 a new scheme of recruitment to the post of Assistant
Administrative Secretary/Assistant Superintendent (Commercial) (P2) was
adopted. Under the said scheme the following officers are eligible for
promotion :  
(i) Administrative Assistants  
  
(ii) Class I Clerks with 6 years' service  
  
(iii) Examiners of Accounts with 6 years' combined service as Examiners and
Class I Clerks.  


Appointments are made after interview by a Selection Board, preference being
given to merit over seniority.  
  
On 01.12.88 a scheme of recruitment to the next higher staff grade viz.
Administrative Secretary was adopted (P3) in terms of which an officer with 3
years' service as Assistant Administrative Secretary/ Assistant Superintendent
(Commercial) is eligible for promotion to that grade on the basis of seniority
and merit. The selection for promotion is after interview by a Selection
Board.



The above schemes of recruitment appear to have been generally acceptable to
the majority of the officers in the Telecommunications Department. However,
the graduate clerks were not satisfied with their promotional prospects under
the said schemes. Acting on their representations the 5th respondent had (in
June, 1990) directed the

113

Department to prepare draft amendments to the schemes of recruitment providing
for preferential treatment to graduate clerks in the matter of promotion to
staff posts. This was challenged in SC Application No. 25/90 by the
Telecommunication Clerical Service Union and 3 non -graduate clerks (P4). The
said application was withdrawn in November 1990 in view of the averments in
the affidavit of the 5th respondent which indicated that the impugned
proposals for amendments to the schemes of recruitment will not be
implemented, particularly in view of the impending transfer of
Telecommunication Services to the Corporation (P5 and P6).



On 03.01.90 the Corporation adopted the following new schemes of recruitment
to staff posts : **  
  
Administrative Assistant **(P11A)  
  
According to this scheme, Class I Clerks with 6 years' service and Examiners
of Accounts with 6 years' combined service as Examiner and Class I Clerk are
eligible for promotion. However, where such officer is a graduate, only 2
years' service is required. **  
  
Assistant Administrative Secretary/Assistant  
  
Commercial Superintendent **(P11 B)  
  
According to this scheme the following officers are eligible for promotion :  
  
(a) Administrative Assistants with 1 year's service or 8 years' combined
service as Administrative Assistant and Class I Clerk.  
  
(b) Class I Clerks with 8 years' service and Examiners of Accounts with 8
years' combined service as Examiner and Class I Clerk. However, where any such
officer is a graduate, only 4 years' service is required. **  
  
Administrative Secretary **(P11C)  
  
According to this scheme, Assistant Administrative Secretaries/ Assistant
Commercial Superintendents with 3 years' combined service in the said grade
and as Administrative Assistants are eligible for promotion.

114

Note :-- Appointment to each of the above grades will be by promotion of
eligible officers on the recommendation of a Selection Board, after an
interview.  
  
The petitioners state that the preferential treatment sought to be given to
graduate clerks by P11A and P11B has no rational basis and hence such
treatment amounts to discrimination violative of Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution. The 2nd respondent states that the object of the revised schemes
is to provide for a better and more reasonable method of promotion and that
the proposed new criteria for promotion are based "mainly on the efficiency of
the officers to be promoted". He adds that in preparing these schemes the
grievances of under- employed graduates in the public service were also taken
into consideration.  
  
According to 2R2 (minutes of a discussion held on 31.05.91 by the Minister of
Posts & Telecommunications with the clerks in the Telecommunications
Department) it would appear that a small minority of these clerks are
graduates and they have formed an organisation (Graduates Organisation). They
urged the Minister to revise the schemes of recruitment to enhance their
promotional prospects. However, the Telecommunication Clerical Service Union
opposed this request on the ground that it was unreasonable. Both in SC
Application 25/90 and in these proceedings the petitioners have urged that
most of the graduate clerks had obtained external degrees whilst in service
and that it is unreasonable to give them preferential treatment for promotion
based on such qualifications. Nevertheless, the evidence clearly shows that
even after the conclusion of SC 25/90, the graduates had been campaigning for
bettering their prospects and that in the end they succeeded in obtaining
relief through the revised schemes of recruitment P11A and P11 B.  
  
This Court has to determine whether the classification of the graduate clerks
for preferential treatment in the said schemes is reasonable, the test of
permissible classification being that it must be founded upon an intelligible
differentia having a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved. In
their objections the respondents took up the position that this application
must fail in limine in that (a) the impugned acts do not constitute "executive
or administrative action" and (b) the petitioners have failed to reveal how

115

they would be affected if the revised schemes are adopted. The learned Deputy
Solicitor- General did not press the first objection. As regards the second
objection, he submitted that if a particular officer is affected by the new
schemes, he must come forward and seek relief in which event, it is not
sufficient to show that the new schemes will generally affect the members of
his Union ; and that the petitioners have failed to establish how they would
be affected by the said schemes.  
  
The above submission is possibly attributable to the experience that Courts
have often granted relief in respect of an impugned scheme of recruitment upon
the application of a person who has been adversely affected by selections made
under such scheme. Such relief is granted at the stage when the impugned
scheme is implemented. If a scheme is prima facie non- discriminatory, it
cannot be challenged in limine on the ground of possible discrimination in its
application. In such a case, relief may be sought only upon the occurrence of
discrimination. However, if a scheme, such as the one before us, affecting
promotions in an existing service is inherently discriminatory, the right to
relief accrues immediately upon the adoption of such scheme and prospective
candidates for promotion under such scheme may apply for a declaration that
such scheme is invalid on the ground that it constitutes an infringement or an
imminent infringement of their rights under Article 12 (1). On this basis the
petitioners are entitled to seek relief ; and the preliminary objection to
their application fails.  
  
Learned Counsel for the petitioners submitted that the impugned schemes have
gone beyond the principle of seniority and merit as a basis of promotion when
it concerns a graduate clerk ; and that this educational qualification applied
for giving them preferential treatment has absolutely no bearing on the
preparation of a fair scheme for promotion. He added that the petitioners
along with other clerks, have risen to Class I after many years of service and
that even if it is sought to amend the schemes for promotion for giving
preferential treatment to graduate clerks, it must be done on the basis of
relevant qualifications and with reasonable notice to enable those affected to
acquire the necessary qualifications. In defence of the impugned schemes, the
respondents have pointed out to the fact that after the conversion of the
Telecommunications Department to a public Corporation, the existing cadre of
posts has been increased as follows :

116

  
1\. Assistant Administrative Secretary from 5 to 24 posts.  
  
2\. Assistant Superintendent (Commercial) from 3 to 15 posts.  
  
3.Administrative Secretary from 3 to 4 posts.  
  
The Deputy Solicitor- General submitted that in the circumstances, the
provision for giving due consideration to educational qualifications in the
interest of the service, is not unreasonable.  
  
On the basis of their submissions the petitioners seek to obtain -  
  
  
(a) a declaration that the preferential treatment given to graduate clerks on
the schemes of recruitment P11A and P11B is violative of Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution ; and  
  
(b) a declaration that the petitioners are entitled to promotion in terms of
the schemes of recruitment which were in force at the time they joined the
Corporation.  
  
Assuming that the petitioners are granted the first of these declarations, I
am of the view that they are not entitled to the second declaration for the
reason that it would still be open to the Corporation to prepare fresh schemes
which would not be violative of Article 12 (1). The safeguard under s. 31 of
Act No. 25 of 1991 that they are entitled to terms and conditions not less
favourable than those on which they had been employed in the Department of
Telecommunications ensure that the basic terms and conditions of their
employment as clerks (e.g. as regards their status or emoluments) will not be
reduced. That section does not preclude a variation of the schemes of
recruitment to the higher posts. As evidenced by the schemes P2 and P3, such
variations had in fact been effected even during their employment by the
Department. Such variations which do not impugn on constitutional rights and
are dictated by the needs of the service are permissible.  
  
In considering whether the schemes P11A and P11B are reasonable, the following
matters are relevant :  
  
(a) Paragraph 16 (5) of P1 (Clerical Service Minute) dealing with promotion to
staff posts said -

**117**

**  
** "mere seniority unaccompanied by special ability to perform the duties of
the higher appointment, will not be regarded as a ground of promotion".  
  
P2 (scheme of recruitment to the post of Assistant Administrative
Secretary/Assistant Superintendent (Commercial) provided that in making
promotions to these grades preference will be given to merit over seniority.  
  
P3 (scheme of recruitment to the post of Administrative Secretary) provided
that promotions will be made on the basis of seniority and merit.  
  
However, the schemes P11A and P11B have -  
  
(i) deleted the express requirement of special ability and merit as a
principle of promotion ; and  
  
(ii) emphasized the requirement of a specific period of service with
preferential treatment to graduate clerks.  
  
(b) Under the previous scheme, clerical officers (whether graduates or not)
were eligible for promotion to the post of Administrative Assistant on the
principle of special ability and seniority, whenever vacancies occurred. After
6 years' of service, they were also eligible for direct promotion to the next
higher grade (viz. Assistant Administrative Secretary/Assistant Superintendent
(Commercial). The new schemes require 6 years' of service before they can be
promoted to the post of Administrative Assistant, (such period being reduced
to 2 years for graduate clerks); and 8 years' service for promotion to the
post of Assistant Administrative Secretary/Assistant Superintendent
(Commercial), (such period being reduced to 4 years for graduate clerks). It
would seem, therefore, that the new schemes, whilst giving preferential
treatment to graduate clerks, impose more stringent conditions on others as to
the requisite period of service for promotion than those provided by the
previous schemes.  
  
 (c) Possession of a degree gives a clerk a preferential right to promotion
without any consideration as to whether such degree is relevant to the duties
of the higher post. In this connection, it is significant that in 2R1, (the
report of the Committee on

118

  
grievances of under-employed graduates in clerical service and allied grades
in the public service, 1987) it was recommended that they may be considered
for recruitment to certain posts in the public service "provided their
educational attainments relate to the relevant field in terms of the
respective schemes of recruitment".  
  
(d) In the absence of evidence as to the number of graduate clerks in the
Corporation, their grades and the period of service as against non-graduate
clerks and other relevant matters, it is not possible to conclude that the new
schemes will not be discriminatory by reason purely of the increase in the
cadre of posts in the Corporation referred to above.  
  
(e) On the whole, it appears that the relevant Ministry and the Corporation
have prepared the new schemes of recruitment primarily with the object of
alleviating the social grievances of under-employed graduates. In doing so
they have overlooked the legitimate expectations of non-graduate clerks such
as the petitioners who have around 20-30 years' of service. What is more, the
benefits under the new schemes have been made available not only to "under-
employed graduates" (viz. Graduates who have joined as clerks for want of
better positions) but also to clerks who have obtained external degrees whilst
in service.  
  
In the result, I am satisfied that the classification of graduate clerks for
preferential treatment under the impugned schemes is unreasonable because it
is not based on criteria having a rational relation to the object sought to be
achieved namely, the efficient functioning of the Telecommunications Service.
If it is desired to give preferential treatment to them in the interest of the
service and for utilising their skills, the Corporation may do so on the basis
of relevant qualifications, with reasonable notice to those affected and
without prejudicing the legitimate expectations of clerks who are on the verge
of promotion under the previous schemes. The identification of relevent
qualifications, the preparation of fresh schemes of recruitment and the period
of notice to be given are matters for the Corporation to determine, after
considering the total effect of such schemes on the officers who are presently
in service and the needs of the Corporation. In the meantime, I see no
difficulty in the way of the Corporation recognising, for the purpose of
promotions, any special skills which  


119

  
graduate clerks may have acquired by reason of their educational
qualifications. This is possible under the existing schemes of recruitment
which have been produced marked P1, P2 and P3.  
  
For the foregoing reasons, I allow the application of the petitioners and
grant them a declaration that the preferential treatment given to Graduate
Clerks on the Schemes of Recruitment P11A and P11B is violative of Article 12
(1) of the Constitution, and hence void. I also grant them one set of costs
which I fix at Rs. 5,500 (Rupees Five Thousand Five Hundred) payable by the
1st respondent.  
  
**FERNANDO** , **J**. - I agree.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA** , **J**. - I agree.  
  
Relief granted.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/15.html_  

