##  Prof. J. W. Wickramasinghe v. The University of Sri Jayawardenapura and
Others - SLR - 321, Vol 1 of 2004 [2004] LKSC 15; (2004) 1 Sri LR 321 (31 May
2004)

**321**

**PROF. J. W. WICKRAMASiNGHE  
v  
THE UNIVERSITY OF SRI JAYAWARDENAPURA  
AND OTHERS**

  
SUPREME COURT  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
EDUSSURIYA, J. AND  
DE SUVA, J.  
SC (FR) APPLICATION NO 587/2002  
AUGUST 5, SEPTEMBER 3  
AND DECEMBER 5, 2003  
  
Fundamental Rights - Denial of the right to spend sabbatical leave as allowed
by the University Grants Commission - Arbitrary decision of the University
-Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.  
_  
The petitioner who was the Vice chancellor of the 1st respondent univer­sity
was due to attain 64 years on 16.3.2003 and according to a strict
inter­pretation of circular No. 408 he would not be granted sabbatical leave
under that circular. However the 2nd respondent, the University Grants
Commission (UGC) allowed him 2 years sabbatical leave from 01.06.2002 to
31.05.2004 on

**322**

the recommendation of the University under special circumstances, namely that
he would relinquish his duties as vice Chancellor on 31.05.2002. Later on the
U.G.C. gave instructions to Universities that in future to strictly comply
with circular 408 and explained to the University of Sri Jayawardenapura that
those instructions did not affect the petitioner as leave had been allowed in
special circumstances. Notwithstanding this clarification the University
insisted that the petitioner should resume duties on 16.03.2003. Even at that
time there were University dons who were on sabbatical leave after reaching
the age of 64 years.  
  
**Held:  
  
**(i) In view of leave granted to him the petitioner had a legitimate
expec­tation of being on leave up to 31.05.2004.  
  
(ii) The instructions given by the University that the petitioner resumes
duties by 16.03. 2003 were arbitrary and violative of Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution.  
  
_Per_ Bandaranayake, J.  
**  
**"Equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies. One belongs to the Rule of
Law....while the other to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch"  
  
**Case referred to :  
  
**1\. E.P Royappa v State of Tamil Nadu - AIR 1974 Sc 555 APPLICATION for
relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Romesh de Silva P.C_., with _Sugath Caldera_ for petitioner.  
  
_A.S.M. Perera, P.C._ with _Prasanna Soyza_ for 1st respondent.  
  
_Rajive Goonatilake,_ State Counsel for 2nd respondent.

_Cur.adv. vult._

January 29, 2004  
  
**SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
  
**The petitioner, who had held the positions of Assistant Lecturer, Lecturer,
Senior Lecturer, Associate Professor and later the posi­tion of Vice
Chancellor of the 1st Respondent University, com­plained that the decision of
the 1st respondent university not to per­mit the petitioner two years leave
from 01.06.2002 to 31.05.2004 out of his accumulated sabbatical leave is a
violation of his funda-

**323**

mental rights guaranteed in terms of articles 12(1), 12(2) and 14(1)g of the
Constitution.  
  
Leave to proceed was granted by this Court for the alleged infringement of
Article 12(1) of the Constitution.  
  
The petitioner's complaint, albeit brief, is as follows:  
  
The petitioner became entitled for his sabbatical leave in 1994 (P3) and had
decided to accumulate such leave. He conveyed this decision to the 1st
respondent which was accepted by letter dated 27.05.1994 (P4). Having
completed a further seven years by 2001, the petitioner once again became
entitled to sabbatical leave in 2001 and by that year was entitled to two
years sabbatical leave with full pay. Thereafter the petitioner requested the
1 st respondent to grant two years sabbatical leave with full pay to which,
accord­ing to the petitioner the University had agreed and promised the
petitioner that such leave would be granted to him. In or about this period,
the petitioner became the Vice Chancellor of the 1st respondent University.
Due to this reason he requested that the said sabbatical leave entitlement be
deferred until 01.06.2002. The petitioner submitted that the 1st and 2nd
respondents, with the full knowledge that the petitioner would be completing
64 years of age in the month of March 2002, granted the petitioner two years
sabbatical leave with full pay with effect from 01st June 2002.  
  
The petitioner therefore claims that, he had a legitimate expec­tation to have
two years of sabbatical leave with full pay from  01.06.2002 till 31.05.2004.
Accordingly, after relinquishing his duties as the Vice Chancellor of the 1st
respondent University, the petitioner commenced his sabbatical leave in or
about 01.06.2002. He had made arrangements to spend his sabbatical leave which
arrangement, included accepting foreign assignments.  
  
The petitioner submitted that on 02.09.2002, he was informed by telephone that
the 1st respondent had decided that the petition­er should resume duties on
16.03.2003. According to the petitioner he had no communication whatsoever
that his sabbatical leave has been reduced and that he should resume duties
earlier than expected. Immediately after receiving this intimation, the
petitioner wrote to the 3rd respondent (P11) querying the changes the 1st
respondent had made to his already approved sabbatical leave.

**324**

The 1 st respondent had replied informing the petitioner that a com­munique
had been sent to the petitioner in July 2002 (P12 and P13).  
  
The petitioner contended that, since he had commenced his sabbatical leave in
June 2002, he had not visited his Department at the 1st respondent University.
Therefore he takes up the position that there was no possibility of his
receiving the letter dated  24.07.2002 (P13),which had been sent to the
Department of Economics of the 1st respondent University, further the
petitioner contended that the notification sent to him informing that he
should resume duties on 16.03.2002, had been sent only after he applied for
his overseas leave.  
  
The petitioner submitted that there have been others who have enjoyed their
sabbatical leave and who are still away from their respective Universities on
sabbatical leave at the time of the filing of this application notwithstanding
the fact that they had complet­ed their 64th birthday. The petitioner has
named some University Dons who have availed themselves of their sabbatical
leave irre­spective of the fact that they are over 64 years of age.  
  
The petitioner therefore complained that the action taken by the 1st
respondent University to revoke the decision to grant sabbati­cal leave from
16.03.2003 to 31.05.2004 is malicious and arbitrary.  
  
The Vice Chancellor of the 1 st respondent University as at April 2003, and
the 2nd respondent filed their objections.  
  
The Vice Chancellor of the 1st respondent University conceded that the
petitioner had qualified for sabbatical leave and could not avail himself of
such leave as he was the Vice Chancellor at the time concerned. In terms of P2
he submitted that the 1st respon­dent had no authority to approve sabbatical
leave to the petitioner, but admitted that the Council of the 1st respondent
University requested the 2nd respondent to consider the petitioner's
applica­tion for sabbatical leave beyond 16.03.2002 as he was completing his
64th year on the said date. Further it was submitted that the 1st and 2nd
respondents had no authority to deviate from the condi­tions laid down in the
University Grants Commission Circular No. 408 dated 20.10.1989, which deals
with sabbatical leave to Teachers and Officers (P2). The Vice Chancellor of
the 1st respondent

**325**

University submitted that the Council of the 1st respondent University at its
243rd meeting held on 13.06.2002 decided to per­mit the petitioner to avail
himself of his sabbatical leave, subject to the condition that the petitioner
reports back to work after he com­pletes his 64th year (1 R4, 1R5 and 1R5A).
Further he had submit­ted that the irregular procedure of granting sabbatical
leave to persons after they reached their 64th birthday was corrected by the
2nd respondent at their 603rd meeting and communicated by let­ter dated
22.05.2002 (1R6) and the previous practice of granting sabbatical leave to
randomly identified University teachers was cancelled by the 2nd respondent as
indicated in the said letter, which was sent to all Universities, Campuses and
Institutes.  
  
Therefore the 1st respondent claims that it had acted on the advice of the 2nd
respondent and therefore denied any violation of the petitioner's fundamental
rights guaranteed in terms of Article 12(1) of the constitution.  
  
In terms of clause 5(iii) of the University Grants Commission Circular No. 408
dated 20.10.1984 (P2), the categories of staff defined under clause 2 of the
said circular would be entitled to sabbatical leave of one year's duration
with pay, after 7 years of service. Clause 8 of the said Circular specifies
that periods of sab­batical leave and/or the periods of service for sabbatical
leave enti­tlement may be accumulated. Clause 5(b) of the said Circular also
states that,  
  
"Sabbatical leave should terminate and the Teacher/Officer shall resume duties
before the 64th birthday in the case of Teachers and before trie 54th birthday
in the case of others."  
  
On the basis of the application made by the petitioner to the 1st respondent
University dated 14.02.2001 (1 R2) the said university no forwarded such
request along with the recommendation of the Council of  the said University
to the 2nd respondent for approval. Such recommendations of the 1 st
respondent was to the effect that the requested leave should be granted to the
petitioner and was in the following terms:

**326**



  
  
in response to this communique' the 2nd respondent, by letter dated
04.06.2001, informed the 1st respondent of its decision regarding the request
made by the petitioner in the following terms:  
  
"Sabbatical leave - Prof. J. W. Wickramasinghe this has refer­ence to your
letter dated 15th March 2001, on the above subject.  
  
The commission at its 588th meeting held on 30th April, 2001 has approved two
years of sabbatical leave to Prof. J. W. wickramasinghe, Vice Chancellor,
University of Sri Jayawardanapura with effect from 01.06.2002 on special
circumstances **on relinquishing his duties as Vice Chancellor on 31.05.2002
by which time he would have reached the age of 63 years, notwithstanding the
fact that in terms of para 5(b) of Commission Circular No. 408, sabbatical
leave should terminate and the person concerned resume duties before the 64th
year** (emphasis added)."  
  
Since issuing the aforementioned communique, the 2nd respondent by letter
dated 22.05.2002, intimated to Vice Chancellors of Universities, Rectors of
campuses and Directors of Institutes, a decision taken by the 2nd respondent
pertaining to sabbatical leave to teachers, which was in the following terms
(2R5):  
  
**" Sabbatical leave to teachers  
**  
Your kind attention is drawn to paragraph 5(b) of Commission Circular No. 408
dated 20th October 1989 issued in respect of 150 the above matter.  
  
The Commission noted that certain Higher Educational Institutions seek
approval of the University Grants

**327**

Commission to allow teachers/officers to avail themselves of sabbatical leave
after their 64th/54th birthday, as the case may be, deviating from the above
provisions of Commission Circular No. 408. The Commission therefore at its
603rd meeting decided to inform all Higher Educational Institutions that they
should strictly adhere to the provisions of para 5(b) of the above Circular
and that requests of this nature will not be entertained by the University
Grants Commission in future (emphasis added)."  
  
It is of importance to note that the aforementioned letter of the 2nd
respondent was dated 22.05.2002 and it specifically referred to the fact that
the said decision would be applicable only in the future. As referred to
earlier, the petitioner's request was approved by the 2nd respondent at their
588th meeting held on 30.04.2001 and such decision was informed to the 1st
respondent by letter dated 04.06.2001 (2R3). Such approval was given after
considering the conditions stipulated in clause 5(b) of the Circular No. 408
dated 20.10.1989 and special circumstances the applicant had referred to in
his application.  
  
Notwithstanding the clear instructions given by the 2nd respon­dent, the 1st
respondent decided to inquire from the 2nd respon-dent by letter dated
03.07.2002 (2R6) whether the decision con­veyed by the 2nd respondent with
regard to the petitioner's leave would be valid any longer on the basis of the
decision taken by the 2nd respondent conveyed to the 1st respondent by letter
dated 22.05.2002. There is no material placed before this Court by the 1st
respondent, showing the reasons for the decision to place the already approved
request for sabbatical leave of the petitioner, before the Council of the 1st
respondent University and later com­municating such decision to the 2nd
respondent and querying whether its decision would still be valid.  
  
This action of the 1st respondent is clearly without any basis. There was no
requirement or a necessity for the 1st respondent to take any steps with
regard to the approval given to the petitioner for him to be away on
sabbatical leave. After writing to the 2nd respon­dent querying the leave
already granted to the petitioner, the 1st respondent did not consider it
necessary to await a reply from the 2nd respondent. Within a period of 3 weeks
the 3rd respondent

**328**

wrote to the petitioner informing him that he has to report for work on
16.03.2003. This letter dated 24.07.2002 was in the following terms (1R5):

  
  
By virtue of this letter, the 1st respondent effectively rescinded the letter
dated 20.08.2001, which intimated the decision of the 2nd respondent to the
petitioner that he could utilise his 2 years of sabbatical leave with effect
from 01.06.2002. While the 1st respondent had communicated its decision to the
petitioner, the 2nd respondent, by letter dated 10.10.2002, informed the 1st
respondent that as the approval for the petitioner's sabbatical leave was
granted before the amendment letter which was issued on 22.05.2002, the
initial decision pertaining to the petitioner would still be valid.  
  
In the aforementioned circumstances, it is surprising to note that the 1st
respondent notwithstanding the clear instructions given by the 2nd respondent
that their decision will be applicable only to future applicants, decided to
inform the petitioner, without even awaiting a reply to their letter by which
they sought a clarification.  
  
It is common ground that sabbatical leave to Teachers and Officers of
Universities is governed by UGC Circular No. 408 (2R4). It is also common
ground that when by letter dated 15.03.2001 the 1st respondent sought approval
of the 2nd respon­dent for two years sabbatical leave for the petitioner
(2R1), the 2nd respondent had approved it on 30.04.2001 and had conveyed the
said decision to the 1st respondent on 04.06.2001. The 2nd respondent by
letter dated 10.10.2002, replied the 1st respondent stating that 'the
petitioner's  sabbatical leave continued to be

**329**

approved as the decision regarding his sabbatical leave had been taken prior
to the communication dated 22.05.2002' (2R7).  
  
It is therefore abundantly clear that the improper decision con­veyed to the
petitioner by letter dated 24.07.2002 (1R5) restricting the petitioner's
sabbatical leave, was taken by the 1st respondent, not only arbitrarily, but
also without any basis.  
  
Considering the totality of the circumstances of this application, it is clear
that the petitioner belonged to a group where sabbatical leave had been given-
to be enjoyed beyond the age of 64 years. Such leave was granted to the
petitioner not by the 1st respondent University, but by the 2nd respondent
Commission, which is the ultimate authority for such purpose. After all
sabbatical leave is  granted under, and governed by the UGC Circular No. 408
dated 20.10.1989 (as amended). In such circumstance, the 1st respon­dent had
no authority to issue the letter dated 24.02.2002 and thereby had clearly
acted arbitrarily.  
  
Such action means that the decision has been influenced by extraneous
consideration, which the relevant authority should not have considered. When
an act is arbitrary it is implicit that such action is unequal and therefore
violative of Article 12(1) of the Constitution which guarantees equality and
equal protection of the law. Commenting on the concept of equal protection of
laws and constitutional guarantee against arbitrariness Bhagwati, J., in E.P.
Royappa v State of Tamil Nadu(1) stated that,  
  
"Equally is a dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions and it cannot
be 'cribbed, cabined and confined' within traditional and doctrinate limits.
From a positivistic point of view equality is antithetic to arbitrariness. In
fact equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies: one belongs to the rule of
law in a republic while the other to the whim and caprice of an absolute
monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal
both according to political logic and constitutional law and therefore it is
violative of Article 14..."  
  
After the conclusion of the hearing and after the petitioner had filed his
written submissions, the 1st respondent had filed a motion dated 20.10.2003.
By that motion the 1st respondent stated that,

**330**

the 1st respondent University is in agreement to grant the following reliefs
to the petitioner, namely, to set aside the decision to revoke the original
decision and to grant sabbatical leave to the petitioner with full pay from
01st June 2002 till 31st May 2004.  
  
The petitioner thereafter submitted that he did not wish to enter into a
settlement on that basis with the 1st respondent, as he could not go abroad
using his sabbatical leave due to the actions of the respondents and the
reliefs suggested in the motion filed by the 1st respondent would not be of
any use to him.  
  
It is to be noted that the petitioner had to invoke the jurisdiction of this
Court, in order to be on sabbatical leave and had to obtain an interim order
so that he could enjoy his sabbatical leave beyond 16.03.2003.  
  
On a consideration of all the circumstances of this case, the motion filed by
the 1st respondent is rejected and I declare that the 1st respondent
University has violated the petitioner's fundamental rights guaranteed in
terms of Article 12(1) of the Constitution. The decision of the 1st respondent
University to revoke the orignal deci­sion to grant the petitioner sabbatical
leave with full pay from 01.06.2002 till 31.05.2004 is set aside and I direct
the respondents to permit the petitioner to be on sabbatical leave with full
pay until 31.05.2004, which is in compliance with the decision of the 2nd
respondent dated 10.10.2002 (2R7).  
  
The 1st respondent University is also directed to pay to the peti­tioner a sum
of Rs. 25,000/- as compensation and costs. This  amount to be paid within 3
months from today.

  
**EDUSSURIYA, J. - I agree.**

**DE SILVA, J. - I agree.**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/15.html_  

