##  Kapugeekiyana v. Hettiarachchi and Two Others - SLR - 153, Vol 2 of 1984
[1984] LKSC 15; (1984) 2 Sri LR 153 (31 August 1984)

**  153**

** **

**KAPUGEEKIYANA**

**v.**

**HETTIARACHCHI AND TWO OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT.

SAMARAKOON, CJ, WIMALARATNE, J. AND COLIN-THOM , J.

S.C. No. 80/84.

AUGUST 2, 3, 6, 7 AND 8, 1984.



Fundamental rights ‑ Violation ‑ lllegal arrest and illegal detention ‑
Torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment ‑ Right to be defended by an
attorney‑at‑law ‑ Freedom to engage in lawful occupation, profession and
business ‑ Articles 11, 12(1) 13(1), (2) and (3) and 14(1) (g) of the
Constitution ‑ Sections 32(1) (b), 36, 37, 115(4) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 ‑ Section 41 (1) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of
1978.



The petitioner, a suspect in a murder case complained that about 6.00 a.m. on
13.6.1984 the 1st  and 2nd respondents entered his house, searched it and took
into Custody documents and files belonging to him without a search warrant.
Thereafter without a warrant of arrest they arrested him and took him to the
4th Floor of the C. I. D. ‑Office, Colombo 1. There they subjected him to
harassment, assault, torture, duress,

##   154



humiliation and cruet, inhuman, degrading and barbaric treatment. He was not
given a meal until the afternoon of 14th June and he was held incommunicado
until the afternoon of 17th June when he was permitted to speak to his brother
over the telephone in the presence of the C. I. D. officers. About 2.00 p. m.
on 17th June he was taken in a police vehicle to the residence of the Acting
Magistrate who remanded him until the 19th of June. On 19th June the
petitioner was produced before the Joint Magistrate's Court in Case No. 1767
an a B report filed by the 2nd respondent. While in the dock the petitioner
handed his Counsel a written note of instructions­ The  1st respondent
demanded that he be shown this note but Counsel refused to show it. The
Magistrate ordered him to be remanded till 22nd June 1984.



The petitioner tiled the present application complaining of infringement to
his fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 11, 13(1), 13(2), 13(3) and
14(1) _(g)_ of the Constitution in that he was 



(i)         subject to torture and/or cruel and/or inhuman and/or degrading
treatment.



(ii)        arrested contrary to procedure established by law and not informed
of the reason of his arrest.



(iii)       held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of his personal
liberty contrary to law and not produced before the Judge of ft nearest
competent Court within 24 hours as required by the procedure established by
law.



(iv)       subjected to an attempt to deny him his unfettered right to be
freely defendant by an attorney‑at‑taw.



(v)        denied the freedom to engage in his lawful  occupation, profession
and business

##  

## Held‑



(1)        Even a person on the blackest of criminal charges is entitled to
his fundamental rights.



(2)        No violation of the provisions of Article 13(1) of the Constitution
in the matter of the  arrest itself has been established.



(3)        The petitioner was arrested on the 13th June at about 9.00 a.m. and
illegally detained on the 4th Floor of the C. I. D. for three days till 17th
June in violation of Article 13(2) of the Constitution.



(4)        The allegation of torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment
has not been established.



(5)        The conduct of the 1st respondent in demanding to see a written
communication of the petitioner to his Counsel was reprehensible but as the
1st respondent's attempt did not succeed it did not impede a fair trial.



(6)        (Samarakoon, C. J. dissenting) : The allegation that there has been
a violation of the right conferred by Article 14 (1) _(g)_ has not been
established.



## Per Samarakoon, C. J.‑



" Communications between Counsel and client are privileged and no person has a
right to pry into them."

##   155



Per Wimalaratne, J.-



" In deciding whether any particular fundamental right has been infringed I
would apply the test laid down in _Velmurugu_ that the civil, and not the
criminal standard of persuasion applies, with this observation, that the
nature and gravity of an issue must necessarily determine the manner of
attaining reasonable satisfaction of the truth of that issue. "



**Cases referred to :**



(1)        _A. K. Velmurugu v. The Attorney ‑General _S.C. Application No.
74/81 Minutes of 9\. 11.81



**APPLICATION** under Article 126 Constitution for violation of fundamental
rights.



_Dr. Colvin R. de Silva,_ with _Mrs. M. Muththetuwegama_ , _Ananda Malalgoda,
Mahinda Ratnayake, Rohan Ratnapala, Daniel Philips_ and _Miss Saumya do Silva_
for petitioner.



_E.D. Wickremanayake_ with _C. P. Jayaweera Bandara,_ for 1st and 2nd
respondents.



_Upawansa Yapa, D. S. G._ with _Asoka do Silva, S. S. C_., and _Mrs. Shirani
Thilakawardene, S.C_. for _A. G_



_Cur. adv. vult._



August 31, 1984.

**  **

**SAMARAKOON, C. J.**



The Petitioner is this case complains of a violation of his fundamental rights
by the 1st and 2nd Respondents (hereinafter referred to as respondents). He is
a suspect in a case of murder of one Shyama Dedigama of Kegalle. The
Magistrate of Kegalle has assumed jurisdiction in the matter in case No.
49789. The Petitioner is presently on remand. The Petitioner states that on
the 13th June 1984 at about 6.00 a.m. the Respondents entered his residence at
Nagolle Road, Kegalle, searched his house and took into their custody
documents and files belonging to the Petitioner. Thereafter they took the
Petitioner into custody at about 9.00 a.m. and brought him to the 4th floor of
the C. I. D. office at Colombo 1. They had neither a search warrant nor a
warrant for arrest. He complains that he was held on the 4th floor of the C.
I. D. office incommunicado until the 17th June and Subjected to harassment,
assault, torture, duress, humiliation and cruel, inhuman, degrading and
barbaric treatment by the Respondents. He was not given a meal after his
arrest until the afternoon of the 14th June. He states that it was only in the
afternoon .of the 17th that he was permitted to speak to his brother over the
telephone in the presence of the C.I.D. officers. At about 2.00 p.m.

##   156



on the 17th June he was taken in a police vehicle to the residence of the
Acting Magistrate. The Acting Magistrate remanded him and ordered him to be
produced before the Joint Magistrate's Court on the 19th June. He was produced
before the Joint Magistrate in case No. 1767 on the 19th June on a B Report
filed by the 2nd Respondent (Copy marked P5). While in the dock the Petitioner
handed to his Counsel a written note of instructions (P6). The 1st  Respondent
thereupon demanded that he be shown the note but Counsel refused  to show him
the note. The Joint Magistrate ordered the Petitioner to be produced before
him on the 22nd  June. The Petitioner pleads that in contravention and
violation of his fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 11 and/or 13 (1 )
and/or 13 (2) and/or 13 (3) and/or14 (1) _(g)_   of the Constitution he was‑



(i)         subjected to torture and/or to cruel and/or to inhuman and/or to
degrading treatment ;



(ii)        arrested in contravention and violation of the procedure
established by law and not informed of the reason for his arrest ;



(iii)       held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of his personal
liberty in contravention of the procedure established by Law and without being
brought before the Judge of the nearest competent Court according to the
procedure established by Law ;



(iv)       "subject to an attempt to deny the Petitioner the unfettered right
to be freely defended by an Attorney‑at‑Law" ; (sic)



(v)        denied the freedom to engage in his lawful occupation profession
and business;



He prays for an award of compensation and/or a direction that the Respondents
furnish him with a list of documents taken from him and return to him his
documents that are not necessary for the purpose of case No. 49787 of the
Magistrate's Court of Kegalle.



The first Respondent has filed an affidavit denying these allegations. Briefly
his position is that by the 15th June "it was publicly know by reason of
newspaper items etc. that the murder of Miss Shyama Dedigama was suspected to
be a 'contract' killing and that the police were looking for the person behind
the said murder". He states that as a result of investigations and
interrogations he was able to  take into

##   157



custody on the 15th June 1984 a man named M. D. Jayasena alias Captain' who
is now the second accused in M.C .Kegalle Case No. 49789\. His interrogation
revealed the complicity of the Petitioner in the murder. Captain who had been
paid a sum of Rs. 15,000/‑ out of a sum of Rs. 20,000/‑ had offered to meet
the Petitioner and ask for the balance money due to him. Para 13 of the
affidavit then states thus‑



"Accordingly, on the night of 15th June, 1984, Captain accompanied by a C. I.
D. officer in disguise, met the petitioner in the garden of his residence on
the night of  15th June, 1984, and engaged the petitioner in a conversation
relating to the payment of the said money. This conversation was recorded on
the mini tape recorder and I state that it unequivocally reveals the
complicity of the petitioner in the commission of the said offences".



On the material available it was decided to take the Petitioner into custody.
He states that he and his party of C.I.D. officers reached the house of the
Petitioner (which was only one room) and took some documents into his charge.
Thereafter the Petitioner was taken into custody. The petitioner's wife was
present throughout and was aware of what was being done. The Petitioner was
brought to Colombo where the documents brought were inventorised.
Interrogation of the Petitioner commenced at about 12 noon after the
Petitioner had the lunch provided him and continued till about 2.30 p.m. when
the tape recording of the meeting between him and Captain was played to him.
The recording of his statement commenced at 3.00 p.m. and continued up to 6.30
p.m. The Respondent states that the statement as a voluntary one and the
Petitioner himself made numerous corrections in the typescript in his own hand
and initialled them. He further states that the Petitioner was remanded to
Fiscal custody on the morning of the 17th. The 2nd Respondent has filed an
affidavit. In Para 3 he states ‑ "I associate myself with and adopt in their
entirety the contents" of the 1st Respondent's affidavit. The above is the
broad picture. I will deal with the facts in detail later when I come to
consider each of the fundamental rights alleged to have been violated.



This is a case in which a suspect in a murder case, who is on remand, is
making a complaint of violation of his fundamental rights by The Police
officers who took him into custody. It is perhaps the first of

##   158



its kind in our Courts. Counsel for the‑Respondents submitted that if this
Court holds that the arrest was on the 13th  June (as stated by the
Petitioner) and not on the 16th June (as stated by the Respondents then the
case against the Petitioner "cannot even be opened against the Petitioner at
the criminal trial". He stated that this application was the result of a plan
cleverly conceived to upset the criminal charge against the Petitioner. Such a
possibility cannot be ruled out. It therefore behoves this Court to make a
strict examination of the evidence while at the same time steering clear of
facts and that do not concern this case and are only germane to the criminal
charge. On the other hand Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that even a
suspect on the blackest of criminal charges is entitle to his fundamental
rights. This is no doubt true. In judging the facts  of this case I will bear
in mind both contentions of Counsel.



I will deal with the second and third allegations first. They state that the
Petitioner without first being informed of the reason for his arrest was
arrested held in custody,  detained or otherwise deprived of his personal
liberty in contravention of the procedure established by law and without being
brought before the Judge of the nearest competent Court according to the
procedure established by law. This  pleads a contravention and a violation of
the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 13(1) and 13(2) of the
Constitution. The dispute between the parties is as to the precise date of
arrest and subsequent detention.  Was the Petitioner arrested on the 13th
June at about 9.00 a.m. and detained till the 17th June or was he arrested on
the 16th  and produced before the Magistrate on the 17th June ? If the latter
there has been no violation of a fundamental right (provided however that no
procedural law has been violated). If the former then there has been an
illegal detention of the Petitioner on the 4th floor of the C. I. D. office
for a period of three days constituting a violation of the fundamental right
conferred by Article 13 (2) of the Constitution.



A convenient point to start a  consideration  of the facts would  be the
complaint made by the wife of the Petitioner to the Police at Kegalle on the
15th June at 15.15 hrs. A certified copy of it has been produced marked P4.
Counsel for the Respondent characterised this as a "suspicious document". The
English translation of it filed with P4 reads  that the C. I. D. officers
arrived at the residence of the Petitioner at 6.00 a.m. whereas the Petitioner
in his affidavit states that they arrived at 6. 00 p.m. The certified copy is
not very clear. We therefore sent for the Information Book and the Criminal
Investigation Book

##   159



Volume 11 of the Kegalle Police Station was produced for our inspection. The
original clearly reads 6.00 a. m Our examination further reveals that it is a
contemperaneous record and ere is no reason to doubt the fact that the
statement P4 was recorded in the Information Book at 15.15 hrs. on the 15th
June on page 13 of the Book and now appears as Para 255. In paragraph 30 of
his affidavit the 1st Respondent states that he is unaware of the truth of the
contents of paragraph 10 of the Petitioner's affidavit ,which thereby includes
the contents of P4. However in paragraph 36 he states that the contents of P4
are not true. In her complaint P4 the wife of the Petitioner states that her
husband (the Petitioner) had been taken away to Colombo on the 13th June by
the C.I.D. officers who came to the residence that day at 6.00 a.m., and that
thereafter she had no information of him up to the time of making the
complaint. The truth of her statement can be checked from other evidence both
documentary and oral. The Member of Parliament for the electorate of Mawenella
Chandra Ranatunga, who is also an Attorney‑at‑Law, has filed an affidavit in
which he states that the wife of the Petitioner, who has been known to him for
many years, came to his house on the 14th  June and complained _inter alia_
that her husband had been forcibly taken away at about 9.30 a.m. on the 13th
June by persons claiming to be C.I.D. officers. Mr. Edward Vincent Lloyd
Peiris an Attorney‑at‑Law who has been in practice in the Kegalle Courts for
29 years stated on oath in this Court that the wife of the Petitioner met him
at his residence at about 8. 00 a.m. on the 15th and told him that their house
had been searched by the C. I. D. on the 13th   morning and that her husband
had been taken away by them when they left at about 9.30 a.m. She informed him
that she had complained about this to the Member of Parliament. Mr. Peiris
advised her to make a complaint to the Kegalle Police as 48 hours had passed
and he had not been produced before the Magistrate. This evidence was not
contradicted. He was not cross‑examined by Counsel for the Respondents or by
Counsel for the Attorney‑General. Mr. Maliyawawadu Buddhadasa Ranatunga of
Molagoda Estate, Kegalle, a retired Government Surveyor and Court
Commissioner, now in Private practice, has filed an affidavit stating that he
went on the 13th to meet the Petitioner at his bungalow. There he was informed
by the Petitioner's wife that the Petitioner had been taken into custody on
the 15th by persons claiming to be C.I.D. officers and that she had not heard
from him since. She also told him of the advice given her by

##   160



Mr. Winston Peiris and that she was reluctant to go alone to the Police
Station. He informed her that she should follow legal advice and thereupon she
went accompained by him to the Police Station where she made a complaint.
Kuruwita Arachchilage Peiris Appuhamy, Chief Survey Labourer under the
Petitioner for 18 years, states in his affidavit that he went to the
Petitioner's bungalow at 6.00 a.m  on 15th June as a survey had been fixed for
that day in terms of a  Commission issued in D.C., Kegalle, Case No. 22119 but
the Petitioner was not in his house. He was informed by the Petitioner's wife
that he had been taken into custody on the 13th by C.I.D Officers. The
Petitioner's diary was produced in court from the custody of the Respondents,
at the request of Counsel for the Petitioner. In it was entered against date
15th June-



"P/Suvy D.C. 22119 Marapone Kegalle."



Anandapala Cyril Jayaratne, Rest House Keeper of the Rest House, Kegalle
states in his affidavit that on the 13th June at about 9.30 a. m. the 2nd
respondent came into the Rest House and left after having tea. One Mervyn
Dharmadasa Gammampila, a businessman of Kegalle, happened to be in the same
Rest House that morning. He states that at about 9.00 a.m. or 9.30 a.m. a jeep
came to the Rest House and was parked in the compound. Two passengers alighted
and went into the Rest House. He looked through the perspex, screen of the
rear door and recognised the petitioner, whom he knew, seated inside. Later
that day he came to know that the petitioner had been arrested by the C.I.D.
The Respondents deny these statements and the 1st Respondent states that
neither he nor the 2nd respondent nor any of his team of C. I. D. officers was
in Kegalle on the 13th.



As against this mass of evidence the Respondents produced for our inspection
in Court a document which was referred to by the Deputy Solicitor General as
the "Information Book" of the C.I.D. It was not a book. It turned out to be a
collection of loose leaves punched and filed between two hard covers. It had
originally been serially numbered but those serial numbers had been altered.
Counsel read out a series of such alterations and submitted that this clearly
proved fabrication and interpolation of papers. Such a comment is not
unjustified in the circumstances. No reliance can be placed on it to justify a
finding that the arrest took place on the 16th June and not on the 13th June.
There is another suspicious circumstance which militates against the
respondents. The respondents state that Captain was taken into

##   161



custody on the morning of the 15th and produced before the magistrate on the
16th. The original of the B Report has the date "84‑06‑16" under the signature
of the 2nd respondent. The figure "16" is an alteration in ink of the figure
in typescript. The figure "2" in type is clearly visible, over which the
figure "1" has been written. The date placed under the Magistrate's order has
the figure "16" written in heavy hand over another figure (which is not
visible) indicating an alteration. The carbon copy of this same B Report which
is also filed of record has the following date in type :



"84 ‑ 06 ‑ 14"



Before "1" in "l4" appears "2" which has been struck off by a verticle stroke.
If as the respondents state "Captain" was arrested on the 15th morning how
came it that a B Report was prepared in respect of him with the date 14th June
stating _inter alia_ in terms of section 124 that Captain had indicated his
willingness to make a confession to the Magistrate ? I find myself unable to
place any reliance on these documents. The totality of evidence adduced on
behalf of the petitioner is consistent with the allegation that he was
arrested on the morning of the13th June and not on the 16th June. I reject the
statements of the respondents on this point.



I will now consider the first of the allegations. The petitioner complains
that he was subjected to torture and/or to cruel and/or to inhuman and/or to
degrading treatment. This allegation has been described in detail in paragraph
10 of his affidavit (marked P1 ) as follows :



"10\. On the said 4th floor after a few preliminary questions the ordeal of
torture which I underwent at the hands of the C.I.D. commenced. A.S.P.
Hettiarachchi ordered that no food or water was to be given to me. I.P.
Amunugama hit my knuckles until they bled. Thereafter he hit my skull and
forehead methodically, after which he made me stretch my hands out and placed
two heavy ledgers in my hands and made me to carry them in that position until
I could not hold them no longer. While this was going on he kept describing
the various methods of torture that the C. I. D. are capable of and reminded
me of the case of Dodampe Mudalali, Thereafter I was handed over to a lower
ranking officer who placed three large ledgers weighing over 100 pounds on my
head and made me walk on my knees. I was thereafter taken into another room
and made to do the same until I collapsed of exhaustion. Well after midnight I

##   162



was handcuffed to a chair and made to lie down on a table. In the morning the
torturing commenced and I was made to walk on bended legs with heavy ledgers
on my head. Inspector Amunugama started questioning  me and when I denied any
knowledge of the crime, I was assaulted, hit on the jaws, given karate shots
on the Chest and ten paper pins were driven, under the nails of both hands.
Thereafter A.S. P. Hettiarachchi arrived and I was taken before him for
questioning. I denied any knowledge of the crime. At the and of the
interrogation the A.S. P. left with the remark to his subordinates "do not
kill him" . I.P. Amunugama thereafter started his torturing session again and
this time an additional ten pins were driven under the nails of both my feet.
I was given a packet of food on the afternoon of the 14th . I was confronted
with a person called Captain whom I had never seen before who said that I am
the person who engaged him to commit the crime. Thereafter tiny tape recorders
were produced and played and where my voice had been recorded. Thereafter I
was taken to another room, manacled to a cupboard and made to sit on the
ground. Captain who was in the room begged of me to agree to say what the
police wanted otherwise they would torture me as they had tortured him and the
others, and said, that would never be able to withstand the other tortures. At
about 4.30 p.m I.P. Amunugama came and assaulted me again and trampled my
ankles and stood on my thighs and kicked me on the jaws with the heel of his
shoes and drove a few more pins under my nails and left threatening to
continue the torture in the evening. In the evening he brought a spike and
showed a handkerchief which would be used to hold a lighted cigarette to the
nose."



These are third degree methods and if true they constitute a violation of
Article 11 of the constitution. However we have only the statement of the
petitioner on this point. He appears to have complained of torture to his
Counsel in Court on the 19th June ( _Vide_ Note P 6). Counsel in his affidavit
states that he brought this to the notice of the Magistrate on the 22nd June
and asked for an order that the petitioner be examined by the Judicial Medical
Officer. There is nothing on record to this effect and no such order has been
made. On the 19th, consequent to an application made by Counsel, the
Magistrate has made order that the petitioner be examined by the prison doctor
for his diabetic condition. But this order has not been communicated to the
prison authorities and therefore the examination has not been

##   163



done Perhaps if this order was carried out a complaint might have been made to
the prison doctor of torture too. In the result corroborative evidence that
might have been available is lacking. The 1st respondent states that the 4th
floor comprises a set of offices used by several high ranking officers for
their official duties. There is no evidence that such a place has living
facilities for ordinary human existence but this fact alone cannot establish
torture, cruel or inhuman or degrading treatment. In the circumstances I hold
that a violation of the fundamental right set out in Article 11 has not been
established.



The fourth allegation is that the first respondent attempted to deny the
petitioner the unfettered right to be freely defended by an Attorney-at-law.
This concerns an incident that occurred in the well of the Magistrate's Court
on the 19th June. While in the dock the petitioner handed to his counsel a
note of instructions (p 6). The first Respondent then demanded that he be
shown this note which Counsel refused to do. The first respondent states that
he was unaware of such a note and therefore denies the allegation. The
petitioner is corroborated on this point by his Counsel Mr. D. M. S.
Gunasekera who states that such an incident did occur which led to cross-talk
between himself and the first Respondent in Court. He describes the incident
thus in paragraph 6 of his affidavit (P 14)



"6\. Whilst submissions were being made by other Counsel a note was handed to
me by my client from the dock. Thereafter A.S.P. Hettiarachchi the C. I. D.
officer in the case demanded of me to show the note to him. I indignantly
refused to show it to him and said that it was a communication from my client
to me. Thereafter there was an exchange of words during the course of which
the said A.S.P. Hettiarachchi threatened to have me questioned on the 4th
floor of the C.I.D. I countered that I would report him for contempt of
Court."



The first Respondent states in his counter affidavit that these averments of
Counsel are false. He adds :



"I further state that the Court Room in the Colombo Fort Magistrate's Court is
quite small and was packed  to capacity on the 19th June 1984."



What impact this fact had on the falsity or otherwise of the allegation made
by Counsel is difficult to comprehend. In view of the fact that this affidavit
and others had been filed on the 31st July and the inquiry. commenced on the
3rd August and also in view of the



##   164



importance of the matters in issue I informed Counsel for the first Respondent
and the Deputy Solicitor General that they could cross‑examine any of the
deponents if they chose to, but they declined to do so. Nothing has been
established to indicate that this statement of Counsel for the petitioner is
untrue and I see no reason to reject his testimony on this issue. The conduct
of the first Respondent in this instance in Court is reprehensible and I have
no doubt the Magistrate would have taken serious note of it had it been
brought to his notice. Communications between Counsel and client are
privileged ad no person has a right to pry into them. However this attempt on
the part of the first Respondent to see these instructions has not succeeded
and has therefore not impeded a fair trial.



The last complaint is that the Petitioner has been denied the freedom to
engage in his lawful occupation, profession and business by reason of his
arrest on the 13th June and the failure or neglect to furnish him with a list
of, and/or signed receipt for, the documents taken from his residence. This is
a reference to the right conferred by Article 14 (1) _(g)_ of the
Constitution. There is no doubt that his professional work could not have been
done during the three days, he was illegally detained. His diary shows that
such work had fixed for the 15th June. Failure to provide a list or receipt
for the documents taken is of little consequence as the Petitioner does not
complain of the taking of the documents itself.



Since writing this judgment I have had the benefit of reading the order of
Justice Wimalaratne. I find that I have not dealt with allegation that there
has been a violation of the provisions of Article 13 (1) of the Constitution.
I have perused the reasons given by Justice Wimalaratne and I agree with his
finding that there has not been a violation of the right granted by article
13(1) of the constitution.



In view of my finding that the Petitioner has been illegally detained for
three days and the finding that he has been unlawfully prevented from
practising his profession on those days he is entitled to relief and I order
the first and second Respondents to pay the Petitioner a sum of Rs. 10,000 as
compensation. His prayer for an order to furnish a list of documents taken and
that his documents be returned to him is a matter for the Magistrate of
Kegalle and application should properly be made to him. The petitioner will be
entitled to costs.

##   165

**  
WIMALARATNE, J.**



I have had the benefit of reading the Judgment prepared by the Chief justice
where the relevant facts are set out. I am in entire agreement with him that
we should steer clear of facts and matters that do not concern this case, but
are only germane to the proceedings pending in the Magistrate's Court of
Kegalle.



The question of the degree of proof required of a Petitioner seeking to
establish his case of infringement of fundamental rights has assumed great
importance because of the sharp conflict in the material Placed before us by
the parties. The nature of that degree of proof has been considered by this
Court on earlier occasions, of which I may refer to the decision in _A._ _K.
Velmurugu v. The Attorney General_ (1) which is a decision of a Bench of five
Judges. Wanasundera, J. expressed the view that "the petitioner must prove his
allegations to the satisfaction of the Court", and observed that the Court had
tried to steer clear of using a formula or language that may lead to any
misunderstanding. But he also made it clear that the test they had applied was
"the degree of proof used in civil cases, which is not so high as is required
in criminal cases". In reaching this conclusion the Court appears to have
balanced the consideration of laying an undue burden on a petitioner
complaining of an infringement of his fundamental rights, which it is the duty
of the Court to safeguard, as against the contrary consideration that as the
liability that has been imposed is one against the State, a high degree of
probability, which is proportionate to the subject matter is necessary.



In deciding whether any particular fundamental right has been infringed I
would apply the test laid down in _Velmurugu_ (above) that the civil, and not
the criminal standard of persuasion applies, with this observation, that the
nature and gravity of an issue must necessarily determine the manner of
attaining reasonable satisfaction of the truth Of that issue.



**Alleged infringement of Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution.**



These Articles read as follows :‑



"13 (1) No person shall be arrested except according to procedure established
by law. Any person arrested shall be informed of the reason for his arrest.

##   166  


 (2) Every person held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of personal
liberty shall be brought before the judge of the nearest competent court
according to procedure established by law, and shall not be further held in
custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty expect upon and in terms of
the order of such judge made in accordance with procedure established by law".

           

In the context of the present case "procedure established by law" in  the
above Article cannot mean any other than the procedure established by the Code
of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979. The two sections of that Code
relevant for present purposes are sections 36 & 37.



"36\. A peace officer making an arrest without warrant shall without
unnecessary delay and subject to the provisions herein contained as to bail
take or send the person arrested before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in
the case.



37.  Any peace officer shall not detain in custody or otherwise confine a person arrested without a warrant for a longer period than under all the circumstances of the case is reasonable, and such period shall not exceed twenty-four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate".



These valuable statutory rights enjoyed by suspects have now been made
constitutional rights, and unless there are compelling reasons, The Petitioner
complains also of infringement of his rights they ought not to be cut down by
judicial construction. The importance of this requirement that no suspect
shall be kept in Police custody in any event for more than 24 hours is
underlined in section115(4) of the Code which provides for the procedure that
Police officers are required to adopt when investigations are long drawn out
and cannot be completed within the 24 hour period. In such an event the
officer in charge of a police station has first to obtain the authorisation of
the Magistrate to have access to the remand prisoner for the purpose of
further investigation ; and such Court may authorise the police officer to
take the suspect from place to place _only_ if the court is of opinion that
the suspect is required to be so taken and _only_ in the company of a prison
officer. This new procedure was not contained in the earlier Criminal
Procedure Code (Cap. 16) even after it received extensive amendments in 1938.
_ _

##   167



In his judgment the Chief Justice has outlined the mass of evidence adduced by
the petitioner in support of his allegation that he was arrested on the 13th
of June. In their second affidavits filed on 3.8.84, the 1st and 2nd
respondents stated that they were trying to obtain the entries relating to the
movements of police jeep bearing No. 31 Sri 5019 which was the vehicle
assigned to them for the purpose of this investigation and which was the
vehicle used by them on the 16th of June when they took the petitioner into
custody. The running chart of that vehicle was not made available to us for
scrutiny even though arguments in this case went on till the 8th of August.



Applying the test relating to the degree of proof referred to above to the
evidence before us, I am satisfied that the petitioner was arrested it his
house in Kegalle at about 9.30 a.m. on the 13th of June, 1984, and not on the
16th of June as averred by the 1st and 2nd respondents. The Petitioner was
produced before the acting Joint Magistrate of Colombo only on the 17th of
June long after the period of time specified in section 37 of the Code. I am
in agreement with the Chief Justice that there has thus been an infringement
by the 1st and 2nd respondents of the petitioner's fundamental right
guaranteed by Article 13 (2). In view of this finding it is unnecessary to
decide the question as to whether in the light of the facts of this case "the
nearest competent court" was the Magistrate's Court of Kegalle.



The Petitioner complains also of infringement of his right guaranteed by
Article 13 (1). Police powers of arrest without a warrant are laid down in
section 32 (1) _(b)_ of the Code. It would appear that the C.I.D. had certain
information against the petitioner which empowered them to arrest the
petitioner. Thus no complaint about an illegal arrest can be entertained. The
question is whether the further requirement that he should have been informed
of the reason for his arrest had been complied with by the officers arresting
the Petitioner. On this question too there is a sharp conflict of testimony As
against the affidavits of the petitioner and of his wife there are the
affidavits of the 1st and 2nd respondents. In regard to the date of  arrest
the material placed before us by the petitioner was conclusive. But in regard
to this question as to whether the petitioner was informed of the reason for
his arrest, there is no such independent evidence. In that situation I would
hold   petitioner has not established an infringement of Article 13 (1) by the
respondents.

##   168



Alleged infringement of the fundamental right guaranteed by Article 13 (3) of
the Constitution.



Article 13 (3) reads thus :



Any person charged with an offence shall be entitled to be heard. in person or
by an attorney‑at‑law, at a fair trial by a competent court".



The corresponding provision of the Indian Constitution (Article 22 (1) 22 (1)
) is much wider in that "no person arrested can be denied the right to
consult, and to be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice". It is
unnecessary to examine the ambit of Article 13 (3) because the petitioner had
in fact been represented by his lawyer on 19.6.84 and there has thus been no
infringement of this Article. If any incident as related by Mr. Goonasekera
did occur in the Magistrate's Court on that date it is a matter to be dealt
with by the Magistrate.



**Alleged infringement of the fundamental right guaranteed by Article 14 (1)
(g) of the Constitution.**



This  paragraph of Article 14 reads as follows :



"Every citizen is entitled to the freedom to engage by himself or in
association with others in any lawful occupation, profession, trade, business
or enterprise".



In paragraph 20 _(e)_ of his petition the petitioner complains that  he has
been denied the freedom to engage in his lawful occupation, profession and
business by reason of the acts referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4. Now, in
paragraphs 3 and 4 he complains mainly about the illegal search and removal of
several documents including files relating to Court cases and surveys
conducted by him. The contention of learned Counsel for the petitioner was
that as a result  of the removal of these documents, he was unable to entrust
his professional work to another surveyor. The 1st respondent's answer is that
the only documents removed were those that he believed would help in the
further investigation of the offence



 Article 14 (1) postulates a legal capacity to exercise the right guaranteed
by it and if a citizen loses the freedom of his person as a result of either a
lawful arrest, remand or detention on conviction for an offence or otherwise,
he cannot in my view claim any of the freedoms guaranteed by Article 14 (1).
In this case the petitioner

##   169



Should have been produced before the Magistrate on the 14th of June. Had he
been so produced the Magistrate had no option but to remand him. As regards
his complaint that he had been denied his right to carry on his business by
entrusting it to others, there necessarily has to be curtailment of such right
if the documents seized are necessary for the investigations There has thus
been, in my view, no infringement of the right guaranteed by Article 14 (1)
_(g)._

_  _



Alleged infringement of the fundamental right guaranteed by Article 11.



I am in agreement with the reasons and finding of the Chief Justice that the
petitioner has not established infringement of the fundamental right
guaranteed  by Article 11 .



Relief.

  
In view of my finding that the Petitioner, a professional man, has been
illegally held in the custody of the ‑ 1st and 2nd respondents at the fourth
floor of the C. I. D. for a period of three days, I order the 1st and 2nd
respondents to pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 10,000 as compensation.



The Petitioner will also be entitled to the costs of this application.



COLIN- THOME. J.



The Petitioner who is a suspect in a case of murder of Shyama Dedigama has
complained of a violation of his fundamental rights by 1st and 2nd
respondents. The petitioner Pleads that in contravention and violation of his
fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 11 and/or 13 (1) , and/or 13 (2)
and/or 13 (3) and/or (1) _(g)_ of the Constitution he was ‑



_(a)_         subjected to torture and/or to cruel and/or to inhuman and/or to
degrading treatment ;



_(b)_         arrested in contravention and violation of the procedure
established by law and was not informed of the reason for his arrest ;



##   170



_(c)_        held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of his personal
liberty in contravention of the procedure established by law and without being
brought before the judge of the nearest competent court according to the
procedure established by law ;



_(d)_         subject to an attempt to deny the petitioner the unfettered
right  to be freely defended by an Attorney‑at‑Law ;



_(e)_         denied the freedom to engage in his lawful  occupation,
profession and business.



He prays for an award of compensation for the torture, cruelty and/or inhuman,
and/or degrading treatment and/or suffering and/or humiliation and/or
harassment caused to him, for costs, and a  direction that the respondents
furnish him with a list of documents  taken from him and to return to him
forthwith any documents that are not necessary for the purpose of M.C. Kegalle
case No. 49789.



The learned chief Justice has summarised the facts in this case in his
judgment. The material placed before Court has been by way of affidavit,
counter affidavit and the sworn testimony of Mr. E.V.L. Peiris,
Attorney‑at‑Law, residing at Nagolle Road, Kegalle. As there are certain
inherent difficulties in the proof of allegations averred in petitions and
affidavits, this Court out of an abundance of  caution examines carefully the
evidence available from an independent source.



In this case there is no medical evidence to support the allegation of
torture. I agree therefore with the learned Chief Justice and this Court that
Article 11 was violated. For similar reasons, the material before this Court
to establish that Article 13 (1) which required that the person arrested shall
be informed of the reason of his arrest is insufficient. I agree with the
learned Chief Justice and Wimalaratne, J. that Article 13 (1) has not been
violated.



I agree with the learned Chief Justice and Wimalaratne, J. that there is
reliable independent evidence which establishes that the Petitioner was
arrested on the 13th of June 1984 by the 1st and 2nd respondents and was
illegally detained by them on the 4th floor of the C.I.D. office for three
days violating the mandatory provisions of Article12(2) of the constitution
read with section 36 and 37 of the

##   171



Code of Criminal procedure Act No. 15 of 1979. The evidence of Mr. E. L. V.
Peiris, Attorney‑at‑Law, that the petitioner's wife informed him on the
morning of the 15th of June 1984 that her husband had been taken away on the
13th morning by the C. I. D. and that he advised her to make a complaint to
the Kegalle Police was not challenged either by learned Counsel for the 1st
and 2nd respondents or the learned Deputy Solicitor‑General. Mr. Chandra
Ranatunga, M.P. for Mawanella, stated in his affidavit that the petitioner's
wife informed him on the morning of the 14th of June that the petitioner was
taken away by the C.I.D officers on the morning of the 13th of June. The
veracity of this affidavit was not challenged by learned Counsel for the 1st
and 2nd respondents and the learned Deputy Solicitor General. Learned Counsel
for the 1st and 2nd respondents suggested that Mr. Ranatunga may have made a
mistake about the date the petitioner I was taken into custody. On the
totality of the evidence in this case this suggestion is untenable. The
learned Chief Justice has referred to the other evidence which establishes
that the petitioner was taken into custody on the 13th..



In my view Article 13 (3) of the Constitution has not been violated because at
the time the petitioner passed the note P6 to his Counsel the stage of a trial
by a competent court had not been reached. However, it appears that an.
attempt was made to interfere with the petitioner's right of representation
contravening section 41 (1) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978. This was a
matter which could have been dealt by the, Magistrate if brought to his notice



As we have held that the arrest of the petitioner under Article 13 (1) has not
been violated it follows that the seizure of the documents may have been
necessary for the investigation of the crime. I hold that Article 14 (1) _(g)_
has not been violated. The petitioner may make an application to the
Magistrate of Kegalle for the return of his documents that have no  relevance
in M.C. Kegalle No. 49789.

_ _

As the Learned Chief Justice, Wimalaratne, J. and I are agreed that the
petitioner has been illegally detained for three days and that his fundamental
rights under Article 13 (2) have been violated. I order the 1st  and 2nd
respondent to pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 10,000 as compensation. The
petitioner will also be entitled to the costs of the application.



_Compensation ordered for illegal detention._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/15.html_  

