##  Visuvalingam and Others v. Liyanage and Others - SLR - 305, Vol 1 of 1984
[1983] LKSC 15; (1984) 1 Sri LR 305 (2 November 1983)

**  305**

**  **

#### VISUVALINGAM AND OTHERS

**v.**

**LIYANAGE AND OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT

SHARVANANDA, A.C.J., RANASINGHE, J. AND RODRIGO, J.

S.C. APPLICATION No. 74 OF 83.

NOVEMBER 22, 23, 30, 1983, DECEMBER 12, 13, 1983, AND FEBRUARY 6 AND 10, 1984.



Fundamental Rights ‑ Sealing of office of newspaper ‑ Prohibition of the
printing, publishing or distribution of newspaper and of the use of the
printing press ‑ Regulation 14 of  Emergency Regulations of 18.10.83 ‑
Violation of fundamental rights under Articles 12 (1), 12 (2), 14 (1) (a) and
_14 (1) ( _g_ ) of the Constitution ‑ Application for leave to proceed under
Article 126 (2) of the Constitution.



The 1st to 4th petitioners who are described as citizens of Sri Lanka along
with the 5th petitioner which is a Company of which the first four petitioners
(together with three others) are the only members and the only directors
complained that the 1st respondent by Order of 18.11.1983 purported to have
been made under the



#  306



Emergency Regulation 14 (3), prohibited the printing, publishing or
distribution of the newspaper called "Saturday Review" of which the 5th
petitioner‑company was publisher or the using of the printing press where this
newspaper was printed for any purpose whatever. The 2nd respondent purporting
to act under this Order had sealed the office of the said "Saturday Review".
These acts the petitioners claimed constitute a violation of their fundamental
rights embodied in Articles 12 (1), 12 (2), 14 (1) ( _a_ ) and 14 (1) ( _g_ )
of the Constitution.



Earlier the same petitioners along with two others had filed application No.
47 of 1983 against the same respondents claiming relief on the basis of
similar acts committed by the 1st and 2nd respondents on the basis of an
earlier Emergency Regulation 14 (3) then in force and whose terms were
identical with those of the Emergency Regulations in force during the events
which led to the present application. In this earlier application the
petitioners had claimed that there had been a violation of their fundamental
rights embodied in Article 14 (1), 14 (1) ( _a_ ) and 14 (1) ( _g_ ) of the
Constitution. While that application was pending the same petitioners filed
application No. 53/83 this time claiming additionally, infringement of
fundamental rights under Articles 12 (1) and 12 (2) by reason of a fresh Order
on the same lines as before made by the 1st respondent under Regulation 14 (3)
of the Emergency Regulations renewed in identical terms as in the earlier
month, and similar action taken on it by the 2nd respondent. While both these
applications were pending a third application No. 61/83 was filed by four of
the earlier petitioners along with the Company joined as the 5th petitioner
alleging the same type of violations as in application No. 53/83 in respect of
a similar Order, in the subsequent month made by the 1st respondent under the
renewed Emergency Regulations and action taken on it by the 2nd respondent,
similar to what constituted the basis of the two earlier applications. All
three applications were heard together by a Bench of five Judges. By a
majority decision the question of locus standi was decided against the
petitioners in all these cases and all five Judges unanimously held that the
1st respondent had justified the order made by him.



In view of the identity of the grievances alleged in the present petition with
those alleged in the earlier cases and the identity of the Order made by the
1st respondent with the Orders impugned in them and the unanimous finding of
the Bench of five Judges that the 1st respondent had justified his Orders,
leave to proceed with the instant application was refused.



Per Ranasinghe, J: "It (the decision in the previous cases) is a decision
which, though it may not be binding on this Court, must nevertheless weigh
heavily with this Bench in considering the petitioners' application for leave,
in terms of Article 126 (2) of the Constitution, to proceed."



# Cases referred to



(1)        _Dr. Neville Fernando and others v. Liyanage and others,_ S.C.
Application No. 116/82, S.C. Minutes of 14.12.82. _  
 _

(2)        _Dr. Neville Fernando and others v. Liyanage and others,_ S.C.
Application No. 134 of 1982, S.C. Minutes of 7.2.1983.  


(3)        _Ram_ _Krishna Dalmia v. Justice Tendolkar_ , AIR 1958 S.C. 538.  


(4)        _State of_ _West Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar_ , AIR 1952 S. C. 75.  


(5)        _U. P. Electric Co. v. State of_ _U.P_., AIR 1970 S.C. 21.  


(6)        _Dr. N. R. W. Perera et al v. The University Grants Commission,_
S.C. Application No. 57 of 1980: S.C. Minutes of 4.8.1980.



#  307

** **

**APPLICATION** for leave to proceed under Article 126 of the Constitution.



_S. Nadesan, Q. C.,_ with _S. Mahenthiran_ and _S. M. Reeza_ for petitioners.



_Cur. adv. vult._



February 27, 1984.

**RANASINGHE, J.**



The 1st to the 4th petitioners, who are all said to be citizens of Sri Lanka
and are also said to be, together with K. Kandasamy, S. Sivanayagam and A
Nallatamby, the only members and the only directors of the 5th
petitioner‑company which was, at all times material to this application, the
publisher of a weekly newspaper called "Saturday Review", have filed this
application on 16.11.83 to have the Order marked P 2, which prohibits the
printing, publishing or distribution of the said newspaper "Saturday Review"
for a period of one month and also directs that the printing press, in which
the said newspaper was printed, be not used for any purpose whatever during
the said period of one month, and which said Order the 1st respondent is
stated to have made on 18.10.83, in terms of the provisions of Regulation 14
of the Emergency Regulations promulgated on 18.10.83, and, in pursuance of
which said Order the office of the said "Saturday Review" is said to have been
sealed by the 2nd respondent ‑ declared null and void and/or to be in
contravention of the Constitution for the reason that the said Order, and the
subsequent acts of the 2nd respondent taken on the basis of the said Order,
constitute a violation of the fundamental rights of the petitioners embodied
in Articles 12 (1), 12 (2) 14 (1 ) ( _a_ ), and 14 (1 ) ( _g_ ) of the
Constitution, and also because they have been made mala fide, in abuse of the
powers conferred by the said Emergency Regulation (14) (3) for an ulterior
purpose: for damages, by way of compensation in respect of the said
prohibition, and the closure.



Prior to the filing of this petition, he 1st to 5th petitioners had, along
with the aforementioned S. Sivanayagam and A. Nallatamby (as the 2nd and 4th
petitioners respectively) filed in this Court, on 22.7.83, an application,
numbered 47 of 1983, against the same three respondents as are referred to in
this application, for similar relief against two similar Orders (marked P 2
dated 1.7.83 and P 3, dated 18.7.83) made by the 1st respondent. Certified
copies of the petition and the affidavit filed by the petitioners, and the
affidavit filed by the 1st respondent in the said application No. 47 of 83
have been produced by the petitioners along with the petition filed in these
proceedings marked P 4, P 3 and P 6 respectively. The facts and



#  308



circumstances set out save and except the reference to the imposition of
pre‑censorship and the promulgation of the Sixth Amendment and the relief
claimed except in regard to damages in P 4, and the facts and circumstances
pleaded and the relief claimed in the petition filed in these proceedings are
identical. The ground upon which relief was claimed in the said application
No. 47/83 was, however, slightly different; for, there the only fundamental
rights, which were said to have been violated by the impugned Order and by the
acts of the respondents, were stated to be those set out in Article 14 (1) (
_a_ ) and 14 (1) ( _g_ ) of the Constitution. No complaint of any infringment
of any of the fundamental rights, set out in Article 12 (1) or 12 (2) of the
Constitution, was made in those proceedings.



Whilst the aforesaid application No. 47 of 83 was still pending before this
Court, the seven petitioners, who had filed the application bearing No. 47 of
83 and amongst whom were the five petitioners now before this Court, filed, on
25.8.83, an application, which was numbered 53 of 83, against the selfsame
respondents, as in the present application, claiming upon the same basis, the
selfsame relief as is now claimed by the petitioners in this application,
against a similar Order and similar acts said to have been made and done by
the said respondents. The order complained of in the said application was an
order dated 18.8.83, which was also claimed by the respondents to have been
made under Emergency Regulations similar to those said to be relied on by the
respondents in both application No. 47 of 83 and the present application.



Thereafter, whilst the aforesaid applications bearing Nos. 47 of 83 and 53 of
83 were both still pending before this Court, the five petitioners filed, on
13.10.83, another application which was numbered 61 of 83, also against the
three respondents, claiming the same relief as prayed for by them in the
present petition, in respect of an Order (which was marked P 1) similar to the
Order, P 2, and which was said to have been made by the 1st respondent on
18.9.83. The facts and circumstances relied on, the relief claimed and the
basis upon which the relief is claimed in the said application No. 61 of 83
are all the same as those upon which the petitioners not only had come before
this Court earlier in the aforesaid application No. 53 of 83 but have also
founded the present application.



#  309

** **

When the application No. 47 of 83 was taken up for hearing before this Court,
of consent the two applications bearing Nos. 53 of 83 and 61 of 83 were also
taken up for hearing along with it, and it was agreed that all three
applications be argued together and that the submissions in respect of the
three applications be considered together, and the issues arising in the three
said applications be all determined in the course of the judgment to be
delivered in one of the three said applications.



Learned Queen's Counsel, who appears for the petitioners in this application,
also appeared for the petitioners in all three earlier applications Nos. 47,
53 and 61 of 83 referred to above; and, in the course of his submissions made
to this Court in respect of the three said earlier applications, maintained
that, even if the 5th petitioner‑company (which was the 7th petitioner in the
two applications, numbered 47 of 83, and 53 of 83, and the 5th petitioner in
application No. 61 of 83) has no status to complain of an infringement of the
fundamental rights set out in Article 14 of the Constitution, yet the 1st to
4th petitioners (who were, as set out earlier, the 1st, 3rd, 5th, 6th
petitioners. respectively in both applications Nos. 47 of 83 and 53 of 83, and
the 1st to 4th petitioners respectively in application No. 61of 83) who are
shareholders of the said 5th petitioner‑ company can, as citizens of the
Republic of Sri Lanka, complain of an infringement of the fundamental rights
guaranteed to them by Article 14 (1) ( _a_ ) and 14 (1) ( _g_ ) of the
Constitution: that the two judgments of Sharvananda, J. in the two cases, _Dr.
Neville Fernando et al. v. D. J. F. D. Liyanage et al,_ (1) and _Dr. Neville
Fernando v. Liyanage and Others_ (2) have been wrongly decided: that the
Orders complained of (marked P 2 and P 3 in application No. 47 of 83 dated
18.8.83 and in application No. 53 of 83 and marked P 1 in application No. 61
of 83) are also bad in law for the several reasons set out, more particularly
in paragraphs 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 32, 33, 34, 36, in the petition P 4
filed in application No. 47 of 83. All those grounds so relied on have been
adopted and reiterated subsequently not only in the aforesaid applications
numbered 53 of 83, and 61 of 83, but also in the present application.



The five‑member Bench of this Court, by its judgment delivered on 18.11.83
held by a majority decision, that the petitioners in the three applications
Nos: 47 of 83, 53 of 83 and 61 of 83 respectively cannot, in law, have and
maintain any one of the said applications on the basis of an infringement of
any of the fundamental rights set out in



#  310



Articles 14 (1) ( _a_ ), 14 (1) ( _g_ ) and or in Article 12 (2) of the
Constitution: and, by a unanimous decision, that none of the impugned Orders
made by the 1st respondent in the three said applications marked P2 and P3 in
applications No.47 of 83, and in No. 53/83 and P1 in application No. 61 of 83
‑ is bad in law, and that not one of the said Orders constitutes an
infringement of any of the fundamental rights relied on by the said
petitioners in the said applications. Thus, although the Bench was divided on
the question of law ‑ whether the petitioners, in the said applications, who
are share‑holders of the 7th petitioner‑company (the 5th petitioner‑company in
application No. 61 of 83 and also in the present application) and include
among them the 1st to the 4th petitioners in the present application, could
maintain an application under the provisions of Article 126(1) of the
Constitution in respect of an infringement of the fundamental rights set out
in Article 14 (1) ( _a_ ) and 14 (1) ( _g_ ) and also Article 12 (2), of the
Constitution ‑ the members of the Bench were nevertheless unanimously of the
opinion that, having regard to the relevant facts and circumstances ‑ which
are the same as those relied on by the petitioners in the present application
‑ the impugned Orders made by the 1st respondent ‑ the only difference between
them and the Order P1 impugned in this application being the periods of time
during which each is to be in operation ‑ were valid and did not constitute an
infringement of any of the fundamental rights relied on by the petitioners.
The fundamental rights so relied on by the petitioners in every one of the
three said applications were, as already stated ‑ with the exception of
application No. 47 of 83 wherein the fundamental right set out in Article 12
was not relied on ‑ the same as those relied on once again by the petitioners
in the present application. The view taken by the members of the said Bench in
regard to the facts was unanimous.



Learned Queen's Counsel appearing for the petitioners, urged the following
grounds in support of his motion for leave to             proceed with the
present application filed by the petitioners: ‑  


(i)         that the plea of discrimination, based upon an infringement of the
petitioners' fundamental right under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution, put
forward in two of the earlier applications, viz., applications bearing Nos. 53
of 83 and 61 of 83 (which have been referred to above) has not been considered
by the earlier Bench, and that, though he (learned Queen's Counsel) "expected
a judgment", he "didn't get it", and that "no order has been made in respect
of this matter";



#  311

** **

(ii)        that in regard to the questions of fact that arose for
consideration in the three said earlier applications the earlier Bench has
misdirected itself in that ‑



( _a_ )        it has failed to consider several matters which had been
strenuously urged on behalf of the petitioners as showing quite clearly that
the 1st respondent had not ,in making the said impugned Orders, addressed his
mind to the propriety and the necessity of exercising the powers vested in him
by the Emergency Regulations before he proceeded to make the said impugned
Orders ‑ viz., the statement of the 1st respondent that he was not aware of
the composition of the directorate of the 5th petitioner‑company, of those who
were responsible for the publication of the newspaper "Saturday Review" and
their "who's who", and of the objectives and the policy of the newspaper
"Saturday Review", or of the situation of the printing press; that the
provisions of the Emergency Regulation 14 (3), under which the 1st respondent
claims to have made the said  impugned Orders, have, except for a few
insignificant variations, been reproduced verbatim in the said impugned
Orders; that the Order P2, which was one of the two Orders, which were the
subject‑matter of application No. 47 of 83, had been made on 1.7.83 Jo be in
operation for a period of one month when the said Regulation itself was due to
expire on 18.7.83; that, in pursuance of P2 and P3, the printing press, in
which the "Saturday Review" was in fact being published was not sealed but
what was in fact sealed was the office of the newspaper "Saturday Review",
­that, as the said Emergency Regulations created very serious offences and
imposed severe punishments, it would be most unlikely that those responsible
for the publication of a newspaper of the standing of the "Saturday Review"
would risk committing any such offence , that in any event the 1st Respondent
has, even though other effective courses of action were open to him to control
and contain any errant newspapers, most unreasonably and unjustifiably chosen
to impose upon the "Saturday Review" the heaviest and the most oppressive
punishment of them all;



#  312



                    ( _b_ )        it has, in the judgment of Soza, J. arrived at findings which are not supported by any evidence, viz., that terrorist groups count in their ranks a sizeable percentage of Varsity educated intelligent young men and women especially inn Jaffna: that they (terrorist group) employ very modern sophisticated techniques which often baffle the law enforcement authorities: that it must be expected that this paper has a circulation among the educated youth bent on wrecking the establishment : that it is reasonable to expect that the 1st respondent was aware of what was being published in this newspaper over a period of time ‑ and that the affidavit of the 1st respondent, P6, has not been read in the way it should have been read.



Learned Queen's Counsel for the petitioners strongly contended that, if he
were given the opportunity, he could show that the aforesaid statements made
in the said judgment were not supported by any evidence, that there is no
evidence to show either that Varsity students are to be found in the ranks of
the terrorists, or that the terrorists use modern sophisticated techniques
which baffle the law enforcement authorities, and that the Varsity students of
today do not have a knowledge of English and that the contents of a newspaper
such as the "Saturday Review" are not meant for the Varsity students of today,
who far from being able to understand its contents, would not even be able to
pronounce most of the words contained in it, and that the tone and the
standard set by the "Saturday Review" are such that it is meant only for the
"elite" of the two races ‑ Sinhala and Tamil.



The contents of several issues of the "Saturday Review"‑ published at the very
early stages, and also both shortly before and after the declaration of the
State of Emergency, and up to the time of the first of the said impugned
Orders ‑ were read at length to this Bench ‑ just as he had done earlier in
the course of the submissions made by him to the earlier Bench at the hearing
of the three applications ‑ by learned Queen's Counsel for the purpose of
showing, in the words of learned Queen's Counsel himself, that: "my grievances
have not been looked into, and adjudicated upon by Your Lordships' Court": "A
new Bench will consider the facts and circumstances anew": " That some judges
of the Supreme Court have expressed a certain view doesn't concern me": he has
"made out that there is something for Your Lordships' Court to look into".



#  313



In supporting the motion for leave, learned Queen's Counsel dealt at length
with the fundamental right embodied in Article 12 (1) of the Constitution,
citing several passages from Seervai on Constitutional Law of India Vol. 1
(2nd edt) Chap. 9 page 203 et seq, wherein the learned author deals with
Article 14 of the Indian Constitution which corresponds to Article 12 of our
Constitution; and he also cited two Indian authorities: _Ramkrishna Dalmia v.
Justice Tendolkar_ (3) and _State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar_ (4). It
has however to be noted that neither the citation from Seervai, nor the Indian
cases now cited were cited by learned Queen's Counsel to the earlier Bench at
the hearing of the three aforesaid earlier applications. For that matter, not
a single authority was cited on the earlier occasion in relation to Article 12
(1) of the Constitution. The plea of an infringement of the fundamental right
set out in Article 12 (1) of the Constitution, which is now embodied in
paragraph 17 of the present petition, and supported in paragraph 17 of the
affidavit of the 4th petitioner, though embodied in paragraphs 5 of the
petitions P7 and P9 filed in application Nos. 53 of 83, and 61 of 83
respectively, and referred to in the written submissions filed along with each
of the said petitions, was not, however, dealt with in court before the
earlier Bench by learned Queen's Counsel for the petitioner. Not a single
submission ‑ either on the facts or on the law ‑ was made orally in Court in
support of the said plea. The only reference, made in Court orally by learned
Queen's Counsel, to Article 12 (1) was made on 2.11.83 when he read out the
contents of the petitions and affidavits filed by the petitioners in
Application Nos. 53 of 83 and 61 of 83. My own recollection in regard to this
matter is borne out not only by my own notes of the submissions made by
learned Queen's Counsel at that hearing, but also by the confirmation received
by me from everyone of the other four judges who constituted the earlier Bench
‑ Wanasundera, J., Rodrigo, J. and also Ratwatte, J. and Soza, J. (both of
whom have since retired). It also finds confirmation ‑ if further confirmation
be necessary ‑ in the very documents tendered to court, at the hearing of the
three aforesaid earlier applications, by learned Queen's Counsel himself as
embodying the oral submissions made by him to the Bench which heard the said
applications. The said documents are: "Notes of oral submissions by S.
Nadesan, Q.C." tendered on 8.9.83, consisting of twenty pages numbered 1 to
20; "Notes of oral submissions" consisting of ten pages numbered 1 to 9,
tendered on 9.11.83: "Notes of oral submissions of Reply by S. Nadesan, Q.C."



**  314**



tendered to court on 9.11.83 and consisting of 7 pages numbered 1 to 7: "Notes
of oral submissions of Reply continued, by S. Nadesan, Q.C." consisting of
fourteen pages 1 to 14. In not one of these documents is there a single
reference to, or a single submission relating to any infringement of the
fundamental right embodied in Article 12 (1) of the Constitution. Besides,
there is not a single averment in either of the petitions marked P7 and P9, ‑
or for that matter even in the petition filed in the present application ‑
setting out the facts and circumstances which show how the petitioners have
been treated unequally and have been unlawfully discriminated against, and
upon which said acts the complaint of the infringement of the fundamental
right of equality and equal protection of the law is founded. There is only a
bare assertion in paragraph 17 of the present petition ‑ and in the
corresponding paragraphs in P7 and P9 ‑ of an infringement, without a
statement of the facts and circumstances which have given rise to such
complaint. In the absence of any such express averments no burden is cast upon
the 1st respondent to satisfy court that his acts do not amount to any
discrimination against the petitioners and that they do not constitute any
unequal treatment meted out to the petitioners. A bare assertion that a
particular act of the 1st respondent violates the fundamental right of the
petitioners embodied in Article 12(1) of the Constitution does not, by itself,
cast an onus on the 1st  respondent to justify his act on the basis of a
permissible rational classification or on any other ground recognized by law.
The petitioners, who put forward a complaint of denial of equal treatment,
must in the first instance, place before court facts and circumstances which
show that, as between the petitioners and others similarly placed, they have
been unlawfully discriminated against and subject to unequal treatment to
their prejudice ‑ vide: _U.P. Electric Co. v. State of U.P._ (5) and _Dr. N.
R. W. Perera et al. v. The University Grants Commission_ (6).



The admission by the 1st respondent, in paragraph 3 of his affidavit, P8, of
the averments in paragraph 8 of the petition P7 does not constitute an
admission that other newspapers, which are similar to the "Saturday Review",
have been differently treated by the 1st respondent. What is set out in
paragraph 8 of P7 is that several newspapers "critical of the Government" are
being published. The position of the 1st respondent in regard to the "Saturday
Review", however, is that it is such a newspaper as is set out in paragraphs
15 and 16 of his affidavit P 6, viz: a political newspaper advocating the



#  315

** **

cause of dividing the country and the establishment of a State known as Eelam
for the Tamils in the North and East of the country, eschewing democratic
processes, negotiations and campaigns based on non‑violence as a means of
resolving the problems facing the Tamils of Sri Lanka, and openly encouraging
the adoption of force and terrorism as the only means. This position is
reiterated in paragraph 7 of P 8.



Even so, Soza J. has, in the judgment with which I have concurred, considered
the plea of an infringement of the fundamental right set out in Article 12 (1)
of the Constitution, ‑plea under 12 (2) being affected by the decision in
respect of 14 (1). Having taken note of the 1st respondents averment that,
apart from the "Saturday Review", another newspaper in Jaffna had been
similarly dealt with, Soza, J. has, at page 23 of the said judgment, expressed
the view that ‑



"The first respondent seeks to justify his action, and in the circumstances of
these cases it is preferable to examine the question whether the first
respondent has established his plea of justification rather than to embark
upon an analysis of Article 12 (1) with a view to ascertaining whether there
are grounds for a complaint under that Article."



Thereafter, upon an examination of all the relevant facts and circumstances,
it was held‑not only by Soza, J. but unanimously by all the judges ‑ that the
fundamental rights of the 1st to the 6th petitioners, amongst whom were the
1st to the 4th petitioners in this application, have not been violated by any
of the impugned Orders made by the 1st respondent. Wanasundera, J. expressed
the view that, although the publishers of the "Saturday Review" had tried to
live up to the objects and ideals set out in the brochure P1, and the
"Saturday Review", judged by journalistic standards, appeared to be a cut
above the average newspaper, there had unfortunately also crept into the
"Saturday Review" material that must necessarily attract the attention of the
authorities at a time when there are unsettled conditions in the country as
today: and that, while some Emergency Regulations permit the authorities to
apply a system of graduated pressure and restrictions on an errant newspaper,
yet such provisions do not preclude the Competent Authority from directly
resorting to the provisions of Regulation 14(3) in a fit case. The facts and
circumstances relied on by the petitioners, if not in all three, at least in
two of the three earlier applications and those set out in the present
application, are as already set out, identical.



#  316



With regard to the matters set out in sub‑paragraph (ii) (a) above, and which
have been urged as being relevant to a consideration of the questions of fact,
a perusal of the judgment of Soza, J. shows clearly that all those factors
have received the attention of Soza, J. and have been considered in arriving
at the conclusion so arrived at therein. A careful reading of pages 30, 32, 35
and 36 in particular shows quite clearly that the said grounds, which are
urged on behalf of the petitioners, have all been dealt with. The views set
out in the judgment may differ from what learned Queen's Counsel himself put
forward and which he expected" to be adopted. What matters is the fact that
the said circumstances have in fact been considered in arriving at the
decision which has been so arrived at in the said judgment.



With regard to the ground set out in sub‑paragraph (ii) (b) above, on a
careful consideration of the contents of several issues of the said "Saturday
Review", which were produced and referred to by counsel, I find myself unable
to agree with learned Queen's Counsel's criticism that the court has arrived
at findings which are not supported by evidence. They do contain material
which justify the said findings ‑ in particular the issues dated 13.2.82,
27.2.82, 14.5.83, 21.5.83 (in regard to the Varsity student's ability to
understand English and the "Saturday Review" being read by the Varsity
students), and those dated 8.1.83, 22.1.83, 29.1.83, 7.5.83, 14.5.83 (in
regard to the involvement of the Varsity students too), and those dated
8.1.83, 22.1 83, 7.5.83 (in regard to the adoption of sophisticated techniques
which baffle the authorities), and that dated 8.1.83 (in regard to the 1st
respondent having been aware of, over a period of time, as to what the
"Saturday Review" was publishing.)



             As was posed by learned Queen's Counsel, the question for consideration by this Bench at this stage, when leave to proceed is being sought, is: whether the petitioner has satisfied this Court, upon the material set out in the petition and affidavit "that there is something to be looked into", and that there is a case for consideration by this Court. The material set out in the petition and the affidavit filed by the petitioner in this application would, on the face of it, have ordinarily been sufficient to put this Court upon inquiry, at any rate in regard to the alleged infringement of the fundamental right set out in Article 14 of the Constitution. The petitioners have, however, already come before this Court on at least two earlier occasions making the same complaint and praying for the same relief as are set out in the said petition and affidavit, and a Bench of five judges of this



#  317

** **

Court, has, after according to the petitioners, and also the respondents, a
full and patient hearing, spread over several days, and after examining the
submissions of the parties unanimously concluded that there has been no
infringement of the petitioners' fundamental rights by any of the impugned
Orders made by the 1st respondent. Even though learned Queen's Counsel
submitted that there are "other forums interested in this matter", and that
the fact "that some judges of the Supreme Court have expressed a certain view
doesn't concern me", this Bench however, is concerned only with this Court;
and the fact that five judges of this Court, constituted on a direction of the
Chief Justice under Article 132 (3) of the Constitution, did, in the said
judgment delivered on the earlier occasion, reach an unanimous decision not
only upon the same questions of fact as are being once again sought to be
canvassed in this application but also in regard to the same relief as is
being once again sought to be obtained by this application, is a very relevant
matter which can and must be taken into consideration by this Bench. It is a
decision which, though it may not be binding on this Court, must nevertheless
weigh heavily with this Bench in considering the petitioners' application for
leave, in terms of Article 126 (2) of the Constitution, to proceed.



On a consideration of all the matters set out above, I am of the view that
this is not a fit case in which leave ought to be granted by this Court under
the provisions of Article 126 (2) of the Constitution.



I, therefore, make order accordingly, refusing the petitioners leave to
proceed with this application.



**SHARVANANDA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**RODRIGO, J.**



Counsel for the petitioner has exerted himself inordinately in supporting this
application for leave to proceed. Notwithstanding his age, he has been on his
feet morning and evening, day in day out, often consecutively, during a period
stretching from 22nd November, 1983 to 10th February, 1984. Coming as it does
for hearing on the heels of the judgment given in application No. 47 of 1983
by the same parties on the same subject matter against the same respondents.
(the occasion for this application being the same Emergency Order repeated
with a different date to correspond to the monthly renewal of the Emergency,)
I thought that this matter will be dropped, judgment



**  318**



being against the petitioners albeit. It may well be therefore a measure of
his conviction in the strength of his cause or correspondingly a measure of
his grievance against the judgment delivered. Presumably the latter, for he
complained that I, for instance (being one of the members that constituted the
earlier Bench) had misdirected myself when I observed, that Jaffna University
students were readers of the paper and therefore subject to its influence, his
submission being that the undergraduates are too poorly educated in English to
comprehend the articles in the paper and that we had overlooked a material
submission based on the discrimination clause ‑ Art 12 (1) of the
Constitution. Be that as it may it is unfortunate, though, that his view of
the law governing these matters both in the previous application and in this,
clouded perhaps by his personal interest in the matter ‑ he being a member of
the ethnic community the political causes and grievances of which the paper is
alleged to espouse and air respectively ‑ has not commended itself to this
Court in either instance.



It has been unanimously held by the Bench of five Judges that heard the
previous application that the Competent Authority was not unreasonable, though
he may have acted differently, in forming the opinion which was his legitimate
province that this paper must be closed as an Emergency measure on the
material and information stated in his affidavit to have been available to him
and which was made available to us. Though we on this Bench may not be
technically bound by the decision of that Bench, it is an intrepid exercise
for us now to undertake what in all truth is a review of the findings of that
Bench. This I am not prepared to do.



The difficulties of Counsel should disappear if it is appreciated that
Emergency Regulations are law to which the fundamental rights constitutionally
have to give way. So it is enacted in Art. 15 (7). There is no point in
harping, as he does on violations of fundamental rights. They take a back seat
to the extent the Emergency Regulations take the front seat. There is no room
for both in the front seat. Since the Emergency Regulation in question is not
argued to be ultra vires, it must be given its full effect. An emergency is
what the word means. In the political storm in which the Competent Authority
was appointed and he acted to close the paper a 'crisis of civilisation' had
arisen. It was notorious that murder and arson were the order of the day in
that part of the country in which this paper was printed. Cause and effect,
action and reaction have lost their threads in a vicious circle. So a



#  319

** **

fireman was appointed in the person of the Competent Authority to put down the
blaze. In the process he may have effected unnecessary though not unreasonable
demolitions like the closing of this paper perhaps. But he was the sole judge
of what he should do though subject to a supervisory jurisdiction where he is
capricious. Authority for this proposition has been given in the judgment
mentioned. For us to fault him ‑ and we do not ‑ is to handle the Emergency
ourselves. It is not the Constitutional task of the Supreme Court. Counsel,
however, would have us make an order to let the "Saturday Review" carry on
regardless. He has read to us every line of the paper in its several issues
over selected periods to satisfy us that this paper posed no threat at any
time to public security or order but the Competent Authority has not shared
that assessment or sanguinity of Counsel and we cannot say that he has been
capricious. I would therefore disallow leave to proceed.



_Leave to proceed refused._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/15.html_  

