##  Augustine Perera and Others v. Richard Pathirana, Minister of Education
and Others - SLR - 125, Vol 1 of 2003 [2002] LKSC 15; (2003) 1 Sri LR 125 (11
December 2002)

**125**

**AUGUSTINE PERERA AND OTHERS** ****

**v.** ****

**RICHARD PATHIRANA, MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND** ****

**OTHERS** ****

** **







SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

GUNASEKERA, J., AND

WEERASURIYA, J.

SC (FR) No. 453/97

WITH SC (FR) Nos, 454/97, 390/99 AND 362/99

11TH DECEMBER, 2002



Fundamental Rights - Salary scales of school principals and teachers-_
_Discriminatory differential in favour of teachers - Article 12 (1) of the_
_Constitution - responsibility of the executive to Parliament - Articles 42
and 43_ _of the Constitution - Whether judicial review of executive decisions
is exclud­ed by those Articles._



Prior to 1995 the salary scales for principals of schools were higher than
those of the teachers. However, with effect from 1.1.95 new scales of
teacher's salaries which were very much higher than those of principals were
adopted, upon the establishment of the Sri Lanka Teachers Service ("SLTS")



The anomaly created on 1.1.95 continued until 31.12.96. The differential in
favour of teachers, which prevailed between 1.1.95 and 31.12.96 was
elimi­nated, prospectively, and a small differential in favour of principals
was restored by a salary revision, but only from 1.1.97 and the principals who
had

126

  
retired before 1.1.97 demanded that their pensions and retiral benefits be
com­puted on the new scales.

**Held :**

1.     There was no rational basis for the failure to remedy the anomaly for the period 1.1.95 to 31.12.96 (in respect of both serving and retired principals) and that was an infringement of Article 12 (1).

2.     The fact that the President under Article 42 and the Cabinet under Article 43 are responsible to Parliament does not in any way exclude judicial review under the Constitution of all executive decisions includ­ing those relating to "policy"

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringements of fundamental rights.

**Cases referred to :**



1.                     _Kanagamoorthy v De Silva_ SC 352/99 SCM 12.11.2002

2.          _Jayasinghe v Wickremanayake_ S.C. 770/97 SCM 22.11.2000

3.                     _Ramupillai v Perera_ (1991) 1 Sri LR 11

_ _

_Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ with _Priyanthi Gunaratne_ for petitioners in 453/97,
454/97 and 390/99

_Upul Jayasuriya_ for petitioners in 362/99

_Harsha Fernando,_ State Counsel for respondents

_ _

_ _

_Cur. adv. vult._

January 30,2003

**FERNANDO, J.** ****

These four applications were taken up together as the same question was
involved.



The All Ceylon Principals' Service Union was the Petitioner in SC (FR)
Application No 454/97 as well as the 1st Petitioner in SC (FR) Application No
390/99. The Secretary of that Union was the

127

  
Petitioner in SC (FR) Application No. 453/97 and also the 2nd Petitioner in SC
(FR) Application No. 390/99. SC (FR) Application No 362/99 was filed by 75
Principals who had retired between 6.10.94 and 31.12.96.



The Petitioners stated that for many years prior to 1995 the salary scales of
Principals of school - who were in the Sri Lanka Principal's Service ("SLPS")
- were generally higher than those of Teachers; that the Sri Lanka Teachers'
Service ("SLTS") was estab­lished with effect from 6.10.94; that new salary
scales were laid down for Teachers, which were considerably higher than those
of Principals; and that although it was admitted and acknowledged that this
was an anomaly it was not remedied until new salary scales were approved by
the Cabinet of Ministers on 24.2.99 effective 1.1.97. They complain that the
failure to make those salary scales retro­spective to 1.1.95 was in violation
of their fundamental rights under Article 12 (1)



The Respondents averred that certain categories of Teachers had enjoyed higher
salaries than Principals Grade III even before the SLTS was established.
However they did not claim that any Teachers were paid more than Principals
Grade I or II. To that extent at least there is no doubt that Principals did
enjoy a favourable salary differ­ential _vis-a-vis_ Teachers before 1.1.95.



The Petitioner's grievance is apparent upon a comparison of the respective
salary scales prior to 1.1.95 and after 1.1.97. The Principals' salary scales
as at 24.12.92 (as amended on 8.3.93) were.



Grade I 45,120-6x1200,3x1560-57,000

Grade II 42,720-6x1200,1x1560-53,880

Grade III 37,200-4x780,9x1200-51,120

The Teachers' new salary scales, effective 1.1.95, were:



Class 1 105,000-10x4800-153,000

Class 2-I 80,400-7x3000-101,400

Class 2-II 53,880-15x1560-77,280

Class 3-I 42,720-12x1200-57,120

Class 3-II 32,520-10x780,2x1200-42,720

128

Thus the salary differential in favour of Principals was not merely eliminated
but reversed, very drastically. A Principal Grade I was placed on a much lower
scale than a Teacher Class 2-ll. Nevertheless no attempt was made to revise
the salary scales of Principals at the same time.



The Petitioners submit that the legitimacy of their grievance was throughout
accepted. Thus in a Cabinet Memorandum dated 27.2.1996 the 1st Respondent, the
Minister of Education, referred to the new salary scales of Teachers, and
stated:



"................ It was intended to re-structure the [SLPS] to provide for
the revision of the [SLPS] salary scales.... However, since this has been
referred to the National Salaries Commission, this Ministry has not been able
to take action to re-structure the [SLPS]. As a result the Principals are paid
much less than the Teachers. The position prevailing earlier was that the
Principals entrusted with management of schools were paid a higher salary
than... Teachers. To remedy this anomaly is recommended to pay the salary
scales of the [SLTS] to the Principals of Schools pending the re-structuring
of the [SLPS]" [emphasis added]

On 28.2.1996 the Cabinet approved the implementation of the 1st Respondent's
proposal with effect from 1.1.95, but decided that to meet the additional
expenditure the Ministry should utilize the sav­ings under other Heads, and
did not agree to a supplementary Estimate being presented due to budgetary
constraints.

It is thus clear that the Cabinet agreed even then that granting higher salary
scales to Principals _(vis-a-vis_ Teachers) was justified, that granting
higher salary scales to Teachers was therefore an "anomaly", that this anomaly
should be removed upon the restruc­turing of the SLPS, and that pending such
restructuring, Principals should be placed on the same salary scales as
Teachers.

129

Thereafter Public Administration Circular No 2/97 dated 15.1.97 prescribed new
salary scales (effective 1.1.97) for Principals and Teachers:

**Principals** ** Teachers**

Class 1 T-16-6 123,480-10x5520-178,680

Class 2-1 T-16-5 117,960-10x5520-173,160 Class 1T-16-5

Class 2-II T-16-4 90,420-7x3000-111,420  Class 2-IT-16-4

Class3 T-16-3 67,320-12x2460-96,840 Class 2-IIT-16-3

55,140-9x1320,8x1560-79,500 Class 3-IT-16-2

45,900-14x1320,6x1560-73,740 Class 3- IIT-16-1

However, that Circular was immediately followed by a letter dated 13.2.97 from
the 5th Respondent, the Director-General of Establishments, stating that
Principals Grade I and II would all be placed on the scale T-16-4 until the
SLPS was restructured. Thus Principals Class I were again placed lower than
Teachers Class I.



The 1st Respondent then submitted a Cabinet Memorandum dated 23.2.99 seeking
approval:

to place Principals Grade I and II (equivalent to Principals Class I and 2 on
the Scale 105,000-153,000, and Principals Grade III on the scale 80,400
(-101,400), to convert "the salary in terms of Chapter VII of the
Establishments Code and to place all officers at the initial of the respective
salary scale", and to make payment in terms of those salary scales with effect
from 1.1.95, the arrears for 1.1.95 to 31.12.96 being payable in 36
instalments; to revise the pensions paid to Principals who retired between
6.10.94 and 31.12.96 in terms of the aforesaid salary scales; and to approve
the draft Minute of the SLPS with effect from 1.1.97 and to convert the
salaries of the Principals in terms of Circular No 2/97 for the period after
1.1.97.

The Cabinet approved those proposals on 24.2.99.

Thus the differential in favour of Teachers, which prevailed between 1.1.95
and 31.12.96 was eliminated, prospectively, and a small differential in favour
of Principals was restored, but only from 1.1.97. In response to a specific
question, learned Counsel for the Petitioners stated that the Principals do
not question the salary scales, the adequacy of the differential, and the
manner in which pay­ments were made, but only urged that the new scales should
have

130

been made retrospective to 1.1.95, and claimed arrears on that basis. Learned
Counsel who appeared for the Principals who had retired before 1.1.97
contended that their pensions and retiral bene­fits should be computed on the
new scales.

Since the Petitioners did not contest the salary differential embodied in
Circular 2/97 and the Cabinet decision of 24.2.99, it fol­lows that they
accepted a salary structure in which (a) Principals of the highest Class (or
Grade) enjoy a salary scale higher than all Teacers, (b) Principals of the
second highest Class have the same salary scale as Teachers of the highest
Class, (c) Principals of the third highest Class have the same salary scale as
Teachers of the second highest Class, and so on. In regard to (a), the
differential was equivalent to one increment on the salary scale T-16-5,
namely Rs 5,520 p.a.

In consequence of the Cabinet decisions of 24.2.99, conditions (b) and (c)
above were satisfied for the period 1.1.95 to 31.12.96. In regard to condition
(a) the position was that a differential was recog­nized for the period
_before._ 1.1.95 and for the period _after_ 1.1.97- but not for the period
1.1.95 to 31.12.96. The Cabinet decision of 28.2.96 shows that the Cabinet
refrained from fully remedying the anomaly only because restructuring was
pending, and equalized salaries as a temporary measure. The subsequent Cabinet
decision and the affi­davits filed on behalf of the Respondents disclose no
rational basis for the failure to remedy the anomaly for the period 1.1.95 to
31.12.96, and that was an infringement of Article 12 (1).

Learned State Counsel made several submissions which the Respondents had not
urged in their pleadings (and, indeed, incomsistent with those pleadings):
that the SLPS and the SLTS were sep­arate structures (citing _Kanagamoorthyv
de SilvaW)_ and that accord­ingly there was no need to compare the salary
scales of the SLTS when determining those of the SLPS; that the decision of
the Cabinet not to grant a salary differential to Principals Class 1 was a
"policy" decision which this Court could not and/or should not review, as the
remedy lay in the hands of Parliament" because the Cabinet was "collectively
responsible and answerable to Parliament" under Article 42; and finally that
the circumstances which justified a salary differ­ential before 1.1.95 may not
have existed after 1.1.95.

131

In _Kanagamoorthyv de Silva, (supra)_ a complaint by members of the Sri Lanka
Education Administrative Service ("SLEAS") as to the adequacy of the
differential between their salary scales and those of the SLPS, was rejected
on the basis that;



"... these two services are being treated as two different ser­vices since the
salary restructuring in 1995. The salary struc­ture of the SLTS further
confirms the fact that each service now is not a promotional grade of the
other, but has a differ­ent status and standing in its own in the hierarchy of
the Education and Educational Administration of the country...



...It is not disputed that there are three separate services in the Education
sector, which comprises of Teachers, Principals and Education
Administrators... each service is a separate entity governed by a Service
Minute with its own salary struc­ture...."

I do not agree that the mere fact that the SLPS and SLTS are different
services precludes comparison of salary scales and the grant (or the
maintenance) of a salary differential were justified. Dealing with the
determination of the comparative salary scales of over a dozen different
services in the Health sector, this Court held in _Jayasinghe_ v
_Wickremanayakd2h_



"It appears that the ministerial sub-committee has not given its careful
consideration to the classification of these para medical officers who were
recruited from a common examination to different categories of service.
Accordingly _it is obvious that the_ job contents, level of responsibility,
knowledge, skills and aptitude must be given due consideration in determining
the different categories as well as their salary scales."



It is not only legitimate but sometimes essential to compare the salary scales
of different services in order to determine salary scales (having regard to
the required qualifications, knowledge, experience, skills, functions,
responsibilities, etc) and salary differentials. Besides, it is clear that the
Minister of Education and the Cabinet of Ministers did recognize that, having
regard to the role and responsi­bilities of the Principal of a school, a
salary differential was justified. That had been recognized before 1.1.95, and
there is no basis for learned State Counsel's speculation that the
circumstances after

132

1.1.95,might have been different to those before. Since there was no rational
basis for refusing such recognition only for the period 1.1.95 to 31.12.96,
such recognition must extend to that period as well.



Finally, it is no doubt true that the Executive-the President under Article
42, and the Cabinet as a whole under Article 43-is responsible to Parliament.
However, those provisions do not mean that Parliament is the only institution
empowered to review executive decisions, and do not in any way exclude
judicial review, under and in terms of the Constitution, of all executive
decisions, including those relating to "policy" (as for instance in
_Ramupillai_ v _Perera_ (3)), particularly on the ground of infringement of
fundamental rights. In any event, the decision impugned in this case-that the
new salary scales of Principals Class I should not be retrospective - is an
_ad hoc_ decision, and by no stretch of the imaganation a matter of "policy"

There remain two aspects where there is some uncertainty. One is the _basis_
of conversion to the 1.1.95 and 1.1.97 sacles, and the other is the _date_ of
conversion. In those respects Principals should not be treated less favourably
than Teachers.



I hold that the Petitioners have established an infringement of their
fundamental rights under Article 12 (1), and that Principals in Grade (or
Class) I must be allowed a salary differential equivalent to one increment on
the salary scale of Teachers Class 1, and placed on the salary scale 109,800-
10x4800-157,800 for the period 1.1.95 to 31.12.96. Principals who retired
between 6.10.94 and 31.12.96 shall also be entitled to have their pensions and
retiral benefits cal­culated on the basis of those salary scales. Principals
shall be placed on the 1995 and 1997 scales in terms of the applicable
provisions of the Establishments Code, but on a basis not less favourable than
that adopted in the case of Teachers, and on the same dates as for Teachers.
If there is any doubt or difficulty, the parties may apply to this Court. The
State shall pay the Petitioners in each case a sum of Rs, 25,000 as costs,
i.e. Rs 100,000 in all, before 31.3.2003.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** - I agree.

**WEERASURIYA, J.** - I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/15.html_  

