##  Gunawardena v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation and Others - SLR - 231, Vol 1
of 2001 [2001] LKSC 15; (2001) 1 Sri LR 231 (3 April 2001)

**231**

**GUNAWARDENA  
v.  
CEYLON PETROLEUM CORPORATION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
PERERA, J. AND  
EDUSSURIYA, J.  
SC (FR) APPLICATION NO. 28/97  
10TH NOVEMBER, 2000  
  
Fundamental rights - Refusal by the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation to grant
dealership to petroleum products at a Service Station -Application by
petitioner to be appointed upon the demise of the original dealer, the
petitioner's father \- Legitimate expectation - Article 12(1) of the
Constitution.  
  
_The father of the petitioner had been appointed and was functioning as the
Dealer for the 1st respondent Corporation at the Lanka Service Station located
at No. 169, Maya Avenue, Colombo 06 with effect from 3rd March 1980 on the
basis of an agreement P1. He was issued with a letter of authority authorizing
to deal in petroleum products in terms of section 5(e) of the Petroleum
Corporation Act. (vide P2). The land on which the said Filling Station was
located belongs to the Corporation. The petitioner's father died on 8.5.1996
leaving as his sole heirs his widow and five children, including the
petitioner.  
  
The petitioner states that he was involved in the management of the Service
Station even prior to the death of his father; and after his demise carried on
the business effectively and efficiently without customer complaints, and
bills for the purchase of petroleum products were settled in the petitioner's
name. The other heirs of the deceased in a letter addressed to the 9th
respondent (Marketing Manager of the Corporation) requested that the
petitioner be appointed the Dealer of the Corporation at the said Service
Station.  
  
Thereafter the petitioner addressed a letter dated 29.05.1996 to the 2nd
respondent (Chairman of the Corporation) making a formal application for
appointment as such Dealer. Clause 9.2.5 of the Marketing Manual of the
Corporation concerning change of Dealership, P9, provides, inter alia,

**232**

that sympathetic consideration may be given to the family of the deceased.  
  
Consequently the 9th respondent prepared a Board Paper dated 3.7.1996, 91? 12,
recommending to the Corporation the appointment of the petitioner as the
Dealer of the said Service Station in succession to his father. However, on
17.10.1996 the 10th respondent (the Area Manager of the Corporation) visited
the Service Station and pasted a letter dated 16.10.1996 (on the direction of
the 2nd respondent) under the hand of the 9th respondent purporting to cancel
the agreement P1 and requiring persons in charge of the Service Station to
hand over the same and the equipment to the 10th respondent. The petitioner
however, retained the possession of the Service Station but the Corporation
immediately stopped the supply of petroleum products to the outlet.  
  
On inquiries made, the petitioner found that the reason for the purported
cancellation of P1 was to enable the Corporation to appoint the 11th
respondent the wife of the Secretary to the Minister of Power and Energy as
the Dealer of the said Service Station. This was in breach of clause 8.2.1 of
the Marketing Manual of the Corporation for the selection of a Dealer, P 10,
which requires consideration of at least three suitable candidates before an
appointment is made.  
  
On 12.12.1996 the petitioner received a letter dated 6.12.1996, P 11,
informing him that possession of the Service Station would be taken over under
the provisions of the Petroleum Corporation Act. Thereafter the Corporation
broke open the doors of the premises and handed over the possession of the
same to the 11th respondent with effect from 14.1.1997.  
  
In response to the petitioner's claim the 9th respondent filed an affidavit
alleging, inter alia, irregularities and public complaints in the carrying on
of the business of the Service Station.  
  
Counsel for the petitioner also submitted that the petitioner was seeking in
his application to agitate a matter which is strictly within the realm of
commercial contract which does not fall within the purview of the fundamental
rights jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.  
  
**Held :  
  
**1\. The allegations made against the petitioner have been made without
sufficient evidence and even without calling upon either the petitioner

**233**

or his father to give explanations, vis - a - vis those allegations, contrary
to the principles of natural justice.  
  
2\. The failure on the part of the respondent Corporation to appoint the
petitioner as the Dealer of the outlet at No. 169, Maya Avenue, Colombo 6
having considered his application objectively and in a fair manner in terms of
the rules set out in the Marketing Manual is mala fide, grossly arbitrary,
capricious and unreasonable.  
  
3\. On the facts established, the petitioner had a legitimate expectation that
he would be appointed Dealer of the aforesaid Service Station upon satisfying
prescribed conditions set out in the Marketing Manual of the 1st respondent
Corporation.  
  
4\. Whilst Article 12 erects no shield against merely private conduct, public
authorities must conform to constitutional requirements, in particular to
those set out in Article 12 even in the sphere of contract; and where there is
a breach of contract and a violation of the provisions of Article 12 brought
about by the same set of facts and circumstances, the aggrieved party cannot
be contained to his remedy under the law of contract.  
  
5\. The rights of the petitioner guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the
Constitution have been infringed by the 1st to 8th respondents.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
  
**1\. _Att. Gen for Hong Kong v. Ng Yuen Shiu_ (1983) 2 AC 629  
  
2\. _Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation_.
(1948) 1 KB 223  
  
3\. _Wickrematunga v. Ratwatte_ and _others_ (1998) 1 Sri LR 201.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Tilak Marapone, P.C_. with _Nalin Ladduwahetty_ and _Jayantha Fernando_ for
petitioner.  
  
_R.K.W. Goonesekera_ with _Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ for 1st to 10th respondents.  
  
_A.K. Premadasa, EC_. with _Dr. Jayatiassa Costa_ and _C.E. de Silva_ for 11th
respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult.  
_  
**234**

April 3, 2001.  
  
**PERERA, J.  
**  
The Petitioner in this case has sought a declaration from this Court that his
fundamental rights guaranteed and protected by Article 12(1) of the
Constitution have been infringed by the failure on the part of the 1st to the
8th Respondents to appoint the Petitioner as the Dealer of the 1st Respondent
of the Petrol Station at No. 169, Maya Avenue, Colombo 6. He has also sought
an order from this Court quashing the decision of the 1st to the 8th
Respondents to appoint the 11th Respondent as the Dealer of the said Service
Station and for a direction on the 1st to 8th Respondents to appoint the
Petitioner as the Dealer of the Corporation at the Service Station at No. 169,
Maya Avenue and to grant him the authority to deal in petroleum products at
the aforesaid location.  
  
**FACTS:  
  
**It is the case of the Petitioner that the Petitioner's father Hiniduma
Liyanage Ariyasinghe Gunawardena, was appointed and was functioning as the
Dealer for the Corporation at the Lanka Service Station located at No. 169,
Maya Avenue, Colombo 6 and bearing Account No M/1196, with effect from 3rd
March, 1980. The said Gunawardena upon such appointment had entered into an
Agreement with the Corporation (vide P 1), and was issued with a letter
authorising him to deal in Petroleum Products in terms of Section 5(e) of the
Petroleum Corporation Act, No. 61 of 1928 as amended by Act, No. 5 of 1993
(vide P2)  
  
The said Service Station situated at No. 169, Maya Avenue, Colombo 6 is
classified as a 'Corporation Controlled Outlet." The land on which the said
filling Station was located belongs to the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation.  
  
In terms of the said Agreement, Gunawardena was appointed as the Dealer and
was required to purchase Petrol

**235**

and Diesel oil on a pre-paid basis from the Corporation at its Terminal at
Kolonnawa. The oil so purchased was transported to the Service Station at No.
169, Maya Avenue, Colombo 6 and using the facilities at the said outlet the
Dealer was required to dispense Petrol and other related products to consumers
at the said Service Station.  
  
The said H.L.A. Gunawardena who was the father of the Petitioner died on
8.5.1996 leaving as his sole heirs, his widow and 5 children including the
Petitioner.  
  
The Petitioner states that he was involved in the management of the said
Service Station even prior to the death of his father and continued to do so
even after his demise.  
  
According to the Petitioner after the death of his father, he had carried on
the business effectively and efficiently and free from any customer
complaints. In the aforesaid circumstances, the family, that is, the heirs of
the deceased H.L.A. Gunawardena had a legitimate expectation that they would
be appointed as the Dealer of the Corporation at the Service Station situated
at No. 169, Maya Avenue, Colombo 6 in terms of the provisions of the Marketing
Manual of the 1st Respondent Corporation.  
  
Upon the death of the said H.L.A. Gunawardena, the heirs of his estate decided
to have the Petitioner appointed as the Dealer of the Corporation at the said
outlet and signed a communication addressed to the Marketing of the Ceylon
Petroleum Corporation, Kolonnawa whereby the other heirs requested the
Marketing Manager, Ceylon Petroleum Corporation to appoint the Petitioner as
the Dealer of the Corporation at the outlet situated at the said premises. The
9th Respondent in his Board Paper marked 9R12 has admitted the receipt of this
document.  
  
Thereafter, the Petitioner addressed a letter dated 29th May, 1996 (P4)
addressed to the Chairman of the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation making a formal
application for the Dealership of

**236**

the Corporation at the aforesaid premises. In this letter, the Petitioner had
specifically requested the 2nd Respondent to give due consideration to the
fact that it was he who had been involved in the management of the said
Service Station even during the lifetime of his father and appealed to him to
grant the Petitioner the Dealership.  
  
According to the Petitioner, he effectively carried on the business of the
said Service Station upon the demise of the said H.L.A. Gunawardena and bills
for the purchase of Petroleum Products were settled in the Petitioner's name
and/or through his Bank. (See P5A to P5D and P13).  
  
However, the Dealership of the said Service Station has been granted to the
11th Respondent on a decision of the Board of the 1st Respondent upon a Board
Paper prepared by the 9th Respondent. A true copy which has been produced
marked P7.  
  
On the 17th of October. 1996 the 10th Respondent who arrived at the aforesaid
Service Station had pasted a letter dated 16.10.96 (on the directions of the
2nd Respondent), under the hand of the 9th Respondent informing the Petitioner
that it has been decided to cancel the Dealership in terms of Section 12(b) of
the Agreement P1 and the authority given under Section 5 (H) (4) of the
Petroleum Corporation Act. This letter further required the persons in charge
of the said Service Station to hand over the Service Station and the equipment
owned by the 1st Respondent Corporation to the 10th Respondent. (P8).  
  
The 1st Respondent Corporation immediately thereafter stopped the supply of
petroleum products to this Outlet. The Petitioner however retained possession
of the said Service Station.  
  
According to the petitioner, inquiries made by him revealed that the decision
to cancel the Agreement and Authority (P1) conveyed by the letter of the 9th
Respondent dated 16.10.96

**237**

had been taken by the 1st Respondent to enable the Corporation to appoint the
11th Respondent as the Dealer of the said Lanka Service Station at Maya
Avenue. The Petitioner alleges that the 11th Respondent is the wife of a
person employed at the SLFP Head Office and also functioned as a Secretary to
the Minister of Power & Energy under whose purview the 1st Respondent
Corporation functions.  
  
The Petitioner complains that the Area Manager (10th Respondent) in selecting
the 11th Respondent as the Dealer has failed to comply with Clause 8:2 of the
Marketing Manual of the 1st Respondent Corporation for the selection of a
Dealer. The attention of this Court has been specifically invited to the
requirement in the aforesaid paragraph for the Area Supervisor to make
inquiries locally and obtain applications from at least three suitable
candidates and to forward his comments as to the competence and suitability of
such candidates to the 10th Respondent. (Vide Clause 8.2.1 of P10).  
  
Further in terms of Clause 9.2.5 of the Marketing Manual, the 1st Respondent
Corporation is obliged to give sympathetic consideration to the family members
of a deceased Dealer in respect of the Dealership, unless they are
individually or collectively incapable of operating the outlet satisfactorily
because of lack of funds or other valid reason. (Vide P9 Clause 9.2.5)  
  
The Petitioner has averred that there was no valid reason for the 1st
Respondent Corporation to form the opinion that the Petitioner was incapable
of operating the said outlet satisfactorily.  
  
It is the case of the Petitioner that after the demise of H.L.A. Gunawardena,
the Petitioner had always faithfully, diligently and efficiently performed the
duties and obligations as a Dealer of Petroleum of the 1st Respondent and has
not defaulted in complying with any of the Terms, Covenants and Conditions of
the Dealership Agreement or the Conditions under which

**238**

commissions and allowances are payable to him in terms of the Agreement.  
  
In the aforesaid circumstances, the Petitioner states that upon the demise of
his father, the 1st Respondent Corporation ought to have considered him for
appointment as the Dealer, there being no valid reason to believe that he was
incapable of operating the outlet satisfactorily. The action of the
Corporation in depriving him of the appointment as the Dealer and appointing
the 11th Respondent is therefore mala fide, capricious, unreasonable and
unfair.  
  
The Petitioner has also adverted to an earlier application made to this Court
for relief upon the decision of the 2nd Respondent to terminate the Dealership
awarded to his father (Application No. 713/96) on the ground that the
Dealership held by the deceased Gunawardena enured to the benefit of the heirs
of his estate. This Court has refused leave to proceed in respect of his
application on the basis that there existed no such right to inherit but had
reserved the right to the Petitioner to file a fresh application if the 1st
Respondent failed to appoint a member of the family, upon such application
being made by that family member.  
  
Thereafter, the Petitioner had met the 3rd Respondent and had requested him to
reconsider the decision taken by the Board and to grant a further opportunity
to the Petitioner by recommending to the Board to review the decision of the
Board to appoint the 11th Respondent as the Dealer of the Service Station at
Maya Avenue. The 3rd Respondent had then given the Petitioner an assurance
that he would make such recommendation to the Board of the 1st Respondent
Corporation and acting upon such assurance the Petitioner had awaited his
appointment as the Dealer of the said Service Station.  
  
However on 12.12.96 the Petitioner had received a letter dated 6.12.96
requiring the Petitioner to hand over possession of the premises No. 169, Maya
Avenue, Colombo 5 on which

**239**

premises the said Service Station was located and that the possession of the
premises in question would be taken over in terms of Section 32(a) (1) and
(11) read with Section of the 38(2) of the Petroleum Corporation Act. (Vide
P11).  
  
Consequent to the aforesaid letter, the 1st Respondent Corporation has broken
open the doors of the said Service Station and has handed over the possession
of same to the 11th Respondent with effect from 14.1.97. The 11th respondent
is presently functioning as the Dealer of the Corporation at the said
premises.  
  
President's Counsel on behalf of the Petitioner submitted that having regard
to the matters the Petitioner has pleaded, the decision taken by the 1st
Respondent and the 2nd to the 8th Respondents as members of the Board of
Directors of the 1st Respondent Corporation to refrain from appointing the
Petitioner as the Dealer of the said Outlet and the decision to award same to
the 11th Respondent is mala fide, capricious, unreasonable and unfair and that
by such action the Petitioner has been subjected to hostile discrimination in
violation of his fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the
Constitution.  
  
It is in these circumstances, that the Petitioner sought a declaration that
the fundamental rights of the Petitioner guaranteed and protected by Article
12(1) of the Constitution have been infringed by the failure to appoint the
Petitioner as the Dealer of the Outlet located at No. 169, Maya Avenue,
Colombo 6.  
  
In response to this claim of the Petitioner, the 9th Respondent on behalf of
the 1st to the 10th Respondents in this case filed a very comprehensive
affidavit seeking to justify the decision of the 1st to the 8th Respondents to
appoint the 11th Respondent as the Dealer of the Service Station at No 169,
Maya Avenue and authority granted to her to deal in petroleum products upon
the following grounds :-

**240**

**(a) Irregularities perpetrated by the Petitioner  
  
**Neither the Petitioner and/or the Petitioner's mother operated the said
Service Station satisfactorily after the death of Mr. H.L.A. Gunawardena
resulting in numerous complaints from members of the public in respect of the
constantly insufficient stocks of petroleum and diesel. The Petitioner's
mother and/or the Petitioner had failed negligently to maintain the minimum
required stock of diesel and petrol in the underground storage tanks of the
Service Station contrary to the rules and regulations formulated by the 1st
Respondent. It Is the position of the 9th Respondent that maintenance of this
minimum quantity is insisted upon by the 1st Respondent in order to ensure the
ready and uninterrupted supply of petroleum to the public.  
  
In September and October 1996, i. e. immediately before the 11th Respondent
was appointed as the Dealer of the said Service Station this fact was
detected. In support of this proposition he produced the "Daily Sales
Analysis" for the months of September and October, 1996 marked 9R3 and 9R4.  
  
**(b) Public complaints against the Petitioner  
  
**In about the latter part of July 1996, the 9th Respondent the Marketing
Manager of the 1st Respondent became aware that the Area Manager (West/South)
of the 1st Respondent had received numerous complaints from members of the
public to the effect that the service extended at this Service Station was
very unsatisfactory in view of the constantly depleted levels of petroleum and
diesel maintained at the Station.  
  
The 9th Respondent also seeks to rely on a report furnished by the Area
Manager (West/South) dated 19.8.96 after a routine inspection by the Service
Station Manager. (Vide 9R7) and extracts from the Field Officer's log book
after a

**241**

visit to this Service Station by the Deputy Marketing Manager marked 9R6 that
the Lanka Service Station at Maya Avenue had been operated in a manner which
is prejudicial and inimical to the discharge by the 1st Respondent of its duty
towards the public under the stewardship of the Petitioner's mother and/or
Petitioner.  
  
The 9th Respondent has also referred to two complaints (9R10 & 9R11) made
against the Petitioner's father regarding his failure to operate the Service
Station satisfactorily - but he states that the allegations could not be
proved with sufficient certainty to warrant the imposition of disciplinary
action although inquiries were made by the 1st Respondent.  
  
**(c) P4 is not an application  
  
**The 9th Respondent states that the document marked P4 is merely a letter
from the Petitioner indicating his desire to be appointed as the Dealer of the
Lanka Service Station at Maya Avenue and fails to furnish any acceptable
material pertaining to the Petitioner's ability to operate Dealership on a
long-term basis. P4 was therefore not a properly constituted application.
There was also some degree of doubt in regard to the financial capacity of the
Petitioner to operate the Dealership successfully.  
  
**(d)** In the 9th Respondent's affidavit he has specifically stated that he
was not aware that the husband of the 11th Respondent (the present Dealer) was
a Secretary to the Hon; Minister of Power & Energy and the then Deputy
Minister of Defence.  
  
**(e)** That the Marketing Manual of the 1st Respondent Corporation has been
abrogated and was therefore not in operation at all times material to the
Petitioner's application having been invalidated by the Board of Directors of
the 1st Respondent Corporation (Vide 9R18 & 9R19). Without prejudice to the
invalidity of the Marketing Manual the 9th.

**242**

Respondent states that in any event Clause 9.2.5 of the said Manual
specifically points out that "while sympathetic consideration may be given to
the family of the deceased, if they are individually or collectively incapable
of operating the outlet satisfactorily because of lack of funds or other valid
reasons, their claims may be dismissed."  
  
**(f)** That upon the death of the Petitioner's father the Dealership was
automatically terminated as a result of the death of the appointed dealer.  
  
I now propose to examine the validity of the grounds set out by the 9th
Respondent in his affidavit justifying the non appointment of the Petitioner
as the Dealer of the aforesaid Service Station.  
  
(a) & (b) **The failure on the part of the Petitioner's mother and/or
Petitioner to operate the Service Station satisfactorily.** In this
connection, the Petitioner in his counter affidavit has invited the attention
of this Court to the fact that the 1st Respondent Corporation has at no stage
issued any warnings to either the Petitioner or to his father during his
lifetime with regard to the unsatisfactory manner in which the said Filling
Station has been operated nor has the 1st Respondent Corporation at any stage
called for any explanation either from the Petitioner or from his father with
regard to the inadequate stock of fuel maintained at the said Filling Station.
The 9th Respondent has failed to adduce any evidence on this aspect of the
matter.  
  
In the absence of any form of evidence in support of the matter set out above,
I agree with the submission of Mr. Marapone, P C. on behalf of the Petitioner
that it is safe to presume that the operation of the said Filling Station was
continued satisfactorily before and after the death of the Petitioner's father
on 8.5.96 without any complaints from the public. It is also relevant to
observe that the Respondents have failed to produce any complaint from the
public for the period

**243**

January to October, 1996 nor have they produced any details with regard to the
inadequate stock levels maintained or the unsatisfactory manner in which the
said Filling Station was operated in the months immediately after the death of
the Petitioner's father. In this connection it Is significant that the 9th
Respondent has admitted that he had prepared a Board Paper No 1996/106/1196
dated 3.7.96 (9R12) recommending to the Board of Directors of the 1st
Respondent Corporation the appointment of the Petitioner as the Dealer of the
said Service Station in succession to his late father.  
  
There also appears to be much substance in the submission of Counsel for the
Petitioner that detections and spot inspections referred to in the 9th
Respondent's affidavit and the allegations relating to the maintenance of
inadequate stock levels surfaced only in September and October 1996 when the
appointment of the 11th Respondent as Dealer was under consideration by the
1st Respondent Corporation. The letter issued by the Bank of Ceylon to the 1st
Respondent dated 20.9.96 (9R15) relating to the financial capacity of the 11th
Respondent is strongly supportive of the fact that towards the latter part of
September 1996 the selection of the 11th Respondent for Dealership was under
serious consideration by the 1st Respondent Corporation. The aforesaid facts
in my view support the proposition of the Petitioner that at this stage the
1st Respondent Corporation was making every endeavour to pave the way for the
11th Respondent to obtain the Dealership of this Service Station.  
  
In evaluating the allegation made by the 9th Respondent that he became aware
in the latter part of July 1996 that the Area Manager (North/South) at the 1st
Respondent Corporation had received numerous complaints from the members of
the public alleging that the service extended at this Service Station was very
unsatisfactory in view of the constantly depleted levels of petroleum and
diesel maintained at the said Service Station, it is relevant to note that the
Respondents have not produced any details with regard to the inadequate stock
levels maintained or the unsatisfactory manner in which the said

**244**

Filling Station was being operated immediately after the death of the
Petitioner's father in May 1996 - the documents produced relate only to the
months of September and October 1996\. It is the submission of Counsel for the
Petitioner that orders were placed by the Petitioner upon payment of cash with
the 1st Respondent Corporation so that there would be adequate stocks when the
inspections took place. However the delivery of necessary stocks of petrol and
diesel had been deliberately delayed with a view to ensuring that there would
not be adequate stocks when the inspections took place. Counsel relied on the
documents marked P15 (A) to P15 (N) in support of his submission.  
  
Further, the Petitioner in this letter P4 dated 20.5.96 while applying for the
Dealership had indicated to the 2nd Respondent his financial capability and
suitability to continue as the Dealer of the said Service Station. Hence in my
view, it is safe to presume that the 9th Respondent prepared the Board Paper
(9R12) recommending the Petitioner for Dealership having determined that the
Petitioner was both financially stable and was capable of conducting the
operations of the Service Station in a suitable manner.  
  
It is also necessary to observe that no report from the Area Manager (10th
Respondent) has been adduced in support of the 9th Respondent's contention
that the said Service Station was functioning in an unsatisfactory manner
either immediately before or after the aforesaid Board Paper (9R12). In the
aforesaid circumstances, there appears to be merit in the contention of
Counsel for the Petitioner that the adverse material was collected thereafter
for the purpose of preventing the Board Paper (9R12) being approved by the
Board of the Respondent Corporation as the 11th Respondent had by this time
indicated an interest in the Dealership of the said Service Station.  
  
Yet another matter that must be borne in mind in this regard is that no
material has been placed before this Court to establish that the Petitioner
was at any stage called upon to give any

**245**

explanation either by the 9th Respondent or by the Board of the 1st Respondent
Corporation with regard to the inadequate stock levels maintained at the said
Service Station, the Petitioner's financial capabilities or with regard to any
complaint on the unsatisfactory manner in which the said Service Station had
been operated.  
  
(c) **The letter P4 submitted by the Petitioner for Dealership of this Service
Station is not a properly constituted application**. It was the contention of
Counsel for the 1st to the 10th Respondents that the document produced marked
P4 is merely a letter from the Petitioner indicating his desire to be
appointed as the Dealer of the Lanka Service Station at Maya Avenue. The said
letter failed to furnish any acceptable material pertaining to the
Petitioner's ability to operate a Dealership on a long-term basis.  
  
I wish to observe that the document marked P4 which is the letter dated
29.5.96 by which the Petitioner applied for the Dealership of this Service
Station he has indeed indicated to the 1st Respondent his financial capability
and his suitability to continue as the Dealer of the said Service Station. In
point of fact, the Respondents have not produced in this case details of any
public complaints that existed from January to October 96, nor produced any
details with regard to the inadequate stock levels maintained and the
unsatisfactory manner the said Filling Station was being operated during the
period immediately after the death of the Petitioner's father.  
  
Further, in my view, there can be little doubt that the 9th Respondent when he
prepared the Board Paper marked 91112 recommending the Petitioner to be
appointed as the Dealer of the said Service Station, he had acted upon the
document P4 and had accepted the suitability and financial capability of the
Petitioner for appointment as the Dealer of this Service Station.  
  
The conduct of the 9th Respondent to initiate inquiries into the capacity and
eligibility of the Petitioner after he prepared the document 9R12 lends
support to the allegation made by

**246**

the Petitioner that the 9th Respondent was not acting bona fide in this matter
and raises grave suspicions In regard to the course of conduct adopted by him.
If the Petitioner's application (P4) had not been properly constituted as
alleged by the 9th Respondent, then the question arises as to why the 9th
Respondent prepared the Board Paper (9R12) recommending the Petitioner's
application for appointment for Dealership.  
  
For the aforesaid reasons, I am unable to accept the statement of the 9th
Respondent who at this late stage takes up the position that P4 was not an
application for Dealership which conformed to the requirements of the 1st
Respondent Corporation.  
  
(d) **The 9th Respondent in his affidavit has stated that he was not aware
that the husband of the 11th Respondent (the present dealer) was the Secretary
of the Hon. Minister of Power & Energy and the then Deputy Minister of
Defence**. However, on this matter, we have the specific averment in the
affidavit furnished by the 11th Respondent herself who says that she is the
wife of Samarasekera referred to in paragraph (4) of the petition and that her
husband was the Secretary to the Hon. Anuruddha Ratwatte, Minister of Power &
Energy and the Deputy Minister of Defence.  
  
(e) **Marketing Manual of the 1st Respondent Corporation has been abrogated**
\- The 9th Respondent has also raised the objection that the Marketing Manual
of the 1st Respondent Corporation has been abrogated and was therefore not in
operation at all times material to the Petitioner's application. It was the
contention of Counsel for the 1st to the 10th Respondents that at the relevant
time the Marketing Manual had been invalidated by the Board of Directors of
the 1st Respondent Corporation (9R18 & 9R19).  
  
However, upon a perusal of the document (9R18), it Is clear that while it
contains a declaration that the Marketing Manual is obsolete, the-decision of
the 1st Respondent Board dated

**247**

24.9.96 (9R19) does not indicate that the Board of the 1st Respondent
Corporation had made a decision either to abrogate or declare the Marketing
Manual to be obsolete. Instead the Board had only taken note of the contents
of the Board Paper (9R18) submitted by the 9th Respondent. lam unable
therefore to accept the averment of the 9th Respondent that at all times
material for the Petitioner's application for Dealership and the appointment
of the 11th Respondent as the new Dealer, the Marketing Manual had been
abrogated by the Board of Directors of the 1st Respondent Corporation.  
  
I hold, therefore, that upon the material placed before this Court there is no
justification to hold that the Marketing Manual had in fact been abrogated,
nor has there been a declaration by the 1st Respondent Board to the effect
that the Marketing Manual was obsolete. In point of fact a memo dated 30.12.96
(P12) addressed to the 2nd Respondent by the 9th Respondent relating to the
appointment of Dealer of a Corporation Controlled Outlet at Thambuttegama is
supportive of the fact that the 1st Respondent Corporation was indeed acting
in conformity with the Guidelines set in the Marketing Manual (Vide P20) even
as late as December 1996.  
  
Part 8 of the Marketing Manual relates to the appointment of Dealers which
lays down the policy and procedure in the appointment of Dealers. Clause 8.2.1
requires the Area Supervisor to make inquiries locally and obtain applications
from at least 3 suitable candidates and to forward his comments as to the
competency and suitability of the 3 candidates as required by Clause 8.2 of
the Marketing Manual. (Vide Part 8 of the Marketing Manual marked P9 of the
Is' Respondent Corporation). There is no material whatsoever furnished by the
Respondent to show that they have complied with the aforesaid requirements.  
  
The only conclusion one can reach in the aforesaid circumstances is that the
1st Respondent Corporation had not taken any step in terms of the procedure
laid down by the

**248**

Marketing Manual in the selection of the dealer for this Service Station and
in taking steps to appoint the 11th Respondent as the dealer of the said
Service Station.  
  
Further, Part 9 of the Marketing Manual makes provision for change of
Dealership and Closure of Outlets. Clause 9.2.5 states thus:  
  
"While sympathetic consideration may be given to the family of the deceased,
if they are individually or collectively incapable of operating the outlet
satisfactorily because of lack of funds or other valid reasons, their claims
may be dismissed."  
  
On a consideration of the entirety of the material placed before this Court by
the 1st to the 10th Respondents, one cannot reasonably come to the conclusion
that any endeavour has been made by the 1st Respondent Corporation to comply
with the provisions contained in Clause 9.2.5 of the Marketing Manual. In my
view the Respondents have failed to give any consideration whatsoever to
ascertain whether the petitioner "was individually or collectively incapable
of operating the outlet satisfactorily because of lack of funds or other valid
reasons."  
  
On the contrary, the material placed before this Court is more supportive of
the fact that the Petitioner has efficiently performed his duties and
obligations as a Dealer of petroleum products of the Corporation and has not
defaulted in complying with any of the terms and/or conditions of the
Dealership Agreement.  
  
It would appear to me that the allegations made against the Petitioner have
been made without sufficient evidence and even without calling upon either the
Petitioner or his father to give explanations, vis-a-vis, those allegations
contrary to the principles of natural justice. It is also significant in this
connection to advert to the fact that the allegation that adequate stock
levels had not been maintained have been levelled against

**249**

the Petitioner, particularly during the months of September and October, 1996
after the 11th Respondent had clearly indicated an interest in the Dealership
as borne out by 9R15. Neither the 1st Respondent Board nor the 9th Respondent
has adduced any evidence to support the allegation with regard to the
inadequate stock levels or other allegations during the period before and
immediately after the death of the Petitioner's father, i.e. the 8th of May,
1996.  
  
There seems to be much merit in the submission of Counsel for the Petitioner
that the Petitioners have delayed delivery of fuel "during the period the
Respondents allege the Service Station had inadequate stock levels" after
payment was made in cash which is borne out by the documents P15A to P15M to
enable the Respondents to justify the Dealership being given to a person other
then the Petitioner.  
  
The Petitioner's position is that the failure on the part of the 1st to the
10th Respondents to consider his application upon its merits for Dealership is
mala fide, grossly arbitrary, capricious and unreasonable, and also that such
failure has been influenced by collateral considerations and made for alleged
reasons which do not bear any form of objective scrutiny.  
  
I am of the view that the failure on the part of the 1st Respondent
Corporation to appoint the Petitioner as the Dealer of the Outlet located at
No. 169, Maya Avenue, Colombo 6, having considered his application objectively
and in a fair manner in terms of the rules set out in the Marketing Manual of
the 1st Respondent Corporation constitutes action which is mala fide, grossly
arbitrary, capricious and unreasonable.  
  
It has been held in the Case of _Att. Gen. for Hong Kong v. Ng Yuen Shiu_ (1)
that a legitimate expectation which has been created may sometimes be no more
than that a particular procedure may by followed.  
  
On the facts established in the present case, I hold that the Petitioner had a
legitimate expectation that he would be

**250**

appointed Dealer of the aforesaid Service Station upon satisfying prescribed
conditions set out in the Marketing Manual of the 1st Respondent Corporation.
I hold that the rights of the Petitioner guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the
Constitution have been infringed by the 1st to the 8th Respondents. It is now
well settled law that if it can be shown that a decision was based on
irrelevant considerations, or that improper purposes were being pursued, it
will be struck down on the Wednesbury Criteria. (See _Associated Provincial
Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation_ )(2)  
  
It was also contended on behalf of the Respondents that the purported right of
the Petitioner cannot be vindicated in a fundamental rights application. It
was Counsel's submission that the Petitioner was seeking in his application to
agitate a matter which is strictly within the realm of private commercial
contract which does not fall within the purview of the fundamental rights
jurisdiction of this Court. This matter has now been finally resolved by this
Court. In the case of _Wickrematunga vs Anuruddha Ratwatte_ and _Others_ (3) -
where it was held that "Law in Article 12 of the Constitution includes
regulations, rules, directions, principles, guidelines and schemes that are
designed to regulate public authorities in their conduct. In the context,
whilst Article 12 erects no shield against merely private conduct, public
authorities must conform to constitutional requirements, in particular to
those set out in Article 12 even in the sphere of contract; and where there is
a breach of contract and a violation of the provisions of Article 12 brought
about by the same set of facts and circumstances, the aggrieved party cannot
be confined to his remedy under the law of contract."  
  
I accordingly declare that the action of the 1st to the 9th Respondents in
this case is indeed mala fide, grossly arbitrary, capricious and unreasonable
and the Petitioner's fundamental right to equal protection of the law has been
violated. In the circumstances of this case, I consider it just and equitable
that

**251**

the 1st Respondent Corporation should pay the Petitioner a sum of Rs 250,000/-
as a solatium.  
  
I make order that a sum of Rs 250,000/- be paid by the 1st Respondent
Corporation to the Petitioner as a solatium for the infringement by the
Corporation of the Petitioner's fundamental rights. I also make order that the
1st Respondent Corporation shall pay the Petitioner a sum of Rs 25,000% as
costs.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J. -** I agree.  
  
**EDUSSURIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/15.html_  

