##  Perera and Nine Others v. Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka
& Twenty-Two Others - SLR - 152, Vol 1 of 1994 [1993] LKSC 16; (1994) 1 Sri LR
152 (2 April 1993)

**152**

**PEREIRA AND NINE OTHERS**

**v.**

**MONETARY BOARD OF THE CENTRAL BANK OF SRI LANKA**

**& TWENTY‑TWO OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT

AMERASINGHE, J.

WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND

WIJETUNGA, J.

SC APPLICATIONS (F/R) NO. 246/93

16 NOVEMBER 1993 AND 26 JULY 1994



Fundamental Rights ‑Discrimination ‑ Article 12(1) of the Constitution
‑Application of Government Circulars to Central Bank ‑ Power of recruitment
‑Promotion ‑ Criteria ‑ Seniority, merit, academic or professional
qualifications, general awareness, capacity to identify a problem and respond
to it, analytical skills ‑ Equal treatment ‑ Scheme of Recruitment ‑ Scheme of
Promotion_ _‑ Need to publish schemes ‑ Adoption of_ _ad hoc criteria ‑
Section 10 of the Monetary Law ‑ Right to recruit ancillary staff ‑ Burden of
proof._

_ _

The ten petitioner and the 11th to 22nd respondents are employees of the
Central Bank of Sri Lanka . The petitioners alleged that their fundamental
right to equality guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution was violated
by the appointment of the 11th to 22nd respondents as Staff Class Grade 1
Officers. The 1st respondent is the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, a body
corporate created by the Monetary Law, Act No. 58 of 1949. It had been decided
that 84 officers were required in the lowest, staff grade class, namely Staff
Class Grade 1. The selection was to be through two schemes: 26 persons through
a scheme of recruitment applicable to rankers and 58 on a competitive
accelerated scheme. The criteria in the Schemes of Promotion in the Central
Bank and relevant salary scales were formulated by the Monetary Board and
circularised but not two amendments to it of dates 10.01.89 and 16.01.90.
There was no mention in the Scheme of criteria for the promotion of non‑staff
class officers in the higher grade, the highest grade in the non‑staff class,
namely Non‑Staff Class (NSC) Grade 5. Four of the petitioners were in NSC 5
and were interviewed. The two amendments to the Scheme provided for the
promotion of staff assistants with a stipulated minimum period of confirmed
service to Staff Class Grade. Under this NSC Grades 4 and 5 were made
eligible. But staff assistants were not mentioned in the original scheme and
there was no decision of the Monetary Board in regard to the mode of their
appointment.



**Held:**



(1)     There was no general rejection of Public Administration Circulars by
the Monetary Board.

 153  


(2) Institutions which require ancillary staff must be empowered by provisions
such as section 10 of the Monetary Law Act to make recruitment. In the absence
of such a provision, a statutory creature, such as the Central Bank, would not
have the legal capacity to recruit ancillary staff at all. It is a necessary
authority. It does not therefore follow, that the powers of recruitment are
unlimited. The Central Bank, like any other institution or person, must comply
with the law, including Article 12 of the Constitution, in the formulation of
its schemes of promotion and in the selection process.



(3) Institutions, whether public or private are juristic persons created for
the achievement of certain objects. Those who are entrusted with the
obligation of ensuring that the objects of the institution are achieved, are
empowered, as the Board was in this case by section 10 of the Monetary Law
Act, to engage the services of ancillary staff to help them in fulfilling
their duty.



(4) Those responsible for the achievement of the objects of the institution,
particularly a sizeable institution, would classify its ancillary staff
according to some method or system founded on intelligible differentia which
distinguish persons grouped together from others left out of each group, the
attributes which distinguish those grouped together having a rational relation
to the object sought to be achieved by the recruitment to each class. At
whatever level, it would be expected that persons whose services are engaged
in each group or sub‑group are, in terms of knowledge, skills and aptitude,
suited to the circumstances of employment in each class. The search for such
persons is ordinarily likely to be most successful if there is an opportunity
of choosing from several persons who possess the requisite minimum qualities
and qualifications. Eligible persons could offer themselves for consideration
only if they have an opportunity of doing so ‑usually by public advertisement
or personal notification to eligible persons. Usually, either in the document
calling for applications, or in a separate instrument to which a prospective
applicant has access, such as a published scheme of recruitment, there would
be information with regard to the nature of the duties to be performed, the
minimum knowledge, skills, experience expected, and how these qualities and
qualifications are to be established. Among other things it will give
legitimate grounds for rejecting an unqualified applicant, provided of course,
the criteria of eligibility were rational. The announcement of the way in
which the eventual selection will be made will also serve as an assurance that
the selection process is not a false, outward show, but an honest attempt to
select the best person for the post. Unless negotiable and so announced,
usually the terms and conditions of employment would also be announced so
that, on the one hand, persons who are eligible may apply with a clear
understanding of what they may expect if they are selected, and on the other
that the contractual obligations are identified and provided for.



(5) Recruitment ‑ whether to create a new class or to add to or keep up the
number of a class of employees ‑ may be either by way of promotion of persons

154  


already in employment in other classes or by the addition of others who are
not already serving the institution. There may well be more than one scheme of
recruitment even within a class of employment, reflecting the need to balance
relevant factors in the recruitment process. Where several factors are to be
considered e.g. seniority, merit, academic or professional qualifications, no
hard and fast rules can be laid in advance as to what is adequate weightage
for this factor or that. It is a matter to be decided having regard to the
exigencies of each case.



(6) Eventually the guiding factor is the achievement of the goals of the
institution within the framework of the law, and at every stage of the
selection process, from the determination of the need for the services of a
particular type of officer and numbers in each class, through the
determination of the relevant qualifications for eligibility, to the selection
of a candidate; those who are entrusted with the task of the achievement of
the goals of the institution must necessarily have a discretion because it is
they who are responsible and accountable for the success or failure of the
institution. In the exercise of their discretion, they have both a right and a
duty to discriminate so that the objects of the institution as set out in the
instrument of creation may be achieved: Distinctions are regarded as
permissible because they are necessary to select those who are necessary and
best suited for the performance of specific tasks. On the question of cadre
they may decide that different numbers of officers are required for each post.
On the question of eligibility they may distinguish between the various
qualifications and qualities.



(7) The use of description involves discernment: Selection is not a mere
matter of fancy, whim or caprice. Distinctions must not be invidious or biased
and there must be no favouritism or partiality. The selected person must be
fit and suitable and qualify for appointment in terms of the formulated
criteria and in accordance with the prescribed mode of verification of those
criteria.



(8) so, while the burden of proving that Article 12 of the Constitution was
violated lies upon a petitioner, the burden of adducing evidence to show that
the discrimination made was rational and justifiable lies on those who had the
authority to do so, and made the distinctions. Decisions must be supported by
evidence. If persons were appointed in terms of a scheme of recruitment the
scheme must be produced and explained in terms of the need for the post and
the nexus between the work to be performed and the criteria for selection. If
the selections were based on an examination the marks must be produced, if on
interview on a group basis the marks earned under each criterion of selection
must be produced. If at the interview the marking was on an individual basis
the marks given by each member of the panel to each candidate under each of
the selection criteria should be made available.

_ _ 155



(9) Transparency in recruitment proceedings would go a long way in achieving
public expectations of equal treatment. In order to ensure that justice is
done and seen to be done, it is at least desirable that cadres, the criteria
for selection ‑ for instance by the publication of marks obtained ‑ be made
known to those concerned.



(10) Equal treatment is a fundamental right guaranteed by the Constitution.
For example those who were both able, by reason of their demonstrable fitness
to perform the functions of the post, and willing to serve in accordance with
the job description formulated in accordance with the needs of the
institution, and in accordance with the terms and conditions of employment,
but were not provided with the opportunity of offering their services, are
entitled to complain that they were not called upon to apply when other
similarly ‑ placed persons were called upon to apply. Persons are entitled to
complain if they were unfairly disqualified because the scheme of recruitment
was not based on intelligible differentia; the attributes prescribed for
eligibility, having no rational relation to the object of recruitment; they
are entitled to complain if they were invidiously or arbitrarily treated by or
in the selection process. The essence of their complaint would be that their
right to equality guaranteed by Article 12 of the Constitution has been
violated.



**Per Amerasinghe J:**



"A scheme of promotion must be justifiable in its formulation and just in its
application. The law insists on justice and this, among other things, means
that in the exercise of authority or power there must be just conduct. In the
exercise of the power of recruitment, just conduct entails the even ‑ handed
treatment of those who might be affected by the exercise of a power."



(11) Whether in the recruitment of Staff Class Grade officers or others, it is
in the interests of the Bank, from the points of view of selecting the best
available person, maintaining industrial peace and retaining public confidence
to adhere to objective standards.



(12) The non‑publication of the two modifications to the earlier publicized
Schemes of Promotion was unsatisfactory. It was more than unsatisfactory that
the selections were made by reference to _ad hoc,_ undisclosed criteria which
were not decided upon or at least ratified by the Monetary Board. The way in
which the promotions were made by the respondents cannot be understood by
examining the announced scheme read with the unannounced amendments made by
the Board. How the final selection was made remains a mystery for the marks
obtained at the interview were not disclosed. What was there was
unintelligibleness and obscurity, a lack of openness and candour, an effective
_ad hoc_ undoing of the directions of the Board.

 156



(13) To have treated NSC Grade 4 and the higher grade NSC Grade 5 officers
equally overlooked the fact that treating inequals equally was unjust and
violative of Article 12 (1) of the Constitution. Grade 5 officers had a
legitimate and reasonable expectation that, if they were not to be regarded as
superior by reason of their Grade, they would at least be treated as equals of
those in the lower grade. Grade 5 officers had come to the top of the
non‑staff class not as flotsam and jetsam of the non‑staff class.



(14) The Bank had failed to show what criteria were adopted in the past by (a)
the Preliminary Interview Committee (b) the Second Interview Committee, and
(c) the Board at the third and final interview or that criteria existed at
all.



(15) Having set its own standards _ad hoc,_ the interview panel did not adhere
to it but had to zig‑zag its way, arbitrarily, avoiding its own criteria, to
be able to appoint certain persons.



(16) If Grade 5 officers had been relegated to a class beyond which they could
not ascend, they should not have been called for interviews. They were not
aware of this. They were disappointed and perplexed by the selection of the
11th to 22nd respondents who were non‑staff class grade 4 officers, persons
comparatively inferior in rank, in preference to them. The exclusion of Grade
5 officers as a class was not mentioned until the Court proceedings. There was
no rational basis for the exclusion of Grade 5 officers.



(17) The selection by a single interview Panel (and not on a final selection
by the Monetary Board on second interview) was an _ad_ _hoc_ departure from __
the Board's own scheme which required three interviews. The duration of the
single interview was five minutes and the questioning was haphazard and even
sometimes irrelevant. The selections were therefore not made after sufficient
and careful consideration but arbitrarily.



(18) Promotion is a reward which after careful consideration, for sufficient
reasons is declared to be merited and earned. It is not simply a matter of
good fortune.



(10) The criteria for evaluation at the interview were uncertain and vague and
not announced.



(20)             How seniority for which 25% of the marks were allocated, was
assessed has not been established by the Bank and selections were not
consistent with seniority. Nor was it clear that merit was taken into account.
The supposed application of criteria namely academic/professional
qualification, general awareness, capacity to identify a problem and
responding to it, analytical skills, could not have been adequately evaluated
by the Interview Committee in the time available to it and having regard to
the questions asked at the interview.

 157



(21) The selection of the 11th to 22nd respondents in preference to the
petitioners was in violation of Article 12(1) of the Constitution and the
appointments of the 11th to 22nd respondents to Staff Class Grade 1 were of no
force or avail and null and void.



Application for relief for violation of Fundamental Right of equality
guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution.



_Faiz Mustapha PC_ with _Dr. Jayampathy Wickremaratne_ for Petitioners



_A. S. M. Perera_ _DSG_ for 1ST- 10TH Respondents.

_Cur adv. vult._



November 1st, 1994  


**AMERASINGHE, J.**  



**(1) EXPLANATION OF THE DELAY IN DISPOSING OF THE MATTER**



On 2nd April, 1993, in an application under Article 126 of the Constitution,
the ten petitioners, alleged that the fundamental rights guaranteed to them by
Article 12(1) of the Constitution were violated. The prayer of the petitioners
that they be permitted leave to proceed was granted by this Court on 13th May,
1993. However, in the interests of the on‑going relationship between the first
respondent, as employer, and the petitioners as employees, the Court referred
the matter to the Commission for the Elimination of Discrimination and
Monitoring of Fundamental Rights to explore the possibility of the resolution
of the matter by mediation. By its communication dated 10th August, 1993 the
Commission reported a negative outcome. The matter was fixed for argument on
16th November, 1993\. On that date a Bench of the Court comprising
Amerasinghe, Wadugodapitiya and Wijetunga, JJ., heard the submissions of Mr.
Faiz Musthapha, P. C., for the petitioners, and a part of the submissions of
Mr. A. S. M. Perera, Deputy Solicitor‑General, for the respondents, and due to
the fact that the calendar of constituted Benches at that time did not enable
the Court to resume the hearing during the current term, the resumption of
hearing was postponed for 9th February, 1994\. However, due to the ill‑health
of my brother Wadugodapitiya J. on that day, the matter could not be taken up
and the Court ordered that the matter be

158  


resumed on 13th May, 1994. On that date the matter was listed for hearing
before G. P. S. de Silva, CJ. and Kulatunga and Ramanathan JJ. and it was
ordered that the resumed hearing before the Judges who had heard a part of the
matter should take place on 26th July, 1994\. And so the hearing commenced on
16th November, 1993 was concluded only on 26th July, 1994.



**(2) THE COMPLAINT AND THE PARTIES:**



The ten petitioners and the 11th to 22nd respondents are employees of the
Central Bank of Sri Lanka. The petitioners allege that their fundamental right
to equality guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution was violated by
the appointment of the 11th to 22nd respondents as Staff‑Class Grade 1
Officers.



The first respondent is the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, a body corporate
created by the Monetary Law Act No. 58 of 1949. The Chairman and Governor of
the Bank is the second respondent. The third and fourth respondents are
members of the Board. The fifth respondent is the Deputy‑Governor of the Bank.
The sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth respondents are Executive Directors of
the Bank. The tenth respondent is the Director of Establishments of the Bank.
The eleventh to the twenty‑second respondents are persons who were selected
in' preference to the ten petitioners. The Attorney-­General is named as the
twenty‑third respondent in terms of Rule 44 (1) (b) of the Supreme Court
Rules, 1990.



**(3) THE APPLICABILITY OF GOVERNMENT DIRECTIVES**



The petitioners maintained that the Monetary Board was bound by the directives
of the Government, and that had the guidelines set out in the Public
Administration Circulars No. 15/90 dated 9th March, 1990, No. 5/90 (1) dated
25th March, 1990, 15/90 (ii) dated 15th June, 1990 and the communication of
the decision of the Cabinet of Ministers on 12th June, 1991 by the Secretary,
Ministry of Public Administration, Provincial Councils and Home Affairs dated
20th July, 1991 been followed, they, rather than the 11th ‑ 22nd respondents,
would have been selected.

_ _ 159

__

__ In paragraph 22 of his affidavit Mr. Easparanathan, an Executive Director
of the Bank who is the sixth respondent in these proceedings, firmly states
that "Public Administration Circulars do not apply to the Central Bank in view
of the provisions contained in Section 10 of the Monetary Board Act No. 58 of
1949 as amended."



According to P14 (Minutes of meetings the Governor had with the Central Bank
Employees Union on 17th July, 1992), when the matter of promotions in
accordance with the Public Administration Circular of 9th March, 1990 was
raised, the Director of Establishments (the tenth respondent) had explained
that it was "difficult" to apply the Circular retrospectively and that
"clarifications" had been sought from the Ministry of Public Administration
"as to the manner in which the provisions of the Circular should be
implemented with retrospective effect and the Ministry of Public
Administration has in turn consulted the Attorney‑General for which no
response has been received so far. It was agreed to review the matter."



When the Deputy‑Governor, the fifth respondent, Mr. Easparanathan, the sixth
respondent, and other representatives of the Bank on 2nd September, 1992 (see
pp. 3‑4 of P11), were requested by the Union's representatives to promote the
candidates who were called for interviews on the basis of examinations held in
1989 under the accelerated promotions scheme to Staff Class Grade 1 in terms
of Public Administration Circular dated 9th March, 1990, the position of the
representatives of the Bank was not that Public Administration Circulars were
inapplicable, but that the "Circular was not applicable to the issue in
question in view of the fact that it was issued after the appointments were
made." The process for those selections, it was pointed out, had been
commenced towards the end of 1989, before the Circular was issued. The
Deputy‑Governor is reported to have "added that legal opinion was being
obtained in this connection." (Vide P11 at page 4). The Union had referred to
the meeting they had on 1st September, 1992 with the Governor of the Bank (the
second respondent) on this matter when, according to the minutes recorded and
issued by the Bank (P11 page 3), the Governor had said that "the request of
the Union may be considered step by step."



And so there was no general rejection of Public Administration Circulars. The
problem was merely with regard to the application of a

160



particular circular in the special circumstances of the case. As a Government
institution, surely the Bank might be reasonably expected in the matter of
recruitment to be guided by Government directives unless expressly exempted?
It is not necessary for the determination of this matter and therefore I make
no decision on that matter. I have referred to this because of the fact that
it was raised by the petitioners as a matter of importance and dealt with by
learned Counsel on both sides.



**(4) LIMITATIONS ON THE POWER OF RECRUITMENT**



The learned Deputy Solicitor‑General submitted that the Bank had statutory
authority in terms of section 10 of the Monetary Law to recruit staff and was
free to determine what staff it required and the right to select staff
according to its discretion in terms of its own schemes of recruitment. The
power of recruitment was central to the issues in this case, and since it
appears to have been misunderstood, some explanation is necessary.



Institutions which require ancillary staff must be empowered by provisions
such as section 10 of the Monetary Law to make recruitments. In the absence of
such a provision, a statutory creature, such as the Central Bank, would not
have the legal capacity to recruit ancillary staff at all. It is a necessary
authority. It does not therefore follow, that the powers of recruitment are
unlimited.



The Central Bank, like any other institution or person, must comply with the
law, including Article 12 of the Constitution, in the formulation of its
schemes of promotion and in the selection process. No institution, no person,
natural or juristic is above the law. Section 10 of the Monetary Law creates
no exception.



Institutions, whether public or private, are juristic persons created for the
achievement of certain objects. Since they are incapable of functioning
unaided by human intervention, certain natural persons are entrusted with the
obligation of ensuring that the objects of the institution are achieved. As it
often happens, especially where the objects of the institution are complex or
numerous or many‑sided, as in the case of the Bank, it would be impossible for
the few persons

161



entrusted with the task of achieving the institution's objects, such as the
members of the Monetary Board in this case, to do all the work themselves. The
assistance of other people may be necessary. And so, those who are entrusted
with the obligation of ensuring that the objects of the institution are
achieved, are empowered, as the Board was in this case by section 10 of the
Monetary Law Act, to engage the services of ancillary staff to help them in
fulfilling their duty. As the schemes of recruitment of the Bank (P1 and P4)
show, various sorts of supportive staff, ranging from persons designated by
the bank in P1 as "Minor Employees" and in P4 as "Labourers", to Heads of
Departments in the Staff Class Grades, were required by the Bank.



What sorts of supportive staff are necessary, and the required numbers of each
kind, are matters to be decided by the persons entrusted with the obligation
of ensuring that the objects of the institution are achieved, for it is they
who must plan a course of action for the achievement of the objects of the
institution and be held accountable for its success or failure.



The work of ancillary staff may range from the performance of simple tasks,
requiring little or no special knowledge or skills, to the services of persons
whose esoteric knowledge and exceptional skills are appropriate to an inner
circle of disciplines. Those responsible for the achievement of the objects of
the institution, particularly a sizable institution, would classify its
ancillary staff according to some method or system founded on intelligible
differentia which distinguish persons grouped together from others left out of
each group, the attributes which distinguish those grouped together having a
rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the recruitment to
each class. At whatever level, it would be expected that persons whose
services are engaged in each group or sub‑group are, in terms of knowledge,
skills and aptitude, suited to the circumstances of employment in each class,



The immediate object of obtaining assistance in the performance of certain
functions with the view to the achievement of the ultimate purpose of the
exercise of the power of employment, namely the achievement of the goals of
the institution, is most likely to be achieved by choosing the best available
person.

 162



The search for such a person is ordinarily likely to be most successful if
there is an opportunity of choosing from several persons who possess the
requisite minimum qualities and qualifications.



Eligible persons could offer themselves for consideration only if they have an
opportunity of doing so. Such an opportunity would usually be afforded by way
of public advertisement or personal notification to eligible persons. In the
case before us, eligible persons were by individual letters addressed to them,
invited to present themselves at an interview.



Usually, either in the document calling for applications, or in a separate
instrument to which a prospective applicant has access, such as a published
scheme of recruitment, there would be information with regard to the nature of
the duties to be performed, the minimum knowledge, skills, experience
expected, and how these qualities and qualifications are to be established
(e.g. a degree or diploma and/or work in a certain capacity and/or at a
certain level of performance and/or for a minimum period of time and/or
performance at an interview and/or at a written examination). The making known
of these matters serve many purposes: Among other things, it will indicate
whether a person is qualified and dissuade him from applying if he is not, and
at the same time give legitimate grounds for rejecting an unqualified
applicant, provided of course, the criteria of eligibility were rational. It
will also serve to give notice to applicants as to what evidence of fitness
they would need to adduce and what preparations they may need to make in
proving their fitness. This may include the obtaining of certificates and/or
the undertaking of studies, depending on the manner in which fitness is to be
established. The announcement of the way in which the eventual selection will
be made will also serve as an assurance that the selection process is not a
false, outward show, but an honest attempt to select the best person for the
post, for those who wish to apply might be **** reasonably expected to do so
only if they feel confident that there is a genuine search for the fittest
person and not a masquerade resulting in a waste of time and effort. It is
also a constraint on those who have been empowered to employ ancillary staff
to act in good faith and effectively in the discharge of their obligations
towards the advancement of the objects of the institution

163



whose destinies have been placed in their hands by selecting the best
available person. Unless negotiable and so announced, usually the terms and
conditions of employment would also be announced so that, on the one hand,
persons who are eligible may apply with a clear understanding of what they may
expect if they are selected, and on the other that the contractual obligations
of the institution are identified and provided for.



Recruitment ‑ whether to create a new class or to add to or keep up the number
of a class of employees ‑ may be either by way of promotion of persons already
in employment in other classes or by the addition of others who are not
already serving the institution. No doubt, in the formulation of schemes of
recruitment, due regard might be paid to various factors: For instance, the
desirability of the injection of "new blood" to increase or re‑invigorate the
services of a class might need to be weighed against the value of the services
of those who had already been occupied in the study and/or practice of the
affairs of the institution as employees and were therefore experienced hands.
As between serving officers, it might be necessary to decide whether one
should be selected in preference to another as being senior by reason of
earlier entrance to the service of the institution or earlier appointment to a
Grade or post, and/or on account of the person concerned deserving well
because of the excellence of his past performance and/or the worth the man's
qualities and/or academic and professional qualifications. In order to
encourage serving officers to better equip themselves, recognition may need to
be given for the acquisition of additional skills and/or academic and/or
professional qualifications while in service. There may well be more than one
scheme of recruitment even within a class of employment, reflecting the need
to balance relevant factors in the recruitment process. Where several factors
are to be considered, e.g. seniority, merit, academic or professional
qualifications, no hard and fast rules can be laid down in advance as to what
is adequate weightage for this factor or that. It is a matter to be decided
**** having regard to the exigencies of each case.



Eventually the guiding factor is the achievement of the goals of the
institution within the framework of the law, and at every stage of the
selection process, from the determination of the need for the

164



services of a particular type of officer and numbers in each class, through
the determination of 'the relevant qualifications for eligibility, to the
selection of a candidate, those who are entrusted with the task of the
achievement of the goals of the institution must necessarily have a
discretion, for, as I have said before, and say again for the sake of
emphasis, it is they who are responsible and accountable for the success or
failure of the institution.



In the exercise of their discretion, they have both a right and duty to
discriminate so that the objects of the institution as set out in the
instrument of creation may be achieved: Distinctions are regarded as
permissible because they are necessary to enable those burdened with the
responsibility of achieving the objects of the institution to select those who
are necessary and best suited for the performance of specific tasks. On the
question of cadre, they may decide that different numbers of officers are
required for each post, depending on the type of work required to be
performed, qualified by relevant factors such as the financial resources of
the institution to engage the services of optimum numbers. On the question of
eligibility, they may distinguish between the various qualifications and
qualities that evidence the competence, aptitude and suitability of a person
to do what he is expected to do. They must be related to the purpose or
purposes of recruitment. As between persons satisfying the minimum prescribed
conditions of eligibility, they may select only the best available.



The use of discretion involves discernment: Selection is not a mere matter of
fancy, whim or caprice. Distinctions must not be invidious or biased: Persons
who are excluded in a scheme of recruitment or in the selection process must
not be excluded on account of their being looked upon with an evil eye.
Persons who are selected should not be chosen on account of favouritism or
partiality. A justifiable selection cannot be one that is accidental or
fortuitous or directed _ad hoc_ to the preference of a certain person,
arbitrarily, dependent on the absolute exercise of the will and pleasure or
mere opinion or humour of those who make the selections. The selected person
must be fit and suitable and qualify for appointment in terms of the
formulated criteria and in accordance with the prescribed mode of verification
of those criteria.

165



And so, while the burden of proving that Article 12 of the Constitution was
violated lies upon a petitioner, the burden of adducing evidence to show that
the discrimination made was rational and justifiable lies on those who had the
authority to do so, and made the distinctions; for if distinctions were drawn,
it is they who can best explain why they were made in the discharge of their
duties and in the exercise of their powers. If challenged in proceedings of
this nature, they should account for their decisions and unfold the reasons
for their decisions which must be plain and intelligible and understandable.
Decisions must be supported by evidence. For example, if it is said that
persons were appointed in terms of a scheme of recruitment, the scheme should
be produced and explained in terms of the need for the post and the nexus
between the work to be performed and the criteria for selection. If it is said
that selections were made on the basis of an examination, the marks earned by
each candidate should be produced. If persons were selected on the basis of an
interview, there should be evidence of how many marks were earned by each
candidate under each criterion of selection, if the marking was on a group
basis; or if marking was on an individual basis, the marks given by each
member of the panel to each candidate under each of the selection criteria
should be made available.



From the point of view of the satisfactory performance of specific tasks, the
implications of the failure of those in charge to discharge their
responsibilities of ensuring the selection of the best person for a required
task is obvious enough. But the matter does not end there. The failure to make
justifiable selections may also frustrate the objects of the institution in
other ways.



The achievement of the goals of an institution would partly depend on the
existence of industrial peace, and contentment would, in a significant
measure, depend on satisfaction that the employer was fair. As far as the Bank
was concerned, the situation, it seems, was far from well. The minutes of the
meeting held on 17th July between the Governor and Employees Union (P14) show
that there was expressed dissatisfaction with regard to the failure of the
Bank to publicize its schemes of recruitment, the Union alleging that
promotions had been made "according to the whims and fancies of

166



the management" and that there had been a violation of the fundamental rights
of employees in making certain promotions. The Governor had agreed that "there
should be some transparency in Confidential Report markings" and that "the
Confidential Report marking scheme should be reviewed" and that "the
percentage system of marking employees should be done away with." The Governor
had given the assurance that improvements of the schemes would take place
"wherever possible" and that the "Union will be consulted before their
implementation."



There are also civic responsibilities to be considered. For instance, if
society is to be purged of and freed from the related evils of corruption,
nepotism and favouritism, public institutions embarking on executive or
administrative action in terms of Article 126(1) of the Constitution must be
clear of inequalities and/or unevenness. Transparency in recruitment
proceedings would go a long way in achieving public expectations of equal
treatment. The selection of a person must be viewed as a serious matter
requiring a thoroughgoing consideration of the need for the services of an
officer, and a clear formulation of both the basic qualities and
qualifications necessary to perform the services, and the way in which such
qualities and qualifications are to be established. In order to ensure that
justice is done and seen to be done, it is at least desirable that cadres, the
criteria for selection, the method of selection and the eventual basis for
selection ‑ for instance by the publication of marks obtained ‑ be made known
to those concerned. Ideally, the whole process from the determination of the
cadre to selection must be easily recognized and seen through, if not obvious.
A selection process veiled in secrecy and not openly avowed and expressed is
at least open to the suspicion of the existence of something evil or wrong. It
is of a questionable character.



There is much more than a question of poor management; there is much more than
a misuse of the power of recruitment and a disregard of civic responsibilities
when schemes of recruitment or the process of selection are unconstitutional.
Equal treatment is a fundamental right guaranteed by the Constitution. For
instance, and these are only some examples, those who were both able, 'by
reason of their demonstrable fitness to perform the functions of the post, and

167



willing to serve in accordance with the job description formulated in
accordance with the needs of the institution, and in accordance with the terms
and conditions of employment, but were not provided with the opportunity of
offering their services, are entitled to complain that they were not called
upon to apply when other, similarly ‑ placed persons were called upon to
apply; persons are entitled to complain if they were unfairly disqualified
because the scheme of recruitment was not based on intelligible differentia,
the attributes prescribed for eligibility, having no rational relation to the
object of recruitment; they are entitled to complain if they were invidiously
or arbitrarily treated by or in the selection process. The essence of their
complaint would be that their right to equality guaranteed by Article 12(1) of
the Constitution has been violated. Article 12(1) of the Constitution provides
that "All persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equal
protection of the law."



For the reasons I have explained, while recognizing the need for those
entrusted with the management of an institution like the Central Bank to have
the power of recruitment of ancillary staff and a discretion in the matter of
selection, I am unable to agree with the suggestion of the learned Deputy
Solicitor‑General that the power is absolute, uncontrolled and unlimited: The
liberty or power must be exercised within the limits allowed by law. A scheme
of promotion must be justifiable in its formulation and just in its
application. The law insists on justice and this, among other things, means
that in the exercise of authority or power there must be just conduct. In the
exercise of the power of recruitment, just conduct entails the even handed
treatment of those who might be affected by the exercise **** of a power.



The learned Deputy Solicitor‑General submitted that it was "not in the best
interests of the Bank" to adopt objective criteria in the selection of Staff
Class Grade Officers. The selection **** of such officers should, he
submitted, be left in the hands of senior officers of the Bank who, as
"responsible people", could be trusted in evolving their own standards of
selection and in choosing the best persons. I am unable to agree with the
learned Deputy Solicitor‑General. Whether in the recruitment of Staff Class
Grade Officers or others, it is in the

168



interests of the Bank, from the points of view of selecting the best available
person, maintaining industrial peace and retaining public confidence to adhere
to objective standards. Otherwise, the selection process is likely to
degenerate into something akin to a lottery rather than being, as it should
be, the exercise of sound judgment within the bounds of rational and
justifiable criteria.



**(5) CADRE AND METHODS OF SUPPLY WERE UNCERTAIN**



The first step in a recruitment process is the decision that a certain number
of persons are necessary to perform certain specific tasks. According to the
learned Deputy Solicitor‑General, it had been decided that eighty‑four
officers were required in the lowest, Staff Grade class, namely, Staff‑Class
Grade 1. It had also, he said, been decided by the Bank that the selection for
those posts should take place through two schemes: Twenty‑six persons would be
chosen through a scheme of recruitment applicable to officers he described as
"rankers", and fifty‑eight in terms of a "competitive accelerated scheme."

  
Was this so?

  
In paragraph II of his affidavit, Executive Director Easparanathan states that
26 vacancies were to be filled by "Non Staff Class Officers who are promoted
under the ordinary scheme of promotion ... the balance 58 vacancies were to be
filled by those internal candidates who qualify under the accelerated scheme
of promotions and externally qualified candidates."



The petitioners maintained that there were three schemes to fill 93 posts: 55
to be filled by "Direct recruitment", 12 in terms of the "Accelerated
promotional Scheme" and 26 by "In‑Service Promotions."



Neither the cadre of Staff Class Grade I officers nor the number of persons to
be recruited through each of the several schemes can be ascertained from the
Scheme of Recruitment P4 as amended by R1 and R2.

**169  
 **

**(6) THE "RANKERS" ‑ "IN‑SERVICE" ‑ "ORDINARY" ‑ SCHEME ONLY RELEVANT IN THIS
CASE**



Whether there were three types of recruitment, namely, (a) Direct recruitment,
(b) accelerated promotion and (c) "in‑service" or 'ordinary' promotions, as
suggested by the petitioners, or two as the learned Deputy Solicitor‑General
submitted, needs no further consideration: It was acknowledged on all hands
that the complaint in the matter before us related only to the so‑called
"rankers" scheme ‑ the "in‑service" "ordinary" promotions to twenty‑six posts.
I shall assume that the twenty‑six recruitments of "rankers" were based on a
demonstrable need determined by the Bank for good, though undisclosed,
reasons. This is of importance to the order I make with regard to the filling
of vacancies, for I so do holding the bank as being committed to its decision
on the question of cadre.



**(7) WHICH "RANKERS"**‑ **" IN‑SERVICE"**‑ **" ORDINARY" -** **SCHEME?**



There was one advertised scheme dated 15th February 1973 (P4) and another
advertised scheme dated 03 February 1993 (P1).  


The petitioners submit that, since the Monetary Board on 12th January 1993
(Vide P1 at page 11, General, 1) said that, "where the existing promotional
schemes are changed, the effective date under the revised scheme will be
01/01/93", the selections announced on 15th March, 1993 (P8), which they
challenge in these proceedings, were, and ought to have been in terms of P1,
since the existing promotional scheme set out in P4 as amended was changed by
P1.



On the other hand, the respondents say that the selections in question,
although **announced** on 15th March, 1993, were made in terms of P4. Mr.
Easparanathan, an Executive Director of the Bank, in paragraph 6 of his
affidavit, explains that the selection of officers in the recruitment in
question was based on P4 as amended by the decisions of the Monetary Board
dated 10th January 1989 and 16th January 1990, since the selection process in
question was commenced in 1992: The eligibility of candidates he says had been
determined by the Establishments Committee on 30th July, 1992 and

170



that their recommendations had been approved by the Monetary Board on 4th
September, 1992; letters inviting eligible candidates for interview had been
issued on 28th December, 1992. The interviews were held prior to the date on
which the new scheme was approved by the Board, namely, 12th January 1993,
although the selections were announced after that date.



Although the petitioners challenge the validity of the promotion of the
eleventh to the twenty‑second respondents in preference to them, assuming that
the effective scheme of recruitment was set out in P1, and indicating
infirmities in the scheme set out in P1 and its applicability and application,
they state. that even if the applicable scheme was that set out in P4 as
amended by R1 and R2, it was irrational, and in any event not adhered to, and
that the selections were arbitrary and violative of Article 12(1) of the
Constitution. It is sufficient for me to dispose of this matter on the basis
of the respondents' position that the recruitments were in terms of P4 as
amended, although in view of the Bank's announcement that the effective date
.of operation of P1 was 1st January 1993, in the absence of the explanation
made by the Bank in these proceedings, they had, at the time of filling the
petition in the matter before us, a very good reason to suppose that
appointments made on and after that date were governed by P1.



**(8)** **THE RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE APPLICABLE SCHEME**



Document P4 (as amended), which the respondents depend upon, sets out
"criteria" in the "Schemes of Promotion in the Central Bank" and the relevant
salary scales at various levels.



Before we consider the amendments brought about by R1 dated 10th January,
1989, and R2 dated 16th January 1990, let us see what P4 contained in its
original form with regard to the promotion of Non­-Staff Class Officers to
Staff Class Grade 1. It is as follows:



**(10) NON ‑STAFF CLASS GRADE 4 TO STAFF CLASS GRADE 1**



Criteria ‑ (a) In the case of Clerks and Cashiers after a minimum of four
years service in the Grade, and on receipt of a

170

_  
_ consolidated salary of not less than Rs. 700/‑ if vacancies exist in Staff
Class Grade 1.



(b) In the case of stenographers and typists (provided they acquire a level of
competence in shorthand adequate for the requirements of the Bank) in the
Non­-Staff Class Grade 4, the service qualification for consideration for
promotion to Staff Class Grade 1 be of an excellent record of 4 years' service
in Non‑Staff Class Grade 4. On promotion to Staff Class Grade 1 they may be
categorized as "Personal Secretaries".



(c) Officers who had been recruited to the Non‑Staff Class as stenographers,
typists, accounting machine operators, comptometer machine operators and other
machine operators but who have with Bank approval ceased to perform such
functions for a number of years and who have since been performing supervisory
or senior clerical or senior cashier functions, will, on completion of 6
years' very good service in the Staff Assistants Grade, be eligible for
consideration for appointment to the Staff Class, subject to the usual
requirements of suitability.



Salary scales : ......



**Accelerated Promotion from Non ‑Staff to Staff Class**



(1) Promotions to Staff Class on the basis of high academic qualifications (as
distinct from promotions in the normal course on minimum service
qualifications in the Staff Assistants' Grade (viz. a minimum of 4 years)).



(a) Promotions to Staff Class would not be automatically considered on the
acquisition of a post‑graduate qualification or of a first degree with at
least a second lower even where the University is recognized and the field of
study is useful to the Bank.



(b) All such cases would be considered along with outside recruits.

172  


(c) Candidates who do not have a good first degree would still be eligible for
consideration if they had in addition ‑to an ordinary pass degree in the
special field of study useful to the Bank, a post­graduate degree from a
University recognized by the Bank and in a field of study deemed to be useful
to the Bank.



(d) All candidates will be interviewed by the Board before promotion to Staff
Class can be considered.



(2) Non‑Staff Class Officers with a Degree in a special subject, useful to the
Bank or the A.I.B. (London) qualification or the Final Examination conducted
by the Bankers' Training Institute (Ceylon) and who had at least 10 years'
experience are eligible for consideration for Staff Class appointments with
outside candidates.



(3) (i) Officers in the Non‑Staff Class who have completed 7 years' service in
the Bank, and who pass the Final Examination of A.I.B. or B.T.I. with
distinctions in two subjects, with an excellent record of service during the
previous five years; and



(ii) Officers in the Non‑Staff Class who have completed 7 years' service in
the Bank and who obtain a Degree in a special subject useful to the Bank, with
a very good record of service during the previous five years;



will be eligible for consideration for Staff Class Grade 1 appointment in
competition with outside candidates.



(4) Non‑Staff Class Officers who obtain a Second Class lower degree or a
higher degree in subjects useful to the Bank while in the service of the Bank,
would be eligible for consideration by the Board (independently of outside
recruitment) for appointment to the Staff Class after Five years' good Service
in the Bank.



**(9) THE AMENDMENT OF THE SCHEME IN P4 BY R1**



According to document R1, dated 10.01.1989, on the question of "recruitment of
officers to Staff Class I (on probation) and promotion to Staff Class Grade
1", the Monetary Board at meeting No. 1/89 "approved of the following":

173  


(a) the requirements pertaining to the recruitment of officers to Staff Class
Grade 1 viz.,



(i) Special Degree with First or Second Class (Upper Division) Honours from a
recognized University in either Economics, Commerce, Business Administration,
Accountancy, Mathematics, Statistics, Computer Science, Engineering,
Sociology, Political Science, Law, Agriculture, Geography, History, Physics or
Chemistry.



OR



(ii) General Degree with First or Second Class (Upper Division) Honours from a
recognized University with Economics, Commerce, Accountancy, Mathematics,
Statistics, Computer Science, Sociology, Political Science, Geography,
History, Physics or Chemistry.



OR



(iii) A Post‑graduate Degree from a recognized University in any of the
subjects referred to at (i) above;



OR



(v) Graduates with progressively responsible experience of not less than five
years in an executive post in a Commercial Bank;



OR



(vi) All parts of the Examination of the Chartered Institute of Cost and
Management Accountants;



OR



(vii) All parts of the Examination of the Institute of Chartered Accountants.



(b) the procedure relating to promotions of Staff Assistants to Staff Class
Grade 1 is set out below.

**174  
 **

(i) The Establishments Committee to take into consideration the record of
service, work, conduct, attendance and punctuality of officers who have
completed 4 years confirmed service in Non‑Staff Class Grade 4 and of officers
in Non‑Staff Class Grade 5 and to recommend candidates for interview by a
Preliminary Interview Committee nominated by the Governor for the purpose.



(ii) A Second Interview Committee nominated by the Governor interviewing those
recommended by the Preliminary Interview Committee and recommend candidates
for interview by the Monetary Board.



(iii) The Monetary Board to interview those recommended by the Second
Interview Committee and selecting those who are considered fit for promotion
to Staff Class.



**(10) THE AMENDMENT OF THE SCHEME IN P4 AND R1 BY R2**



According to R2, dated 16.01.1990, the Monetary Board at its meeting 2/90,



"In modification of its decision taken at Meeting No. 1/89 of 1989.01.10 as
set out at Paragraph (b) (i) of Item 6, approval of the Establishments
Committee taking into consideration the record of service, work, conduct,
attendance and punctuality of officers who have completed 6 years confirmed
service in Non‑Staff Class Grade 4 and Non‑Staff Class Grade 5, and to
recommend candidates for interview by a Preliminary Interview Committee
nominated by the Governor for the purpose."



**(11) AMENDMENTS IN R1 AND R2 NOT PUBLICIZED**



Although P4 was said by the Respondents to be the applicable scheme, R1 and R2
which significantly modified P4, were not publicized. They were filed in these
proceedings by the respondents and stamped as "Confidential" documents on
"Minute" papers of the Monetary Board communicating Board decisions to the
Director of Establishments. On the other hand P4 and P1 were circulated to

175



Heads of Departments and Regional Managers who were directed to bring the
contents of P4 and P1 to the notice of all employees in their respective
departments or regional offices.



If a Scheme of Recruitment is publicized, it is to be expected as a matter of
reasonableness and fairness that the modification of such a scheme should also
be publicized. Otherwise the known scheme would be misleading. The respondents
failed to explain why R1 and R2 were not publicized, and exposed the Bank to
the criticism that the modified recruitment procedures were kept secret
because they were irrational, _ad hoc_ and arbitrary, resulting in the
disqualification and exclusion of the petitioners unfairly in contravention of
their constitutional right to equality of treatment in the selection process.
The only response of the learned Deputy Solicitor‑General was that it would
have been "fairer" to have publicized the scheme of recruitment, but, he
submitted, "that was not the test". Admittedly, there are other ways also for
judging fairness, but publicity would, among other things, have enabled the
petitioners and anyone concerned, to see for themselves how justifiable was
the modified scheme and how just was its application.



**(12) PROMOTIONS NOT EXPLICABLE BY REFERENCE TO P4, R1 AND R2 ALONE**



For the reasons I have given, it was unsatisfactory that the modifications of
P4 by R1 and R2 by the Board were not publicized. It is more than
unsatisfactory that the selections were made by reference to _ad hoc,_
undisclosed, criteria which were not decided upon or at least ratified by the
Board. It is the Monetary Board that is statutorily empowered to employ
ancillary staff. If the schemes of recruitment determined by the Board
required modification in the light of discussions the representatives of the
Bank had with the Unions, or in the opinion of the Governor, or other officers
of the Bank, the modifications should have been made, or at least ratified, by
the Board which formulated the scheme in P4 in pursuance of its power of
recruitment. The Board did not, and could not, abdicate its responsibility,
and there was no authority and no justification for others to usurp its
functions.

176



Even at this stage one can only understand the recruitment process in question
with difficulty and without special accuracy, albeit sufficiently, for the
purposes of determining this matter. The way in which the promotions were made
by the respondents cannot be understood by merely examining the announced
scheme in P4 read with the unannounced amendments made by the Board in R1 and
R2. One may only have a sufficient understanding of the selection process by
additionally considering P7, a letter dated 3rd March 1993 addressed by the
petitioners to the Bank and P15 the reply dated 12th April 1993; the minutes
of meetings between the representatives of the Unions and the Bank; the
affidavit of the Executive Director of the Bank, the petition and affidavits
of the petitioners; the written submissions of the Attorney‑at‑Law on behalf
of the 1st to 10th respondents; the written submissions of the Attorney‑at‑Law
for the petitioners; the summary of submissions made on behalf of the
petitioners; and the oral submissions of Counsel for the petitioners and
respondents. How the final selection was made remains a mystery, for the marks
obtained at the interview were not disclosed by the Bank which has chosen to
make a secret of the justification for its preference of the 11th to 22nd
respondents to the petitioners. There was certainly a lack of what the
Governor, at his meeting with the Unions on 17th July 1992 (P14) felicitously
described as 'transparency'. What we have instead is unintelligibleness and
obscurity, a lack of openness and candour, an effective _ad hoc_ undoing of
the directions of the Board, and the thwarting and frustration of the
expressed good intentions of the Governor on the question of transparency.



**(10) P4 DID NOT REFER TO NON ‑STAFF GRADE OFFICERS IN GRADE 5**



While paragraph 10 of P4 sets out the "criteria" for the promotion of
Non‑Staff Class Officers in Grade 4 to Staff Class Grade 1, P4 makes no
mention at all of criteria for the promotion of Non‑Staff Class Officers in
the higher grade, the highest Grade in the Non‑Staff Class, namely Non‑Staff
Class (NSC) Grade 5. In paragraph 17 of his affidavit the Executive Director
admits that all the petitioners, and these include the NSC Grade 5 Officers,
"were summoned to present

177



themselves for an interview." In paragraph 5 of his affidavit the Executive
Director refers to "letters inviting the eligible candidates for interviews"
which had been issued on 28th December 1992. Four of the petitioners ‑ G. F L.
Perera. K. M. P. Wijekoon, R. S. Liyanage and T. H. Wickramasinghe were NSC
Grade 5 officers. (See paragraph 2 of the affidavit of the first and tenth
petitioners dated 2nd April 1993). Executive Director Easparanathan, in
paragraph 3 of his affidavit dated 16th August 1993, admits that four of the
petitioners were in NSC Grade 5. There is no denial of the fact that G. F. L.
Perera, Wijekoon, Liyanage and Wickremasinghe were interviewed and that they
were the NSC Grade 5 Officers referred to by the Executive Director.



If, as the respondents maintain, P4 was the applicable scheme which sets out
'criteria', then by reference to what criteria were the NSC Grade 5 officers
summoned for interview when P4 does not mention NSC Grade 5 Officers at all?



**(14) POSSIBLY NSC GRADE 5 OFFICERS WERE ELIGIBLE IN TERMS OF THE AMENDMENT
OF P4 BY R1 AND R2, BUT WHO WERE `STAFF ASSISTANTS'?**



Although P4 does not refer to officers in NSC Grade 5, paragraph (b) of R1
provides that in the matter of the promotion of "Staff Assistants" to
Staff‑Class Grade 1, the Establishments Committee should recommend for
interview non‑staff grade officers in Grade 4 as well as Grade 5 who had
completed four years of confirmed service, taking into consideration their
record of service, work, conduct, attendance and punctuality. R2 modified that
procedure to the extent of stipulating that NSC Grade 4 and 5 officers should
have completed six, instead of four years of confirmed service, recognizing
again the eligibility of NSC Grade 5 officers for promotion to Staff Class
Grade 1.



There is no mention of "Staff Assistants" as a separate class in the
hierarchical scheme set out in P4. However, they did exist at the time P4 was
formulated and continued to exist at the time of the promotions in question.
P4 in paragraph 10(c) refers to the eligibility

178



of persons in the "Staff Assistants Grade" (sic.) for promotion to Staff Class
Grade 1. Reference is made to the designation and appointment of Staff
Assistants at a meeting held on 24th October 1992 between representatives of
the Trade Unions and the Governor, Deputy Governor, Executive Director
Easparanathan, and others representing the Bank. (See P10).



Who were they? No decision of the Monetary Board was submitted with regard to
the mode of appointment of Staff Assistants. In terms of paragraph 10(c),
Non‑Staff Class Officers who had been recruited as stenographers, typists,
accounting machine operators, comptometer machine operators and other machine
operators but who, with the approval of the Bank, had ceased to perform such
functions for a number of years and who had since been performing "supervisory
or senior clerical or senior cashier functions" would "on completion of 6
years very good service in the Staff Assistants Grade, be eligible for
consideration for appointment to the Staff Class, subject to the usual
requirements of suitability." It would seem that at one time Staff Assistants
would have been performing **either** supervisory functions or senior clerical
or senior cashier functions.



"Staff Assistants" were, in terms of a discussion between the employee Unions
and representatives of the Bank (See P10), only non‑Staff Grade IV officers
entrusted with **supervisory,** as distinguished from clerical functions,
selected on the basis of 50% seniority and 50% performance. The Selection
criteria agreed to at an earlier meeting between the representatives of the
Union and the Deputy Governor, Executive Director Easparanathan and other
representatives of the Bank on 2nd September 1992 (See P11) had been 50% for
length of service in the Grade, 40% for performance, 10% for educational
qualifications (i.e., Degree, BTI, AIB). The Governor removed the 10%
weightage for educational qualifications. The removal of the 10%, it is
explained in the Minutes, was to obviate a duplicated consideration of
educational qualifications, which had already been taken into account in
earlier promotions.



The position of "Staff Assistant" conferred advantages in the matter of
promotion to the Staff Class Grade I. Paragraph 10 (C) of P4

179



made "completion of 6 years very good service in the Staff Class Grade"
(meaning Staff Assistant, and recognizing, perhaps, that they were performing
staff grade functions?) as a criterion of eligibility for promotion from
Non‑Staff Class Grade 4 to Staff Class Grade 1. It had been agreed at the
meeting on 24 October (P10) that in the matter of promotions of NSC Grade 4
officers to Staff Class Grade 1, "in the computation of marks for seniority
additional marks for seniority (one point per year) will be given to the
experience gained in the post of Staff Assistant."



Presumably, since all persons summoned for interview in terms of the
promotional scheme P4 as modified by R1 and R2 were deemed to be "eligible",
as the Executive Director says in his affidavit, in accordance with the
criteria laid down by the Monetary Board in R1 (b) and R2, they ought in the
first place to have been "Staff Assistants". Otherwise P4 as modified by R1
and R2 which related to the promotion of "Staff Assistants" to Staff‑Class
Grade 1 Staff Grade serving in either Grade 4 or 5 of the non‑Staff Class (see
especially R1(b) has no relevance at all to the recruitments in question.



The first, second, fifth and seventh petitioners were NSC Grade 5 officers,
whereas the 11th to 22nd respondents were in NSC Grade 4\. The view expressed
by the Union that NSC Grade 5 officers should be separately treated and
promoted was rejected by the Bank's representatives. Non‑Staff Class Grade 4
and 5 officers were to be considered together. The view of the Bank, expressed
by the Deputy Governor at the interview with the Union on 2nd September 1992,
was that the promotion of NSC Grade V officers could be considered under
"existing criteria", meaning presumably the criteria set out in R1 and R2.
Assuming that the 11th ‑ 22nd respondents were 'Staff Assistants', it does not
follow that all Staff Assistants were in the same Grade. The reference to
"Staff Assistants Grade" in paragraph 10(c) of P4 was a misnomer. It was not a
"Grade" but a work related **designation** of persons who may have belonged to
either Grade 4 of 5 of the Bank's classification of employees. Persons in
Grade 5 were officers promoted from Grade 4 if they had completed 25 years of
service in the' Bank with at least 10 years of "very good" service in Grade 4.
(See paragraph 7 of Mr. Easparanathan's affidavit). Four of the petitioners
were in NSC Grade 5 while the other petitioners and

180



each of the 11th ‑ 22nd respondents were in NSC Grade 4. The Minutes of the
meeting between the Governor and other representatives of the Bank and the
Trade Unions on 24 October 1992 (P10) confirms the fact that NSC Grade 4
officers may have been designated as "Staff Assistants."



In my view a procedure in terms of which all Staff Assistants were to be
judged by the same criteria was flawed, for NSC Grade 5 officers were, in
terms of the Bank's hierarchical classification of Non­-Staff Class officers,
as explained by the Executive Director in paragraph 7 of his affidavit,
superior in rank to NSC Grade 4 officers; and, therefore, to have treated NSC
Grade 4 and NSC Grade 5 officers equally overlooked the fact that treating
unequals equally was unjust and violative of Article 12(1) of the
Constitution.



**(15) WAS BELONGING TO NSC GRADE 5 A DISQUALIFICATION**?



Strange as it may seem, the position of the respondents was that NSC Grade 5
officers were not superior, but for the purposes of promotion, deemed to be
inferior to NSC Grade 4 officers.



The learned Deputy Solicitor‑General said that NSC Grade 5 officers were
persons who were beyond the pale; they were placed in NSC Grade 5, which was
in terms of gradation admittedly higher than NSC Grade 4, but simply because
they were people who could no longer "develop and progress". They were, he
suggested, permitted as a matter of tolerance to vegetate at the top of the
non‑staff class level, physically present, but leading more or less, a useless
life as far as the Bank was concerned.



Learned Counsel for the petitioners responded that "if they are not eligible
to be in service, their services should be terminated."



I do not agree with learned Counsel for the petitioners. The services of the
NSC Grade 5 officers may have been adequate to perform the services they were
called upon to perform in NSC Grade 5. There is no dispute with regard to
that; and therefore the conclusion that if they were unfit, their services
should have been terminated is unwarranted. The question is with regard to
their

181



eligibility to perform other functions at a higher level, and why G. F L.
Perera, Wijekoon, Liyanage and Wickramasinghe ‑ who were NSC Grade 5 officers
‑ were summoned for interview as being, as the Executive Director says,
"eligible", if they did not deserve to be considered as fit and proper or
desirable or suitable to be chosen for service in the next higher group,
namely, the staff‑class? The fact that, having regard to the available
vacancies, only the best of those who were eligible were selected, is another
matter.



That in the selection process certain individuals who happened to be in a
higher grade were found for good and established reasons to be less suitable
is understandable, assuming that it was proper to treat them alike in
determining eligibility. But there must be rational criteria for
differentiating between NSC Grade 5 **officers as a class** and other eligible
candidates. By reference to what criteria were they excluded from promotion as
a class? There is nothing in the schemes of promotion P4 or R1 and R2
indicating that NSC Grade 5 officers as such were unsuitable. There is nothing
in the reply of the Bank R3 dated 12th April 1993, in response to the protest
of the petitioners P7 dated 3rd March 1993, indicating that NSC Grade 5
officers were to be shut out of consideration. Were they informed that
although they had been summoned merely because they had crossed the threshold
of eligibility as determined by the Establishments Committee and approved by
the Board, there was no hope of success? They were not. On the other hand, at
the interview on 2nd September 1992 (P11), when the Union suggested that NSC
Grade 5 be scrapped and that the officers in NSC Grade 5 be promoted to Staff
Class Grade 1, the Deputy‑Governor had said that "the request cannot be
acceded to and promotion of the above officers could be considered under
existing criteria". At the interview on 24th October 1992 (P10) it was
recognized that "All NSC officers who have completed 4 years in NSC Grade IV
and officers in NSC Grade V will be eligible for consideration for promotion
to Staff Class Grade 1 on the decision of a Committee or by an interview."
Grade 5 officers therefore had a legitimate and reasonable expectation that,
if they were not to be regarded as superior by reason of their Grade, they
would at least be treated as the equals of those in the lower Grade.

  **182  
 **

As we shall see, those who were recommended by the Establishments Committee
for interview and accepted as 'eligible' by the Board, and these included the
Grade 5 officers, were selected because they achieved a very high standard of
excellence at the five annual evaluations preceding the date on which their
eligibility was determined. They were summoned because they were, as we shall
see, rated by the Establishments Committee as "Outstanding" officers.



In paragraph 7 of his affidavit, the Executive Director of the Bank states
that "the criteria for promotion from Non‑Staff Class Grade 4 to Non‑Staff
Grade 5 is 25 years of service in the Bank with at least 10 years of very good
service in Non‑Staff Grade 4. The promotions are effected subject to
availability of cadre vacancies."



Grade 5 Officers were certainly not as it were the flotsam and jetsam of the
Non‑Staff Class as suggested by the learned Deputy Solicitor‑General.



Moreover, NSC Grade 5 officers, G. F L. Perera, K. M. P. Wijekoon, R. S.
Liyanage and T. H. Wickramasinghe were Staff Assistants. Presumably, like the
other Staff Assistants, they were so designated because they deserved in terms
of seniority and merit to be placed above other Non‑Staff Class Grade
officers. That is what the discussions between the representatives of the Bank
and the Unions suggest. (Cf. P11.)



The petitioners in their affidavit dated 5th October 1993, in response to the
Executive Director's affidavit, deny that there was a cadre in respect of
Grade 5 officers. No evidence has been placed before us by the respondents to
support the position of the Executive Director that there was a complement of
officers determined by the Board to serve in Grade 5 within the framework of a
scheme. There was certainly no cadre for Non‑Staff Class Grade 4 (See the
Minutes of the Meeting between the Deputy‑Governor and other representatives
of the Bank, including Executive Director Easparanathan, with the Employees'
Union on 2nd September 1992, P11). One may, in the absence of evidence to the
contrary, assume that there was no cadre in respect of Grade 5 employees as
well. It is



183  


not a necessary inference, but one that is reasonable. Such an inference is
further evidence in support of the petitioners' position that the Bank was
acting arbitrarily in the matter of recruitment. However, the more important
matter with regard to the question presently under consideration is that the
Executive Director does not support the view of the learned Deputy
Solicitor‑General that persons were placed in Grade 5 because they were
undeserving of further consideration. The evidence indicates that they were
promoted to Grade 5 because they deserved well, both on account of length of
service and excellence of their performance and worth of their qualities.



**(16) THE FAILURE AT PREVIOUS INTERVIEWS AS A CRITERION** **FOR ELIMINATION**



Were Grade 5 officers regarded as "chronic" cases for other reasons? In
paragraph 31 of the affidavit of the Executive Director of the Bank, it is
stated that "All the petitioners were persons who had been considered at
similar interviews for promotion from Non‑staff Grade to Staff Grade on
several prior instances but had not been promoted on those occasions. A list
setting out the number of occasions on which these several petitioners had
faced interviews earlier is annexed herewith marked R6."



The document referred to is R7 and not R6.



What does the Executive Director mean by "similar interviews"? The Scheme of
Promotion relied upon by the respondents required three interviews. The
selections in question were based on a single interview. "Similar" to which of
the several interviews? It was certainly not similar to the final interviews
held earlier where the interview panel was differently constituted.



The interview was not 'similar' in the way in which the interview panel was
constituted. In what other way was it 'similar'?



The Executive Director, in paragraph 8 of his affidavit, states that "where
more than one interview was held for the purpose of promotions there was a
process of elimination of candidates at each interview."

184  


What were the criteria adopted in the past by (a) the Preliminary Interview
Committee (b) the Second Interview Committee and (c) the Board at the third
and final interview, in deciding on elimination and selection? The Bank has
failed to show that such criteria were announced or that they existed at all.
In the circumstances, there is no way of ascertaining whether, if at all, and
in what respects the latest interview was "similar" to those held earlier.



If the latest interview led to arbitrary selections because of the absence of
certain criteria to guide the interview committee, or if the criteria were
irrational, or if the criteria were arbitrarily departed from and the
selections were made on the basis of subjective considerations, as it was the
case in this matter for **** reasons I will state later on, then if previous
interviews were "similar", the results of those interviews would be of no
value at all and ought not to have been taken into consideration.



If the decisions of previous interview committees was a determining factor,
what was the role of the latest Interview Committee?



If failure at previous interviews was a negative factor in assessing
performance at the latest interview, it was not made known to the candidates.



The number of unsuccessful appearances of each petitioner is stated to be as
follows:‑



1\. Mr. F G. L. Perera 5  


2\. Mr. K. M. P. Wijekoon 4  


3\. Mrs. W. D. P. M. Samaratunge 4  


4\. Mrs. D. Jayasuriya 4  


5\. Mr. R. S. Liyanage 4  


6\. Mr. J. Gurugamage 4  


7\. Mr. T. H. Wickremasinghe 4  


8\. Mr. W. R. de Alwis 4  


9.                   Mr. M. G. W. Karunaratne 3  


10.               Mr. K. N. W. Fernando 2

185  




If Perera, Wijekoon, Liyanage and Wickremasinghe were disqualified as
`chronic' NSC Grade 5 cases, why were Samaratunge, Gurugamage, de Alwis,
Karunaratne and Fernando, who were NSC Grade 4 officers, disqualified? Because
they had been unsuccessful at previous interviews? If failure at previous
interviews was a decisive factor, why were respondent 14 Miss S. P. Mendis,
and respondent 16 W. A. Sirisena, who had, like petitioner 9 Karunaratne,
failed three times at previous interviews, promoted? Having set its own
standards _ad hoc_ , the interview panel did not adhere to it but had to
zigzag its way, arbitrarily, avoiding its own criteria, to be able to appoint
certain persons.



Having regard to the submissions of the learned Deputy Solicitor-­General, NSC
Grade 5 officers were in a category superior to NSC Grade 4 officers. There
was no rational basis to say, as the learned Deputy Solicitor‑General ventured
to do so in his astounding revelation, that NSC Grade 5 officers had been
relegated to a class beyond which they could not ascend. Banished to some
limbo, were NSC Grade 5 Officers tormented from time to time by the hope held
out to them by being called for interviews, that they had, after all, been
redeemed and crossed the border of eligibility? Assuming that they were aware
that NSC Grade 5 officers as such had been disqualified from eventual
selection, that would have been the case. However, the situation is much
worse, since they were not aware of this fact at all. On the contrary, at
meetings with the Bank's representatives, they had been given the assurance
that they would be considered for promotion with Grade 4 officers; and so,
hopefully and confidently, they presented themselves for interview whenever
summoned. The learned Deputy Solicitor‑General maintained that the petitioners
were persons who had faced earlier interview committees and therefore knew all
about the recruitment procedures and criteria. I am unable to agree with him.
They may have certainly suspected that something was seriously amiss, for at
the meeting of the Governor with the Central Bank Employees Union on 17th July
1992 (P14) the Union had expressed its dissatisfaction with the manner in
which promotions had been made. But that was not all. They were once again
disappointed and perplexed by the selection of the 11th to the 22nd
respondents who were non‑staff class Grade 4 officers, persons comparatively
inferior in rank, in preference to them. And so

186



they wrote on 3rd March 1993 (P7) objecting to the latest selection. However,
they could not have been aware of what was exactly the problem, for the Bank's
methods of promotions, including the fact that Grade 5 officers were not as a
class persons grata and not acceptable came to be revealed only in these
proceedings. The reply to P7 by the Bank R3 setting out the criteria which
were supposed to have been adopted was dated 12th April 1993. This petition
was filed on 2nd April 1993. In any event, exclusion of Grade 5 officers as a
class was not mentioned in R3. In the light of the learned Deputy
Solicitor‑General's explanation, the NSC Grade 5 officers must not only feel
disappointed that they were not selected, but also greatly astonished and
distressed that they were excluded because they were, albeit secretly,
despised as a class and looked upon with an evil eye. Grade 5 officers were
"eliminated" on the preconceived opinion that they should not be selected and
not on the basis of their performance at the interview. They were excluded on
account of prejudice. There was no rational basis for their exclusion. In
fact, the evidence points in the opposite direction.



**(15) THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE ESTABLISHMENTS  ** **COMMITTEE**



All those who were summoned as "eligible", whether NSC Grade 4 or NSC Grade 5
officers, were selected for interview on the recommendations of the
Establishments Committee on 30th, July, 1992 as approved by the Monetary Board
on 4th September, 1992. (Vide paragraphs 5 and 6 of the affidavit of the
Executive Director of the Bank). According to the Executive Director of the
Bank, the Establishments Committee in recommending candidates for interview
"followed the practice" of recommending for the interview only those
candidates who had an excellent record (average of 86% and over) during the
five years immediately preceding the date on which eligibility was determined,
and taking into consideration the criteria laid down by the Monetary Board as
set out in documents marked R1 and R2. The "eligibility" of the petitioners
and 11th ‑ 22nd respondents was considered as at 6th March 1992\. (See
paragraphs 9, 10, 12, 13, 14 and 15 of the affidavit of the Executive
Director).



The Establishments Committee made its selections from those who had obtained
"near excellent" qradinqs on the basis of assessments

187



made in terms of very detailed annual personnel evaluation reports in a
prescribed form (P12) of those who had obtained a "near excellent grading".
P12 contained fifteen main headings relating to specific aspects of
performance and ability. In addition there was a special assessment of
"Negative Qualities". The evaluation required the consideration of eighty‑two
options, ranging from four to seven options under each of the sixteen main
heads, in the process of forming notions with regard to the performance,
abilities and qualities of each employee. "Near Excellent" may, in terms of
the affidavit of the Executive Director, have ben 81 % (para. 25 (b) of his
affidavit) or 76% (para. 25(d) of the affidavit). There is no criterion to
determine "near excellent". The "Classification and Descriptive Code" in P12
refers to "over 85%" as "outstanding" and 76% to 85% as "Excellent". The
Executive Director states in paragraph 14 of his affidavit that "all officers
who were invited for the interviews held on 5th, 6th and 7th January were
officers who had excellent ratings during the 5 year period immediately
preceding the date on which their eligibility was considered ..." In paragraph
25(d) of his affidavit, the Executive Director explains that "To achieve an
excellent grading an officer should get a minimum average of 86% of the total
marks given, after adjustment for late attendance and negative qualities." In
paragraph 25(g) of his affidavit the Executive Director said that in
recommending the names to the interview panel "the Establishment Committee
also took into consideration the work, conduct, attendance and punctuality of
the officers concerned." In terms of the Descriptive Code in P12, those who
obtained an overall rating of over 85% were classified as A+ and merited the
descriptive standing "Outstanding", and not merely "Excellent" as the
Executive Director explains in paragraph 25(d). The petitioners maintain that
all of them were classified as "Outstanding".



If, as the respondents maintain, some of those who were summoned for interview
had obtained higher ratings than others and were therefore superior, that fact
has not been established by evidence. Who were those who obtained more marks?
Why was this information suppressed? The inference I draw is that the
disclosure of that information would have been adverse and unfavourable to the
respondents' selection of the 11th ‑ 22nd respondents in preference to the
petitioners.

_ _ **188  
 **

**(18) THE SELECTION BY A SINGLE INTERVIEW PANEL WAS AN _AD HOC_**
__**DEPARTURE FROM THE BOARD'S OWN SCHEME**



After the Establishments Committee at its meeting held on 30th July 1992 had
recommended the eligible candidates for interview, the recommendations were
approved by the Monetary Board on 4th September 1992 and letters inviting the
eligible candidates to present themselves for interviews were issued on 28th
December 1992 and the interviews were held on 5th, 6th and 7th January, 1993.



The petitioners maintained that in terms of Public Administration Circulars,
it was Government policy that promotions should not be made on the basis of an
interview but on the basis of merit and seniority and an examination. The
Bank, as we have seen, took up the position that the Circulars did not apply
to the Bank and that the Bank was "empowered to lay down the manner in which
promotions are to be conducted." Was the scheme laid down by the Bank in the
exercise of its powers adhered to by the Bank?



The Scheme of Recruitment set out in P4 does not mention an interview as a
part of the selection process. However, in terms of R1, the Board had at its
meeting 1/89 decided on the following "procedure relating to promotions of
Staff Assistants to Staff Class Grade 1 ":



(i) The Establishments Committee to take into consideration the record of
service, work, conduct, attendance and punctuality of officers who have
completed 4 years confirmed service in Non‑Staff Class Grade 4 and of officers
in Non‑Staff Grade 5 and to recommend candidates for interview by a
**Preliminary Interview Committee** nominated by the Governor for the purpose



(ii) **A second Interview Committee nominated by the Governor interviewing
those recommended by the Preliminary Interview Committee** and recommended
candidates for interview by the Monetary Board. ** **



**189  
 **

**(iii) The Monetary Board to interview those recommended by the second
Interview Committee and selecting those who were considered fit for promotion
to Staff Class.**



The emphasis is mine.



R1 was modified by the Board at its meeting 2/90 on 16th January 1990 with
regard to the criteria the Establishments Committee should apply in
recommending candidates "for interview by a **Preliminary** Interview
Committee nominated by the Governor." (The emphasis is mine.) It did not
modify the provisions of R1 regarding the need for three interviews.



The Executive Director of the Bank in paragraphs 6 and 9 of his affidavit
accepts the fact that the Establishments Committee, taking the prescribed
criteria into account, was to "recommend candidates for interview by a
**Preliminary** Interview Committee nominated by the Governor for the
purpose." (The emphasis is mine.)



The petitioners in paragraph 12 of their affidavit stated that "prior to the
present scheme of Promotions (P1) coming into force, it was the practice at
the Central Bank to conduct 2 or 3 interviews for the promotion of Non‑Staff
Class Officers to Staff Class Grade 1. The final interview was conducted by
the Governor or by the Monetary Board."



Responding to that, the Executive Director in paragraph 8 of his affidavit
states as follows: "Answering paragraph 12 of the affidavit of the
petitioners, I admit the several averments contained therein and I further
state that where more than one interview was held for the purpose of
promotions there was a process of elimination of candidates at each
interview."



Obviously the purpose of having several interviews is to eliminate less
suitable candidates at each stage. However, the respondents fail to explain
why.



(1) a final selection was made at the first and only interviews, whereas the
procedure approved by the Monetary Board as set out in

190



R1, which the respondents say was the procedure applied, required three
interviews, and when that was the established practice?;



(2) the final selection was made by senior officers of the Bank and not by the
Board itself as prescribed by the Monetary Board in R1, and in accordance with
practice, except when, if the petitioners were right, the Governor, departing
from the scheme in R1, held the third interview.



It should be mentioned that even in the selection of serving officers in terms
of the scheme of "accelerated promotions", when serving officers competed with
outsiders, the Scheme of Recruitment in P4 specified that "All candidates will
be interviewed by the **Board** before promotion to Staff Class can be
considered." (The emphasis is mine.) Importance was attached to the Board
itself selecting Staff Class officers, irrespective of which scheme was used.



In paragraph 19 of his affidavit, the Executive Director of the Bank states
that the object of the single interview was "for the purpose of **ascertaining
finally** "(the emphasis is mine)" the suitability of candidates for promotion
to the Staff Class of the Central Bank ..." How was this justifiable in the
light of the decision of the Board embodied in R1 that the final selection
would be by the Board itself after candidates had been screened at two
previous interviews? Why was a departure from the Bank's scheme made _ad hoc_?



Obviously, several interviews, with the final selection being made by the
Board itself, was intended to minimize arbitrariness and ensure a fair
evaluation of the candidates. In terms of paragraph 12 of the Executive
Director's affidavit, 65 officers were invited for interview, but five of them
did not present themselves for interview. If as the Executive Director
explains in paragraph 8 of his affidavit, the interviews sorted out the
candidates, it is to be expected that by the time of the final interview by
the Board a much smaller number of candidates than interviewed earlier would
have presented themselves, giving the Board the time and the opportunity to
carefully assess the candidates. As it happened, the final selections were
made in a hurry, and therefore, as a matter of reasonable inference,
inconsiderately, without due deliberation.

191



In paragraph 21 of their affidavit the petitioners state that "each candidate
was interviewed for a maximum of five minutes, the 10th respondent (The
Director of Establishments) making an announcement that the time was up at the
end of five minutes)." In paragraph 17 of his affidavit, the Executive
Director states that the interviews were "not restricted to five minutes and
that the candidates were interviewed for as long as it was necessary." If the
Executive Director's version is to be preferred, he should have adduced
evidence to support it. For how long were each of the 11th ‑ 22nd respondents
and the petitioners interviewed? Why was one interview longer than another?
Why was it "necessary" in the one case but not in the other? At least what was
the total time spent on all the interviews? No evidence has been placed before
us on these matters. "Five minutes" is not in this case a less distasteful way
of saying that the Interview Committee was making its evaluations too quickly,
for specific reference is made to the role of the Director of Establishments
acting as a time‑keeper. "Five Minutes" was much more than an euphemism.



The members of the Interview Committee were said by Executive Director
Easparanathan in paragraph 29 of his affidavit to have had the bio‑data and
service records of the candidates. each candidate was supposed to have been
assessed "independently by the members of the Board." Taking "Board" to mean
Interview Committee, for the one and only interview was by a group of senior
officials who made the selection and not, as required by R1, by the Monetary
Board, what kind of assessment of capability could have been made in five
minutes after perusing the bio‑data and service records? In terms of paragraph
17 of Executive Director Easparanathan's affidavit, the "Interview Board"
consisted of the 5th to 10th respondents. "However", he explains that "the 8th
Respondent was present as a member of the Interview Panel only in the morning
of the 5th January 1993 and he was not present and did not function as a
member of the Interview Panel thereafter." Those who were interviewed on the
morning of 5th January would have been worse off than the others who were
interviewed when the 8th respondent was absent, for six rather than five
persons would have been perusing the bio‑data and service records in five
minutes. Assuming, as we must if each member of the Interview Committee,

192  


as the Executive Director says, acted "independently", each member would have
had a single minute to peruse the bio‑data and service record of a candidate
to assess "capability" and/or "experience." The service records spanned many
years: 27‑34 years in the case of the petitioners, and 22‑27 years in the case
of the 11th to 22nd respondents. There was even less, if not no time for this
at all, for time was spent questioning the candidates. What was the estimate
that could have been made even if "five minutes" was an euphemism for 'a short
time'?



In the circumstances, one is compelled to conclude that the selections were
not made after sufficient and careful consideration, but arbitrarily. The
respondents maintained that the petitioners and those selected were treated
alike. It is a superficial and worthless submission. Perhaps, both the
petitioners and the 11th to 22nd respondents were treated alike in that they
each had five minutes at a single interview. At best they were as equal as are
the purchasers of lottery tickets. Whereas the purchasers of lottery tickets
are randomly selected and the losers do not complain because they consider
themselves to be more deserving, promotion is a reward which after careful
consideration, for sufficient reasons is declared to be merited and earned.
Selection for promotion is not simply a matter of good fortune. There was not
even a random selection, for, as we have seen, a group of persons, namely
those who were in Grade 5, were disqualified as a class, and it was pretended
that those who had failed at previous interviews were also disqualified.
Moreover, as we shall see, the equal time spent was used very differently,
both with regard to the questions asked and with regard to what was done in
the making of decisions within that time.



**(18) THE COMPOSITION OF THE INTERVIEW COMMITTEE/ PANEL/BOARD AND THE
INTRUSION OF SUBJECTIVITY INTO THE SELECTION PROCESS**



In paragraph 27 of his affidavit, the Executive Director states that the
interview panel consisted of "several senior officers of the Central Bank who
had worked in the Bank in different capacities over a long period", and filed
a document (R5) entitled "Career of each member of the Interview Panel",
giving the name, designation and positions

193  


held by each member of the panel. In paragraph 29 of his affidavit, the
Executive Director states that "In addition to the members of the Interview
Panel being aware of the capabilities of the various candidates who presented
themselves for said interview, their service records were also made available
to the said members and each candidate was assessed independently by the
members of the Board."



The learned Deputy Solicitor‑General submitted that the interview was
conducted by "responsible" officers of the Bank. They decided on the criteria
to be adopted and made their selections. No doubt they were estimable people
about whom even the petitioners probably entertained a favourable opinion, for
no objection has been taken to the composition of that panel on personal
grounds. What they object to is the role of that panel as the final selecting
authority. They maintain, justifiably, that in terms of the scheme of
promotion relied upon by the respondents, the final selection should have been
made by the Monetary Board after a second interview.



In the matter before us, as we shall see, the interview panel was not even
guided by criteria laid down by the Board, and, therefore, the Board in making
the final selections may well have selected other persons. Moreover, if, as
the Executive Director says, the members of the Interview panel were equipped
to assess the candidates because, among other things, they were already "aware
of the capabilities of the various candidates", subjectivity was introduced
into the selection process. Each candidate, the Executive Director said, was
assessed "independently" and not, therefore, after his opinion was discussed
and moderated by the panel as a whole. And so, in the process of assessing the
worth of each candidate exclusively through the medium of one's own mind or
individuality, having regard to one's own experience, a member of the panel
may well have entertained erroneous opinions. Objective, and not subjective
standards, must be used at every stage of a recruitment process so that
selection may be determined by actual facts and not be coloured by irrational
or prejudicial feelings, or by fanciful opinions or misguided notions. Were
each of the sixty persons interviewed personally known to each of the five
members of the panel? If not, how was it possible for each member to act
"independently" on the basis of his personal knowledge? What was

194  


the nature and extent of contact between the persons interviewed and each
member of the panel? The Bank has not adduced any evidence in that regard. The
Bank, as we have seen, placed reliance on the personal knowledge the members
of the interview had of the candidates. Had the selection been made by the
Monetary Board, is it not likely that objective, rather than subjective
considerations based on personal knowledge, would have been taken into
account? Even well‑formed interview panels are not infallible and can
sometimes produce strange results; but their composition can be crucial, as it
was in this case.



**(20) THE UNEVENNESS OF THE QUESTIONS ASKED AT THE INTERVIEW**



The petitioners state that the questions asked were haphazard, and sometimes
irrelevant, and that the selections were fortuitous and therefore resulted in
the elimination of the petitioners and the selection of the 11th to 22nd
respondents unfairly. In paragraphs 23‑32 of their affidavit they set out the
questions asked of each of the petitioners.



The first petitioner had been questioned on the definitions of management and
financial audit; whether he had read a certain newspaper article on
international accounting standards; and about the work he had done thirty‑two
years earlier in the Exchange Control Department.



The second petitioner had been questioned on the air route to Madagascar; the
present name for what was once known as Congo; the present name for Burma and
its capital; and about his current and previous work.



The questions put to, and the answers given by the third petitioner were as
follows:



Q. What is the subject you are doing at present?



A. I am attached to the Administration Division of the Public Debt
Department.

195  


Q. Why are you doing administration?



A. I was posted there by my Head of Department.



Q. Who was the tall boy who was doing administration earlier?



A. The tall boy in the Department did not do administration, he did treasury
bills.



Q. Where is he now?



A. He is at the Anuradhapura Branch.



The fourth petitioner was questioned about the functions of the Central Bank,
re‑finance, EPF refunds and Bank re‑financing.



The fifth petitioner was questioned as to whether salaries could be paid
before the 25th of the month, and what disadvantages there were in such
payment.



The sixth petitioner was questioned on the differences in the EPF Department
in the 1960s and at the present time; the names of the Superintendent of EPF
then and now; how an employee of a firm comes to know whether EPF
contributions are made on his behalf; and on suggestions for the better
functioning of the EPF Department.



The seventh petitioner was questioned on his work in the Bank Supervision
Department; what the BASLE agreement was; and the subject of visas for
expatriates attached to foreign Banks. There was also an aborted question: The
seventh respondent Executive Director Nagahawatte, asked the seventh
petitioner, Wickramasinghe, about the number of EPF account holders, and
before petitioner Wickramasinghe could answer, the Executive Director G. M. P
de Silva, the eighth respondent, interrupted and asked "Why do you ask that
question?" Nagahawatte stated that he was not able to answer the question.



The eighth petitioner was questioned as to the number of departments of the
Bank in which he had worked and which was the best department; how the
genuineness of gold is tested; who was the

196



famous Oxford‑educated anthropologist; who is the Prime Minister of Pakistan;
and who was the person responsible for obtaining independence for Pakistan.



The ninth petitioner was questioned about the technical defects in the
Mahaweli Scheme.



The tenth petitioner was questioned about the Collection Division of the EPF
Department and the functions of the Banking Department.



Although he was himself a member of the interview panel (See R5), Executive
Director Easparanathan in paragraph 19 of his affidavit states that he "cannot
at this stage recall all the questions that were asked from each of the
candidates..." Personal amnesia may be understandable or even excusable.
However, why was no record kept of the questions and answers when the
interview was a matter of paramount importance in the selection process? The
recording of interviews has the salutary effect of keeping interviewers within
the bounds of propriety and relevance in addition to providing evidence of
fairness. The failure to do so disabled the Bank in refuting the allegation of
the petitioners that the questions were irrelevant and uneven, generally or
specifically, in relation to the petitioners. Surely, especially with the
assistance of modern technology, the recording of an interview and
transcribing it, should be a very simple matter ?



The evidence adduced by the petitioners certainly supports their claim that
the questioning was uneven and therefore resulted in unequal treatment.
Moreover, the exchange between the seventh and eighth respondents during the
interview of the seventh petitioner shows that the members of the Interview
Committee were not always, if at all, certain as to what the purpose of
interview was, in the sense of what they were supposed to be ascertaining.



**(21) THE SUPPOSED CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION AT THE  INTERVIEW WERE UNCERTAIN**



In the written submissions filed by Attorney‑at‑Law S. Abeywickrama on behalf
of the 1st to 10th respondents, while

197



rejecting that no interview ought, in terms of Public Administration Circular
No. 30/91, to have been held at all, it is stated in paragraph 2.2 that "in
any event the Public Administration Circular prescribes **merit and
seniority** as the criteria that should be applied for the purposes of
promotions. **The Central Bank has applied these criteria in selecting the
candidates for promotion.** This position is apparent considering the criteria
that were adopted at the interview for the purpose of selecting." The emphasis
is that of the Attorney‑at­-Law.



Apparent from what? The Scheme of Recruitment in P4 as amended by R1 and R2 do
not, as they should have, specified the criteria to be taken into account for
evaluation at the interviews. And as far the evidence before us is concerned,
the variously expressed positions of the Bank cannot be reconciled.



That which is stated in the Bank's written submissions is different to what
the petitioners were told in P15 by the Bank, namely, that the selections were
made on the basis of performance at the interview, seniority, experience, and
general capability in their work.



In paragraph 19 of his affidavit, Executive Director Easparanathan states as
follows:



"...I state that the interview was conducted for the purpose of ascertaining
finally the suitability of candidates for promotions to the Staff Class of the
Central Bank where the responsibilities and the qualities that an officer is
called upon to bear are vastly different to the responsibilities and qualities
that an officer is called upon to bear in the class to which the candidates
belonged, namely, the Non‑Staff Class. With a view to achieving this objective
at the interview, the questions were asked for the purpose of ascertaining the
knowledge of the candidates with regard to the work handled by them, the
knowledge of the functions of the Department in which they worked, the
functions of the Central Bank, general knowledge and awareness, ability to
identify a problem and respond to it and their analytical skills in answering
a question."

**198**



**(22) THE SUPPOSED CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION AT THE INTERVIEW WERE VAGUE**



The promotions in question related to the promotion of "Staff Assistants".
"Staff Assistants" were persons who were expected to exercise "supervisory
functions". In what ways were the "responsibilities and qualities" of "Staff
Assistants" different to those of Class I Staff Grade Officers? Being not only
different, but "vastly different", one might reasonably expect an explanation
of what were the differences in the tasks to be performed and some rational
explanation of the character, and nature of the qualities including those of
excellence, good natural gifts and capacity, ability, skill and disposition
that were expected of a Staff‑Grade Class I Officer, and how the interviews
were structured and conducted to select the best persons in the light of the
tasks to be performed. We had no satisfactory explanation of these matters.
The inexactness of the couching of criteria, and the inability of members of
the interview panel therefore to think with clearness in the formulation of
their questions appear from the application of the criteria.



**(23) CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION AT THE INTERVIEW NOT ANNOUNCED**



How was it decided by the Interview Committee that the candidates selected
were better than the others who were not selected, and especially the ten
petitioners?



The criteria that were supposed to have been applied were first revealed by
the Director Establishments in R3, after the selections were made and after
these proceedings were commenced. Moreover, the criteria set out in R3 are not
only inconsistent with what was said by the respondents themselves in the
written submissions and through Executive Director Easparanathan to have been
done but also, as we shall see, inconsistent with what they did.



**(24) THE APPLICATION OF THE SUPPOSED CRITERIA ‑(A) THE CRITERION OF
SENIORITY**



Seniority was supposed to have been a criterion. In terms of the information
contained in paragraphs 13 and 15 of the affidavit of the



199



Executive Director, albeit not in the exact manner in which he sets out the
information, the position with regard to the seniority of the petitioners was
as follows as at 6th March 1992:



200  


Length of service as a Staff Assistant was a factor stated in P4 to be taken
into account in determining eligibility. If as the respondents say in their
written submissions P4 was the applicable scheme and that the selections were
made on the "same basis" as that used in the determination of eligibility by
the Establishments Committee, why is no mention made by the Executive Director
of service as Staff Assistants? It was, after all, a factor recognized at the
meeting between the Trade Unions and the Governor and other representatives of
the Bank on 24th October 1992. An additional mark was to be given for "the
experience gained in the post of Staff Assistant."



If seniority was a factor to be taken into account by the Interview Committee,
how was this assessed? What weightage was given for each year of service (1)
in the Bank (2) in NSC Grade 4 and (3) NSC Grade 5 (4) and as Staff
Assistants? The respondents failed to show what weightage, if any, was given
to any or each of these factors. If the Interview Committee was doing anything
more than the Establishments Committee, should not the marking for seniority
have been at the time of **selection,** 5th ‑ 7th January 1993, rather than
6th March 1992 when **eligibility** for interview was considered?



According to the respondents, 25% of the marks allocated at the interview was
for seniority. How many marks each candidate earned and how that was
determined have not been established by the Bank. However, in the light of the
information in the Executive Director's affidavit, in terms of years of
service in the Bank, petitioners Perera, Wijekoon, Samaratunge, Jayasuriya,
Liyanage, Gurugamage and Wickramasinghe were senior to each and every one of
respondents 11 ‑ 22\. With regard to Petitioner Karunaratne and respondents
Wansapura and Musafer, each of them had 27 years of service. Petitioner De
Alwis had 27 1 /2 years of service and was senior to petitioner Karunaratne
and to respondents Wansapura and Musafer. Petitioner Fernando had 27 years of
service and was senior to the 13th to 22nd respondents.



In terms of years of service in Non‑Staff Class Grade 4, all of the
petitioners were senior to the 11th to 22nd respondents.

201



In terms of years of service in Non‑Staff Class Grade 5, none of the
respondents had served in that Grade, whereas petitioners Perera, Wijekoon,
Liyanage and Wickramasinghe had served in that Grade. Taking the total service
in NSC Grades 4 and 5, in terms of seniority in service, Perera, Wijekoon,
Liyanage and Wickramasinghe were well ahead of some of the other petitioners
and above each and every one of the 13th to 22nd respondents.



**(25) THE APPLICATION OF THE SUPPOSED CRITERIA ‑ (B) MERIT**



Seniority alone, the respondents said, was not the basis of selection. If, as
established by the petitioners, they ought, in terms of the criterion of
seniority, to have been selected in preference to the 11th to 22nd
respondents, what were the other criteria in terms of which they were
excluded? Admittedly, when one compares the response of the Bank in P15, the
affidavit of Executive Director Easparanathan and the written submissions of
the Bank submitted by Attorney‑at‑Law Abeywickrama, it is evident that there
were no certain standards of selection. However, the Attorney‑at‑Law for the
1st‑10th respondents, as we have seen, in making the written submissions of
the Bank, stated that the Central Bank had applied the criteria of "merit and
seniority" in selecting the candidates for promotion. What was "merit"? What
were the criteria for evaluating "merit"?



The Attorney‑at‑Law in paragraph 2.3 of the written submissions of the 1st to
10th respondents explains that, since the record of service, work, conduct,
attendance and punctuality, in terms of the scheme of promotion in P4 as
amended, were to be taken into account, "as such it is clear that merit in
addition to seniority will be considered for the purpose of promotion from
Non‑Staff Class Grade 5 to Staff Class Grade."



It is by no means clear that merit was taken into account. All we have is an
assurance that in future it "will be considered". The criteria set out in P4
as amended were for the purpose of guiding the **Establishments Committee** in
making its recommendations with regard to those for the preliminary interview.
P4 as amended says

202  


nothing about the way in which merit was to be determined by the **Interview
Committee.** Neither merit, nor seniority nor any other criteria are mentioned
in P4, as amended, as guiding factors which the preliminary or second
Interview Committees or the Board at the final interview should take into
account. How does it become "clear" that merit was taken into account by the
**Interview Committee** or that it was expected to do so merely because the
**Establishments Committee** was required to take certain matters into
account? Nor is there any reference in P4, R1, R2 or elsewhere as to how
seniority and merit were to be ascertained.



What did the Interview Committee **do**? In paragraph 2.2 of the written
submissions of the Bank, it is stated that "at this interview candidates were
marked on seniority, academic qualifications, general awareness and
performance." The assertion of the Bank that candidates were selected on the
basis of "seniority and merit" cannot be sustained on the ground that academic
qualifications, general awareness and performance constituted the elements of
"merit", for the Bank in its written submissions, after stating that the
"candidates were marked on seniority, academic qualifications, general
awareness and performance", adds that "equal weightage was given to each of
these elements and the members of the interview panel marked each of the
candidates independently. The candidates were selected on the basis of the
average marks obtained by them." Executive Director Easparanathan in paragraph
28 of his affidavit confirms this. He states as follows:



"I state that the candidates who presented themselves for interview were
judged on the basis of their seniority, academic qualifications, general
awareness and their performance. Equal weightage was given to the above
criteria."



Thus, the selection was not simply on the basis of two criteria, namely,
seniority and merit, as stated by the Bank in paragraph 2.2 of its written
submissions but, as differently stated in the same submissions, and supported
by Executive Director Easparanathan, on the basis of seniority, academic
qualifications, general awareness and performance, for "equal weightage" was
given to each of these four separate factors.

203



Executive Director Easparanathan further explains the selection process as
follows:



27\. The interviews were held by a Panel consisting of several senior officers
of the Central Bank who had worked in the Bank in different capacities over a
long period...



29\. In addition to the members of the interview panel being aware of the
capabilities of the various candidates who presented themselves for the said
interview, their bio‑data and their service records were also made available
to the said members and each candidate was assessed independently by the
members of the Board.



30\. I further state that 10 out of the 12 respondents who were promoted had
Degrees from recognized Universities and/or had completed the examinations
conducted by the Institute of Bankers. Out of the two candidates who did not
have such special qualifications, the 12th respondent had received a special
commendation from a Governor of the Central Bank. A copy of the said
commendation is annexed herewith marked R6. In addition, the said two
candidates, namely the 11th and 12th respondents, were found to be suitable
for promotion on the basis of the criteria referred to earlier. Amongst the
several petitioners only the 8th petitioner had obtained a Degree from a
recognized University or had any equivalent banking qualifications."



When the petitioners in their letter dated 7th March 1993 protested against
their exclusion from promotion (P7), the response of the Bank in its letter
dated 12th April 1993 (P15) was that the Interview Committee had made its
selections on the basis of performance at the interview, seniority,
experience, and general capability in their work. No mention is made of
academic and/or professional qualifications having been taken into account. No
mention is made of "special qualifications" or "commendations" being taken
into account. Whereas "performance", simpliciter, is referred to in the
written submissions of the 1st ‑ 10th respondents and in Mr. Easparanathan's
affidavit, "performance at the interview" is referred to in the letter of 12th
April 1993. Did "performance at the interview"

204  


mean how well or badly they answered the questions, or did it mean how they
fared, having regard to marks given for seniority, educational qualifications,
general awareness and performance in the sense of the successful
accomplishment in past years of the tasks assigned to them and/or proven
capabilities in that regard? Or did it mean the judgment of capabilities by
reference to the personal notions of the members of the panel? We have been
given no answer. If "performance" meant "experience" and/or "general
capability", could the interview committee have done better than accepting the
assessments made by the Establishments Committee on the basis of the five
annual evaluation reports? I do not think so, having regard to the way in
which the interviews were conducted.



There were no certain standards and understandably, no standards that could
have been announced without reasonable protest. For example, could it have
been announced, without legitimate resistance, that all NSC Grade 5 officers
were, by reason of being in that Grade, excluded from further consideration as
being 'chronic' cases: or that failures at previous interviews were taken into
the process of reckoning? Could it have been announced without justifiable
protest that academic/professional qualifications were being taken into
account?



**(26) THE APPLICATION OF SUPPOSED CRITERIA ‑ (C) ACADEMIC/PROFESSIONAL
QUALIFICATIONS**



It was common cause that the matter in question related to the "rankers",
"in‑service", "ordinary scheme". Accepting the respondents' view that the
applicable scheme was that which was set out in P4 as amended by R1 and R2,
there is nothing that suggests that academic and/or professional
qualifications play any part in the promotion of Staff Assistants to Staff
Class Grade 1. That was plainly a scheme recognizing the importance of
experience judged by the proven excellence and worth of serving officers.
Academic and/or professional qualifications were relevant, as far as serving
officers were concerned, to the scheme of "accelerated promotion" in terms of
which the Bank was attempting to inject new blood as well as providing
incentives to serving officers to improve their knowledge and skills. In any
event, academic and professional qualifications had

205



been already given credit in earlier promotions and it seems to have been a
recognized policy in the Bank not to give credit for academic/professional
qualifications if it had already been given. Thus, although at one stage 10%
weightage had been given for educational qualifications in the appointment of
Staff Assistants, this had been withdrawn by the Governor in order to avoid
duplication.



Assuming that it was legitimate to have taken academic/professional
qualifications into account and that ten of the twelve respondents had the
requisite qualifications ‑ and this we do not know for certain because there
is no evidence that the Degrees were not merely any Degrees from "recognized
universities" as the Executive Director says in paragraph 30 of his affidavit,
but also in specific subjects deemed relevant to the work in hand and of a
specified quality, namely, first or second class upper division, as prescribed
by the Board in R1 ‑ why was De Alwis, the eighth petitioner, who in paragraph
30 of Executive Director Easparanathan's affidavit is admitted to have had a
Degree, excluded from selection? Why was he excluded while respondent 17, S.
R. Gnanamuttu who, according to the written submissions of the Bank, had no
Degree but merely possessed a Diploma in Library Science selected? In the
written submissions of the Bank Gnanamuttu is referred to as a person holding
"special academic qualifications." Were selections made on the basis of a
Degree, as the Executive Director claims, or on the basis of "special academic
qualifications" as stated by the Bank in its written submission? What were
"special academic qualifications"? How were they relevant to the selection of
Staff Class Grade officers? A Diploma in Library Science is not a recognized
academic or professional qualification in terms of P4 as amended by R1 which
took great care in specifying the relevant degrees and professional
qualifications. The respondents have made no explanation. How are the
selections of Wansapura, the 11th respondent, and Musafer, the 12th
respondent, justified if the phrase 'special qualifications' meant 'diplomas',
Wanaspura and Musafer had neither degrees nor diplomas of any sort. The
explanation of the Executive Director in paragraph 30 of his affidavit is that
although Musafer had no degree, she had "a special commendation from the
Governor" in support of which he produced R6. R6 is a letter dated 16th
December 1982 from the Secretary to the Governor and Deputy Director of
Economic

** 206**



Research addressed to the Governor commending the "devoted work" of four
officers, including Musafer, in connection with the "efficient organization
and smooth functioning" of a seminar. The letter bears an endorsement,
presumably from the Governor, stating DE. Mrs. Musafer is hereby commended.
P1. place this in her personal file". Whether, and if so, and to what extent
this commendation, which had been issued as far back as 1982, had already been
taken into account in making Musafer eligible for interview is not in
evidence. However, there is no justification made by the respondents, and I
can see no grounds, let alone sufficient reasons, for equating such a
commendation with the academic and professional qualifications of the sort
specified in R1 in the scheme that was supposed to have been applicable. It
was an _ad hoc_ criterion adopted for the particular purpose of selecting
Musafer, and therefore, unfairly discriminatory in her favour, resulting in
the unjustifiable exclusion of one of the petitioners. As far as Wansapura,
the 11th respondent was concerned, not even so much as a substituted criterion
was suggested. After, unsatisfactorily explaining why Musafer was selected,
the Executive Director, in paragraph 30 of his affidavit, lamely and vaguely,
says: "In addition, the said two candidates, namely the 11th and 12th
respondents were found to be suitable for promotion on the basis of the
criteria referred to earlier." There is no evidence establishing Wansapura's
superiority in any way to the petitioners.



**(27) THE APPLICATION OF SUPPOSED CRITERIA ‑ (D) "GENERAL AWARENESS"**



What was "general awareness"? If "awareness" was used in the usual,
contemporary sense of being watchful and being on one's guard, how was this
relevant to the purpose of recruitment by way of promotion of Non‑Staff Class
Officers to the Staff Class? Perhaps the term "awareness" was used in the
Middle English sense of being informed and cognizant and conscious? Aware of
what? Matters germane to the work to be performed; or other matters? If they
were with regard to unrelated matters, what was the purpose of the questions?
Was the quizzing then to merely expose the ignorance of some persons and to
make fun of them or to embarrass them? There is no explanation.

207



It is understandable that questions may have been asked about the functions of
the Central Bank and the functions of the Department in which they worked, for
they were going to continue to work in the Bank and may have been assigned to
work in the same Department of the Bank as that in which they were
functioning. However, what was the relevance of ascertaining the knowledge of
candidates "with regard to the work handled by them"? What might have been
relevant would rather have been what Executive Director Easparanathan
described as the "vastly different" work **to be** handled by them as Staff
Class Officers. The interview should have been concerned with whether
candidates were aware of what they were **expected to do** rather than with
what they were **doing.**



Competence with regard to what the candidates were doing, had already been
ascertained, among other things, in five annual evaluation reports and
considered for the purpose of determining eligibility for the interview.
Column 4 entitled "Knowledge" of the annual Personnel Evaluation Report (P12),
states that it "describes the extent of the background information an employee
has in respect of his own duties and of subjects allied to those duties," and
proceeds to set out seven possible assessments ‑ the most number of options
under any head ‑ in the Report. The evaluation of "knowledge" had been by
reference to responses to the following assessments:



(a) Has a good knowledge of his subject and related matters.



(b) Very well‑informed; unusually sound knowledge not only of his own subject
and related subjects as well.



(c) Has a thorough knowledge of his subject; shows effective experience.



(d) Knows his subject fairly well.



(e) Has just sufficient knowledge, of his subject to deal satisfactorily with
only the general aspects of his work.



(f) Has hardly any knowledge of his subject and functions.



(g) Has little knowledge of his subject and has need to consult others and
refer frequently for information.



208



Could the interview panel have done better in the time available?



**(28) THE APPLICATION OF SUPPOSED CRITERIA ‑ (E)  IDENTIFICATION OF A PROBLEM
AND RESPONDING TO IT**

****

Likewise, the capacity to identify a problem and satisfactorily respond to it
had been considered at five annual evaluations under the head "Comprehension
and Judgment". The evaluation form states that what was sought to be
ascertained was "the capacity of an employee to understand a situation in
relation to his work and give an apt decision in relation to that situation."
The evaluation was based on responses to the following assessments:



(a) Can pick up new work in a reasonable period of time.



(b) Has satisfactory capacity for grasping new ideas or learning a new job of
work.



(c) Has a clear and sharp mind; quick to grasp a problem; high order of
intelligence.



(d) Slow in picking up new work and in grasping new ideas.



(e) Very slow to learn a new task even with some explanation.



(f) Is able to understand the general implications of a problem and pick up
new work fairly quickly.



Could the interview panel have done better in the time available?



**(29) THE APPLICATION OF SUPPOSED CRITERIA ‑(F)  ANALYTICAL SKILLS**

****

What the Executive Director meant by "analytical skills in answering a
question" is not clear. How this was ascertained by the questions asked of the
petitioners is difficult to understand. However, "Analytical Ability", which
is described in the annual evaluation form as an "employee's ability to think
logically and set out the salient features of a problem", were ascertained in
the five annual evaluation reports by reference to the following assessments:



209



(a) Has good capacity for investigating a problem analytically and logically.



(b) Is able to pick out the salient features of some of the simpler problems
only.



(c) Capacity for logical thinking and analytical investigation is of a very
high order.



(d) Capacity to think logically and to analyse a problem is limited.



(e) Officer's capacity to think logically and present the essential features
of a new problem is satisfactory.



(f) Unable to think logically and sort out the factors bearing on a problem.



Could the interview panel have done better in the time available?



**(30) THE INTERVIEW PANEL WAS IN NO POSITION TO MAKE A  BETTER EVALUATION
THAN THAT WHICH HAD BEEN   ALREADY MADE**



Could the Interview Committee in the time available to them have made a more
thorough and fairer evaluation of the knowledge of the work handled by the
candidates, their ability to identify a problem and respond to it, and their
analytical abilities, than those already made year by year for five years by
the immediate supervising officer of each candidate, moderated by the Deputy
Head of the Department to which the candidate was attached and finally
confirmed by the Head of such Department? (See paragraph 25(c) ‑(f) of the
affidavit of Executive Director Easparanathan)? I do not think so. Indeed,
having regard to the questions asked of the petitioners, one wonders how their
relevant knowledge, abilities and skills were ascertained.



The interview panel had before them candidates who were, in terms of the
"classification and Descriptive Code" set out in the "Personnel Evaluation
Form ‑ Report Sheet" (P12), "excellent" if not "outstanding. If the 11th ‑
22nd Respondents were more excellent or more outstanding than the petitioners,
if has not been established by evidence.

210



There was no mark sheet produced to enable us to ascertain how each member of
the Interview Committee made his "Independent" assessment in respect of each
of the matters about which Mr. Easparanathan in paragraph 19 of his affidavit
says the Interview Committee was concerned. Not even the aggregate mark sheet
was produced in these proceedings. The respondents have failed to discharge
their burden of adducing evidence to show that the selections they made were
even‑handed, fair and justifiable, The evidence in fact points in the opposite
direction.



**(31) DECLARATION**



For the reasons stated in my judgment, I declare that the selection of the
eleventh to twenty‑second respondents in preference to the petitioners was in
violation of Article 12(1) of the Constitution and that the appointments of
the eleventh to twenty‑second respondents to Staff Class Grade 1 were
therefore of no force or avail and null and void.



**(32) ORDERS**



Although the Court has a wide discretion in terms of Article 126(4) of the
Constitution in granting relief and in making directions, I do not deem it
just and equitable that I should accede to the prayer of the petitioners that
the Central Bank of Sri Lanka should be directed to promote the petitioners to
Staff Class Grade 1 with effect from 16th March 1993, for accountability for
achieving the objects of that institution lies with the Monetary Board. Within
the bounds of the law, the determination of the necessary ancillary staff to
assist the Board in achieving its objects and the selection of the best
available persons, ought, in fairness, to be matters for the Monetary Board as
the accountable authority. My business as a Judge of this Court is to see that
they act within the bounds of the law.



The Central Bank in terms of what it has stated, requires ten more persons in
Staff Class Grade 1 on the basis of the promotion of serving officers in
Non‑Staff Class Grades 4 and 5. I direct the Central Bank to make such
recruitments by way of promotions within two months of this order.

211



I direct that petitioners G. F. L. Perera, K. M. P. Wijekoon, R. S. Liyanage
and T. M. Wickremasinghe because they were, as explained, the victims of a
cruel charade aggravating the disappointment of unequal treatment in violation
of their fundamental right of equality, shall each be paid forthwith a sum of
Rs. 20,000 by the First Respondent by way of a solatium.



I further direct that the First Respondent shall pay forthwith a sum of Rs.
10,000 each by way of a solatium to petitioners W. D. P. Samarathunga, D.
Jayasuriya, J. Gurugamage, W. R. de Alwis, M. G. W. Karunaratne and K. N. W.
Fernando for the violation of their fundamental right of equality.



Additionally, I direct that the First Respondent shall pay forthwith to each
and every one of the petitioners a sum of Rs. 5000 as costs.



**WIJETUNGA, J.**



I agree with the conclusions reached by my brother Amerasinghe in regard to
the complaint of the petitioners and his reasons therefor. I also agree with
the orders he proposes to make.



**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.**



I have read the judgment of my brother Amerasinghe, and I agree with the
conclusions reached by him in regard to the violation of the fundamental
rights of the complaints in this case. I am also in agreement with the
remedial measures he has proposed.



_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/16.html_  

