##  Gamaethige v. Siriwardena and Others - SLR - 384, Vol 1 of 1988 [1988]
LKSC 16; (1988) 1 Sri LR 384 (24 March 1988)

**

384

GAMAETHIGE  
V.  
SIRIWARDENA AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SENEVIRATNE. J., JAMEEL, J. AND FERNANDO, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION No. 73/87.  
MARCH 24, 1988.

_

     Fundamental Rights- Removal of petitioners name from waiting list for Government Quarters upon vacation of post \- Article 12(i) of the Constitution - Discrimination.

_

Computation of time - Reckoning of time limit for filing application for
relief under Article 126(1) of Constitution.

The petitioner was the General Secretary of the Sri Lanka Government Clerical
Union and was released for full time trade union work. In view of petitioner's
participation in a strike from 17.07.80 to 12.08.80, he was treated as having
vacated his employment but later on appeal he was reinstated by letter' dated
01.11.85: Earlier in 1973 the petitioner's name had been registered in the
waiting list for Government Quarters. In June 1984 prior to the petitioner's
reinstatement in service, the petitioner's eligibility for quarters was re-
examined, and upon it being reported that he was not in service, his name was
deleted from the waiting list for Government Quarters.

Soon after his reinstatement, the petitioner discovered that his name had been
deleted from the waiting list and by letter dated 28.11.1985 requested the
Director of Establishments to allocate quarters to him as any quarters became,
vacant as persons below in the waiting list had been allocated quarters. This,
letter was treated as a request for restoration to the waiting list. The
Director of Establishments by letter dated 08.01.86 refused the request.
Thereupon the petitioner appealed by letter dated 24.01.86 to the Secretary,
Ministry of Public Administration through the Secretary, Ministry of Power .&
Energy but was informed that the decision of 08.01.88 could not be varied. A
further appeal dated 08.01.87 evoked a similar reply dated 06.03.87. Yet
another appeal dated 24.03.87 was rejected by letter dated 27.05.87 He filed
the present application on 23.06.87. He alleged discrimination in that
preferential treatment had been accorded to J. D. Silva, 9th respondent and
four officers not on the waiting list and another employed on contract after
retirement who had been given quarters though their names were not on the
waiting list.

**

Held-

**

(1) The circumstances relating to J. D. Silva was different although the
petitioner and he may have been in the same class or category and there was no
invidious discrimination or unequal treatment of equals or equal treatment of
unequals.

The other instances cited were of officers in a different and more responsible
category. Hence petitioner's fundamental rights under Article 12(1) of the
Constitution had not been violated.

**385**

(2) (Seneviratne, J., dissenting)

The petitioner's application to court is time-barred in terms. of Article
126(2) of the Constitution on the application of the principle that the
pursuit of other remedies judicial or administrative does not prevent or
interrupt the operation of the time limit. The alleged infringement took place
on 08.01. 1986.

Per Fernando, J:-Three principles are discernible in regard to the operation
of the time limit prescribed by Article 126(2). Time begins to run when the
infringement takes place; if knowledge on the part of the petitioner is
required (e.g of other instances by comparison with which the treatment meted
out to him becomes discriminatory), time begins to run only when both
infringement and knowledge exist. The pursuit of other, remedies judicial' or
administrative, does not prevent or interrupt the operation of the time limit.
While the time limit. is mandatory, in exceptional cases on the application of
the principle lemon cogit ad impossibilia, if there is no lapse, fault or
delay on the part of the petitioner, this Court has a discretion to entertain
an application made out of time." '

**

Cases referred to :

** _

(1) Elmore Perera v. Jayawickrema (1985) 1 Sri L. R. 285, 295-297, 298, 299,
300, 321, .

(2) Siriwardene v Rodrigo (1986) 1 Sri L. R. 384, 387.

(3) Hewakuruppu v. de Silva S.C. application No. 118184 S.C. Minutes 30.11.84.

(4) Mahenthiran v. Attorney-General S.C. Application No. 6811980 S.C. Minutes
of 14. 08. 1980.

(5) Jayawardena v. Attorney-General F.R.D. Vol. 1p, 175.

(6) Gunawardena v. Senanayake F. R. D. V61 1 p. 178.

(7) . Hewakuruppu v. de Silva S. C. Application No. 169/84 S. C. Minutes
22.01.85.

(8) Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam (1985) 1 Sri L.R. 100, 105, 106.

(9) Visuvalingam v. Liyanage (1983) 1 Sri L. R. 203.

(10) Jayasena v: Soysa F.R.D (Vol. 1) p. 97, 100.

(11) Velmurugu v. Attorney-General F.R.D. (Vol. 1) 180, 197,

(12). Mackie & Co. v. Molagoda (1986) 1 Sri L. R. 300, 309-313.

_**

APPLICATION** under Article 126 of the Constitution.

_

D. W Abeykoon with K. S. Tilakaratne, K. Thiranagama and N. Punchihewa for the
petitioner.

P. Karunaratne, S.C. for 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th respondents.

_

**386**

May. 19. 1988. **  
  
SENEVIRATNE J.

**

I have read the judgment of my brother Fernando, J. He has come to two
conclusions

(1) that the petitioner has' not satisfied Court that his fundamental rights
under Article 12(1) of the Constitution have been violated.

(2) that the petitioner's application to this Court filed on 23.6.1987 is out
of time, with reference to Article 126(2) of the Constitution.

The above conclusion (2) has been arrived at on the premises that the alleged
infringement complained of has been, on or about 8.1.1986.

I entirely agree with the finding in respect of No. (1) above, but I
respectfully disagree with the finding on No. (2) above, that is, the
determination of the period in terms of Article 126(2) of the Constitution
considering 8.1.1986 as the relevant date. The facts pertaining to this
application have, been adequately set out in the judgment of, Fernando, J.

The petitioner has been in the waiting list for allocation of general
government quarters from 6.7.1973 in terms of Chapter XIX of the Establishment
Code, Volume 1 (1985). The petitioner, who took part in the general strike
from 17.7.1980 to. 31.7.1980 referred to. in this application was considered
as having vacated the post by the operation of the relevant emergency
regulations. The petitioner was only re-instated -on 1.11.1985, and`
transferred to the Ministry of Power and Energy from-the Ministry of Public
Administration to which he was attached prior to the strike. Due to the
vacation of the post the petitioner's name which was in the waiting list of
officers for allocation of government quarters was deleted, and on re-
instatement his name was included at a position in the list as at that time.
After the resumption of office, the petitioner by letter dated 28.1 1.1985
addressed to the Director of Establishment the 3rd respondent requested that
his name be restored to the original place in the waiting list (i.e. to the
place in the list before he was deemed to have vacated the office and that
'quarters be allocated to him according to his original registration). The
Director of Establishment by his letter dated 8.1.1986 informed him that his
request cannot be granted, for the

**387**

reasons that if his name restored to the original place, before the strike the
entire list as it presently stood would be upset. Further, that such other.
officers will also apply for the restoration of their names to the original
positions.

My brother Fernando, that it was by letter dated 8.1.1986 that the alleged
infringement of the fundamental rights :on the case put forward by the
petitioner occurred,. as such determining the date in respect- of Article
126(2) of the Constitution must be considered as 8.1.1986, and the one month
must be determined as from this date. In coming to this conclusion my brother
Fernando J. has stated that the subsequent administrative, remedies ;that the
petitioner sought, that is, by way of appeal, cannot, be taken into account as
such appeals were after the determining date 8.1.1986 wider principle that 6
My brother Fernando J. has laid " down a party even 6 public officer must come
to Court within one month of the alleged infringement of the fundamental
rights, and the delay caused by such party resorting to further administrative
remedies cannot be taken into account in granting a discretionary extension of
the time, -specified in Article 126(2) of the Constitution.

In this particular instance after the petitioner received the letter of
8.1.1986 from the Director of Establishment, the petitioner resorted to
further, administrative remedy by way of appeal to the Head of the Ministry,
that is to the Secretary; Ministry of ;Public Administration. Such remedies by
way of appeal are provided for in the Establishment Code, Chapter XXVIII. A
Public Officer: can. resort to these remedies as of Tight. The Establishment
Code, Chapter XXVIII . Section 5: 1 is as follows :

'Any officer may address an application or appeal to any duly constituted
authority on any matter directly affecting his personal interest. His superior
officer is -bound to forward every such application or appeal.

The last leg of this regulation is relevant in this instance because the
petitioner had to communicate with the Director of Establishment and later the
Secretary , Ministry of Public Administration through the Secretary, Ministry
of Public Administration through the and later the Secretary, Ministry of
Power and energy , and this channel of communications also has led lapse of
time. In considering the right of appeal in dealing with the public officer of
this grade, the court cannot

**388**

take into account that such an officer may even appeal to the Prime Minister
or to His- Excellency, and, if so, that such time will also have to be taken
into account. Firstly, no public officer can appeal to the Prime Minister as
Prime Minister because-no. such appeal is provided for in the Code. An officer
of this grade has no right at all to appeal to His Excellency. Such officer's
right of appeal is to the Secretary of the Ministry and the Minister in charge
of the Ministry. In any event, the Code provides for the procedure to be
followed in the instance of a petition or appeal to the President-

Regulation 6:3.

"The President will entertain a petition only if relates to a subject on which
he may properly be addressed under the Constitution. The petition addressed to
the President on a matter falling within the function of a Minister will be
referred to by him to the relevant Minister."

As the allocation of general quarters is a matter coming under the Ministry of
public Administration and dealt with by Secretary to the Ministry of Public
Administration, this officer has a right to address an appeal to the Minister
of Public Administration. The officer has not done so.

After the receipt of the letter of 8.1.1986(P) from the Director of
Establishment, the petitioner addressed an appeal to the Ministry of Public
Administration dated 24.1.1986(Q), in which he gave further grounds on which
his application should be considered. the reply to this letter was a curt
letter dated 2.4.1986 from an officer for the Secretary, Ministry of Public
Administration stating that. the decision by letter of 8.1.1986 cannot be
changed. The petitioner then made a second' appeal dated 8.1.1987 to the
Secretary' Ministry of public Administration giving another ground, that is,
that a person whose name has been removed from the waiting list has been
restored to the list and quarters allocated. (This is a reference to the
allocation of quarters to the 9th- respondent J. D. Silva. This allocation has
been explained in the affidavit ;filed in this application by Edgar- Fernando
Director of Establishments and referred to in the judgment of my brother
Fernando, J.) The reply to this appeal to the petitioner was also from the
Senior Assistant Secretary f or the Secretary by letter dated 6.3.1987 (T)
informing him that the earlier decision by letter of 81.1986 cannot be
changed. This is a curt reply and this officer has

**389**

not explained to the petitioner the circumstances under which the 9th -
respondent was allocated quarters. If the facts of the allocation of quarters
to J: D.. Silva was brought to the notice of the petitioner, he would have
been undoubtedly satisfied, and not made J. D. Silva a. party to this
application. the petitioner has ;then: addressed a third appeal dated
24.3.1987 (U) to the Secretary Ministry of Public Administration, and he has
on the top of the letter added those words and underlined "to the personal
attention of D'. B. I `P S. Siriwardene, Secretary, Ministry of Public
Administration." In' this appeal of 24.3.1987 he has given further `grounds on
which his application should be considered, and why the decision by' letter of
8.1.1986 should also be reconsidered. The reply to this appeal was received by
the petitioner by letter dated 27.5.1.987 (V), by the Senior Assistant
Secretary, Ministry of Power and Energy, who informed, the petitioner that he
has been requested to inform him. that the decision conveyed by' letter dated
8.1.1986 cannot be changed, in this letter (V) of 27.5.1987 it is not stated
whether the Secretary, Ministry of Public Administration, Mr. Siriwardena
himself has considered the appeal.

The petitioner has treated the letter dated 27.5.1987 (V), as the final reply
to his application dated 26.11.1985 for allocation of quarters to him based on
the original list, that is before he is alleged to have vacated post. The
petitioner filed the present application in this Court on 23.6.1987, and the
learned. counsel for the petitioner submits that the time limit in respect of
Article 126(2) should be determined with reference to the date 27.5.1987, the
final refusal which he says has infringed the fundamental. right of the
petitioner in terms of Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

The petitioner in making this appeal to the Secretary, Ministry of Public
Administration, who dealt with the allocation of quarters, has exercised a
right granted to him by the Establishments Code, which has been issued under
the authority of the Cabinet of Ministers exercising the powers conferred on
it under Chapter XIX of the Constitution. I am of the opinion that as the
petitioner has exercised a right, I should say, a fundamental right (in the
administrative sense) of appeal available to him; the, determination of the
period for filing this application in terms of Article 126(2) of the
Constitution should: be considered as flowing from 27:5.1987- (V). On the
facts of this application .in my: view 27.5.1987 should be considered the
relevant

**390**

date on which there was the alleged violation of the fundamental rights of the
petitioner set out in this petition I am not considering 27.5.1987 as the date
on the basis that a public officer before making this kind of application
should exhaust all his administrative remedies as in the case of an
application for a Writ.

As I am of the opinion that the determination of the time limit for filing
this application in terms of Article 126(2) of the Constitution must be
considered as, from 27.5:1987, I hold that this application is within time. As
I have agreed with my brother Fernando, J. in respect of the matter under head
(1), the application is dismissed. '

I do not order any costs as` this petitioner has been out of employment from
17.7.1980 to 31.10.1985 ,for 63 1/2 months, without pay. He would not have
drawn any pay during the period of strike; and in terms of Cabinet Circular
dated 20.11.1980, by which Circular the petitioner was reinstated, paragraph
10 (v) he would not have been paid up to the date he applied for
reinstatement. The petitioner has suffered all this for exercising his
legitimate trade union rights as an office-bearer of a trade union. The
application is dismissed without costs. .

**

JAMEEL, J** : I agree with the judgment of my brother Fernando, J.

**

FERNANDO, J.

**

The Petitioner, a public officer, was in 1973 a -clerk in the General Clerical
Service. He applied to the Director of Establishments for General Service
Quarters, and on 6.7.73 his name was registered in the waiting-list for such
quarters:

Chapter XIX of the Establishments Code classifies "Government Quarters" into
two categories: "Scheduled Quarters", being quarters assigned to a particular
post- or grade within a department, and "General Service Quarters": being
quarters which are not "Scheduled Quarters" (section 1). All quarters are
graded according to floor area (section 2), and the eligibility of a public
officer for quarters of a particular grade is related both to the category to
which he belongs (i.e. staff, clerical or minor) and to his annual salary
(section 3). The demand for quarters being far in excess of availability,
detailed rules

**391**

have been formulated in regard to other criteria for eligibility, selection
and allocation, and for the registration of applicants on separate ''Waiting
Lists" for each grade of quarters (section 4) 'Two provisions of section 4,
which are relevant to certain submissions made to us, are as follows:

"4:3:9 It an officer refuses to accept quarters allotted to him, he will be
placed at the bottom of the waiting list.''

''4:4:1 The Allocating Authority may recommend deviations from the principles
of selection outlined above for very special reasons with the prior approval
of the Director of Establishments:"

The Petitioner's: application was, for clerical grade quarters.

On being elected as the General Secretary of the Sri Lanka Government Clerical
Union on 19.6.75, the Petitioner was released for , full-time trade union
work,' and was attached h6 the Ministry of Public Administration, Local
Government and Home Affairs from that date. Later, on being elected as the
President the Sri Lanka Independent Government Trade Union Federation, he `was
similarly released for full-time trade union work of that Union with effect.
From 19.11.1978

A general strike by public I officers commenced on 17.7.80, and on 30.7:80 the
1st Respondent cancelled the Petitioner's full-time release for trade. union
work. The Petitioner by-fetter dated 31.7.80 informed the. 1st Respondent
that, as the Union of which he was a member had launched a general strike, he.
too should be- treated as having been on strike from 17.7.80. On 12.8.80 that
strike was called off. However the Petitioner (in common with other strikers)
was unable to resume duties in the public service a, Q, was treated as having
vacated his employment.

In June 1984, prior to the Petitioner's reinstatement in service, the
Petitioner's eligibility. for quarters was re-examined. and upon it being
reported that he was not in service, his name was* deleted from the waiting
list.

All the strikers who had previously been employed in the Ministry of -Public
Administration, and -in Departments. under that Ministry, were reinstated with
effect from 1.7.85 with the exception of the

**392**

Petitioner and a few others. To' the Petitioner" s query, made by letter dated
17.7.85, as to why he had not been reinstated, the 1st Respondent replied that
the Petitioner had not been reinstated as he had failed to make an application
.for relief. Although the Petitioner states in his petition that he was
thereafter reinstated without any such application for relief, it is clear
from the Petitioner's reply dated 20.8.85 that he had made an application for
relief addressed to the Secretary to the Cabinet (which the 1st Respondent
admits) ; he also stated in that letter (although not in his petition) that he
had made an application for relief to the 1st Respondent as well, a copy of
which was not produced and which the 1st Respondent does not admit. The 1st
Respondent's position was that, in terms of the Cabinet decision (a copy of
which was. produced) dealing with the manner in which officers who vacated-
their, employment should be dealt with, "all matters in connection with the
reinstatement of any person who vacated post is. the function of the Cabinet
Minister in whose Ministry he worked", and that the Secretary to the Cabinet
was not the proper authority to whom an application for relief should have
been made.

Since it was confirmed that the Petitioner had submitted an application for
relief to the Secretary to the Cabinet, in terms of a general order made by
the Minister of Public Administration, the Petitioner was reinstated by letter
dated 1.1 1.85, and transferred to the Ministry of Power-and Energy. That
letter states that reinstatement is in terms of paragraph 7(ii) of the.
aforesaid Cabinet decision. That Cabinet decision drew a distinction between
officers who had justifiable reasons for absence, (or who had been
intimidated, or had attempted to attend work but were-refused work) and
officers who had been on strike.-In regard to the. first category, it was
stipulated inter alia that they would be eligible:

from the date of reinstatement (to) continue to enjoy all the rights ,.and
privileges that they were entitled to prior to the date of vacating post."
(para 6(ii)).

No such provision was made in regard to the second category:

One of the complaints in the petition is that the 1st Respondent \-
"deliberately and purposely delayed the carrying out of instructions issued by
the Secretary to the Cabinet on 3.12.80 with regard to the reinstatement of
strikers"; it is urged that, if not for such delay, the Petitioner would have
been reinstated much earlier, certainly before

**393**

June 1984, and that his name would not have been deleted from the waiting
list-inJune 1984. This allegation is unfounded. Firstly, it is clear from the
Cabinet decision that reinstatement was a matter for the relevant Ministry,
and the Petitioner ought therefore to have made an application for relief to
the 1st Respondent as Secretary of that Ministry. The Petitioner's own
averment in the petition is that he was reinstated without any such
application for relief. In these circumstances, it is probable that an
application had been made only to the Secretary to the Cabinet as claimed by
the 1st Respondent. Secondly, even if an application for relief had been duly
made, it is unlikely that he would have been reinstated prior to June 1984,
for, as stated in his petition, all the strikers (apart from a few like the
Petitioner who were not reinstated even then) had been called back only in
July 1985.

Soon after his reinstatement, the Petitioner discovered that his name had been
deleted from the waiting list, and by letter dated 28.11.85 requested the
Director of Establishments to allocate quarters to him as soon as any quarters
became vacant, as persons previously below him in the waiting list had been
allocated quarters. Although this letter does not contain any specific.
request that his name be restored to the waiting list, in. the course of the
argument Counsel on both sides dealt with it as if it were 'a request for.
restoration to the waiting list.

The Director of Establishments, by letter dated 8.1.86, refused this request,
stating that when the Petitioner's turn came he was found to be ineligible as
he was not in the public service, and that officers whose names were
registered later in the waiting list were considered. It was further stated
that application for quarters made by persons who were not eligible could not
be considered, as that would amount to disregarding the existing waiting list,
and as applications from a large number of others who had ceased to be
eligible would also have to be considered; this would be contrary to the
definite principle being followed in the Ministry, and accordingly the
Petitioner's request could not be granted.

Thereupon the Petitioner appealed by letter dated 24.1.86 to the 1st
Respondent, through the Secretary, Ministry of Power & Energy; to this ,a
reply was sent by the Secretary, Ministry of Power & Energy, to the effect
that the Director of Establishments had informed him that

**394**

the decision conveyed by the aforesaid letter dated 8.1.86 could not be
varied. A further appeal dated 8.1:87 evoked a similar reply dated 6.3.87 that
the appeal had been sympathetically, considered, but that the original
decision could not be varied. Yet another appeal dated 24.3.87, was similarly
dealt with by letter dated 27.5.87.

On 23..6.87, the. Petitioner filed this application alleging infringement of
his fundamental rights by .reason of discriminatory treatment. The
Petitioner's specific complaint, and his only complaint, was that he had been
subjected to discriminatory treatment by reason .of a gross :violation of
section 4:2:2 of the Establishments Code, Which provides that-

"Government Quarters Grades 5A, 5, 4, 3 and 2 situated in Colombo and
controlled by the Secretary to the Ministry' of Public Administration will be
allocated according to the order in the waiting list maintained in respect of
each grade of quarters."

He also specified certain instances in which preferential treatment was
allegedly given to other officers, in support of his plea that he had been
discriminatorily treated:

(a) The name of J. D. Silva (the 9th Respondent) had been deleted from the
waiting list Without quarters having been allocated to him, and had
subsequently been restored upon an appeal being made by him

(b) Four officers were named as having been allocated quarters although their
names were not registered on a waiting list and/or they were not entitled to
such quarters under Chapter XIX of the Code;

(c) Quarters were alleged to have been allocated to one named officer serving
on contract basis after retirement;

(d) General-Service Quarters in Colombo were alleged to have been allocated to
two officers, outside the waiting list, for use as a chummery, without their
families, although such quarters should be allocated only to married officers
with children.

Counsel for the Petitioner, in the course of his submissions, contended that
the Petitioner's complaint was of violations of Articles 12 (1), 12 (2) and 14
(1)(d). When asked to particularise the Petitioner's allegations in-r. regard
to Articles 12 (2) and 14(1) (d), his reply was that the discrimination under
Article 12(2) was on the ground of political. opinion, and that the non-
restoration of his name to

**395**

the waiting list was on account of trade union activities, in violation of
Article 14(1,):(d). No allegation had been made in his petition or affidavit
in regard to the Petitioner's political opinion, discrimination based thereon,
or adverse action based on his trade' union activities. Although there is a
passing reference in his written submissions to Articles 12(2) and 14(1) (d),
there is not even an averment, let alone evidence, in regard to any facts
tending to support these allegations. The Petitioner is not entitled to rely
on any such allegations even if such matters had been duly pleaded, the
Petitioner has riot discharged the burden which lies upon him to satisfy this
Court of the truth of his allegations. The allegations based on Articles 12
(2) and 14 (1) (d) have necessarily to be rejected.

At the commencement of the hearing, learned State Counsel raised two
preliminary objections:

(a) The Petitioner had failed to file written submissions as required by Rule
65(1) (f) ;

(b) The petition should be rejected for non-compliance with Article 126(2) in
that if had been filed more than one month after, the infringement complained
of.

**THE PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS:**

Although copies of the written submissions had not been served, on the
Respondents and were not in the record, Junior Counsel for the Petitioner
stated from the Bar that written submissions had been filed with the petition,
and tendered copies, thereof. Learned State Counsel accepted this statement;
and withdrew this objection.

After hearing Counsel on both sides, it became apparent that the question of
compliance with Article 126 (2) depended on whether the infringement
complained of occurred on or about 8.1.86, upon the refusal to restore the
name of the Petitioner to the waiting list, in which event the petition had
not been filed within one month, or on or about 27.5.87, upon the Petitioner's
final appeal being refused, in which - event the petition had been filed in
time. We therefore decided to hear Counsel in regard to the application itself
in order to determine when the alleged infringement had occurred.

**396**

The principal complaint of the Petitioner is that his name had not been
restored to the waiting list upon, or soon after, his reinstatement in
service, with the consequence that he was not immediately allocated :quarters.
If such non-restoration was not in violation of fundamental right, the
Petitioner cannot seek relief in proceedings under Article 126, however:
wrongful it may have been (Elmore Perera v. Jayawickreme). (1) If such non-
restoration was in violation of a fundamental right, and it is on this
assumption that we have to decide the preliminary objection, the Petitioner
was entitled to apply under Article 126(2) within one month of the receipt of
letter dated 8.1.86. It is clear, therefore, that the Petitioner's case must
be that there had been a violation of his fundamental right on or about
8.1.86.

It was the Petitioner's contention, however, that although he might have been
entitled to apply to this Court in January or February 1986, it was the
refusal of his final appeal that constituted the operative infringement for
the purpose of computing the time-limit of one month. This contention is
untenable. If a person is entitled to institute proceedings under Article
126(2) in respect of an infringement at a certain point of time, the filing of
an appeal or an application for relief, whether administrative or judicial,
does not in any way prevent or interrupt the operation of the time-limit. Thus
a person aggrieved by an unlawful arrest may institute civil proceedings for
damages for wrongful arrest or may complain to the Ombudsman, under Article
156. If he is unsuccessful, in that his action or complaint is dismissed, he
cannot claim that the computation of time for the purposes of a subsequent
petition under Article 126 (2) commences from the date of such dismissal. That
example relates to a judicial or constitutional remedy: the position of an
aggrieved person can hardly be better if he opted to` pursue an administrative
remedy. The Constitution provides for a sure and. expeditious remedy, in the
highest Court, to be granted according to law, and not subject to the
uncertain discretion of the very Executive of whose act the aggrieved person
complains; if he decides to pursue other remedies, particularly administrative
remedies, the lapse of time will (save in very exceptional circumstances)
result in the former remedy becoming unavailable to him.

In Siriwardene v. Rodrigo, (2) the petitioners had been granted leases under
the Land Reform Law which were cancelled in 1979; they did not vacate these
allotments, and by notice dated 23.8.82 it was

**397**

announced that these allotments would be distributed to persons who had the
qualifications therein specified. Several of the petitioners filed
applications in the Court of Appeal in September 1982 for writs to quash that
notice and to prohibit action being taken in terms thereof; it was alleged
that the action proposed to be taken in terms of that notice was in breach of
the petitioner's fundamental rights. Those applications were later withdrawn,
and applications were made under Article 126. It was held that the period of
one month should be calculated from the date the petitioners became aware of
the notice dated 23.8.82; thus the period when the matter was pending in the
Court of Appeal was not treated as a suspension of, or interruption to, the
operation of the time limit.

It appears that had the petitioners pursued the applications made to the Court
of Appeal, a reference to this Court would have been required under Article
126(3); but the interesting question whether a petitioner who has delayed for
over one month may nevertheless apply . by way of writ to the Court of Appeal,
and bring his grievance before this Court by means of a reference under
Article 126(3) does not have to be decided in this case:

Apart from that possibility ,any other interpretation of Article 126 (2) would
preclude expeditious disposal which is its undoubted object. An aggrieved
person who chooses of to pursue his constitutional remedy, and later finds
that other remedies are of no avail, can grant himself an extension of time,
by the simple devise of filing yet an appeal; if he had previously appealed
only to the Secretary to the Ministry, he will appeal to the Minister; or from
the Minister, to the Prime. Minister; and then to the President; or he will
make a second or a third appeal, before ultimately deciding to petition this
Court. Article 126 neither permits, nor was intended to permit, such a course
of action: on the contrary, the remedy under Article 126 must be availed of at
the earliest possible opportunity, within the prescribed time, and if not so
availed of, the remedy ceases to be available.

In Hewakuruppu v. de Silva (3) the Tea Commissioner had refused the
petitioner's application for a subsidy on 18.10.83; he did not apply to this
Court under Article 126(2) within one month, and on 13.7.84 appealed to the
Tea Board. In. that appeal reference was made to instances where other
persons, similarly situated, had allegedly been granted subsidies: thus the
petitioner had knowledge,

**398**

before 13.7.84, of the acts by comparison to which he had been subjected. to
unequal treatment. The decision. of the Tea Board refusing relief was received
by the petitioner on 4.9:84, and application to this Court was made on
4.10.84: It was urged in that case that the petitioner was entitled to exhaust
administrative remedies before invoking the jurisdiction of this Court, and
that Article 126 should be liberally interpreted. Although a strong case was
established of unequal treatment, the Court nevertheless did not grant any
relief as the petition was not filed in time. It was pointed out that the law
did not provide for an appeal to the Tea Board, and that it was the decision
of the Tea Commissioner which constituted the operative refusal of the
petitioner's application for a subsidy. It was further observed that in any
event the delay of nine months in placing the matter before the Tea Board
could not be condoned.

In the case before us, the operative decision was the refusal of the
petitioner's request by letter dated 8.1.86; the law makes no provision for an
appeal there from, and the petition, not having been filed within one month
thereof, is out of time. The petitioner has neither a right nor a duty to
exhaust administrative remedies, but must come to this court promptly. Even if
this Court has a discretion to grant relief, a delay of several months cannot
be condoned.

The provisions of Chapter XXVIII section 5:1 of the Establishments Code, which
were not referred to or relied on by Counsel at the argument before us, have
pertinently been referred to by my brother Seneviratne, J., in his judgment;
he regards these provisions as affording the petitioner a right of appeal
against the decision of the #9; Director of Establishments contained in letter
dated 8.1.86. Even assuming that the petitioner's subsequent letter dated
24.1.86 was written in the exercise of this right; of appeal, that appeal was
refused by letter dated 2.4.86 sent in reply thereto; and even in relation to
that date, the petitioner is out of time.

However, the effect of the conferment on this Court of sole and exclusive
jurisdiction to hear and determine questions relating to the infringement of
fundamental rights by executive or administrative action is two fold; firstly,
this Court cannot give relief under. Article 126 in respect of an executive
act though clearly or flagrantly wrongful unless it is also an infringement of
a fundamental right; and secondly,

**399**

no other court or tribunal can hear or determine any question relating to the
infringement of a fundamental right-by executive or administrative action,
although it may give relief against other wrongful acts.

It is therefore necessary to analyse the nature of a petitioner's grievance.
He may be aggrived by a decision adverse to him because it is discriminatory
within the meaning of Article 12(l) ; or because, without being
discriminatory, it is wrongful in terms of the applicable law or regulations.
In the former case his only remedy is under Article 126(1) ; no other court or
tribunal has jurisdiction. In the latter case, Article 126 (1) is
inapplicable. Further, if in the former case he opted to pursue some
administrative remedy before some other tribunal, and if that tribunal did not
grant him relief, the discrimination which he has been subjected to is the
original discriminatory decision, and is not the decision of the appellate
tribunal. If, therefore, the petitioner in this case had in fact been
subjected to discriminatory treatment by the refusal of the Director of
Establishments to restore his name to the waiting list, no appellate tribunal
or authority had jurisdiction to hear or determine that question; his only
remedy was by petition under Article 126. The decision of the appellate
tribunal is not the source of discrimination: indeed, it would be proper for
such a' tribunal to decline jurisdiction on the ground that Article 126
confers exclusive jurisdiction on this Court. This the- right of appeal, if
any, which the petitioner had under the Establishments Code was only
in'-respect of other wrongful acts; time spent in seeking to vindicate his
fundamental rights in such an appeal does not prevent or delay the operation
of the time-limit.

It is useful to appreciate that the remedy under Article 126(2) cannot be
equated to the prerogative writs. Whether an applicant: for the latter remedy
has a right or a duty to exhaust administrative remedies; or whether the Court
has a discretion to withhold relief where an applicant has failed to seek a
possibly more convenient or expeditious remedy or whether the pursuit of, an
administrative remedy is an adequate excuse for delay, may all be questions
relevant to the grant of the prerogative writs but they have no 'bearing on
Article 126. The conferment of exclusive jurisdiction on this Court and the
imposition of a time-limit is consistent with the need for the prompt
invocation of the jurisdiction of this Court.

**400**

Counsel for the petitioner further contended that the provisions of Article
126(2) were directory only, and not mandatory a question which has been
considered in several decisions of this Court.

This question appears to have first been considered in Mahenthiran v. Attorney
General (4). The acts, of torture complained of were alleged to have been
committed on 26.5. 80, and the petitioner had been produced before a
Magistrate on 28.5.80 who remanded him to . Prisons custody. On that occasion
Counsel seems to have watched the interests of the petitioner: The petitioner
alleged that he was able to obtain proper legal advice only on 19.6.80.
Application was made to this Court on 4.7.80: 8 days late. It was held

"Article 126 requires that the application to the Supreme Court must be made
within one month of the date of the alleged infringement of the fundamental
right. The petition is clearly out of time.

Mr. Pullenayagam however contended that the time limit in Article 126 is not
mandatory but only directory, and that this Court has a discretion, in a fit
case, to entertain an application 'outside the time limit, Counsel for the
State referred us to the time limits laid down in Article 126 and argued that
the limits :have been put in with a purpose and the Court should give effect
to these time limits. Although there is much substance in the latter
contention, it is unnecessary to decide the question now, as we are not
disposed to entertain the application even if a, discretion, as stated by Mr.
Pullenayegam, is vested in us. The explanation given by the petitioner for the
delay in presenting this petition does not in our view provide an adequate
excuse for his delay."

In Jayawardena v. Attorney General (5) an application made more than one month
after, the alleged infringement was refused on- the ground-that the
jurisdiction of this Court, cannot be exercised after the lapse of one month
from the date of the executive or administrative act complained of. In
Gunawardena v. Senanayake (6) an application made more than one month after
the alleged infringement was dismissed. In Hewakuruppu v de. Silva (7) .leave
to proceed was refused: where the time limit had expired:-All these cases
proceeded on the basis that the time limit is mandatory; although not
expressly so stated, and the question -whether the Court should exercise any
discretion in favour of the petitioner was accordingly not considered.

**401**

In Hewakuruppu v. de Silva (3) too the question whether the time limit was
mandatory or directory was not expressly discussed, but the possibility that
the Court has a discretion is adverted to, although in the particular
circumstances of that case the Court was of the view that the delay was
excessive.

These decisions were considered in Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam, (8) and while
reiterating that the time - limit of one month set out in Article 126 (2) is
mandatory, it was held that this Court has, a discretion in a fit case to
entertain an application made after the expiry thereof, but that in such cases
the petitioner must provide an adequate excuse for the delay. Although,
rightly, no attempt was made to define that exception, it is implicit in that
decision that there is a heavy burden on a petitioner who seeks that
indulgence. In that case, the petitioner was held in custody, allegedly
incommunicado and therefore unable to take effective steps to invoke the
jurisdiction of this Court (see also Siriwardena v. Rodrigo, (supra): Had this
fact been established, on the principle lax non cogit ad impossibilia the
petition would have been entertained. Ranasinghe, J. as he then was (with
Sharvananda, CJ, agreeing) held on the facts that the petitioner did have
adequate access to his lawyers, but Wanasundera, J., held that the extent of
such access did not constitute the minimum of `facilities, trine and freedom
that is reasonably expected by the law in the case of a person so placed, so
as to enable him to discuss his case and instruct counsel." Though there was
disagreement as to the application of the principle. It was agreed that time
runs unless there is a grave restraint on the freedom to take effective steps
to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court.

The time limit of one month prescribed by Article 126(2) has thus been
consistently treated as mandatory; where however by the very act complained of
as being an infringement of a petitioner's fundamental right, or by an
independent act of the respondents concerned, he is denied such facilities and
freedom (including access to legal advice) as would be necessary to involve
the jurisdiction of this court, this Court has discretion, possibly even a
duty, to entertain an application made within one months after the petitioner
ceased to be subject to such restraint. The question whether there is a
similar discretion where the petitioner's failure to apply in time is on
account of the act of a third party, or some natural or man-made disaster,
would have to be considered in an appropriate case when it arises.

**402**

Counsel for the Petitioner also referred us to Visuvalingam v. Liyanage (9),
in which the majority of this Court held that the provisions of Article 126(5)
- requiring this' Court to dispose of any petition under Article 126 within
two months of the filing thereof are directory only, and not mandatory. By a
parity of reasoning, he urged, Article 126(2) must also be regarded as
directory only. It is clear from the majority judgment. (at. page 226) that
the reason for holding the time limit in Article 126(5) to be directory was
that the fundamental right sought. to be vindicated by an aggrieved party
cannot be lost or. denied "for no fault of his"; the lapse of the Court, in
failing to dispose of an application within two months cannot operate to
deprive him of his rights, in the absence of specific provision to that
effect. This confirms my view that "fault" or delay on the part of petitioner
does not entitle him to. claim an extension of the time limit under Article
26(2).

Three principles are thus discernible in regard to the operation of the time
limit prescribed. by Article 126(2): Time begins to run when the infringement
takes place; if knowledge on the part: of the petitioner is required (e.g of
other instances by comparison with which the treatment meted out to him
becomes discriminatory), time begins to run only when both infringement and
knowledge exist. (Siriwardena v. Rodrigo (2). The pursuit of other remedies,
judicial or administrative, does not prevent or interrupt. the operation of
the time limit. While the time limit is mandatory, in exceptional cases, on
the application of the principle lex non cogit ad impossibilia, if there is no
lapse, fault or, delay on the part of the petitioner, this Court has a
discretion to entertain an application made out of time.

The preliminary objection must therefore be upheld, and the petition has to be
dismissed on this ground:

DISCRIMINATION CONTRARY TO ARTICLE .12(1):

The first of the allegations made by the Petitioner, in support of his plea of
discriminatory treatment, is without foundation; it is clear from the
correspondence between J. D. Silva and the Director of Establishments that. a
letter sent to the former regarding the allocation of a house was not received
by him; upon his failure, to respond, a notation was made. against his name
(probably referable to section :3:9 of the Code) that he was not interested in
quarters; upon an appeal made by him stating that he had not received the
aforesaid

**403**

letter, it was found that the letter had not-been sent-by registered post as
required, and accordingly he- was requested to meet the 4th Respondent
regarding the .allocation of quarters: quarters were allocated to him, but he
refused to accept the same, and thereupon his name was deleted from the
waiting list; perhaps,: under section 4:3:9 if would have been more correct to
have placed his name at the bottom of the waiting list. Comparison of these
two instances, does not support a complaint of discriminatory treatment in
regard to the non-restoration of the Petitioner's name to the waiting list.
Although the Petitioner and J. D. Silva may have been in the same class or
category, in that; they were of  the same waiting list, the circumstances in
which their name: were deleted, and passed over, respectively, were completely
different In the one case, J. D. Silva, an eligible applicant, was overlooked
due to the failure to notify him in the usual manner; his name was not'
deleted on that occasion. In the other case, the Petitioner's name was
deleted, and he was not allocated quarters, as he was then an applicant who
had ceased to be eligible. In the former case, the error, when discovered, was
corrected. In the latter, what was done in 1984 not having been an error,. but
being action in conformity with the relevant rules, no question of correcting
an error arose. Since the Petitioner's reinstatement (unlike that of non-
strikers) was not with the right to continue to enjoy all the rights .and
privileges to which he was previously entitled, he had no right thereby to be
restored to the waiting list. Apart from the foregoing facts, our attention
was not drawn to any rule or practice relating to the restoration of names to
the waiting list. There has thus been no invidious discrimination; neither
unequal treatment of equals nor equal treatment of unequal (see Elmore Perera
v. Jayawickreme (10)). It is also relevant to mention that the-Petitioner
appear to have been aware of the restoration of J. D. Silva's name to the
waiting list (which took place in late .1986) at the time he submitted his
second appeal on 8.1.87.

In regard to the other three allegations the Respondents claim that the
allocations were made in terms of section 4:4:1: All the persons mentioned
held offices of responsibility, ranging from that of Vice-Chancellor, Public
Relations Officers of Ministries, and Private Secretary or Personal Assistant
to a Minister or deputy Minister. It is not suggested that they were of the
same category, i.e., clerical Officers, as the Petitioner; or that they had
been allocated quarters of the same grade as that applied for by the
Petitioner; they would thus

**404**

not even have been on the same waiting list. It is for the Petitioner to prove
his allegations to the satisfaction of the Court (Jayasena v. Soysa (10),
Velmurugu v. Attorney-General 01), Elmore Perera (1) at 298-300). Here, the
Petitioner's allegation that these  persons were not on the waiting list
and/or were not eligible for General Service Quarters amounts to, an
allegation that quarters were allocated in breach of the relevant rules. Two
wrongs do not make a right, and on proof of the commission of one wrong the
equal protection of the law cannot be invoked to obtain relief in the form of
an order compelling commission of a second wrong (Mackie & Co. v. Molagoda
(12)). Even if the Petitioner's allegation of wrongdoing were to be
disregarded, and 'if the persons specified are regarded as having been
allocated quarters in the exercise of the discretion under section 4: 4:1, (as
claimed by the Respondents:) the Petitioner cannot succeed in establishing
unequal treatment in the absence of proof that the. Petitioner. and those
persons were equals, in, that they were in the same class or category, and,
more important, that they were unequally treated. There is no allegation that
the discretion under section 4:4:1 had not been properly exercised: there is
neither suggestion nor proof that the Petitioner had even applied to the
"Allocating Authority" to be considered under this provision; or as to any
circumstances relating to the Petitioner which might constitute the "very
special reasons" which would entitle him to be considered under this rule. The
Petitioner has thus failed to prove even one prior instance which is necessary
to serve as the basis of comparison whereby the treatment meted out to the
Petitioner may be shown to be discriminatory (see Elmore Perera (1) at pages
297-298).

The third and fourth allegations are also irrelevant, for the reason that the
Respondents state that the original allocations were made in 1974 and 1977,
before the Constitution came into operation, and even if, true cannot be used
as the basis of a complaint of discrimination.

The Petitioner has thus failed to prove discrimination in violation of Article
12(1); and for this reason too the petition has to be dismissed.

The Petitioner is therefore dismissed with costs fixed at Rs.500

Application dismissed with costs fixed at Rs.500

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/16.html_  

