##  Nallanayagam v. Delgoda and Others - SLR - 299, Vol 1 of 1987 [1985] LKSC
16; (1987) 1 Sri LR 299 (22 November 1985)

**

299

NALLANAYAGAM  
v.  
DELGODA AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
WANASUNDERA, J. COLIN-THOME, J. AND ATUKORALE, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION No. 95/85.  
OCTOBER 18. 1985

_

Fundamental Rights-Articles 12(1), 13(1), 13(2), 13(4), of the Constitution-
Jurisdiction-Emergency Regulations 19, 20, 59, 64.

_

Jurisdiction based on the geographical location of the place where the offence
was committed has given way under the Emergency Regulations to the place where
the suspect is being kept for the time being.

Article 13(4) clearly implies that detention does not constitute a punishment
provided the detention is for further investigation or a trial of the person
detained is pending. At the end of the investigations if no trial of the
person detained is contemplated then that person should be released from
detention without waiting for the duration of the limit of 90 days to be over.

When a trial of the detent is contemplated at the end of the investigation his
detention in police custody must be converted to Fiscal custody in terms of
Regulation 19 (3) read with Regulations 20 and 64 and Article 13 (4) of the
Constitution. Under Regulation 20 any person produced before a Magistrate
under the provisions of Regulation 19 (3) shall remain in Fiscal custody for a
continuous period of three months and shall not be released at any time prior
to the expiry of such period, except in accordance with the provisions of
Regulation 64.

Once the indictment is filed the detenu will be remanded by the High Court
until the conclusion of the trial under the provisions of Regulation 59(1) and
59(2).

Remand for an offence under the Emergency Regulations is made compulsory and
bail can only be granted with the prior consent of the Attorney-General. It is
as if the law itself made such an offence non-bailable, thereby preventing a
Magistrate from considering the question of bail.

On the lapse of the period of three months, the Magistrate is empowered,
except in the case of violation of Regulation 24(1)(b), to release such a
person on bail, unless the Attorney-General directs otherwise. Further, after
the period of 3 months' detention, the ultimate power of release on bail is
reposed in a judicial tribunal, the Court of Appeal Which could do so in
exceptional circumstances.

**300**

**

Case referred to:

**_

Yasapalitha Nanayakkara v Henry Perera-_ S. C. Appeal No. 19/85-S.C. minutes
of 9.8.1985.

**

APPLICATION** for infringement of Fundamental Rights.

_

Nimal Senanayake, P.C._ with _K. P. Gunaratne, S. Jayatillake, Mrs A B.
Dissanayake_ and _Miss A. P Thelespha_ for petitioner.  

_

Sunil de Silva, Addl. S. G._ with _Rohan Jayatilleke, S. S. C._ and _Nihara E.
Rodrigo, S. C._ for respondents.

_

Cur. adv vult.

_

November 22, 1985.  
**COLIN-THOME, J.

**

This application filed on 2.9.85 by the petitioner is a sequel to Supreme
Court Application No. 59/85 filed on 1 1.6.85 by the petitioner.

The petitioner states that on 26.7.85 he was taken from the Slave Island
Police Station -before the Magistrate, Colombo Fort, and thereafter to the
Magazine Gaol, where the petitioner has been in custody since 26.7.85. He has
not been produced before any Judicial Officer after 26.7.85.

The petitioner states that his fundamental rights under Articles 12 (1), 13
(1)., ,13 (2) and 13 (4) have been infringed by his continued detention on or
after 1.8.85.

The petitioner avers that his continuing detention is under the authority of
Emergency Regulations which are ultra vires and illegal and in any event the
application of Emergency Regulations 18, 19 and 20 are inapplicable in the
circumstances of his case.

The petitioner states further that the petitioner's continued detention and
production on or about 26:7.85 before the Magistrate, Colombo Fort, by the 5th
respondent is illegal and makes and renders the provisions of Regulations 19
and 20 inapplicable to the petitioner. The detention of the petitioner is
consequently illegal and the petitioner's fundamental rights aforesaid are
being violated on each and every day of the continuing detention by the 1 st
and 5th respondents.

**301**

The petitioner prays

(a) for an order on the 1st respondent and any other officer of State to whom
the 1st respondent may deliver custody of the petitioner to release the
petitioner forthwith from custody,

(b) for a declaration that the petitioner's fundamental rights have been
violated ;

(c) for compensation in a sum of Rs 250,000,

(d) for costs and other further relief as seem meet to this court

It has been brought to our notice that on 30.7.85 an indictment charging the
petitioner with committing offences under the Emergency Regulations was filed
in the High Court of Batticaloa. Thereafter, the Attorney-General has
designated the High Court of Colombo as the court where the trial of the
petitioner will take place and accordingly the indictment was filed in the
High Court of Colombo on 24.9.85. On the same day the Judge of the High Court,
Colombo, enlarged the petitioner on bail with the consent of the Attorney-
General. The trial is to take place on 8.1.86.

The Inspector-General of Police, the 4th respondent, has stated in his
affidavit that on or about the 25th July 1985 he was advised that the
investigations had been concluded and that the Attorney-General has decided
that there was sufficient material to indict the petitioner on charges of
contravening provisions of the Emergency Regulations

Accordingly the petitioner was produced on 26.7.85 in the Magistrate's Court,
Colombo Fort, in terms of Regulation 19 (2) of the Emergency Regulations. The
Magistrate made order under Regulation 1 9 (3) remanding the petitioner till
20th September, 1985. A copy of the warrant of detention was produced marked 1
R 1. According to the Commissioner of Prisons, the 1st respondent, since
26.7.85 on the order of the Magistrate's Court, the petitioner has been
detained in the custody of the Fiscal in a prison established under the
Prisons Ordinance.

**302**

Learned President's Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the warrant of
detention marked 1 R 1 was not issued by a Court of "competent jurisdiction"
under Regulation 19 (3). He stated that the court of competent jurisdiction
was the High Court or Magistrate's Court having jurisdiction in Kalmunai where
the alleged offences are said to have been committed. He further submitted
that under Regulation 19 (2) and 19 (3) a competent court cannot be the court
contemplated in Regulation 57 (1 ).

It is now necessary to examine the relevant regulations :-

19 (2) Any person detained in pursuance of the provisions of regulation 18 in
a place authorized by the Inspector-General . of Police may be so detained for
a period not exceeding ninety days reckoned from the date of his arrest under
that regulation, and shall at the end of that period be released by the
officer in charge of that place unless such person has been produced by such
officer before the expiry of that period before a court of competent
jurisdiction.

(3) Where a person who has been arrested and detained in pursuance of the
provisions of regulation 18 is produced by the officer referred to in
paragraph (2) before a court of competent jurisdiction, such court shall order
that such person be detained in the custody of the Fiscal in a prison
established under the Prisons Ordinance.

20\. The provisions of section 115 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No.
15 of 1979, shall not apply in relation to any person who is produced before a
Magistrate under the provisions of regulation 19 (3) or appears before a
Magistrate in any other manner and is detained or remanded in the custody of
the Fiscal in any prison in respect of being suspected or accused of any
offence under any emergency regulation. Such person shall remain in such
custody for a continuous period of three months and shall not be released at
any time prior to the expiry of such period, except in accordance with the
provisions of regulation 64.

**303**

Regulation 57(1) reads as follows :-

57(1) Save as otherwise herein provided and notwithstanding any other written
law the proceedings in respect of an offence alleged to have been committed by
a person under any emergency regulation may be taken before the appropriate
court in Sri Lanka having jurisdiction over the place where that person is for
the time being.

Under section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979, the
criminal summary jurisdiction of Magistrates' Courts extends to offences
committed wholly or in part within its local jurisdiction. However, under
Regulation 57(1) of the Emergency Regulations the appropriate court is the
court having jurisdiction over the place where the suspect is for the time
being.

The geographical location of the place where the offence has been committed
under the ordinary law has given way under the Emergency Regulations to the
place where the suspect is being kept for the time being. The reason for this
change of venue is in the interests of national security.

Under section 30 of the Judicature Act, No. 1 of 1978, a Magistrate's Court
could be vested with the power and jurisdiction to remand a suspect. A reading
of Regulations 19 (2), 19 (3), 20, 57 (1) and 64 of the Emergency Regulations
makes it clear that the court contemplated is the Magistrate's Court.

The phrase "a court of competent jurisdiction" has to be read with Article
13(2) of the Constitution which reads:

"Every person held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of, personal
liberty shall be brought before the judge of the nearest competent court
according to procedure established by law, and shall not be further held in
custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty except upon and in terms of
the order of such judge made in accordance with procedure established by law."

**304**

As the petitioner was being kept at all` times relevant to the Magistrate's
order at the Slave Island Police Station the nearest court having jurisdiction
over such place was the Magistrate's Court, Colombo Fort. We hold therefore,
that the order of the Magistrate, Colombo Fort, marked 1 R 1, has been
lawfully made by a Magistrate having jurisdiction and that the petitioner was
in lawful custody at the time of filing of this application on 02.09.85.

Learned President's Counsel also submitted that there is no clear evidence
when the investigations were completed. He conceded that detention pending
trial is not punishment under Article 13 (4) of the Constitution and- hence a
law or regulation authorising detention pending trial is permissible. He
submitted, that there was no regulation authorising detention pending trial.
Learned counsel also submitted that there was no material before the
Magistrate that there was a trial pending when he made his order of detention
on the 26th July, 1985. He added that the authority for detaining a person
pending trial contemplated in Article 1 3 (4) cannot be any other than the
tribunal before which inquiry or trial is pending, All these submissions were
collectively made in order to urge that the warrant of detention issued on the
26th July 1985 was illegal and that the continuing detention of the petitioner
was violative of his fundamental rights.

The Inspector-General of Police has stated in his affidavit that on or about
the 25th July 1985 he was advised that the investigations had been concluded
and that the Attorney-General had decided that there was sufficient material
to indict the petitioner on charges of contravening provisions of the
Emergency Regulations. Though there is prima facie material indicating when
the investigations were concluded, investigations are however in law not
concluded the moment the police are of the view that no further statements
need to be recorded. Investigations will continue until the Attorney-General
is satisfied that no further investigations are necessary. This is so even
under the ordinary law. Under section 397 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
Act, No. 15 of 1979, the Attorney-General may give instructions to a
Magistrate with regard to further investigations.

**305**

The relevant portion of Article 13(4) of the Constitution states:

"The arrest, holding in custody, detention or other deprivation of personal
liberty of a person, pending investigation or trial shall not constitute
punishment."

Article 13 (4) clearly implies that detention does not constitute a punishment
provided the detention is for further investigation or a trial of the person
detained is pending. At the end of investigations if no trial of a person is
contemplated then that person should be released from detention without
waiting for the duration of ninety days to be over. In Yasapalitha Nanayakkara
v. Henry Perera et al a trial of the suspect was never contemplated. That is
why the judgment stated at page 11:

"it is manifest, therefore, that the detention of a person arrested without a
warrant under Regulation 18 can be justified in law only if the detention is
for further investigation. It would be unlawful to detain such a person for an
unspecified and unknown purpose as this would be an infringement of Article 13
(4). It necessarily flows from this that no sooner the further investigation
is concluded the suspect' is entitled to his release from detention without
waiting for the duration of ninety days to be over."

When a trial of the detenu is contemplated at the end of the investigation his
detention in police custody must be converted to fiscal custody in terms of
Regulation 19 (3) read with Regulations 20 and 64. These regulations have also
to be read with Article 13 (4) of the Constitution. Under Regulation 20 any
person produced before a Magistrate under the provisions of Regulation 19(3)
shall remain in Fiscal custody for a continuous period of three months and
shall not be released at any time prior to the expiry of such period, except
in accordance with the provisions of Regulation 64.

Once the indictment is filed the detenu will be remanded by the High Court
until the conclusion of the trial under the provisions of Regulation 59 (1)
and 59 (2). "

**306**

Regulation 64 deals with the question of bail. The relevant parts of
Regulation 64 states as follows:

64 (1) Notwithstanding anything in any other law, no Magistrate shall, except
with the prior written consent of the Attorney-General, release on bail any
person suspected or accused of any offence under any emergency regulation.

(2) In every case where a person is remanded by reason of the provisions of
paragraph (1) of this regulation, the Magistrate shall forthwith, inform the
Attorney-General of such remand and the circumstances relating to such case.

(3) Where any person by reason of the provisions of paragraph (1) of this
regulation, has been on remand for a continuous period of three months, the
Magistrate shall release such person on bail, unless the Attorney-General
directs otherwise

Provided that where. any person is suspected or accused of having under the
provisions of sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph (1) of regulation 24 of these
regulations, committed the offence of causing or attempting to cause death,
such person shall not, be released on bail until the conclusion of the trial
except with the prior written consent of the Attorney-General.

(3A) The Court of Appeal may, in exceptional circumstances release on bail,
any person who has been on remand for a period exceeding three months
notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (3) of this regulation.

(4) Where a Magistrate has released any person on bail and the Attorney-
General intimates to the Magistrate that such person should not have been so
released, the Magistrate shall, forthwith, take such steps as may be necessary
to take such person into custody and to remand him.

**307**

We note that the above regulations provide that remand for an offence under
the Emergency Regulations is made compulsory and bail can only be granted with
the prior consent of the Attorney-General. This is undoubtedly due to the
emergency situation that would be prevailing Such a provision in that context
would be as if the law itself made such an offence non-bailable, thereby
preventing a Magistrate from considering the question of bail. In an emergency
situation which could endanger the security of the State, the courts must
concede some latitude to the executive for a proper handling of the situation.
The above provisions are however limited for a period of three months, and we
do not consider this unreasonable.

On the lapse of a period of three months, it would appear that different
considerations apply. Except in the case of violation of Regulation 24(1) (b),
a Magistrate is now empowered to release such a person on bail, unless the
Attorney-General directs otherwise. Further, after the period of 3 months'
detention the ultimate power of release on bail is found reposed in a judicial
tribunal, namely the Court of Appeal which could do so in exceptional
circumstances.

On 30.09.85 the indictment was filed in the High Court of Colombo designated
by the Attorney-General to be the trial court. On the same day the petitioner
was released on bail with the consent of the Attorney-General.

We have examined photocopies of the record in M.C. Colombo Fort Case No. B .R.
3053. We find from the entries in the record on the 26th July 1985 that the
Magistrate has examined the merits of the application for bail by counsel for
the petitioner. He has made a full note of the submissions of counsel for the
petitioner as well as the submission made by Mr. Seneviratne, A.S.P. who
appeared for the prosecution. Mr. Seneviratne informed court that he had
instructions from the Attorney - General to move court to remand the suspect
in Fiscal's custody under regulation 19(5). He had also been instructed by the
Attorney General to file indictment against the suspect in the High Court.
There was, therefore, material before the Magistrate of pending trial.

**308**

Learned President's Counsel submitted that Regulations 19 and 20 are in
conflict, with Articles 3 and 4(d) of the Constitution. Articles 3 and 4(d)
state :

3\. In the Republic of Sri Lanka Sovereignty is in the People and is
inalienable. Sovereignty includes the, powers of government, fundamental
rights and the franchise.

4\. The Sovereignty of the People shall be exercised and enjoyed in the
following manner

(d) the fundamental rights which are by the Constitution declared and
recognised shall be respected, secured and advanced by all the organs of
government, and shall not be abridged, restricted or denied, save in the
manner and to the extent hereinafter provided

These articles have to be read with Article 15 (7) of the Constitution.

15(7) The exercise and operation of all the fundamental rights declared and
recognised by Articles 12, 13 (1), 13 (2) and 14 shall be subject to such
restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the interests of national
security, etc. . . . . .For the purposes of this paragraph 'law' includes
regulations made under the law for the time being relating to public security.

In other words the laws relating to arrest and detention may be modified under
the Emergency Regulations in force at the time in the interests of national
security.

For the reasons stated in this judgment we hold that the petitioner has failed
to establish a contravention of any fundamental right guaranteed: under
Chapter III of the Constitution. The application is missed but without costs.

**

WANASUNDERA, J. -** I agree.

**ATUKORALE. J. -** I agree.

_Appeal dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1985/16.html_  

