  
_Fundamental rights - Termination of dealership contract in petrol by
Petroleum Corporation - "Executive or administrative action" \- Article 12 (1)
of the Constitution.  
_  
The petitioner was carrying on the business of a petrol filling station at No.
502, Sirimavo Bandaranaike Mawatha, Colombo 14, as a dealer of the 2nd
respondent Petroleum Corporation (the Corporation). The said filling station
was owned by the Corporation. The petitioner was appointed as a temporary
dealer in 1984 and a formal dealership agreement was entered into between the
petitioner and the Corporation in 1997. On 14. 10 1998, officers of the
Corporation arrived at the petitioner's filling station and took possession of
it after handing over a letter of termination dated 13. 10. 1998.  
  
The defence of the respondents was that according to a Board Paper dated 28.
09. 1998 the Board of Directors o< ins Corporation had decided to limit "one
shed per dealer".  
  
The petitioner had been operating three Corporation owned outlets owned by the
Corporation.  
  
Notwithstanding, the claim of "one shed per dealer" policy which was also the
claim made in an SC application decided on 02. 10. 1997 - it was proved that
the Corporation had permitted some dealers to operate more than one filling
station and that a dealer who operated one filling station had been given
another on 12. 08\. 1998.

**337**

Normally, the conditions of the agreement require three month's notice prior
to the termination of agreement, but in the case of certain specified
defaults, the Corporation is permitted to terminate the agreement without
notice. In the instant case requisite notice of three months was not given
even though the relevant Board Paper did not refer to any such default.  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1) Although the relationship between the petitioner and the Corporation was
contractual, it is settled law that the latter's conduct constitutes
"executive or administrative action" within the meaning of Article 126 of the
Constitution.  
  
(2) The petitioner had been subjected to discrimination vis-a-vis persons who
were similarly circumstanced. Further, the termination of the agreement
without due notice was arbitrary. Hence, the petitioner's right under Article
12 (1) has been infringed.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. _Dahanayake v. De Silva -_ (1978-79-80) 1 Sri LR 47.  
  
2\. _Kuruppu Don Somapala Gunaratne and Others v. Ceylon Petroleum
Corpo­ration and Others -_ SC (Application) No. 99/96 SC Minutes of 31st July,
1996.  
  
3\. _Wickrematunge v. Anuruddha Ratwatte and Others_ \- (1998) 1 Sri LR 201.  
  
4\. _Sangadasa Silva v. Anuruddha Ratwatte and Others -_ (1998) 1 Sri LR 350.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Romesh de Silva, PC with Geethaka Gunawardena_ for petitioner.  
  
_D. S. Wijesinghe, PC_ for 2nd respondent.  
  
_J. C. Weliamuna_ for 3rd respondent.  
  
_Ms. I. Demuni de Silva, Senior State_ Counsel for 1st and 4th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**338**

March 25, 2002  
  
**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
  
**The petitioner, a duly incorporated society with 17,000 members and
approximately 500 employees, had been carrying on the business of a Petrol
Filling Station at No. 502, Sirimavo Bandaranaike Mawatha, Colombo 14, as a
dealer of the 2nd respondent Corporation. The petitioner was first appointed
as a temporary dealer of petroleum products in February, 1984 (C) and a formal
dealership agreement between the petitioner and the 2nd respondent Corporation
was entered into on 28. 02. 1997 (G2). In September, 1998, the petitioner
became aware that the 2nd respondent was attempting to take steps to terminate
the dealership. On hearing these unconfirmed reports, the petitioner wrote to
the 2nd respondent on 23. 09. 1998, but there was no response to this letter.
On 14. 10\. 1998, several officers from the 2nd respondent Corporation arrived
at the petitioner's filling station and took possession of the filling
station, after handing over the letter of termination dated 13. 10. 1998 (11),
to the Manager.  
  
The petitioner claims that by the said termination of the dealership
agreement, the 1st and 2nd respondents had infringed the petitioner's
fundamental right to equal treatment and acted in a discriminatory manner.  
  
This Court granted leave to proceed in respect of the alleged infringement of
Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.  
  
The 2nd respondent Corporation on the other hand contended that the agreement
with the petitioner was terminated due to a policy decision taken by the Board
of Directors to permit the dealers to operate only one dealership. The letter
dated 13.10.1998, terminating the dealership with the 2nd respondent
Corporation (11) however stated that the termination was due to the fact that
the petitioner was operating more than one filling station and further that
the petitioner's dealership was on a temporary basis.

**339**

The Manager (Marketing) of the 2nd respondent Corporation averred in his
affidavit that the general consensus of the Board of Directors of the 2nd
respondent Corporation was that there were several dealers who enjoyed
multiple dealerships and that it was more commercially viable and equitable if
it is limited to one dealership per person. It was also submitted on behalf of
the 2nd respondent Corporation that representations were made to the effect
that persons with multiple dealerships were not able to maximize the potential
of their filling stations in view of logistical and financial strains they had
to bear as a result of operating more than one filling station. As a result of
this line of thinking, a decision was taken by the Board of Directors of the
2nd respondent Corporation on 06. 10. 1998 to terminate the dealership of the
petitioner's filling station situated at Sirimavo Bandaranaike Mawatha,
Colombo 14.  
  
_Consequently, the Manager (Marketing) of the 2nd respondent Corporation
submitted a Board paper on 28. 09. 1998 (2R7) recom­mending the termination of
dealership of the petitioner society. The reason for this recommendation was
on the basis that it was 'the intention of the Board of Directors to limit one
corporation owned filling station or service station to one individual or
organization.  
_  
It was submitted on behalf of the 2nd respondent Corporation that the said
decision to limit 'one shed per dealer was taken after one D. Kasturiarachchie
filed a fundamental rights application against the termination of his
dealership at Nuwara Eliya in SC (Application) No. 289/95 decided on 20. 10.
1997 (2R4). The contention of the 2nd respondent Corporation in the said
Kasturiarachchie's case was that, a proposal was made to the Board of
Directors of the 2nd respondent Corporation, to permit one dealership per each
dealer, thus placing a limitation on multiple dealerships.  
  
The Board paper of the 2nd respondent Corporation, dated 28. 09. 1998, had
incorporated the following resolution, with regard to the termination of the
dealership of the petitioner:

**340**

"As it is the intention of the Board of Directors to limit one Corporation
owned filling station or service station to one individual or organization we
recommend that of the three Corporation owned outlets operated by the Colombo
South Co-operative Society Ltd, the dealership at the filling station at
Sirimavo Bandaranaike Mawatha, Colombo 14, which accrues the lowest income to
this society, be terminated ..."  
  
The petitioner, however, contended that, although the Board of Directors of
the 2nd respondent Corporation had taken up the position that a dealer would
be given only one filling or service station, contrary to this policy, the 2nd
respondent had permitted some agents to operate more than one filling station.
The learned President's Counsel for the petitioner contended that, one Slipto
Agencies (Pvt) Ltd., had obtained the dealership of filling stations at
Baseline Road, at Maligawatte and at Bastian Mawatha. The dealership of the
filling station at Baseline Road had to be terminated not owing to a decision
taken by the 2nd respondent Corporation, but due to an order given by this
Court in SC (Application) No. 251/95.  
  
Although the 2nd respondent Corporation accepted that, pursuant to a decision
taken by the Board of Directors in or around October, 1997, that facility
should be granted to dealers on the basis of 'one shed per dealer', it would
appear that even in August, 1998, the 2nd respondent had allocated dealerships
to persons who were already dealers of filling or service stations of the 2nd
respondent Corporation. The documents annexed along with the affidavit dated
01. 02\. 1999 bear testimony to this fact. Annex (i), attached to the Board
Paper of the 2nd respondent Corporation, dated 28. 09. 1998 marked 2R7 is a
list of dealers operating more than one "Petroleum Corporation controlled
dealerships as at 31. 08. 1998'. According to 2R7, one Mrs. C. K.
Warusavithana who was the dealer of the filling station at Attidiya Junction
from 12. 10. 1988 was given another dealership

**341**

in Mt. Lavinia on 12. 08. 1998. It is surprising how the 2nd respondent
Corporation decided to grant her the second dealership in August, 1998, if a
policy decision was taken in October, 1997, to permit the dealers, 'to operate
only one deadership'.  
  
The petitioner contended that, although initially there was only a temporary
dealership, on 28. 02. 1997, the petitioner entered into a dealership
agreement with the 2nd respondent Corporation. The Manager (Marketing) of the
2nd respondent Corporation has not denied this fact. He, however, contended
that the dealership of the filling station at No. 502, Sirimavo Bandaranaike
Mawatha, Colombo 14, was given to the petitioner only on a temporary basis and
the 2nd respondent Corporation had decided to enter into a formal dealership
agreement to regularize and formalize the terms and conditions between the two
parties. He, in his affidavit, further averred that even where a dealership is
granted temporarily, a dealership agreement is entered into with the 2nd
respondent Corporation. The Memorandum of agreement, however, does not
indicate that the dealership agreement was on a temporary basis as claimed by
the 2nd respondent Cor­poration. According to the dealer agreement the right
to terminate an agreement without any notice was on the basis that the dealer
had failed to 'pay and settle in full all monies due to the Corporation'.
Clause 12B of the dealer agreement is as follows:  
  
"If the Dealer does not in the opinion of the General Manager perform his
duties and obligations as a Dealer of petroleum prod­ucts of the Corporation,
faithfully, diligently and efficiently or if he defaults in complying with the
terms, covenants and conditions of this Agreement or the terms and conditions
under which commissions and allowances are payable to him referred to in
paragraph 12 above, the Corporation shall be entitled to terminate this
agreement without any notice whatsoever. The Corporation shall also be
entitled to terminate this agreement after three months' notice in writing to
the dealer ....".

**342**

The Board paper on the letter of termination however, did not refer to any
such defaults made by the petitioner regarding the dealership. When the
termination of the petitioner's dealership was taken up for discussion on 14.
09. 1998 (2R 5), the Board had directed the Manager (Marketing) of the 2nd
respondent Corporation to fall in line with the policy adopted by the Board,
viz 'one shed per dealer' (2R 6). When the Board met again on 09. 10. 1998, it
was resolved to terminate the dealership of the petitioner on the basis that
the co-operative society operated more than one filling station.  
  
In the first Board paper, it was recommended by the Manager (Marketing) that
the 3rd respondent must be appointed as dealer of the filling station in
question (2R5). The purpose of the second Board Paper was to _'terminate the
dealership of M/s Colombo South Co-operative Society Ltd. and appoint Mr. W.
K. D. Tilak Waragoda of No. 26, Biyagama Road, Pethiyagoda, Kelaniya, as
Dealer at Corporation owned Lanka Filling Station, Sirimavo Bandaranaike
Mawatha, Colombo 14.'  
_  
It is common ground as pointed out earlier, that as soon as the petitioner
became aware that there was a move to terminate the dealership of the
petitioner, a letter was sent to the 2nd respondent Corporation. If the Board
of Directors and the Manager (Marketing) of the 2nd respondent Corporation
were of the view that the petitioner's agreement had to be terminated, the
petitioner should have been given three months' notice prior to the
termination of the agreement in terms of clause 12B of the agreement. No
reasons were given by the 2nd  respondent as to why the alternative procedure
of termination without notice, based upon a resolution of the Board of
Directors of the 2nd respondent Corporation was opted for by them.  
  
The relationship between the petitioner and the respondent, which is based on
the agreement entered into on 28. 02. 1997, no doubt is contractual. It is
however, now well-settled law that the action taken by the Board of the 2nd
respondent Corporation to terminate the

**343**

petitioner's dealership and to appoint the 3rd respondent in his place
constitutes "executive or administrative action" within the meaning of Article
126 of the Constitution _(vide Dahanayake v. De Silva (1) ,  Kuruppuge Don
Somapala Gunaratne and Others v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation and Others,(2)
SC (Application) Wickrematunga v. Anuruddha Ratwatte and Others (3),
Sangadasa Silva v. Anuruddha Ratwatte and Others (4)._  
  
Article 12 (1) of the Constitution states: "All persons are equal before the
law and are entitled to the equal protection of the law". This provision
implies that there should be no discrimination between any two persons if they
are similarly situated and that no decision should be taken in a capricious,
unreasonable or arbitrary manner. Considering the applicability of this
provision in a matter regarding the termination of a dealership agreement by
the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation, Justice Dr. Amerasinghe in Wickrematunga v.
Anuruddha Ratwatte and Others (supra) at pp. 229-230 stated that:  
  
"If the rules of conduct contain provisions that are constitutionally
impermissible ..., they must be declared unconstitutional. Likewise, if such
provisions are ex facie lawful, not invidiously discriminatory and rational in
the matter of classification, but in their application violate the
constitutional restraints and guarantees relating to fundamental rights and
freedoms declared and recognized by the Constitution, the action of the
authority concerned must be declared unconstitutional: For instance, if they
are applied in an invidiously discriminatory manner or in a capricious,
unreasonable or arbitrary manner."  
  
In these circumstances, I am of the view that the 2nd respondent Corporation
has acted in an arbitrary manner in total violation of clause 12B of the
dealer agreement by their failure to give due notice to the petitioner before
the cancellation of the dealer agreement. Besides, it is also to be noted that
the aforesaid material shows that the petitioner had been subjected to unequal
treatment in violation of

**344**

Article 12 (1) of the Constitution by applying the purported policy 190
decision to limit **'one shed per dealer'** unequally and arbitrarily.  
  
I, therefore, hold that the Board of the 2nd respondent Corporation was not
entitled to terminate the petitioner's dealership and therefore the
termination of the petitioner's dealership was not justifiable. I,
accordingly, hold that the petitioner's fundamental right guaranteed by
Article 12 (1) of the Constitution has been infringed by the 2nd respondent
Corporation. I also hold that the order dated 13. 10. 1998 (11), terminating
the petitioner's dealership of the filling station situated at No. 502,
Sirimavo Bandaranaike Mawatha, Colombo 14, and contained in the letter marked
11 is null and void and of no effect in law.  
  
I, accordingly, make order and direct the 2nd respondent Corpo­ration to
reinstate the petitioner society as the dealer of the filling station situated
at No. 502, Sirimavo Bandaranaike Mawatha, Colombo 14, under and in terms of
the agreement dated 28. 02. 1997 (G2) entered into between the 2nd respondent
Corporation and the peti­tioner within one month from today. The 2nd
respondent Corporation should also pay the petitioner society a sum of Rs.
125,000 as compensation and Rs. 25,000 as costs. These amounts totalling to a
sum of Rs. 150,000 must be paid within three (3) months from today.  
  
**EDUSSURIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**YAPA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Relief granted.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/16.html_  

