SC (FR) APPLICATION NO. 797/98  
6TH SEPTEMBER AND 13TH NOVEMBER. 2000  
  
_Fundamental rights - Rights of employees of Sri Lankan Airlines Ltd -
Termination of services - Posting of an officer as Manager, Kuwait -
Shareholders Agreement between the Government and Emirates Airlines - Whether
in view of the agreement and amended Articles of Association of Air Lanka, the
impugned acts constitute "executive or administrative action" -Article 12(1)
of the Constitution.  
  
_The petitioner in Application No. 791/98 alleged that the termination of his
services by letter dated 17. 11. 98 addressed to him by the Chief Executive
Officer of Sri Lankan Airlines Ltd (3rd respondent) is violative of Article
12(1) of the Constitution. The petitioner in Application No. 797/98 alleged
that inter alia, his being posted as Manager, Kuwait is violative of Article
12(1) of the Constitution.  
  
A, preliminary objection was raised on behalf of Sri Lankan Airlines (the 1st
respondent) that consequent upon the Shareholders Agreement signed by the
Government with Air Lanka and Emirates Airlines and the amended Articles of
Association of Air Lanka the impugned acts do not constitute "executive or
administrative action." The petitioners cannot therefore invoke the
fundamental rights jurisdiction of the court. By the said Agreement, Emirates
agreed to purchase 40% of the shares of Air Lanka. However, it acquired only
26% of shares.  
  
Air Lanka was subsequently renamed Sri Lankan Airways.  
  
According to the amended Memorandum and Articles of Association, the business
of the Company was to be conducted by a Board of Directors having 7 members, 4
of whom are approved by the Government, the balance 3 are appointed by
Emirates (the Investor) which number

**95**

includes the Managing Director. The Investor was placed in charge of the
management of the business of the Company. It was submitted on behalf of the
1st respondent that the impugned decisions remain that of the Investor and the
Government has no control over the Board of Directors even if such decisions
need the prior consent of the Board.  
  
**Held :  
  
**(1) "Executive or administrative action" (within the meaning of Chapter III
of the Constitution) would include executive or administrative action of the
State or its agents or instrumentalities.  
  
(2) _Per_ Ismail, J.  
  
"It is clear from the provisions of the Memorandum and Articles of Association
and the Shareholders Agreement that the management. power, control and
authority over the business of the Company is vested in the Investor and with
certain management decisions being vested exclusively in it."  
  
(3) _Per_ Ismail, J.  
  
"Applying the test of government agency or instumentality, it is clear upon a
consideration of the provisions of the amended Articles of Association and the
Shareholders Agreement **. . .** that the Government has lost the "deep and
pervasive" control exercised by it over the Company earlier. The action taken
by Sri Lankan Airlines cannot now be designated "executive or administrative
action."  
  
**Cases referred to :  
  
**1\. _Perera v. University Grants Commission_ FRD VOL(1) 103; (1978-80) 1 Sri
L R 128  
  
2. _Wijetunga v. Insurance Corporation of Sri Lanka_ (1982) 1 Sri L R 1  
  
3\. _Rajastan State Electricity Board. Jaipur v. Mohan Lal_ AIR (1967) SC 1857  
  
4\. _Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagatran_ AIR (1975) SC 1331  
  
5\. _R.D. Shetty v. International Airport Authority_ AIR (1979) SC 1682  
  
6\. _Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib_ AIR 1981 SC 487  
  
7\. _Som Prakash v. Union of India_ AIR 1981 SC 212  
  
8\. _Rajaratne v. Air Lanka Limited_ (1987) 2 Sri L R 128 at 146  
  
9\. _Wijeratne v. The People's Bank_ (1984) 1 Sri L R 1

**96**

**PRELIMINARY** objection to an application for relief for infringment of
fundamental rights.  
  
**S.C. NO 791/98  
  
**_Faisz Musthapha, P.C_. with _Dr. Jayampathy Wickramaratne_ and _Sanjeewa
Jayawardena_ for petitioner.  
  
_Romesh de Silva, P.C_. with _Palitha Kumarasinghe, Hiran de Alwis_ and
_Sugath Caldera_ for 1st respondent.  
  
_U. Egalahewa State Counsel_ for Attorney-General.  
  
**S.C. NO 797/98  
  
**_D.S. Wijesinghe, P.C_. with _Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ and _Ms. Priyadharshini
Dias_ for petitioner.  
  
_Romesh de Silva P.C_. with _Palitha Kumarasinghe, Hiran de Alwis_ and _Sugath
Caldera_ for 1st, 3rd, 5th, 7th and 8th respondents.  
  
_U. Egalahewa State Counsel_ for Attorney-General.

_Cur. adv. vult._

January 11, 2001.  
  
**ISMAIL, J.  
  
**The petitioner in SC (FR) Application No . 791/98 has sought a declaration
that the letter dated 17. 11. 99 of the Chief Executive Officer of Sri Lankan
Airlines Limited, terminating his services is null and void and that it is in
violation of his fundamental right to equality under Article 12(1) of the
Constitution.  
  
The petitioner in SC (FR) Application 797/98 has sought, inter alia, a
declaration that his promotion to Grade MII be ante-dated to take effect from
May 1995 instead of April 98; that he be reverted to his substantive post as
Route Manager, Middle East and Asia, and that his posting as Manager, Kuwait,
referred to in the directive dated 23. 11. 98, be

**97**

declared null and void and that his fundamental right to equality guaranteed
to him under Article 12(1) of the Constitution has been violated;  
  
These two Applications were taken up together in view of the preliminary
objection raised on behalf of Sri Lankan Airlines Limited that the impugned
acts of its management, referred to in the respective petitions, do not
constitute 'executive or administrative action' and that the petitioners
cannot therefore invoke the fundamental rights jurisdiction of this court.  
  
The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to grant relief against any infringement
or imminent infringement of fundamental rights recognized by Chapter 111 of
the Constitution is restricted to cases of such interference by executive or
administrative action. The expression 'executive or administrative' action has
not been defined. However, the trend of our decisions has been to construe it
as being equivalent to actions of the government or of an organ or instrument
of the government. In _Perera v. University Grants Commission_ (1), it was
observed that the expression executive or administrative action would include
"executive or administrative action of the State or its agencies or
instrumentalities".  
  
It was pointed out in _Wijetunga v. Insurance Corporation of Sri Lanka_ (2),
that Article 4(d) of the Constitution mandated all organs of the Government to
respect, secure and advance the fundamental rights enshrined in it and that
"action by the organs of the government alone constitutes the executive or
administrative action that is a sine qua non or basic to proceedings under
Article 126." While there can be no doubt that the expression would include
official acts of all government departments and its officers, a problem could
be envisaged when the acts of entities other than that of the government are
being questioned.

**98**

In India the meaning of "other authorities" which fall within the definition
of State in Article 12, which reads as follows, has been considered in several
cases.  
  
"In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, `the State' includes (i)
the Government and Parliament of India. (ii) the Government and the
legislature of each State and (iii) (a) all local or other authorities within
the territory of India, (b) all local or other authorities under the control
of the Government of India."  
  
The majority judgment in _Rajastan State Electricity Board, Jaipur v. Mohan
Lal_ (3), adopted the test that a statutory authority "would be within the
meaning of 'other authorities' if it has been invested with statutory power to
issue binding directions to the parties, the disobedience of which would
entail penal consequences or it has the sovereign power to make rules and
regulations having the force of law".  
  
Ray C.J. adopted this in his judgment in _Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagatram_ (4).
Mathew, J. observed, in a concurring judgment, that the concept of 'State' has
changed radically in recent years. He said;  
  
"the question for consideration is whether a public corporation set up under a
special statute to carry on a business or service which Parliament thinks
necessary to be carried on in the interest of the nation is an agency or
instrumentality of the State and would be subject to the limitations expressed
in Article 13(2) of the Constitution. A State is an abstract entity. It can
only act through the instrumentality or agency of natural or juridical
persons. Therefore, there is nothing strange in the notion of the State acting
through a corporation and making it an agency or instrumentality of the
State."  
  
This doctrine of agency and state instrumentality was adopted in _R.D. Shetty
v. International Airport Authority_ (5). Bhagwati, J. said;

**99**

"While accepting the test laid down in _Rajasthan Electricity Board v. Mohan
Lal_ (supra) and followed by Ray C.J. in _Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagatram_ (supra),
we would, for reasons already discussed, prefer to adopt the test of
Governmental instrumentality or agency as one more test and perhaps a more
satisfactory one for determining whether a statutory corporation, body or
other authority falls within the definition of 'State.' If a statutory
corporation, body or other authority is an instrumentality or agency of
Government, it would be an 'authority' and therefore 'State' within the
meaning of that expression in Article 12."  
  
In _Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib_ (6), Bhagwati, J. while affirming the broader
test of agency and state instrumentality formulated by Mathew, J. in Sukhdev's
case added that if agencies or instrumentalities of the government were not
held to be "other authorities", it would be the easiest thing for the
government to assign to a plurality of corporations almost every state
business or economic activity and thereby cheat the people of the fundamental
rights guaranteed to them. Bhagwati, J. then formulated the relevant tests for
determining whether a corporation was an agency or instrumentality of the
government adding that they were not limited in their application to a
corporation created by statute but that it was equally applicable to a company
or a society. According to him the factors that could be taken into account as
being relevant in determining whether a corporation is an agency or
instrumentality of the government are whether the entire share capital is
being held by the government; whether the financial assistance being provided
by the State is to the extent that it meets almost the entire expenditure of
the undertaking; whether the corporation enjoys a state conferred or a state
protected monopoly status and whether there is a deep and pervasive government
control of the corporation.  
  
In _Som Prakash v. Union of India_ (7), Krishna Iyer, J. delivering the
judgment of the majority stated:

**100**

"A study of Sukdhev's case (supra) **. . .** yields the clear result that the
preponderant considerations for pronouncing an entity as State agency or
instrumentality are (i) financial resources of the State being the chief
funding source, (ii) functional character being governmental in essence, (iii)
plenary control residing in Government, (iv) prior history of the same
activity having been carried on by the Government and made over to a new body,
and (v) some element of authority or command. Whether the legal person is a
corporation 'created by a statute, as distinguished from under a statute, is
not an important criteria although it may be an indicium."  
  
After a review of the Indian authorities referred to above, _Atukorale, J. in
Rajaratne v. Air Lanka Limited_ (8), was inclined to adopt the test of
governmental agency or instrumentality and was of the view that it was a more
rational and meaningful test. He stated that the expression 'executive or
administrative' action in Article 17 and 126 of our Constitution should be
given a broad and not a restrictive construction. He took into account the
following matters as being relevant in respect of Air Lanka Ltd, when
considering a similar objection in April 1987 and concluded that its acts fell
within the ambit of the expression 'executive or administrative action'.  
  
(i) The subscribers to the Memorandum of Association consisted of 7 persons of
whom 4 were individuals and the other three were Corporations. Three of the
individuals were those who held the offices of the Secretary to the Cabinet,
the Secretary to the Ministry of Finance and Planning and the Secretary to the
Treasury. The three Corporations consisted of the Bank of Ceylon, the People's
Bank and the Ceylon Shipping Corporation which are semi-government
organizations.  
  
(ii) The Board of Directors was enjoined to ensure that in the disposal or
allotment of the shares the total holding of shares in the capital of the
company by or on behalf of the

**101**

Government shall not be at any time less than 60% of the issued capital for
the time being.  
  
(iii) On the basis of the Government holding of 60% of the issued capital, it
was entitled to nominate a majority of Directors and the business of the
company was managed by the state.  
  
(iv) More than 90% of the issued share capital was held directly by the
Government whilst the People's Bank and Bank of Ceylon held virtually the
balance.  
  
(v) Air transport services was earlier a function that was carried on by the
Government under the name of Air Ceylon through the Department of Civil
Aviation.  
  
He found that the cumulative effect of these factors and features rendered Air
Lanka an agent or organ of the government and its actions were therefore
designated as 'executive or administrative action'. Atukorale, J. concluded;  
  
"All the above circumstances enumerated by me show that Air Lanka is no
ordinary company. It has been brought into existence by the Government,
financed almost wholly by the Government and managed and controlled by the
Government through its nominee directors. It has been so created for the
purpose of carrying out functions of great public importance which was once
carried out by the Government **. . .** "  
  
Air Lanka was incorporated on 11. 01. 79 under the Companies Ordinance as a
limited liability company and was owned solely by the Government. However,
since 30, 03. 98 there has been a change in this position after the Government
entered into a Share Sale and Purchase Agreement consequent to which 40% of
its shares were to be sold to Emirates, a company incorporated in the Emirate
of Dubai, which operates the international airline of the United Arab

**102**

Emirates. However, at present the Emirates holds. only 26% of the shares of
Air Lanka Limited.  
  
The Government also entered into a Shareholders Agreement on 30. 03. 98 with
Air Lanka Limited and the purchaser Emirates (Investor) for an initial period
of ten years. In terms of the said Agreement, the management, power, control,
authority over and responsibility for the business and affairs of the Company
is vested with Emirates for the implementation of an approved business plan.
Section 2.2.1 of the Agreement further provides that in matters over which the
Investor exercises such power, control and authority, the Investor shall not
be required to refer such matters to or seek the approval at a General Meeting
of the company or the Board of Directors and that such matters shall be
validly conducted without such reference or consent. If was also stipulated
that for the avoidance of doubt, such power, control and authority is vested
in the Investor notwithstanding its status as minority shareholder in the
Company.  
  
Air Lanka Limited changed its name to Sri Lankan Airlines Limited and it was
so incorporated on 09. 05. 99.  
  
The Memorandum and Articles of Association, as amended, provide for the
business of the Company to be conducted by the Board of Directors, which
consists of seven Directors, four of whom are to be appointed by the
Government and three exclusively by the Investor. The Board appoints the
Managing Director and a Finance Director as nominated by the Investor from
among the nominee Directors appointed by the Investor. The Managing Director
manages the business of the Company and is in turn accountable to the Board
for its management. The senior management of the Company reports to him and he
has to keep the Chairman informed and shall take his advice into
consideration.  
  
The quorum necessary for the transaction of the business of the Board is for
any four Directors to be present in person,

**103**

of whom at least two must be Nominee Directors appointed by the Investor and
at least two appointed by the Government. No decision can be taken at any
General Meeting unless a quorum is present and it should include at least one
authorized representative of the Investor. Thus the Government has no control
over the Board as the decisions of the Board have to be taken by both the
representatives of the Government and the Investor, both voting in favour of
such decision.  
  
It is clear from the provisions of the Memorandum and Articles of Association
and the Shareholders Agreement that the management, power, control and
authority over the, business of the Company is vested in the Investor and with
certain management decisions being vested exclusively in it. Although the
written consent of the Board of Directors is necessary for certain decisions,
it has been pointed out that the decisions complained of in these cases do not
come within the matters stipulated in the clause needing the prior consent of
the Board. Such decisions remain that of the Investor and the Government has.
no control over the Board of Directors even if such decisions need the prior
consent of the Board.  
  
The following observations of Sharvananda, CJ. in _Wijeratne v. The People's
Bank_ (9), can be appropriately considered in resolving the question as to
whether Sri Lankan Airlines is An agency of the state or its instrumentality.  
  
"When a corporation is wholly controlled not only in its policy making but
also in the execution of its functions it would be an instrumentality or
agency of the State. On the other hand, where the Directors of the
Corporation, though appointed by the government with a direction to carry out
governmental policies, are otherwise free from the fetters of governmental
control in the discharge of their functions, the corporation cannot be treated
as instrumentality or agency of the State. It is not possible to formulate an
all inclusive or exhaustive test to determine whether a particular corporation
is acting as an instrumentality or

**104**

agency of the government for its action to be labelled executive or
administrative action. Mere finding of some control would not be determinative
of the question. The existence of deep and pervasive State control may afford
an indication that a corporation is a State agency."  
  
Applying the test of government agency or instrumentality, it is clear upon a
consideration of the provisions of the amended Articles of Association and the
Shareholders Agreement referred to above that the Government has lost the
"deep and pervasive" control exercised by it over the Company earlier. The
action taken by Sri Lankan Airlines cannot now be designated 'executive or
administrative action'. I therefore uphold the preliminary objection and hold
that this Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the Applications of the
petitioners. Both Applications are accordingly dismissed without costs.  
  
**S. N. SILVA, CJ.** \- I agree.  
  
**P. R. P. PERERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**DR. S. A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**D. P. S. GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Preliminary objection upheld.  
  
Applications dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/16.html_  

