##  Leader Publications (Pvt) Ltd. v. Ariya Rubasinghe, Director of
Information and Competent Authority and Others - SLR - 265, Vol 1 of 2000
[2000] LKSC 16; (2000) 1 Sri LR 265 (30 June 2000)

**265**

**LEADER PUBLICATIONS (PVT) LTD.  
 v.  
 ARIYA RUBASINGHE, DIRECTOR OF INFORMATION AND  
COMPETENT AUTHORITY AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
SC (FR) No. 362/2000  
19th JUNE, 2000.  
  
_Fundamental rights - Prohibition of the printing and publication of a
newspaper - Taking possession of the printing press - Regulation 14 of
Emergency. Regulations - Articles 12(1), 14(1)(a) and 14(1)(g) of the
Constitution - Validity of the appointment of Competent Authority - Regulation
2 of Emergency Regulations.  
_  
The petitioner is a Company incorporated with the object of carrying on
business as a publisher, printer and proprietor of newspapers.  
  
On 3rd May, 2000 the Secretary to the President announced that in terms of
Regulation 2 of the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulation
No. 1 of 2000 read with Regulation 14(1) of that Regulation, the President had
appointed the 1st respondent (Ariya Rubasinghe) to be the Competent Authority
"for the aforesaid regulation."  
  
On 22nd May, 2000 the 1st respondent purporting to act in terms of Regulation
14(2) b (i) by an order in writing prohibited the petitioner from printing,
publishing and distributing its newspaper "Sunday Leader" or any newspaper for
a period of six months from the date of the order. Further by an order
purporting to be under regulation 14(2)(b) (ii) he directed the Inspector
General of Police to take possession of the petitioner's printing press and
its premises. The petitioner complained that the said orders were violative of
his rights under Articles 12(1), 14(1)(a) and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution. At
the hearing of the application. the validity of the 1st respondents
appointment as Competent Authority was taken up as a preliminary matter.  
  
Regulation 14(2) in terms of which the 1st respondent was appointed as
Competent Authority provides inter alia

**266**

"Competent Authority" in relation to any emergency regulation means, unless
otherwise provided, for in such regulation, any person appointed, by name, or
by office, by the President to be a Competent Authority for the purpose of
such regulation."  
**  
Held:  
  
**1\. Section 6 of the Public Security Ordinance requires the authorities or
persons empowered to make orders and rules to be empowered by emergency
regulations. There must be a substantive enactment in that regard. The words
in the definition are merely descriptive and had no substantive effect of
empowering the authority or person for the purposes of regulation 14.  
  
Per Amerasinghe, J.  
  
"Benion (Op. Cit. p. 436) says "It is a drafting error (less frequent now than
formerly) to incorporate a substantive enactment in a definition. A definition
is not expected to have operative effect as an independent enactment. If it is
worded in that way, the Courts will tend to construe it restrictively and
confine it to the proper function of a definition."  
  
2\. Article 35 of the Constitution does not bar the challenge to the
appointment of the Competent Authority.  
  
Per Amerasinghe, J.  
  
"This is not a proceeding against the President in respect of anything done or
omitted to be done by the President. What is in issue, is the validity of Mr.
Rubasinghe's orders."  
  
3\. The 1st respondent was not entitled to make the order he did, for he was
not empowered by the regulation to do so within the meaning of section 6 of
the Public Security Ordinance. There is no regulation stating who the
"Competent Authority" is for the purposes of regulation 14.  
  
4\. The 1st respondent had no power or authority to act under regulation 14 :
and the document dated 22nd May, 2000 addressed to the Leader Publications
(Pvt) Ltd. by the 1st respondent, is a nullity and of no force or avail in
law.

**267**

**cases referred to :  
**  
1\. Pargan Singh v. Secretary of State for the Home Department (1992) 1 W. L.
R 1052 at 1056.  
2\. Blackpool Corporation v. Locker (1948) 1 K B. 349.  
3\. Wakefield Board of Health v. West Riding & Grimsby Railway Co. (1865) L R
1 QB 84 at 86.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Romesh de Silva, P. C. with Palitha Kumarasinghe and Hiran de Alwis
instructed by G. G. Arulpragasam_ for petitioner.  
  
_K. C. Kamalasabeyson, P. C., A. G. with Saleem Marsoof, P. C. A. S. G.,
Uditha Egalahewa, S. C. and Harsha Fernando, S. C.,_ for 1st, 5th, 6th and 7th
respondents.  
  
_Wijeyadasa Rajapaksha with Kapila Liyan age_ for 2 nd respondent  
  
_P. A. D. Samarasekera, P. C. with Keerthi Sri Gunawardene_ for 4th
respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

June 30, 2000  
**AMERASINGHE, J.  
**  
The petitioner is a company. It was incorporated with the object of carrying
on business as a publisher, printer and proprietor of newspapers. In 1994, the
petitioner commenced publication of The Sunday Leader. In 1999, the petitioner
commenced publication of the Irida Peramuna.  
  
The President of the Republic, acting under the powers vested in the President
by the Public Security Ordinance No. 25 of 1947 (as amended), made the
Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations No. 1 of 2000.
(See Gazette Extraordinary 1130/8 of May 03, 2000). Regulation 14 of the said
regulations provided for the "control

**268**

of publication." Regulation No. 1 of 2000 was amended by the President on 10th
May 2000. (See Gazette Extraordinary 1131/20 of May 10, 2000) by the
substitution of a new regulation 14.  
  
Regulation 14 (1), among other things, provides that a "Competent Authority"
may take such measures or give such directions as he may consider necessary
for preventing or restricting the publication of matters which would or might
be prejudicial to the interests of national security or the preservation of
public order. The "Competent Authority" could direct the submission of
material intended to be published, to be submitted to him. Regulation 14 (2)
(a) states as follows: Every person who contravenes the provisions of any
direction given under paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be guilty of an
offence; and where any person is convicted of such an offence by reason of his
having published a newspaper. . ., the President may by order direct that
during such period as may be specified in that order, that person shall not
publish any newspaper in Sri Lanka . . ." Regulation 14 (2) (b) states as
follows: "Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-paragraph (a), where
there is a contravention of the provisions of any direction given under
paragraph (1) of this regulation and such contravention is in respect of any
publication in any newspaper. . ., the Competent Authority may, after issuing
one or more warnings as he may consider reasonable, order -  
  
(i) that no person shall print, publish or distribute or in any way be
concerned in the printing, publication or distribution of such newspaper ...
for such period as may be specified in the order; or  
  
(ii) that the printing press, computer or equipment used for the publication
of such newspaper. . ., for such period as is specified in the order, not be
used for any purposes whatsoever or for any purpose as is specified in the
order, and such order may authorize any person specified therein

**269**

 to take such steps (including the taking possession of any printing press,
computer or equipment with respect to which the order is made or of any
premises in which it is contained or of any part of such printing press,
computer or equipment or premises) as appear to the person so authorized) to
be necessary for seeking compliance with the order."  
  
On 03 May 2000, the Secretary to the President made the following notification
under the caption `The Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers)
Regulation No. 1 of 2000 Appointment of Competent Authority under Regulation
14 (1); "It is hereby notified that in terms of Regulation 2 of the Emergency
(Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulation No. 1 of 2000, read with
Regulation 14 (1) of that regulation, the President has appointed Mr. Ariya
Rubasinghe, Director of Information, to be the Competent Authority for the
aforesaid regulation." (See Gazette Extraordinary 1130/23 of May 06, 2000).  
  
On 08 May 2000, Mr. Ariya Rubasinghe, signing the document as "Director of
Information and Competent Authority", sent the Editor of The Sunday Leader a
copy of Gazette Extraordinary 1130 of 03 May 2000 and issued the following
"directive": "I being the Competent Authority appointed under section 14 (1)
of the said regulation hereby require you to strictly adhere to the provisions
of section 14 of the said regulation and to obtain my prior approval for any
such publication or transmission (sic)." On May 09, 2000, the Editor replied
as follows: "I write with reference to your letter ... dated 08 May 2000
informing me that you have been appointed a Competent Authority under section
14(1) of the regulations cited above. You have however not intimated when your
appointment was gazetted. I write to inform you that The Sunday Leader will
adhere to the provisions of section 14 and 14 (1) as requested by you."  
  
On 09 May 2000 Mr. Rubasinghe wrote to the Editor of The Sunday Leader
alleging that regulation 14 (1), had been

**270**

violated. He stated, "l, being the Competent Authority appointed under, this
regulation, do hereby inform you that any such future violation of this
regulation will compel me to take appropriate action against you and your
newspaper." Another warning was issued on 19 May 2000. On 22 May 2000, Mr.
Rubasinghe, wrote to the petitioner as follows:  
  
"Acting under the powers vested with the Competent Authority under the
regulation 14 (2) (b) ... I Ariya Rubasinghe the Competent Authority do hereby
inform you that the news article appearing in The Sunday Leader. . . of 21St
May 2000 . . . "War in fantasy land - Palaly is not under attack" is a
publication made in contravention of the directives given under the regulation
14 (1) particularly with reference to the matters relating to the operations
of security forces and that the said article has been published without
submitting the same to me for prior approval as required by my directives
dated 8th May 2000 and further that [the] said news item is prejudicial to the
interest of national security and the preservation of public order.  
  
Therefore acting under the powers vested with me by regulation 14 (2) (b) (i)
I, hereby order that from 22nd May 2000 to 21St November 2000 for the period
of six months you are prohibited from printing, publishing and distributing
... the said The Sunday Leader newspaper or any newspaper.  
  
Further acting under the powers vested with me by regulation 14 (2) (b) (ii),
I, hereby order that from 22nd May 2000 to 21St November 2000 for the period
of six months, the printing press located at Leader Publications (Pvt.) Ltd.,
No. 24, Katukurunduwatte Road, Ratmalana, shall not be used for any printing
purpose whatsoever and for the purpose of carrying out this order the
Inspector General of Police, Sri Lanka is hereby authorized by me to take such
steps for securing compliance with the order including the taking of the
possession of the said printing press and its premises . . ."

**271**

On 31 May 2000, the petitioner filed an application in this Court alleging the
violation of its fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution. An amended
application was filed on 05 June 2000. Leave to proceed was granted for the
alleged infringement of Articles 12 (1), 14 (1) (a) and 14 (1) (g) of the
Constitution. The application for interim relief was refused and the matter
was listed for hearing on 19 June 2000.  
  
After learned counsel for the petitioner had outlined his case, he commenced
his submissions on the validity of the order made by the 1st respondent. When
learned counsel for the petitioner referred to the order of the 1st
respondent, purporting to act under the provisions of regulation 14 (2) (b),
we enquired whether the 1st respondent had the power to make the decisions he
did, since it did not appear from the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and
Powers) Regulation No. 1 of 2000 that he had been appointed under the
provisions of the said Emergency Regulation to be a 'Competent Authority' for
the purposes of regulation 14.  
  
Although the Attorney General did make certain oral submissions, he said he
was taken by surprise and requested time to consider the matter and make
written submissions. We were at a loss to understand why the respondents,
including the Attorney General, were in such a state of un preparedness on
that matter, for, as we have seen, when the Editor of The Sunday Leader was
sent a copy of the Gazette notification by Mr. Rubasinghe who had claimed to
be the Competent Authority for the purposes of regulation 14, the Editor had
raised the matter of his appointment. Again, in the appeal of the Managing
Director of the petitioner to the Chairman of the Advisory Committee on 24 May
2000, it was stated that "Mr. Rubasinghe has purported to act in terms of his
purported powers purportedly vested in him by regulation 14. . .". The
Advisory Committee was requested to "set aside the purported order. . .",
inter alia, on the ground that it was "ultra vires the purported powers of Mr.
Rubasinghe." (The emphasis is mine). In paragraph 41 of its petition, the
petitioner states that it is

**272**

"unaware whether the 1st respondent has been appointed as a Competent
Authority. . .". With regard to the reliefs sought in the petition, the
petitioner, inter alia, prays as follows: "(e) declare that the 1st respondent
has no power or authority to act as a Competent Authority under Regulation 14
... ; (f) declare that the order contained in the letter dated 22nd May 2000
made by the [ 1st] respondent, prohibiting the printing, publication and
distributing of the petitioner's newspapers and prohibiting the petitioner
from using its printing press is null and void and/or bad in law." The
question of jurisdiction, in the sense of the I It respondent's power to
decide and make orders on matters referred to in regulation 14, was in issue,
despite his confident assertion that he had been the duly appointed 'Competent
Authority' for the purposes for which regulation 14 was made. It was certainly
not, as the Attorney General said and learned Counsel for the second
respondent suggested,, a question "raised by the court for consideration": we
merely drew attention to the matter and clarified the issue to be decided. We
stated that if the issue of the competence of the 1st respondent was decided
against him, the matter before us would be at an end. On the other hand, if we
held in favour of the respondents' submissions on the question of competence,
the matter would be resumed for argument.  
  
We wanted assistance from counsel to enable us to decide the matter. In
response to our question. How much time do you want?, the Attorney General
requested a day's time to make written submissions. This was granted to him as
well as to all other counsel. The Attorney General and learned counsel for the
2nd respondent filed written submissions. We took time for consideration of
the submissions of counsel.  
  
**THE ATTORNEY GENERAL'S SUBMISSIONS  
**  
The Attorney General's oral and written submissions will be considered
together. The Attorney General submitted that although the 1st respondent had
not in fact been appointed a 'Competent Authority' by the regulations, he had
nevertheless been duly appointed. Regulation 2 (1), states as follows:

**273**

" 'Competent Authority' in relation to any Emergency Regulation means, unless
otherwise provided for in such regulation, any person appointed, by name, or
by office, by the President to be a Competent Authority for the purpose of
such regulation." Regulation 5 (1) provides for the appointment of any person
as a Competent Authority for the purposes of any emergency regulation. This is
an "enabling provision" and cannot be "diluted" by the rest of the provisions
of that regulation. Therefore, the appointment has been validly made for the
purposes of regulation 14. Even in the absence of specific reference in
regulation 5 for the appointment of the Competent Authority by the President,
yet the said appointment by necessary implication would be valid as the words
"Competent Authority" contemplated in regulation 5 "would attract the
interpretation in regulation 2 (1)." Regulation 2 (1) makes it clear that the
"Competent Authority" is the person appointed by name or office by the
President. Whilst regulation 5 enables the appointment of a Competent
Authority, the mode of appointment is set down in regulation 2," although this
may be "inelegant drafting." In the Gazette notification published on May 06,
2000, it was stated that the 1st respondent had been appointed a 'Competent
Authority' for the purposes of regulation 14 (1). In any event, in terms of
section 6 of the Public Security Ordinance, the only person who could have
appointed the Competent Authority is the President. "Where the Emergency
Regulation makes no reference to the appointment of a particular authority,
the only person who could make such appointment is the President and such
appointment when made derives its validity through section 6." Furthermore,
Article 4 of the Constitution provides that the executive power of the
President, including the defence of Sri lanka, shall be exercised by the
President of the Republic. Executive power "necessarily includes the power of
appointment." The Competent Authority contemplated by regulation 14 "is not an
institution or body requiring to be formally constituted. This regulation by
itself enables such person to be appointed in order to exercise powers and
functions specified therein." Regulation 14 is "self contained to

**274**

enable such Competent Authority to act without any reference being made to
such person either in regulation 2 or regulation 5 provided he is appointed by
the President." Therefore, "even assuming but not conceding that there is no
empowering provision in the Regulation in relation to a Competent Authority,
the appointment of a Competent Authority for the purposes of Regulation 14 (1)
is valid and in accordance with the said Regulation." "Having regard to the
nature and scope of the Emergency Regulations and the circumstances in which
they were made, as set out in paragraph 19 of the affidavit of the 1st
respondent, such regulations must be interpreted so as to give proper and
effectual effect to the purpose for which they were made . . . Even when there
is an omission, a Regulation must be interpreted to give effect to the purpose
for which it was made."  
  
**MY VIEWS ON THE ATTORNEY GENERAL'S SUBMISSIONS  
**  
The Attorney General correctly submitted that the executive power of the
people, including the defence of Sri Lanka, is, by Article 4 (b) of the
Constitution, vested in the President. I agree that the executive power
extends to the power of making appointments. However, it does not follow that
the President may do as she or he may will, for appointments must be made in
conformity with the provisions of the law. The executive power of the
President includes the defence of Sri Lanka. But emergency powers derive from
Parliament by delegation. The executive has no pouvoir reglementaire, as it
has in France. Under the Constitution, the legislative power of the people is
exercised by Parliament. The President has no primary legislative power.
However, the law making power is delegated by Parliament to the President in
respect of the making of such emergency regulations as appear to her or him to
be necessary or expedient in the interests of public security and the
preservation of public order and the suppression of mutiny, riot or civil
commotion, or for the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the
life of the community. (Section 5 Public Security Act No. 25 of 1947 as

**275**

amended). Article 155 (1) of the Constitution states the Public Security
Ordinance shall be deemed to be a law enacted by Parliament. Ordinarily,
delegated powers should be exercised by the authority upon whom it is
conferred, and by no one else. Delegatus non potest delegare, unless a
contrary intention is expressed. Section 6 of the Public Security Ordinance
permits delegation by the President. Section 6 states as follows: "Emergency
regulations may provide for empowering such authorities or persons as may be
specified in the regulations to make orders and rules for any of the purposes
for which such regulations are authorized by this Ordinance to be made, and
may contain such incidental and supplementary provisions as appear to the
President to be necessary or expedient for the purposes of the regulations."
The section confers a power which if exercised is coupled with a duty.
Parliament has intended to leave to the judgment of the President the question
whether or not to exercise the power to empower authorities or persons at all,
but where the President decides to exercise the power, the President must make
emergency regulations empowering such authorities or persons as may be
specified in the regulations to make orders and rules for any of the purposes
for which such regulations are authorized by the Public Security Ordinance to
be made. There is a duty to exercise such delegated power even though it has
been conferred in discretionary terms. In Pargan Singh v. Secretary) of State
for the Home Department(1), where the Immigration Act 1971 s. 18 (1) says that
the Secretary of State  may by regulations provide' for notice to be given of
an appeasable decision, the House of Lords held that the true legal meaning of
this enactment was that such regulations must be made. See also Francis
Bennion, Statutory Interpretation, 3rd ed. 1997, p. 182.  
  
In the matter before this Court, the President did make emergency regulations
empowering certain authorities or persons specified in such regulations to
make orders for the various purposes of the regulations made. Thus with regard
to requisitioning and acquisition of property, regulation 8

**276**

states that "a Competent Authority" has the power to do certain things.
Regulation 8 (10) states that for the purpose of regulation 8 "Competent
Authority" includes six specified classes of persons. Additionally,
regulations 8 (7) and (8) confer powers with regard. to the requisitioning of
immovable property on the Secretary to the Ministry of Defence. Regulation 9
confers powers with regard to the requisitioning of vehicles on a "Competent
Authority". Regulation 9 (5) specifies who "Competent Authority" means for the
purposes of regulation 9. Regulation 10 A provides for the appointment by the
President of a Commissioner-General of Essential Services for the purposes of
the regulation ... Regulation 10 B provides for the appointment by the
President of a Commissioner of Civil Security for the purposes of the
regulations. With regard to the prevention of the entry of persons into
restricted places, regulation 11 confers powers on a "Competent Authority".
Regulation 11 (3) specifies who "Competent Authority" means for the purposes
of regulation 11. With regard to the prohibition of meetings and processions
(regulation 12) and the imposition of curfew (regulation 13) the President is
designated as the relevant authority. With regard to the supervision, search
and detention of persons, regulations 16 and 17 confer powers on the Secretary
to the Ministry of Defence: With regard to the power of search, seizure arrest
and detention, regulation 18 (1) confers powers on certain specified persons.
Regulation 20 B provides for the appointment of a Commissioner-General of
Rehabilitation by the President of the purposes of that regulation. These
provisions recognize the fact that when Parliament in section 6 of the Public
Security Ordinance enabled the President to empower authorities or persons to
do certain things authorized by the Ordinance, such empowerment was
conditional: the authorities or persons empowered to make orders and rules for
any of the purposes for which any regulation was made must be specified in
emergency regulations. If Parliament has found it necessary in order to meet
the severe conditions of a time to authorize by indirect means the taking of
the extraordinary

**277**

measures set out in regulation 14 at the command of a selected authority or
person, plain justice at least requires that the public should know not only
what precisely is the authority conferred, so that it may be ensured that the
exercise is not in excess of the power Parliament has conferred, but also that
the authority or person designated to take such measures should be identified
and duly empowered in accordance with a prescribed mode of appointment.
Publicity is essential. See the observations in Blackpool Corporation v.
Locker(2)  
  
In the same delegated legislation in which the regulations mentioned above
relating to the appointment of various authorities and persons to make orders,
namely, the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provision and Powers) Regulation No. 1 of
2000 as amended, regulation 14 deals with "Control of Publications". There are
several authorities or persons empowered to exercise the powers conferred by
regulation 14. It is stated in regulation 14 (2) (a) that where there has been
a conviction of a person for an offence of having published a newspaper in
contravention of regulation 14 (1), the President may by order direct that
during such period as maybe specified in that order that person shall not
publish any newspaper in Sri Lanka. In terms of regulation 14 (6), the
President may direct that an order made under regulation 14 be suspended or
revoked by the President. Regulation 14 (1) refers to a "Competent Authority"
who may also make decisions and take various actions with regard to the
"control of publications," including the authorization of any person specified
in the order of the Competent Authority to take such steps as appear to the
persons so authorized to be necessary for compliance with the order. As we
have seen, in the matter before us, the person authorized was the Inspector-
General of Police. I am not considering or commenting upon the acts or
omissions of Mr. Rubasinghe. I do note, however, that whereas the President
has confined action on the part of the President to cases where there has been
conviction for an offence, regulation 14 (2) (b) enables the "Competent
Authority ... after issuing one or more warnings as he may consider reasonable
. . ." to take the

**278**

measures set out in regulation 14 which, as we have seen, far exceed those
measures the President may take under regulation 14 (2) (a).  
  
We are not at this stage concerned with the question of 'warnings' issued by
the 1st respondent and their validity or significance. Nor are we concerned
with the 1st respondent's interpretation of a cartoon or articles referred to
in paragraph 19 of the 1st respondent's affidavit as suggested by the Attorney
General to be indicative of the purpose for which the regulations were made,
namely to deal with a "serious crisis" confronting the country. What is in
issue is not the existence of circumstances warranting the bringing into
operation Part II of the Public Security Ordinance. The question is whether
the 1st respondent was by law entitled to make the orders he made, even
granting that there was a "serious crisis.  
  
I am of the view that the 1st respondent was not entitled to make the orders
he did, for he was not empowered by the regulations to do so within the
meaning of section 6 of the Public Security Ordinance. There is no regulation
stating who the "Competent Authority" is for the purposes of regulation 14.  
  
Regulation 14 may be "self contained". But, who is the authority or persons as
specified in the regulations to make orders under regulation 14? No one. The
delegation of power by the President to a Competent Authority was effected by
regulation 14. But the means chosen for the appointment, as far as the
Competent Authority for the purposes of regulation 14 was concerned, namely by
a notification published in the Gazette was not an effective exercise of the
delegated power conferred by Parliament by section 6 of the Public Security
Ordinance. Regulation 5 is no doubt, as the Attorney General said, an
"enabling provision"; but what it enables is the appointment of competent
authorities for the whole or any part of Sri Lanka and for the appointment of
several competent authorities for the purposes of any regulation or for any
specified area or place. Reliance was placed upon section 2 (1)

**279**

of the regulations which defines "Competent Authority". The Gazette
notification making the purported appointment, too refers to regulation 2 (1).
Section 6 of the Public Security Ordinance requires the authorities or persons
empowered to, to make orders and rules to be empowered by emergency
regulations. There must be a substantive enactment in that regard. The words
in the definition are merely descriptive and had no substantive effect of
empowering any authority or person for the purposes of regulation 14\. See
Wakefield Board of Health u. West Riding & Grimsby Railway Co.,(3).  
  
Bennion (op. cit. P. 436) says: "It is a drafting error (less frequent now
than formerly) to incorporate a substantive enactment in a definition. A
definition is not expected to have operative effect as an independent
enactment. If it is worded in that way, the Courts will tend to construe it
restrictively and confine it to the proper function of a definition."  
  
If the definition of "Competent Authority" in regulation 2 (1) was drafted
with the intention of having a substantive effect it must be regarded as a
drafting error and construed restrictively and confined to its limited
function of a definition. Parliament has reposed trust and confidence in the
President and since the President is authorized to make binding, general law
through emergency regulations, all conditions imposed by Parliament, including
those set out in section 6 of the Public Security Ordinance where Parliament
has, in an exceptional instance, included a power of sub-delegation to
authorities and persons selected by the President, must be strictly observed,
especially since the rights and freedoms of citizens under the ordinary laws
may be disregarded. Indeed, the very purpose of emergency regulations is to
suspend the operation of the laws of the land for the sake of achieving the
purposes specified by Parliament in the Public Security Ordinance  
  
Moreover, the failure to identify the Competent Authority for the purpose of
regulation 14 falls outside the usual, operative, delegated \- legislative
scheme of Parliament: As we

**280**

have seen, the "Competent Authority" and other person or authority for the
purpose of each regulation in the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and
Powers) Regulation No. I of 2000 have been identified except in the one case
of the "Competent Authority" for the purposes of regulation 14. It might also
be pointed out that in several Emergency (Restriction on Publication and
Transmission of Sensitive Military Information) Regulations, (e. g. regulation
2 of No. I of 1995, regulation 4 of No. I of 1996; regulation 4 of No. I of
1998), it is stated as follows: "The President may for the purpose of these
regulations, appoint by name or office, any person or body of persons to be
the "Competent Authority". Those regulations gave the "Competent Authority"
certain powers with regard to the control of publication, just as regulation
14 of the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulation No. 1 of
2000 seeks to do.  
  
**THE SUBMISSIONS OF LEARNED COUNSEL FOR THE SECOND RESPONDENT  
**  
Regulation 2 states that any person can be appointed by name or office as a
Competent Authority. The President may in terms of Article 155 (2) of the
Constitution make regulations overriding or suspending the operation of the
provisions of law except the provisions of the Constitution. The President has
derived authority to appoint a Competent Authority by virtue of Article 155 of
the Constitution and sections 5 and 6 of the Public Security Ordinance. When
the President makes regulations the President need not mention in such
regulations that the President is empowering herself with authority to appoint
competent authorities. If the proposition put forward is accepted. "then one
can argue that even in the absence of provisions in the Constitution and the
Public Security Ordinance still the President can appoint competent
authorities if there is enabling provision in the regulation." It is not
"logical to argue that the President is empowered to make regulations
empowering herself to appoint competent authorities in the absence of the said
(sic) provisions of law. In view of the

**281**

applicability of the said provisions of law there is no necessity whatsoever
for the President to include an enabling provision to appoint the competent
authorities." The power to appoint competent authorities is vested in the
President and the President has made the appointment. There is no irregularity
in the procedure followed. In any event, the appointment cannot be challenged
in view of the immunity of the President in terms of Article 35 of the
Constitution. Under no circumstances can the Court question the validity
and/or legality of the appointment of competent authorities. In fact the
petitioner has not in the petition challenged the appointment of the competent
authorities. Neither the President nor the Attorney General under and in terms
of Article 35 (3) of the Constitution have been made parties to this
application and therefore it is incorrect to consider the validity of such
appointment without hearing the necessary parties.  
  
**MY VIEWS ON THE SUBMISSIONS OF COUNSEL FOR THE SECOND RESPONDENT  
**  
The President's power to appoint competent authorities is not derived from
regulation 2. Nor is it derived from Article 155 of the Constitution. It is
derived from section 6 of the Public Security Ordinance. Article 155 of the
Constitution states that the Public Security Ordinance "shall be deemed to be
a law enacted by Parliament." As I have explained, if and when the President
decides to appoint authorities or persons to exercise certain functions, the
President must, as required by Parliament in section 6 of the Public Security
Ordinance, as a condition of its delegation of legislative authority to the
President, empower persons who are to exercise sub-delegated powers relating
to the making of orders and rules, in emergency regulations.  
  
The President cannot, as learned counsel for the second respondent supposed,
appoint competent authorities except in strict accordance with the provisions
of section 6 of the Public Security Ordinance. It is not a question of
"logic", as learned counsel submitted; it is a question of law; and the law

**282**

is stated in section 6 of the Public Security Ordinance. The making of
emergency regulations cannot have the effect of overriding, amending or
suspending the operation of the Public Security Ordinance, under Article 155
(2) of the Constitution, for it is through that law that Parliament delegates
the power of making emergency regulations to the President. It is a duteous
thing that the President strictly observes the conditions of the powers of
legislation delegated by parliament. The submissions based on the immunity of
the President from suit and the need to hear "necessary parties" does not
require much consideration. This is not a proceeding against the President in
respect of anything done or omitted to be done by the President. What is in
issue, is the validity of Mr. Rubasinghe's orders. It is a matter where
Parliament has delegated some of its Constitutional powers to the President
and the issue is whether the power of Parliament delegated to the President
has been exercised in accordance with the intention of Parliament as stated in
section 6 of the Public Security Ordinance. The Constitution, as well as
sections 2 (3), (4) (5) and (6) of the Public Security Ordinance, make it
clear in Article 155 that the President's powers with regard to public
security are derived from Parliament and are subject to Parliament's control
and scrutiny. The Courts shall endeavour to ensure that the will of
Parliament, as expressed in the Public Security Ordnance, will be duly carried
out. As for the submission that, the petitioner had not challenged the
validity of the Competent Authority's appointment, attention is drawn to
paragraph 41 of the petition and prayers (e) and (fl of the petition, as well
as correspondence, referred to above.  
  
**ORDER  
**  
For the reasons set out in my judgment, I declare that the first. respondent
had no power or authority to act under regulation 14. I further declare that
the document dated the 22nd of May, 2000 (P26) addressed to Leader
Publications (Pvt.) Ltd. by the first respondent, is a nullity and of no force
or avail in law.

**283**

Acting under and in terms of Article 126 (4) of the Constitution, I  
  
(1) Direct the 5th respondent, the Inspector-General of Police, to restore
forthwith to the petitioner possession of any printing press, computer
equipment or premises of which possession may have been taken pursuant to any
order or purported order issued by the first respondent to the 5th respondent;  
  
(2) make order that the State shall pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 100,000 as
costs within 8 weeks from the date of this order.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J**. - I agree.  
  
_Relief granted by declaration that the 1st respondent's appointment as
Competent Authority is a nullity._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/16.html_  

