##  Abdul Razak and Another v. Dharmadasa, Chief Inspector of Police,
Katugastota and Others - SLR - 128, Vol 1 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 16; (1999) 1 Sri
LR 128 (23 February 1999)

**128**

**ABDUL RAZAK AND ANOTHER  
v.  
DHARMADASA, CHIEF INSPECTOR OF POLICE,  
KATUGASTOTA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
P. R. P. PERERA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 877/96 (FR)  
DECEMBER 17, 1998

_Fundamental rights ‑ Unlawful arrest and detention ‑ Articles 13 (1) and 13
(2) of the Constitution._

The 1st petitioner and his son the 2nd petitioner were reputed businessmen in
Kandy. The 3rd respondent was an Attorney‑at‑law. On 10.11.1996 at about 7 pm
the petitioners were returning home and were driving along a narrow road close
to the lane where their residence was situated. At that point of time the 3rd
respondent was driving a car along the same road but in the opposite
direction. Next an argument occurred between the 3rd respondent and the
petitioners when the vehicles driven by the 3rd respondent and the 1st
petitioner found it difficult to pass each other. After the argument the 3rd
respondent drove away threatening that he would complain to the police and
have the 1st petitioner remanded. On 11.11.1996 the 1st respondent Chief
Inspector visited the petitioners at their business office and arrested them
on a complaint made by the 3rd respondent and took them to the Katugastota
Police station. The 1st respondent informed the petitioners that the 2nd
respondent had given him specific instructions to arrest the petitioners and
produce them at the Police station. According to the 3rd respondent's
complaint to the Police, at about 7 pm on 10.11.1996 the 1st petitioner had
abused him and the 2nd petitioner had attempted to seize the 3rd respondent by
his shirt collar. On that complaint the 1st respondent produced the
petitioners before the Magistrate on a "B" report alleging that the
petitioners had committed offences under sections 332, 480 and 484 of the
Penal Code, whereupon the Magistrate committed the petitioners to remand
custody.

**Held:**

The "B" report presented to the court did not justify the allegation of an
offence under section 332 of the Penal Code which was the only cognizable
offence referred to therein. The other two offences are non‑cognizable
offences for which

**129**

an arrest without a warrant cannot be made. Hence the arrest and detention of
the petitioners were wrongful and the 1st and 2nd respondents had infringed
the rights of the petitioners guaranteed by Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the
Constitution.

_Per_ Perera, J.

"Having regard to the facts and circumstances of this case, there is very
little doubt in my mind that the 1st and 2nd respondents arrested the
petitioners at the instigation of the 3rd respondent **. . .** I would have
had no hesitation in awarding substantial compensation personally against the
3rd respondent, but for the fact that the petitioners have specifically stated
that they claim no relief from him."

**Case referred to:**

_Faiz v. Attorney ‑General _and _Others_ ‑ (1995) 1 Sri LR 372.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Faiz Musthapha_ , PC with _Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ for petitioners.

_Rienzie Arsekularatne,_ DSG with _Harsha Fernando,_ SC for State.

_Dr. J. De Costa_ with _Upali Kirindigoda_ for the 3rd respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult_.

February 23, 1999.

**PERERA. J.**

In the present petition to this court, the petitioners complain that the 1st
and 2nd respondents have acted in violation of their Fundamental Rights
guaranteed by Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution. The petitioners
have, in the circumstances, sought a declaration to this effect from this
court with the prayer that the 1st and 2nd respondents be ordered to pay
compensation in a sum of Rs. 1 million to the said petitioners.  
  
The facts relating to this complaint of the 1st and 2nd petitioners are as
follows:-

**130**

The 1st petitioner is a reputed businessman and is the owner of several
commercial establishments in and around Kandy. He is the Chairman and Managing
Director of Bobby Industries (Pvt) Ltd., a manufacturing concern specialising
in Jossticks and other related products, and is also the Chairman and Managing
Director of Monara Match Co., (Pvt) Ltd.  
  
The 2nd petitioner is the son of the 1st petitioner who is presently preparing
for the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants Stage 1 examination. He
is also a Director of both the aforesaid companies referred to above.  
  
According to the petitioners they were arrested by the 1st respondent on the
11th of November, 1996, in pursuance of a false complaint made by the 3rd
respondent. This arrest was effected without a warrant and without explaining
to them the reason for such arrest.  
  
The 1st respondent is the Chief Inspector of the Katugastota Police station
and the 2nd respondent is the OIC of the same station.  
  
According to the petitioners around 7.00 pm on the 10th of November, 1996, the
1st and 2nd petitioners were returning from Kandy to their residence at 1st
lane, Mavilmada, Kandy. The 2nd petitioner was driving the van bearing
registration No. 61‑5801 followed by the 1st petitioner who was driving the
car bearing registration No. 19‑9065\. The petitioners proceeded in their
aforesaid respective vehicles along the road which connects the Mavilmada road
and the intersection of the 2nd and 1st lanes. The said road is a steep and
narrow one and as such two vehicles could not pass abreast of each other. As
the petitioners approached the said intersection, they observed a car driven
by the 3rd respondent approaching them at an excessive speed from the
direction of the 2nd lane. As the 3rd respondent failed to dip the headlights
of his car in accordance with established driving rules, the petitioners who
were driving up the hill were blinded by the glare emanating from the light of
the said headlights and they were, therefore, compelled to stop their
vehicles.

**131**

The 2nd petitioner who had stopped at the aforesaid intersection thereafter
drove past the 3rd respondent in the direction of the 2nd lane. The car driven
by the 3rd respondent passed the intersection and entered the aforesaid road
at a high speed without dipping its headlights. As it was not possible for the
1st petitioner's car and the 3rd respondent's car to pass each other, the 3rd
respondent had driven up alongside the 1st petitioner's car and asked him to
reverse the van up to Mavilmada road. The 1st petitioner had explained to the
3rd respondent that the Mavilmada road was about 200 yds away and requested
him to reverse his car on to the intersection which was only a few yds behind
him. Thereupon, the 3rd respondent had abused the 1st petitioner in foul
language and stated that the 3rd respondent was an Attorney‑at‑law and that he
would complain to the Police and have the 1st petitioner remanded.  
  
By this time, the 2nd petitioner had arrived on the spot and advised the 3rd
respondent that there was no necessity for such abuse over a trivial matter.
The 3rd respondent had continued to abuse both petitioners and had threatened
to have both of them remanded. Thereupon, the 1st petitioner had driven his
car along the ditch on to the road with the assistance of the 2nd petitioner
and proceeded to their residence.  
  
The petitioners state further that on the following day ‑ ie on 11. 11. 1996
at or about 8.30 am the 1st respondent had visited the petitioners in the
office at Bobby Industries (Pvt) Ltd., and requested them to accompany him to
the Katugastota Police station. When the petitioners inquired from the 1st
respondnet as to why they were requested to accompany him to the Police
station, the 1st respondent had informed them that he had to record statements
from both petitioners on a complaint that had been made against them by the
3rd respondent. The petitioners had then requested the 1st respondent to
record their statements at the office. This request had been turned down by
the 1st respondent who had informed them that the 2nd respondent had given him
specific instructions to arrest the petitioners and to bring them to the
Katugastota Police station.

**132**

Accordingly, the petitioners had arrived at the Katugastota Police station
around 11.00 am that morning and met the 1st respondent, who had then read out
a complaint made by the 3rd respondent. The 3rd respondent in this complaint
had stated that the petitioners had abused him and that the 2nd petitioner and
attempted to seize the 3rd respondent by his shirt collar at around 7.00 pm on
the previous night at the aforesaid intersection.  
  
The petitioners then denied the aforesaid allegations and made their
statements relating to this incident. (Copies of the statements made by the
1st and 2nd petitioners are annexed to the petition marked P2 and P3).  
  
Thereafter, according to the petitioners, the 1st respondent showed them a
document and informed them that the said document had already been prepared to
produce them before the Magistrate, Kandy. The petitioners had protested
stating that they had not committed any offence and had requested the 1st
respondent to release them forthwith. The 1st respondent had refused to do so
and had informed the petitioners that they were "under arrest". On the same
day, at around 1.30 pm ‑ ie 11. 11. 1996, the petitioners were produced before
the Additional Magistrate, Kandy, by the 1st respondent on the basis of the
aforesaid document which had been previously shown to them. The petitioners
later discovered that this document was a 'B' report bearing number B/42292/96
(P4).  
  
According to the said 'B' report, the petitioners had committed offences
punishable under sections 332, 480 and 484 of the Penal Code. The petitioners
state that although there were several lawyers present in court at the time
the petitioners were produced, no lawyer was willing to appear on their
behalf.  
  
The 1st respondent had having filed this report moved that the petitioners be
released on bail. However, several lawyers who appeared for the 3rd respondent
had strenuously objected to bail being granted. Thereupon the Additional
Magistrate committed the petitioners to remand custody and directed that the
case be called in open court on 19. 11. 1996. Thereafter, this case was called
before the Magistrate

**133**

on the 12th of November, 1996, on a motion filed on behalf of the petitioners
and the Magistrate released the petitioners on cash bail in a sum of Rs. 5,000
each with two sureties who were ordered to deposit a sum of Rs. 10,000 each.
In addition, the said Magistrate directed the petitioners to report to the
Katugastota Police station on every Sunday till the conclusion of the trial.
(A true copy of the said 'B' report and the journal entries of the said case
have been produced marked P4. The Order of the Additional Magistrate dated 11.
11. 1996 committing the petitioners to remand custody has been produced marked
P4A and the order of the Magistrate releasing the petitioners on bail dated
12. 11. 1996 is marked produced P4B).  
  
Mr. Musthapha, PC invited the attention of this court to the 'B' Report which,
inter alia, states that of the two vehicles which had come up the road, the
1st vehicle had driven past the virtual complainant and that the virtual
complainant had also at a later stage driven away from the scene of the
alleged incident. Specific attention of this court was also invited to the
fact that there is no mention whatsoever in the 'B' report filed in court that
the 3rd respondent had been prevented from proceeding in any direction. Hence,
counsel contended that their was no justification whatsoever to allege the
commission of the offence of wrongful restraint (section 332 of the Penal
Code) in the aforesaid 'B' report.  
  
It was also submitted that the other offences alleged in the said 'B' report,
namely, offences under sections 480 and 484 of the Penal Code are
non‑cognizable offences for which a Peace Officer shall not arrest without a
warrant. (vide 1st schedule of the Criminal Procedure Code Act, No. 15 of 1979
read with the definition of "non‑cognizable offences" in section 2 of that
Act).  
  
These offences are bailable offences, and as such, the petitioners were
entitled to be released on bail in terms of the provisions of section 116 (1)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979.  
  
It was counsel's submission that the 1st respondent had no warrant from a
competent court to arrest either of the petitioners on 11\. 11. 96. The arrest
of the petitioners was, therefore, not in

**134**

accordance with the procedure established by law and as such the 1st
respondent has acted in violation of their fundamental rights guaranteed by
the provisions of Article 13 (1) of the Constitution.  
  
The petitioners state that they were arrested by the 1st respondent at the
instance and instigation of the 3rd respondent.  
  
It was also submitted on behalf of the petitioners that neither the 1st
respondent nor the 2nd respondent requested the petitioners to furnish
security with a view to releasing them (vide section 116 (1) of the Criminal
Procedure Code). Hence, the consequential detention of the petitioner for the
purpose of producing them before the Additional Magistrate was illegal and
unlawful and was in violation of Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the
Constitution.  
  
The petitioners have also averred that when the above case filed against them
by the respondents was called in court on the 19th of November, 1996, the
Katugastota Police had informed the Magistrate that they would not be filing a
plaint against the said petitioners and the learned Magistrate then referred
this matter to the Mediation Board for settlement.  
  
Having regard to the facts set out in the affidavits filed by the petitioners
and the submissions of President's Counsel, I have carefully examined the
affidavits filed by the respondents and the written submissions filed on their
behalf. The 1st respondent in his affidavit states that in this case he has
merely performed his statutory duties as a Police Officer on a complaint (1R1)
made by the 3rd respondent in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Criminal Procedure Code Act.  
  
On a complaint made by the 3rd respondent to the Katugastota Police on the
10th of November, 1996, he had deputed a subordinate officer to proceed to the
scene of the alleged offence and having recorded the statements of the wife of
the 3rd respondent and the two petitioners, had the petitioners arrested and
produced in the Magistrate's Court, Kandy.

**135**

The petitioners were produced in court by the 1st respondent upon a 'B' report
(P4) alleging that they had committed offences under sections 332, 480 and 484
of the Penal Code (vide P4 & 1 R6) and stating that further investigations
were proceeding. The 1st respondent moved that the petitioners be released on
bail upon such terms as the court deems fit.  
  
Counsel for the State in the written submissions filed on behalf of the 1st
and 2nd respondents has submitted that the direction of the 1st respondent
requiring the petitioners to attend the Police Station was a lawful order,
which a Police officer investigating a cognizable offence was empowered to
make in terms of section 109 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. He also
contended that the arrest of the petitioners was lawfully effected under the
provisions of section 32 (1) _(b)_ of the aforesaid Act. This section counsel
submitted, empowered any Peace officer to arrest without a warrant any person
who has been concerned in any cognizable offence, or against whom a reasonable
complaint has been made, or credible information has been received, or a
reasonable suspicion exists of his having been so concerned.  
  
In this case, it was State counsel's contention, that the 'B' report ‑ P4,
disclosed the commission of the offence of wrongful restraint (section 332)
which is a cognizable offence. Hence there was sufficient material for the
respondent if he gave credence to the complaint of the 3rd respondent to act
upon the basis that a cognizable offence had been committed. In the aforesaid
circumstances, State counsel submitted that the arrest of the two petitioners
by the respondents was a lawful arrest effected according to the procedure
established by law. The detention in the Police station thereafter up to the
time the petitioners were produced before the Magistrate was hence lawful. It
was State counsel's submission that the petitioners have failed to establish
that their fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the
Constitution have been violated by the 1st and 2nd respondents.  
  
I am in entire agreement with this submission of State counsel on behalf of
the respondents that if there was any material which

**136**

disclosed that the petitioners had committed an offence under section 332 of
the Penal Code which is a cognizable offence, the conduct of the respondents
could in no way be faulted for the reason that they have acted under the
provisions of section 32 (1) _(b)_ of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.  
  
In the said circumstances, it was indeed necessary for this court to ascertain
upon a perusal of the 'B' report marked P4, whether on the basis of the facts
set out in that report the petitioners had either jointly or severally
committed an offence under section 332 of the Penal Code. With this objective
in view, I have given my careful consideration to the contents of P4, which is
based upon the material which was available to the Police at the time this
report was filed. The 'B' report (P4) bears the heading, "Intimidation and
attempted assault". According to the 'B' report (P4), the petitioners are
alleged to have threatened and abused the 3rd respondent and attempted to pull
him out of his car in order to assault him. The 3rd respondent had at this
stage with some degree of difficulty, closed the door of his motor car and had
driven away.  
  
It is nowhere alleged in the 'B' report ‑ P4, that the petitioners had
prevented the 3rd respondent from proceeding in any direction. In other words,
it does not disclose the commission of an offence under section 332 of the
Penal Code, which is the only cognizable offence referred to in the 'B'
report. The other two offences punishable under sections 480 and 484 of the
Penal Code are non‑cognizable offences for which a Peace officer shall not
arrest without a warrant. (vide first schedule read with the interpretation of
"non‑cognizable" in section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of
1979).  
  
Section 332 of the Penal Code sets out the punishment of the offence of
wrongful restraint. The offence of wrongful restraint is defined in section
330 of the same Code:  
  
"Whoever voluntarily obstructs any person so as to prevent that person from
proceeding in any direction in which that person has the right to proceed is
said "wrongfully to restrain that person."

**137**

It is implicit in the analysis of the word, "obstruction" in the aforesaid
section that the complainant should have been dissuaded from pro­ceeding on
his way because of fear induced in his mind of impending unlawful harm ‑ (vide
offences under the Penal Code, second edition at page 155, G. L. Peiris). On
an examination of the document P4, it is clear that there is no material from
which one could draw the inference that an offence punishable under section
332 of the Penal Code had been committed or even an allegation to that effect.  
  
Having regard to the facts set out above, I am of the opinion that the 1st and
2nd respondents by arresting the petitioners without a warrant in this case,
where there was no credible information that a cognizable offence had been
committed, had acted in violation of the law. It is in my view reasonable to
conclude on the material placed before this court that the respondents have
deliberately stated in the 'B' report that an offence under section 332 of the
Penal Code had been committed for the purpose of justifying the arrest of the
petitioners without a warrant. If this type of conduct on the part of Police
officers is condoned by this court, the very salutary provisions relating to
arrests contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure Act would be rendered
nugatory. Indeed it was these irresponsible acts on the part of the 1st and
2nd respondents that ultimately culminated in the incarceration of the
petitioners in the Kandy Remand Prison without any justification whatsoever.
Such conduct on the part of Police officers must indeed be strongly condemned.  
  
In the above circumstances, I hold that the arrest and the detention of the
petitioners at the Police station by the respondents up to the time the
petitioners were produced before the Magistrate by the 1st and 2nd respondents
constituted wrongful arrest and wrongful detention and that such arrest and
detention was therefore not in accordance with the procedure established by
law.  
  
Having regard to the facts and circumstances of this case, there is very
little doubt in my mind that the 1st and 2nd respondents arrested the
petitioners at the instigation of the 3rd respondent. This court in Faiz's
case held that a person who induced or instigated the unlawful arrest or
detention of a person would himself be liable for

**138**

the violation of such person's fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 13 of
the Constitution. (see _Faiz v. AG & Others_(1)).  
  
In the present case, I would have had no hesitation in awarding substantial
compensation personally against the 3rd respondent, but for the fact that the
petitioners have specifically stated that they claim no relief from him.  
  
Having regard to the facts of this case, I hold that the 1st and 2nd
respondents have acted in violation of the fundamental rights of the
petitioners guaranteed by Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution.  
  
I accordingly direct the 1st respondent to pay ‑

_(a)_ Compensation in a sum of Rs. 15,000 to the 1st petitioner,

_(b)_ Compensation in a sum of Rs. 15,000 to the 2nd petitioner.

The 2nd respondent is directed to pay ‑

_(a)_ Compensation in a sum of Rs. 15,000 to the 1st petitioner,

_(b)_ Compensation in a sum of Rs. 15,000 to the 2nd petitioner.  
  
Both the 1st and 2nd respondents are ordered to pay a sum of Rs. 2,500 as
costs to the two petitioners. The 1st and 2nd respondents are ordered to pay
the compensation and costs to the two petitioners within three months of the
date of this judgment.  
  
I also direct the State to pay the petitioners a sum of Rs. 50,000 as
compensation.  
  
The petitioners would accordingly receive a total sum of Rs. 112,500 as
compensation and costs.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.** ‑ I agree.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** ‑ I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/16.html_  

