##  Lucas Appuhamy v. Maturata and Others - SLR - 401, Vol 1 of 1994 [1994]
LKSC 10; (1994) 1 Sri LR 401 (31 March 1994)

**401**

**LUCAS APPUHAMY**

**v.**

**MATURATA AND OTHERS**  



SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J.

AMERASINGHE, J. AND

DHEERARATNE, J.

S.C. APPLICATION NO. 87/94

OCTOBER 11TH, 1994.



_Fundamental Rights -Arrest and Torture - Constitution, Articles 11 and
13(1)._



Where there were sufficient grounds for suspecting that a cognizable offence
had been committed by the petitioner, his arrest without a warrant was in
accordance with procedure prescribed by the Code of Criminal Procedure and
therefore not in violation of Article 13(1) of the Constitution.



Where the medical evidence of the injuries found on the petitioner was
consistent with the version of the Police that they had been sustained in the
process of the use of reasonable force in making the arrest, it cannot be said
that a violation of his rights under Article 11 of the Constitution has been
established.



**APPLICATION** for violation of fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles
11 and 13(1) of the Constitution. _ _

**402**



_A. H. H. Perera_ for petitioner.

_ _

_Asoka Weerasooriya_ for 2nd, 4th and 5th respondents. Kumarasiri for 3rd and
6th respondents.

_ _

_Kolitha Dharmawardena SSC,_ for 1st, 7th and 8th respondents.

Cur adv vult.



November 7th, 1994.  


**AMERASINGHE, J.**

** **

On 31st March 1994, this Court granted the petitioner leave to proceed in
respect of the alleged infringement of Articles 11 and 13(1) of the
Constitution.



On 22nd February 1994, the petitioner and one Weeraratna boarded a bus
sometime after 7.35 p.m. and assaulted the third respondent, a police officer,
who was travelling home after work. The reason for the assault was that the
petitioner, who was intoxicated at the time, had been provoked at the sight of
the third respondent who had sometime before arrested the petitioner on a
complaint of mischief in respect of which proceedings were pending in the
Magistrate's Court of Negombo. Having got off the bus, the third respondent
complained of the incident to two police officers who were on duty close by
and proceeded by taxi to the Negombo Police Station and made a complaint. The
third respondent, later complained of the incident to the officer in charge of
the Police Station, the first respondent who no doubt would have seen the
injury caused. On the advice of the first respondent, the third respondent
presented himself for examination before the District Medical Officer who
certified that the third respondent had a contusion. The fact that the third
respondent was injured is borne out by the notes of the police officers who
investigated his complaint, for they recorded observing blood stains on the
clothes of the complainant. It is also supported by Weeraratne who said that
he joined the petitioner in the assault. There was sufficient evidence to
establish the fact that the petitioner assaulted the third respondent.



Although Weeraratne had been arrested by the officers to whom the third
respondent had complained soon after the incident, the



**403**



Petitioner had not been arrested. The first respondent ,therefore, ordered his
arrest. The arrest was made be a police party comprising the second, fourth,
fifth and sixth respondents on the basis of-the complaint made by the third
respondent.



Since there were sufficient grounds for suspecting that a cognizable offence
had been committed by the petitioner, his arrest without a warrant was, in
accordance with the procedure prescribed by the; Criminal Procedure Code and
was therefore, not in violation of Article 13(1) of the Constitution.



When the sixth respondent informed the. petitioner that; he was from the'
Police, the petitioner attempted to flee and in doing, so stumbled against a
coconut stump and fell into a pit which was about four feet deep. The
production of a plan made by a surveyor in 1969 showing paddy lands in the
area did not refute the version of the



When the police party "pounced on him", the petitioner offered resistance and
"minimum force" had to be used to bring him under control. He was soon
afterwards produced before a medical officer ho certified that the petitioner
was under the influence of alcohol and that he had sustained abrasions. On the
directions of this Court, the District Medical Officer, Negombo, examined the
petitioner on 23rd February 1994. The D.M.O. confirmed the fact that the
petitioner had sustained abrasions. In addition, he reported the existence of
"a simple fracture of the radius and ulna left side". No complaint -was made
to the medical officer who first examined him with regard to the injury to the
arm. The sixth respondent suggests that the petitioner was at the time too
intoxicated to feel any pain The petitioner, has submitted photographs of
himself purporting-to'-'show the injuries inflicted on him. However, apart
from the plaster cast on his arm, the marks depicted in the .photograph have
not been interpreted: Were they lacerations, abrasions, medication or some
other substance applied for-the purpose of the photographs? In any- event; the
photographs have not been authenticated, and, therefore they are of no
probative value:

**404**



The injuries reported are more consistent with the fall into the pit and for
the use of minimum force to effect the arrest, than with the several sessions
of brutal assault all by him. The petitioner's story that he was "divested" of
his sarong and that the members of the Police party "sported themselves by
pouring hot tea on my body", is not borne out by the medical evidence. The
petitioner was obviously exaggerating and reduced the credibility of his
version of his injuries and how he came by them. The petitioner was a Bus
Conductor in the Peoplised Road Transport Service of Negombo. The petitioner
was released on bail and handed over to the custody of two officers of the
Road Transport Service for which he worked. In their statements to the
Assistant Superintendent of Police, no reference is made by the two officers
with regard to the alleged assault.



In my view, the petitioner has simply sustained certain injuries in the
process of the use of reasonable force in making the arrest and he has failed
to establish that his rights under Article 11 of the Constitution were
violated.



For the reasons explained in my judgment, I declare that there has been no
violation of Article 13(1) or 11 of the Constitution and therefore dismiss the
application.



**FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree.

** **

**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.



_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/10.html_  

