##  Dissanayaka v. Superintendent Mahara Prison and Others - SLR - 247, Vol 2
of 1991 [1991] LKSC 10; (1991) 2 Sri LR 247 (28 March 1991)

**247**

**DISSANAYAKA**

**v.**

**SUPERINTENDENT MAHARA PRISON AND OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT,

BANDARANAYAKE, J. FERNANDO, J. AND KULATUNGA, J.

S. C. (Spl.) 6/90

NOVEMBER 26, 1990, DECEMBER 13, 1990 and FEBRUARY 05, 1991.



Fundamental Rights ‑ Detention under S. 9 of Prevention of Terrorism Act ‑
Application of objective test ‑ Illegal arrest ‑ Unlawful detention
‑Compensation ‑ Article 13 (1) and (2) of the Constitution ‑ Section 6(1),
9(1) and 31 of the Prevention of Terrorism Act.



The Petitioner was arrested on 08.03.1989 and kept at Galnewa Police Station
initially for 72 hours and thereafter on 06.04.89 order was made to send him
to the Boossa Detention Camp in terms of S. 9 (1) of the Preven­tion of
Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act, No. 48 of 1979 (PTA).



However he was kept at Galnewa Police Station until 23.05.1989 on which date
he was sent to Boossa. The detention order was extended from time to time. On
12.02.1990 the petitioner was produced before the High Court on a charge of
possessing a gun and a cartridge only while the origi­nal allegations against
him were involvement in the robbery of a roneo machine and a typewriter from
the Galnewa Provincial Council Office, a tri­ple murder on 15.02.89, intending
to cause violence to one Jayawardena and possession of a gun and a cartridge.
On 12.02.1989 the petitioner was remanded to Fiscal's custody but even
thereafter the Minister made two further extensions to his detention at Boossa
by orders dated 02.04.90 and 01.07.90.



This was a period of insurgent activity and the petitioner who was riding a
bicycle in the company of another tried to escape on seeing the Police. The
petitioner's companion had a document which indicated a plan to murder one
Jayawardena.



Though the detention order issued on 06.04.89 specified the place of
det­ention as Boossa it was only on 23.05.89 that the petitioner was taken
there ‑the excuse being security problems attending transport to Boossa.



**248**



**Held:__ ‑ **

**  **

            1.         The petitioner's arrest when he was trying to make a getaway was law­ful and not violative of Article 13(1) of the Constitution.



2.         There can be no objection to the initial detention for 72 hours at the Police Station in terms of s. 6(1) of the PTA.



3.         After his arrest on 08.03.1989 the petitioner was kept in unlawful cus­tody at the Galnewa Police Station for nearly a month before application was made for a detention order on 04.04.89.



4.         The detention order made on 06.04.89 on the basis of the initial appli­cation of the Police was lawful.



5.         The detention at Galnewa Police Station from 06.04.1989 to 23.05.89 was unlawful for failure to comply with the requirement regarding place of detention namely, Boossa.



Per. Kulatunga, J:



"I am of the view that the entire order covering the detention, the place of
detention and conditions thereof is mandatory and non‑compliance can­not be
excused save on exceptional grounds such as impossibility in giving effect to
it".

6\.         The Police themselves applied for the detention order on 04.04.89.
If two days later, the situation had deteriorated, a variation as to the place
of detention could have been obtained. This was not done.



7\.         The first detention order was made by the Minister on 06.04.89
valid for the maximum period of three months. Extensions were made on
06.07.89, 25.09.89 and 28.12.89. In the absence of averments to the con­trary
by the State, the detention of the petitioner under the Prevention of
Terrorism Act after 25.09.89 cannot be upheld. The objective test is the
correct test to apply. The detention from 25.09.89 to 12.02.90 when the
petitioner was remanded by order of Court, was unlawful.



8\.         The petitioner's detention from 08.03.89 to 25.05.89 and
thereafter from 25.09.89 to 12.02.90 constitutes an infringement of his
fundamental rights enshrined in Article 13(2) of the Constitution.



Per Kulatunga, J.:



"The expression "unlawful activity" as defined in S. 31 of the (Preven­tion of
Terrorism) Act is of wide import and encompasses any person



### 249



whose acts "by any means whatsoever" are connected with "the commis­sion of
any offence under this Act". This would include a person who has committed an
offence under the Act".



"Where the power to arrest without a warrant is couched in the lan­guage of s.
6(1) of the PTA it is well settled that the validity of the arrest is
determined by applying the objective test. This is so whether the arrest is
under the normal law....., under the Emergency Regulations..... or under the
P.T.A However, it is not the duty of the Court to determine whether on the
available material the arrest should have been made or not. The question for
the Court is whether there was material for a reasonable officer to cause the
arrest.... Proof of the commission of the offence is ndt required; a
reasonable suspicion or a reasonable complaint of the commission of the
offence suffices..... There is also the consideration that during a period of
emergency a wider discretion is vested in the police in the matter of arrest
..... Nevertheless it is for the Court to determine the validity of the arrest
objectively. The Court will not surrender its judgement to the executive for
if it did so, the fundamental right to freedom from arbitrary arrest secured
by Article 13(1) of the Constitution will be defeated. The executive must
place sufficient material before the Court to enable the Court to make a
decision, such as the notes of investigation, including the statements of
witnesses, observations etc. without relying on bare state­ments in
affidavits".



**Cases referred to:**



1.         _Senthilnayagam v. Seneviratne_ [1981] 2 Sri LR 187, 208   


2. _          Muttusamy v. Kannangara_ 52 NLR 324, 327   


3.         _Gunasekera v. de Fonseka_ 75 NLR 246 



4.         _Joseph Perera v. Attorney ‑General_ SC Nos 107‑109/86 

          SC Minutes of 25.05.1987 

5\.         _Somasiri v. Sub ‑Inspector __Jayasena_ SC Application No. 147/88

                                                                      SC Minutes of 01.03.1991 



6\.         _Withanachchi v. Cyril Herat Leelaratne v. Cyril Herat_

            SC Nos. 144‑145/86 SC Minutes of 01.07.1988   


7\.         _Wickremabandu v. Cyril Herat_ SC Application. No. 27/88

                                                               SC Minutes of 06.04.1990   


8\.         _Sudath Silva v. Kodituwakku_ [1987] 2 Sri LR 119, 127



**APPLICATION** for infringement of Fundamental Rights under Article 13(1) and
(2) of the Constitution.



_A.A. de Silva_ with _K. Thiranagama_ for the petitioner,

_  
Nihal Jayasinghe SSC_ with _J. C. Jayasuriya S.C. for the State._



_Cur.adv. vult._



### 250



March 28, 1991.



**KULATUNGA, J.:**



Pursuant to a complaint dated 26.12.89 addressed to His Lordship The Chief
Justice by the petitioner complaining about the conditions of his detention at
the Boossa Detention Camp, this Court afforded to him the opportunity of
prefer­ring a formal application for relief against the alleged infrin­gement
of his fundamental rights by reason of his arrest and detention in early 1989.
In view of the fact that his freedom to seek redress had been hampered for
some time by the condi­tions of his detention, this Court is able to entertain
his appli­cation.



At the time of his arrest the petitioner was an undergradu­ate in the Faculty
of Agriculture of the Peradeniya University. After his arrest, he was kept at
the Galnewa Police Station and thereafter sent to the Boossa Detention Camp in
terms of an order under S.9(1) of the Prevention of Terrorism (Tem­porary
Provisions) Act, No. 48 of 1979 (P5) which was extended from time to time by
further orders (X7, X8 and X9). On 12.02.90 he was brought before the High
Court of Colombo, in case No. 4068/89 charged with certain offences and was
remanded to Fiscal Custody at the Mahara Prison where he is presently detained
pending his trial.



The petitioner alleges that he was arrested by a party of police officers on
08.03.89, at Kalankuttiya and was taken to the Galnewa Police Station with his
hands tied. He was not informed of the reason for his arrest. He was then
blindfolded and assaulted. Thereafter, he was put into a room which was damp
and which he later found to be a lavatory. On occasions he was taken out and
assaulted and then returned to the room. On 26.03.89 there was a visitor whom
he could not see as he was blindfolded; later he learnt that it was his
father. On 28.03.89 and 03.04.89 his mother visited him when he was taken to
the Inspector's room and was shown to her. On



### 251



04.04.89 he was locked up in the Police cell. An order dated 06.04.89 under
S.9(1) of the P.T.A. was then issued authorising his detention at the Boossa
Detention Camp (P5). However, he was not transferred to Boossa. Instead, he
was kept at the Galnewa Police Station until 23.05.89 on which date he was
sent to Boossa.



The detention order against the petitioner was made on the ground that the
Minister had reason to suspect that the peti­tioner is connected with or
concerned in unlawful activity to wit __



l.          Robbery of the property of the government via. Roneo machine from
Galnewa Provincial Council office.



2\.         Being in possession of leaflets........  intended to cause the
commission of acts of violence.



The petitioner is presently indicted for possession of a gun and a cartridge
said to have been found with him at the time of his arrest. However, he states
that the police have not at any stage questioned him about the allegations
contained in the detention order and that there is no evidence whatsoever to
connect him with the alleged offences. He also denies that he was in
possession of any weapon or other offensive article at the time of his arrest.



In a supporting affidavit (P1) his father, Abeyratne Banda (a Grama Sevaka)
states that the petitioner left home on the morning of 06.03.89. On 12.03.89
he learnt that the petitioner had been arrested by the Galnewa Police,
whereupon he obtained leave for 12th and 13th and visited the Police Station
but did not see his son in the Police Station. The police offic­ers advised
him to make search in other areas. On 13.03.89 he sought the assistance of Mr.
Mahinda Abeykoon, Member of Parliament, Kandy District who promised to
telephone the Galnewa Police and Mahendra Adikari, Member of Parlia­ment,
Anuradhapura District. He then visited the Galnewa Police on 21.03.89 but the
officers again denied that the peti‑



### 252



tioner was there; whereupon once again he contacted the two Members of
Parliament. Thereafter, he obtained leave from 25th to 27th and visited the
Galnewa Police on 26.03.89. On that occasion the Officer‑in‑Charge of the
Police Station took him behind the station remarking that some influence had
been used and showed him the petitioner and another boy both of whom were
blindfolded.



The petitioner's mother Yaso Manike's affidavit (P2) also supports him. The
petitioner has also produced an extract from the "Divaina" newspaper of
11.04.89 (P3) containing particulars of detained students, being
representations made to Hon. Hameed, Minister of Higher Education by the
Students' Organisation. In P3 the petitioner is described as having been
arrested on 12.03.89 and in detention at the Galnewa Police Station. Mahinda
Abeykoon M.P. in his affidavit (P4) says that on information supplied by the
petitioner's father on 13.03.89 about the detention of his son, he telephoned
Mr. Mahendra Adikari M.P. and the O.I.C., Galnewa Police. Later the
petitioner's father met him to say that the police had shown the petitioner to
him and to thank him for it.



In an affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents, Sub­Inspector of Police
Senapathi who was a member of the Police party which arrested the petitioner,
states that he was arrested on 04.04.89 and not on 08.03.89 as alleged by him;
and that he was arrested along with another person after they had taken to
their heels on seeing the police. The petitioner had with him a gun and a
cartridge. The other person also had a gun and a cartridge and a document
relating to the planned murder of one Jayawardena for giving information
against and contrary to the interests of "Deshapremi". This document (X) which
is hand written and is in Sinhala contains on one side two revolutionary
verses, intera alia exhorting the taking up of arms. On the other side it
contains certain information which reads thus when translated __



### 253



"C. D. Jayawardena,

Kurakappitiyawa,

Viyaluwa.



* giving information to the police against "Deshapremis";

* getting his henchmen to assault Deshapremis;

            * arrest and handing over of a Deshapremi to the Superintendent on false      

               charges;



* plying a vehicle without authority during the strike;

* unreasonable criticism;

* failure to deliver the things ordered by way of punish­ment.



S.I. Senapathi has also produced marked X1 a copy of the application dated
04.04.89 made to the Senior Superintendent of Police, Anuradhapura by the
O.I.C. Galnewa Police Station requesting the authorisation of the detention of
the petitioner and the other suspect at the Galnewa Police Station for 72
hours from 04.04.89 in terms of S.7(1) of the P.T.A. and their detention at
Boossa for 90 days in terms of S.9(1) of the P.T.A., pending the completion of
investigations into the fol­lowing allegations.



1\.         Planned murder of Jayawardena. This allegation is         based on
the document X'.



2\.         Possession of two guns and cartridges.



3\.         A triple murder by shooting at Pattinigama which occurred on
15.02.89.



4\.         Robbery of a Roneo machine and a type‑writer from the Galnewa
Provincial Council Office on 12.12.88.



S.I. Senapathi admits that the petitioner is presently indicted in H.C.
Colombo case No. 4068/89 for possession of a gun and a cartridge on 04.04.89.
He has also produced



**254**



 marked X2 a copy of the authorisation to detain the petitioner at the Galnewa
Police dated 05.04.89 by the Superintendent of the Police Station for 72 hours
and a copy of the detention order dated 08.04.89 for his detention at Boossa
marked X3 (same as P5).



On 25.04.89 Assistant Superintendent of Police, Wijesekera recorded a
statement of the petitioner in terms of S.16 of the P.T.A. The A.S.P.'s record
as well as S.I. Senapathi describe this statement as a confession. This
statement has been pro­duced marked X4. Therein the petitioner gives personal
par­ticulars about himself and proceeds to state that in March 1988 the
University was closed; that he is a student activist who campaigned on issues
such as the arrest of University stu­dents and school children and the
nationalisation of the Pri­vate Medical College; that they worked for the
establishment of a united front of all political groups opposed to the
government including the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna to put forward Mrs.
Bandaranayake as their common candidate at the Presidential Election; that
they were disappointed when she submitted her nomination on her own, otherwise
than as a common candidate; that in November 1988 there was an all Island
general strike for which too he campaigned; that in December 1988 he decided
to join the J.V.P. and engage in political activities in Galnewa along with
one Jayaweera; that at the instance of Trishantha an area leader of the
military wing of the Deshapremi movement he engaged in political activities in
Kalankuttiya; but he did not participate in the activities of the military
wing; nor did he use any weapons against anybody; that he knew nothing about
the document which the police recovered from the other person (one Sunil
Dissanayake) at the time of the arrest; and that at that time he did not have
anything in his possession.



Mr. Kumarasiri, S.S.P. Anuradhapura states that on the application of the
O.I.C. Galnewa Police he ordered the deten­tion of the petitioner at the
Galnewa Police Station for 72



### 255



hours and submitted the material sent to him by the Galnewa Police to the
Deputy Inspector General of Police (Ranges), by letter (X6); subsequently he
received the detention order from the Minister which he handed over to the
O.I.C., Galnewa. The Minister states that on the material submitted by the
police he made the detention order against the petitioner and extended it from
time to time by subsequent orders.





From the fact that the petitioner was detained in terms of S.7(1) of the
P.T.A. it has to be presumed that he was arrested without a warrant under
powers contained in S.6(1) of the P.T.A. According to S.I. Senapathi the
arrest was effected by late S.I. Ratnapriya who led the police party. S.6(1)
empowers the arrest by that officer if he had been authorised in writing in
that behalf by a Superintendent. In the absence of any chal­lenge, I shall
assume the existence of such authority. Such an officer may arrest any person
"connected with or concerned in or reasonably suspected of being connected
with or concerned in any unlawful activity". The expression "unlawful
activity" as defined in S.31 of the Act is of wide import and encom­passes any
person whose acts "by any means whatsoever" are connected with "the commission
of any offence under this Act". This would include a person who has committed
an offence under the Act. _Senthilnayagam v. Seneviratne_ (1).



S.I. Senapathi has alleged four offences against the peti­tioner.



These are __



1.         the robbery of roneo machine and a type‑writer being the property of the government on 12.12.88;



2\.         a triple murder on 15.02.89;



3\.         intending to cause violence to one Jayawardena shown by the
possession of document X'; and



4.         possession of a gun and a cartridge.



### 256



These would constitute offences under S.2(1)(d), (a), (h) and (g) respectively
of the Prevention of Terrorism Act.



Where the power to arrest without a warrant is couched in the language of
S.6(1) of the P.T.A. it is well settled that the validity of the arrest is
determined by applying the objective test. This is so whether the arrest is
under the normal law _Muttusamy v. Kannangara_ (2), under the Emergency
Regula­tions _Gunasekera v. de Fonseka_ (3), _Joseph Perera v. Attorney
‑General_ (4) or under the _P.T.A. Somasiri v. Sub­Inspector Jayasena_ , (5).
However, it is not the duty of the Court to determine whether on the available
material the arrest should have been made or not. The question for the Court
is whether there was material for a reasonable officer to cause the arrest.
_Withanachchi v. Cyril Herat, Leelaratne v. Cyril Herat_ (6). Proof of the
commission of the offence is not required; a reasonable suspicion or a
reasonable complaint of the commission of the offence suffices. _Joseph Perera
v. Attorney ‑General_ (supra).



There is also the consideration that during a period of emergency a wider
discretion is vested in the police in the mat­ter of arrest _Joseph Perera v.
Attorney ‑General_ (supra). Nevertheless it is for the Court to determine the
validity of the arrest objectively. The Court will not surrender its judgement
to the executive for if it did so, the fundamental right to free­dom from
arbitrary arrest secured by Article 13(1) of the Con­stitution will be
defeated. The executive Must place sufficient material before the Court to
enable the Court to make a deci­sion, such as the notes of investigations,
including the state­ments of witnesses, observations etc. without relying
solely on bare statements in affidavits. In the instant case, no such material
has been produced; and the best evidence consists of a mere statement of
allegations contained in the report to Senior S.P. (X1) and the document X'
which was found not with the petitioner but with the other suspect. No notes
of investigations relating to the alleged offences of murder or



### 257



robbery or the recovery of offensive articles from the peti­tioner have been
produced. The need to furnish such material was emphasised by Gratiaen J. in
Muttusamy's case (supra) when he said __



"Inspector Kannangara has nowhere in the course of his evidence referred to
any complaint or information or suspicion **the reasonableness of which could
have been tested by the learned Magistrate,** whose function it was to inquire
into the officer's state of mind at the time that he ordered the arrest".



Even though no material of this sort was forthcoming, I am not inclined to
declare the arrest to be unlawful having regard to the admitted circumstances
of the arrest. This was a period of insurgent activity; at the time of the
arrest the police party were going about investigating subversive activity
when they sighted the petitioner and another on bicycles. (In his petition the
petitioner admits that he was riding his bicycle); on seeing the police they
took to their heels; one of them had the document X'; as it is evident from
his statement X4, the police had later questioned the petitioner about this
document; even though it was not in the petitioner's possession, the fact of
their running away could give sufficient justification to the police to have
arrested them. I therefore hold that the peti­tioner's arrest is lawful and
not violative of Article 13(1) of the Constitution.



As regards the petitioner's detention, I see no objection to his initial
detention for 72 hours at the Police Station in terms of S.6 (1) of the P.T.A.
What really requires scrutiny is the detention which followed commencing on
06.04.89 followed by the order of the Minister under S.9(1); but before I
consider that question, I must make a decision on the allegation that the
petitioner was arrested on 08.03.89. If that is proved, his detention which is
not covered by the detention order will be per se unlawful.



**258**



In his complaint to His Lordship The Chief Justice and there after the
petitioner has consistently maintained that he was arrested on 08.03.89. This
is well supported by the affidav­its of his parents, the extract from the
"Divaina" newspaper and the affidavit of Mr. Mahinda Abeykoon, M.P. (P1, P2,
P3 and P4). The learned Senior State Counsel for the respondents submitted
that the alleged arrest on 08.03.89 has not been proved; that the visits by
the petitioner's father to the Galnewa Police Station were in April '89; and
that the M.P. cannot pos­sibly recall the events in March '89. I cannot agree.
To my mind the contents of the affidavits relied upon by the peti­tioner
appear to be intrinsically true. The petitioner's father, a Grama Sevaka
speaks to having obtained leave on several days to search for the petitioner.
The State could have verified whether such leave has been taken. If no such
leave was taken, the petitioner's version could have been impeached on that
ground. The State has not checked the matter. It was submit­ted that the
M.P.'s affidavit should not be acted upon because he did not explain therein
how or why he remembers the date on which the petitioner's father contacted
him. There is no requirement that such particulars be set out, and I am
there­fore not prepared to reject the M.P.'s affidavit. The detention order
dated 06.04.89 is subject to strict conditions inter alia prohibiting access
to the petitioner by visitors without the permission of the Secretary,
Ministry of Defence. It would be naive to assume that the police would have
allowed anybody to visit the petitioner or to see him in April '89.
Accordingly, I am satisfied that the petitioner was arrested on 08.03.89 and
kept in unlawful custody at the Galnewa Police Station for nearly a month
before applying for a detention order.



The next allegation of the petitioner is that although the order P5 dated
06.04.89 directed his detention at Boossa, he was kept in continued detention
at the Galnewa Police Station until 23.05.89. S.I. Senapathi admits this and
explains that this was because in the situation that prevailed it was
impossible to transfer him to Boossa with adequate security until 23.05.89.



### 259



The learned Senior State Counsel submitted that what is man­datory under the
detention order is the detention; that the place of detention is directory
only and in view of difficulties for transportation, the continued detention
of the petitioner at Galnewa is not unlawful. I am of the view that the entire
order covering the detention, the place of detention and conditions thereof is
mandatory and non‑compliance cannot be excused save on exceptional grounds
such as impossibility in giving effect to it. The police themselves applied
for the petitioner's detention at Boossa by an application dated 04.04.89
(X1). If two days thereafter the situation deteriorated this could have been
reported to the Minister with a view to obtaining a varia­tion of the place of
detention. This was not done. There is also no evidence as to the situation
which prevailed subsequent to the detention order and up to 23.05.89. Hence
the excuse given by S.I. Senapathi for keeping the petitioner at Galnewa is
untenable. Accordingly, I hold that the petitioner has been unlawfully
detained at the Galnewa Police Station until 23.05.89.



I now turn to the validity of the petitioner's detention since 23.05.89. The
impugned order was made under S.9(1) of the P.T.A. which empowers the Minister
to do so where he has "reason to believe or suspect that any person is
connected with or concerned in unlawful activity". The expression "unlawful
activity" though defined in wide terms has been held to include the commission
of an offence under the Act and is not limited to acts "on the outskirts of
criminal liability"; it has also been held having regard to the language of
S.9(1) that there must be objective grounds and a rational basis for the
Minister's belief or suspicion for making the order; that this view is also
correct having regard to the fact that __



"The primary purpose of detention under S.9 is to facilitate further
investigation and interrogation .... "of suspects".... in order to achieve the
object of irradicating



### 260



terrorism. S.9 is not intended merely as a negative form of preventive
detention nor is it intended to be a pun­ishment".



Vide _Senthilnayagam's case_ _(supra)_ (1) at 208 and 205 and the decision of
this Court in _Somasiri v. Sub ‑Inspector Jayas­ena_ (5). This Court observed




"In other words detention under S.9 is an aid to investi­gation and its
validity will be strictly adjudged by the application of the objective test as
opposed to the sub­jective test applicable to a preventive detention order
which may be made in circumstances in which no charge is preferred and no
investigations are pending".



This Court also observed 



"Even in respect of a detention order under Regulation 17 of the Emergency
Regulations which is made upon the subjective satisfaction of the
Secretary/Defence, a Bench of five Judges of this Court held in _Wickremabandu
v.Cyril Herat_ (7)..... that the power to make the order is not unfettered and
that the test of reasonableness in the wide sense applies".



Viewed in the light of the above principles, I see no objec­tion to the order
P5 which was made on the basis of the initial application of the police and
was effective for 3 months from 06.04.89. That order was lawfully made but as
already determined the petitioner was unlawfully detained at Galnewa until he
was transferred to Boossa on 23.05.89 where he remained in lawful detention
until the expiry of the period of his detention on 06.07.89. His detention was
then extended from time to time by successive orders each of which granted an
extension of 3 months (being the maximum period permitted by S.9 at a time).
These were X7 dated 06.07.89, X8 dated 25.09.89 and X9 dated 28.12.89.
Thereafter the petitioner was produced before the High Court on 12.02.90 on
which date he was remanded to Fiscal Custody (see 1R1). The question which I

###  

### 261



have to consider is whether the entire period of his detention on extensions
up to 12.02.90 can be justified by the application of the objective test. In
this connection it would also be rele­vant to ask how much of this extended
detention was neces­sary to facilitate further investigation.



The following matters are relevant in determining the valid­ity of the
extended detention 



(a)                Although the detention order was sought on the ground of
four allegations, it was made only on the basis of two of them viz. the
alleged robbery of a roneo machine and the possession of the document X';



(b)               The police recorded the petitioner's statement (X4) on
25.04.89. According to that statement the police had not questioned him about
the alleged robbery but only about the document X' recovered from the other
sus­pect; and the petitioner has denied any knowledge the­reof;



(c)        The State has not produced any material as to the nature of the
investigations which were pending thereaf­ter. However, I can assume that the
indictment against the petitioner was under consideration. The indictment
which was eventually framed charged him with the pos­session of a gun and a
cartridge which is not an offence disclosed by the allegations contained in
the detention order. This would show that those allegations had been
abandoned; but the Court has not been informed as to when and in what
circumstances such abandonment occurred;



(d)        The State has also not pleaded that the impugned deten­tion was
being extended pending indictment. Yet having regard to the unsettled
conditions in the country during this period it would not be correct to weigh
this in fine scales. If so, a reasonable time should be given to the State to
consider the charges against the petitioner.



### 262



Having made every allowance to the State I find it difficult, in the absence
of any averment by the State to the contrary, to uphold the detention of the
petitioner under the P.T.A. after 25.09.89 by the application of the objective
test. This means that the Minister has exercised his power under S.9 of the
P.T.A. merely to impose "a negative form of preventive deten­tion" or as a
mere matter of expediency. This is an unwar­ranted exercise of statutory power
which is ultra vires the ena­bling provisions of the law. As observed by Wade
"Administrative Law" 5th Ed. p. 748 



"Acts of Parliament have sovereign force, but legislation made under delegated
power can be valid only if it con­forms exactly to the powers granted".



Accordingly, I hold that the petitioner's detention under the impugned order
after 25.09.89 is unlawful.



It is also relevant to note that even after the High Court remanded the
petitioner to Fiscal Custody on 12.02.90 the Minister has made two further
extentions to his detention at Boossa by orders dated 02.04.90 (X10) and
01.07.90 (X11) each for three months which period finally expired on 30.09.90.
I do not think that the Minister has thereby intended to countermand the Court
order remanding the petitioner to Fiscal Custody. In my view, it merely
indicates that these orders were being made mechanically without the Minister
giv­ing his mind to the necessity for making them.



For the foregoing reasons, I determine that the petitioner's detention from
08.03.89 to 25.05.89 and thereafter from 25.09.89 to 12.02.90 constitutes an
infringement of his funda­mental rights enshrined in Article 13(2) of the
Constitution by executive or administrative action which entitles him to
com­pensation against the State.



Before I proceed to consider the relief to be granted to the petitioner, I
wish to record the fact that in a number of cases in which this Court has
determined fundamental rights to have



### 263



been infringed it is observed that such infringements have been the result of
lapses on the part of the officials who are required to advise the higher
authorities or to scrutinise the necessity for exercising extraordinary
powers. The State becomes answerable for all such defaults and pays
compensa­tion out of public funds. Unless there is adequate provision for
identifying the officers who are actually responsible for such lapses in cases
where blatant infringements have occurred and for restricting the use of
extraordinary powers as a matter of expediency, the drain on public funds will
keep on increasing in proportion to the growth of public awareness of their
con­stitutional rights. It would be ironical if the public themselves have to
pay for the infringement of their rights on such a scale.



Despite the situation referred to above this Court must assess what relief may
be just and equitable whenever an infringement of fundamental rights is
established regardless of the personal antecedents of the petitioner but in
the light of the facts and circumstances of each case. As Colin Thome J. said
in _Senthilnayagam's_ case (supra) at 208 



"The Courts have been jealous of any infringement of personal liberty and care
is not to be exercised less vig­ilantly, because the subject whose liberty is
in question may not be particularly meritorious".



In _Sudath Silva v. Kodituwakku_ (8) Atukorale J. said 



"The petitioner may be a hard‑core criminal whose tribe deserve no sympathy.
But if constitutional guarantees are to have any meaning or value in our
democratic set­up, it is essential that he be not denied the protection
guaranteed by our Constitution".



The petitioner is a University student whose involvement with student politics
was perhaps the beginning of the process which led to his incarceration. In
his statement X4 he has



**264**



referred to his association with the "Deshapremi" movement and the J.V.P. The
authorities have not preferred any criminal proceedings against him on that
account. Hence it would seem that there is no material to prosecute him; and
if it is intended to merely detain him, that must be done without
transgressing the Law. Under no circumstances, can this Court condone any
detention which is not permitted by law. The petitioner has been unlawfully
detained for 7 months 4 days. In all the cir­cumstances, I direct the State to
pay him a sum of Rs. 14,000/‑ (Rupees Fourteen Thousand) as compensation. I
order no costs in his favour as Counsel supported his applica­tion as amicus
curiae.



**Bandaranayake, J. __**    I agree.



**Fernando, J. __**    I agree.



_**Application allowed.  
  
Compensation ordered.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/10.html_  

