##  Ansalin Fernando v. Sarath Perera, Officer In Charge, Police Station,
Chilaw and Others - SLR - 411, Vol 1 of 1992 [1988] LKSC 10; (1992) 1 Sri LR
411 (18 January 1988)

**411**

**ANSALIN FERNANDO** **  
v.** **  
SARATH PERERA, OFFICER-IN-CHARGE, POLICE STATION,  
CHILAW AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO. J.  
AMERASINGHE, J. AND  
KULATUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 18/87  
19 AND 30 MARCH 1990

_     Fundamental Rights - Arrest and detention - Torture - Articles 11,
13(1), 13(2), 13(4) of the Constitution \- Emergency Regulations 18, 19 and
45._

Regulation 18 of the Emergency Regulations only empowers an arrest on account
of an offence under Emergency Regulations. Murder as such is not such an
offence. If (murder) is an offence in respect of which an arrest can only be
made under Section 23 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, in which event
the suspect has to be produced before a Magistrate in terms of Section 36 and
within the period prescribed by section 37 of the Code. Where such arrest is
claimed to have been made under Regulation 18(1) on a suspicion of the
arrestee being concerned in committing an offence under Emergency Regulations,
it would not be possible to defend the arrest even on the ground that it is
referable to section 23 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. The arrest and
the detention on that basis are violative of Article 13(1) of the
Constitution.

Even if the arrest for murder was lawfully made in terms of Section 23 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure Act and it became necessary on the basis of
material disclosed during the investigation to detain the arrestee under
Emergency Regulation 19(2), he was entitled to be informed of the reason for
the deprivation of his personal liberty. Failure to do so would make the
detention illegal.

Regulation 45 does not create an offence. Hence detention on an allegation of
being concerned in committing an offence under Regulation 45 would be
unlawful.

An arrest under Regulation 18(1) to be lawful has to be reasonable by
application of the objective test; it should be effected on credible
information.

An unlawful custody for 49 days, and detention for fifteen days without a
semblance of authority for such detention and assaults and humiliations and
pain (by being blindfolded and chained to a bench) inflicted during this
period would

412

amount to degrading treatment or punishment and are violative of Article 11 of
the Constitution.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Nanayakkara v. Henry Perera (1985) 1 Sri LR 375, 385, 388, 399.  
_  
_2\. Wijewardena v. Zain and Others S.C. Application No. 202/87 S.C. Minutes
of 24.07.1989  
_  
_3\. Joseph Perera v Attorney-General S.C. No. 107-109/86 S.C. Minutes of 25
May 1987  
_  
_4\. Gunasekera v. De Fonseka 75 NLR 246.  
_  
_5\. Muttusamy v. Kannangara 52 NLR 324  
_  
_6\. Yapa v. Bandaranayake (1988) 1 Sri LR 63_

**APPLICATION** for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Sanath Jayatilleke with Jayantha Nandalal for the petitioner.  
_  
_C. R. de Silva, S.S.C. for 1 to 5 respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult._

21st May, 1990.  
**KULATUNGA, J.**

By her petition dated 18.02.87 the petitioner complains that her son the 6th
respondent (a University student) was arrested at their house in Chilaw on
02.01.87 at about 3.30 p.m. by a police party who assaulted him with fists and
took him away in a jeep without giving any reason for the arrest; that
thereafter the 6th respondent was detained at the Bandaragama Police Station
where he was subjected to assaults and other ill-treatment; that the 6th
respondent was last seen on the evening of 04.02.87 after which she. was
informed that he had been transferred to the Kalutara Police Station; that
although on 07.02.87 and 10.02.87 she visited the Kalutara Police Station she
was not allowed by the H.Q.I. Kalutara Police to see the 6th respondent and
the H.Q.I. even refused to talk to her.

The petitioner alleges that the detention and incarceration of the 6th
respondent since 02.01.87 is illegal and violative of Articles 11,12, 13 and
14 of the Constitution. The petition is accompanied by an affidavit of one
Raymond Fernando, an uncle of the 6th respondent, who had helped the
petitioner in obtaining information

413

regarding the whereabouts of the 6th respondent and by visiting him whilst he
was in police custody.

When the 6th respondent was taken. away by the police, the petitioner believed
that he had been taken to the Chilaw Police. Consequently, Raymond went to
make inquiries at the Chilaw Police and was informed that the 6th respondent
had been taken to the Bandaragama Police.

On the 3rd and 4th, Raymond Fernando visited the Bandaragama Police where he
was informed that the Police team had not yet arrived with the 6th respondent.
He had gone there again on the 5th when he saw the 6th respondent crying in
pain having been assaulted on the knees and legs. He visited the 6th
respondent next on 6th, 7th, 14th, 19th and 23rd but was not allowed to speak
to him for more than 10 minutes on any day and a police officer was listening
to the conversation throughout. The petitioner visited the detenu on 10th,
18th and 24th. On the 18th she had seen him chained to a bench with much pain.
On her visit on the 31st she heard from another University student who was
chained to a bench that the 6th respondent had been taken to the Criminal
Investigation Department, but the police officers said that his whereabouts
are not known.

On 04.02.87 the petitioner and Raymond Fernando went to the CID to be told
that the 6th respondent had not been brought there. They were informed by the
Police Headquarters that the 6th respondent was at the Bandaragama Police
where they met him that evening. In the absence of a police officer he told
them that he had been taken blindfolded to a lonely house where he was
assaulted and kept for two days and bought back to the Kalutara Police
Station; that he had been produced before the Magistrate Horana by the
Kalutara Police that morning; and the Magistrate ordered him to be remanded
for a further period of one month. In his affidavit dated 18.01.88 the 6th
respondent states that on 04.02.87 he was produced before a lady Magistrate at
her bungalow when she "remanded" him and two other detainees Rupasinghe and
Jayasuriya for a further period and thereafter he was "remanded" at the
Kalutara Police from 05.02.87 to 20.02.87.

414

The 1st respondent (O.I.C. Chilaw Police) states that the 6th respondent was
not arrested by the Chilaw Police and further states that he is unaware of the
arrest of the 6th respondent by the police. The 2nd respondent (O.I.C.
Bandaragama Police) states that the 6th respondent was arrested by S.I.
Manamperi on 05.01.87 and was produced at the Bandaragama Police Station on
06.01.87; that on "further investigations" there was evidence that the 6th
respondent was concerned in committing offences under Emergency Regulations.
He therefore obtained from Mr. Rajaguru, Deputy Inspector General of Police, a
detention order under Emergency Regulations to detain the 6th respondent. The
detention order 2131 dated 07.01.87 authorises the detention of the 6th
respondent and two others Asoka Rupasinghe and Bandula Jayasuriya for a period
of 30 days from 06.01.87 at the Bandaragama Police Station under Regulation
19(2) of the Emergency Regulations. The order states that it had been reported
that they had been arrested on 05.01.87 under Regulation 18(1) for an offence
in contravention of Section 45 of the Emergency Regulations.

S.I. Manamperi in his affidavit (2132) states that in January, '87 he was
attached to the Horana Police; that he was detailed to investigate the murder
of University student Daya Pathirana; that on information received he had
reason to suspect that the 6th respondent was involved in that murder and it
was necessary to arrest him for the purpose of investigation. He accordingly
arrested him on 05.01.87 having explained the purpose for his arrest. He then
proceeded to Medawachchiya and Badulla to check on other suspects and returned
to the Bandaragama Police on 06.01.87 and produced the 6th respondent. He also
recorded the 6th respondent's statement a certified copy of which is produced
marked 'X'.

S.I. Manamperi claims that on the basis of the material that transpired during
his investigations including the statement of the 6th respondent it became
necessary to detain him under Emergency Regulations on the ground of a
reasonable suspicion that he had been concerned in committing offences under
Emergency Regulations and as such steps were taken to obtain a detention order
from Mr. Rajaguru, Deputy Inspector General of Police.

415

It is clear from the affidavit of S.I.Manamperi that the 6th respondent had
been arrested on a suspicion that he was involved with the murder of Daya
Pathirana. The murder had been committed in mid December, 1986. No material
has been placed before us as to what investigations were carried out during
the two weeks preceding the arrest of the 6th respondent or what information
led to his arrest. Even assuming the existence of credible information against
him, the police had no power to have arrested the 6th respondent under
Regulation 18(1) as stated in the detention order (2R1). That regulation only
empowers an arrest on account of an offence under Emergency Regulations.
Murder as such is not such an offence. It is an offence in respect of which an
arrest can only be made under Section 23 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in
which event the suspect has to be produced before a Magistrate in terms of
Section 36 and within the period prescribed by Section 37 of the Code. As
such, the impugned arrest is illegal for failure to effect it according to
procedure prescribed by law and is therefore violative of Article 13(1) of the
Constitution. In view of the affirmative stand taken by the 2nd respondent
that the 6th respondent was arrested under Regulation 18(1) on a suspicion of
being concerned in committing an offence under Emergency Regulations it would
not be possible to defend the arrest even on the ground that it is referable
to Section 23 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Consequently, the impugned
detention is also illegal and is violative of Article 13(2) of the
Constitution.

It is then claimed that "on further investigations" there was evidence against
the 6th respondent including his statement that he had been concerned in
committing offences under Emergency Regulations and hence a detention order
under Regulation 19(2) was obtained. The only material placed before us in
regard to further investigations is the statement of the 6th respondent
recorded on 14.01.87 which is subsequent to the date on which the detention
order was made. No material obtained between the date of the 6th respondent's
arrest and the date of the detention order has been produced. I shall,
however, consider the validity of the detention order on the assumption that
the material appearing in the 6th respondent's statement had transpired during
the interrogation of the 6th respondent after his arrest and prior to the
making of the detention order.

416

The 6th respondent states that he is a student of the Sri Jayewardenepura
University. He is also the representative of that University on the Inter
University Students Union. A meeting of the Union had been scheduled for
13.12.86 at the Kelaniya University which he attended but it could not be held
due to poor attendance. He admits that it was not lawful to hold such meetings
as student bodies had been proscribed. On 17.12.86 he read a newspaper report
about the killing of a student of the Colombo University. He collected funds
from students and put up a banner condoling the death. Thereafter he left for
his home in Chilaw where he stayed until his arrest.

The statement of the 6th respondent discloses no offence under Emergency
Regulations except perhaps the reference to his participation in the
activities of a proscribed student organization. However, the police have not
sought to justify the impugned detention on that ground. Even if he was
lawfully arrested in the first instance for murder in terms of Section 23 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure and it became necessary on the basis of
material disclosed during investigations to detain him under Emergency
Regulation 19(2) he was entitled to be informed of such reason for the
deprivation of his personal liberty. The failure to so inform him is further
ground for holding that the impugned detention is illegal.

The detention order itself has been made on the basis that the 6th respondent
is concerned in committing an offence under Regulation 45 of the Emergency
Regulations; but that regulation does not create an offence. It only makes
provision to the effect that any attempt, abetment of or a conspiracy to
commit an offence under any Emergency Regulation should be punished with the
same punishment prescribed for such offence. However, no such specific offence
has been alleged. In _Nanayakkara v. Henry Perera_ (1) this Court expressed
the opinion that it would be unlawful to detain a person for an unspecified
and unknown purpose as this would be an infringement of Article 13(4). Colin-
Thome, J. said (p. 388) -

"Although Regulation 19(2) does not state that the order of the Inspector
General of Police nominating a place of detention should state the reason for
the detention we think that it is in the interest of natural justice that the
reason should be

417

communicated to the detainee in the written order and that he should be
supplied with a copy of the order".

As explained by Colin-Thome, J. (p. 389) the rationale of this requirement is
that the arrest and detention are inextricably linked.

This view was followed in my judgment in _Wijewardena v. Zain and Others_ (2).
Accordingly, I hold that the detention order 2R1 is illegal. I shall now
proceed to consider the validity of the 6th respondent's detention from
05.02.87 until his release.

The 3rd respondent (O.I.C. Kalutara Police Station) admits the production of
the 6th respondent before the Acting Magistrate, Horana, Mrs. Gunatilake on
04.02.87. He states that he did so in terms of Regulation 19 of the Emergency
Regulations on instructions from the O.I.C. Counter Subversive Division. He
disclaims, inter alia, any knowledge of the fact that the 6th respondent was
thereafter detained at the Kalutara Police but fails to explain the
whereabouts of the detenu after 04.02.87. It is not the position of the 3rd
respondent that he was remanded to fiscal custody or that he was released.
After carefully considering the evidence, I am satisfied that the 6th
respondent was detained at the Kalutara Police from 05.02.87 to 20.02.87. No
detention order covering that period has been produced; as such the continued
detention of the 6th respondent during that period is also unlawful.

The total denial by the 1st \- 5th respondents of almost every fact material
to the case for the petitioner including date of the impugned arrest was
countered with an affidavit dated 18.01.88 from the 6th respondent supported
by other affidavits X1 - X7. The material, so furnished, if accepted, would
corroborate the petitioner's version that the 6th respondent was arrested at
about 3.30 p.m. on 02.01.87. The affidavits of Lionel Appuhamy who showed the
6th respondent's house to the police, Anthony Fernando, Principal of a school
who had seen the 6th respondent being taken away by the police, Nicholas
Fernando, Chairman, Gramodaya Mandalaya and Maxima Fernando Depot Manager,
Regional Transport Board, Chilaw to whom the petitioner and the 6th
respondent's uncle Raymond Fernando had spoken about the impugned arrest and
Asoka Rupasinghe another University student who was arrested by the
Bandaragama Police at

418

about 7.00 p.m. on the same day are particularly relevant. It is true that
these are belated affidavits; but there is an explanation for the delay namely
that. it was only after the respondents filed affidavits stating that the 6th
respondent was arrested on 05.01.87 it became necessary for the petitioner to
furnish further material to contradict that version.

Asoka Rupasinghe says that he was arrested when he was in the official
quarters of his sister, a doctor attached to the Medawachchiya Government
Hospital. The police party detained him and the 6th respondent at the Kekirawa
Police Station on the night of 02.01.87. On the 3rd morning they were taken
via Dambulla, Laggala and Mahiyangana to the Passara Police at which point the
student Bandula Jayasuriya was brought into the jeep. They were then taken via
Badulla and Bandarawela to the Haputale Police where they were detained at
night. On the 4th they were taken via Balangoda and Ratnapura and reached
Horana Police by about 2.30 p.m. where they were detained for the night; on
the morning of the 5th they were brought to the Bandaragama Police by about
8.00 a.m. The police then took the 6th respondent, assaulting him, to the rear
of the Police Station from which direction the witness heard the sound of
cries.

On a careful consideration of the available evidence including the averments
contained in the petition itself, I am satisfied that the 6th respondent was
arrested on 02.01.87 and not on 05.01.87 as spoken to by S.I. Manamperi; this
officer admits that after arresting the 6th respondent he visited
Medawachchiya and Badulla to check other suspects wanted in the same case and
returned to the Bandaragama Police on 06.01.87. He gives no further
particulars of his investigations; nor has he produced any notes of
investigations. His story does not have the ring of truth; it is unlikely that
he could have carried out the entire investigations at Chilaw, Medawachchiya
and Badulla and returned to Bandaragama with three suspects between the 5th
and 6th. On the other hand, Asoka Rupasinghe and the 6th respondent have
supplied the details of investigations covering 5 days from 02.01.87 to
06.01.87 which I accept. Even if the petitioner had not filed further
affidavits, I accept the petitioner's version as to the arrest of the 6th
respondent which appears to me to be intrinsically true.

419

Turning to the alleged violation of Article 11, the 6th respondent states that
the police assaulted him and on 06.01.87; he was offered for interrogation by
K. L. Dharmasiri, Vice President of the Independent Students' Union who
visited the Bandaragama Police Station; that Dharmasiri humiliated him in the
presence of the police and said "if you come out not a piece of yours would be
spared". He also confirms the allegation in the petition that prior to his
production before the Magistrate on 04.02.87 he had been taken blindfolded to
a lonely house where he was subjected to assault and interrogation. He states
that after such treatment he was taken to the Kalutara Police Station. Events
thus averred to also have the ring of truth and can be relied upon by this
Court. Whilst I shall not accept each and every allegation of assault/ill-
treatment against the police unless it is supported by cogent evidence I do
not consider it proper to reject such an allegation merely because the police
deny it or because the aggrieved party cannot produce medical evidence of
injuries. Whether any particular treatment is violative of Article 11 of the
Constitution would depend on the facts of each case. The allegation can be
established even in the absence of medically supported injuries.

The 6th respondent was arrested for alleged involvement in the murder of Daya
Pathirana. As pointed out earlier, no evidence of his complicity in the
alleged murder and no material warranting a suspicion that he is concerned in
committing an offence under Emergency Regulations has been produced. An arrest
under Regulation 18(1), to be lawful has to be reasonable by the application
of the objective test; it should be effected on credible information. _Joseph
Perera v. Attorney-Genera_ (3); _Gunasekera v. de Fonseka_ (4) see also
_Muttusamy v. Kannangara_ (5) and _Yapa v Bandaranayake_ (6). The arrest of
the 6th respondent cannot satisfy this test; as such the arrest is illegal. If
he was arrested for an offence under Emergency Regulations, he was not
informed of such reason, in breach of his rights under Article 13(1) of the
Constitution.

Having arrested the 6th respondent on speculation the police kept him in
unlawful custody for 49 days as a subversive. He was at times chained to a
beach causing severe pain. He was assaulted. He was submitted for
interrogation by a hostile student unionist who

420

humiliated him. He was blindfolded and taken to a lonely house for
interrogation. He was detained at the Kalutara Police Station from 05.02.87 to
20.02.87 without a semblance of authority for such detention. In my view
deprivation of personal liberty, in such conditions. is degrading treatment or
punishment violative of Article 11 of the Constitution.

Accordingly, I determine that the arrest and detention of the 6th respondent
are violative of his rights guaranteed by Articles 13(1), 13(2), 13(4) and 11
of the Constitution. There is no material to warrant the allegation that his
rights under Articles 12 and 14 have been violated. On the question of relief,
I have taken into consideration the fact that the 6th respondent had been
illegally arrested and detained for 49 days and subjected to grave
humiliation. The thought that the arrest made in the background of a killing
which may have been politically motivated is irrelevant and should not stand
in the way of granting just and equitable relief to the petitioner. I direct
the State to pay the petitioner on behalf of the 6th respondent a sum of Rs.
25,000/- and costs which I fix at Rs. 2500/-.

**FERNANDO J.** \- I agree.

  
**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/10.html_  

