##  Jayasinghe v. The National Institute of Fisheries and Nautical Engineering
(Nifne)And Others - SLR - 230, Vol 1 of 2004 [2004] LKSC 10; (2004) 1 Sri LR
230 (29 March 2004)

**230**

**JAYASINGHE  
v  
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FISHERIES AND  
NAUTICAL ENGINEERING (NIFNE)  
AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
S.N.SILVA, CJ.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J . AND  
DE SILVA, J.  
S.C.(FR) 639/2001  
6 JUNE, 27 JULY AND  
6 AUGUST, 2003  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Manner of pleading the case for the petitioner - Rule 44
(a) of the Supreme Court Rules - Rule against prolixity \- Use of defama­tory
language in pleadings._

The petitioner who was Director of the 1st respondent Institute from
20.12.1999 was interdicted by letter dated 8.11.2001. He had claimed the right
to appointment as the Director General of the Institute and filed FR
Application No. 692/2000 and a writ application in the Court of Appeal, CA
1569/2000 both

**231**

of which were dismissed for willful suppression of material facts. Two other
writ applications are pending judgment.  
  
The petitioner also filed the present petition. Despite its length and
prolixi­ty, he failed to aver how his interdiction had violated his rights
under Article 12(1) of the Constitution. The language used in his petition is
slanderous and abusive of the character of the respondents.

**Held:  
  
**1\. A preliminary objection that the petitioner had failed to satisfy Rule
14(1 )(a) of the Supreme Court Rules must be upheld. That Rule requires the
petitioner to set out a plain and concise statement of facts and the
infringement of the fundamental right. These guidelines are similar to those
set out in sections 40(d) and 46(2) (a) and (b) of the Civil Procedure Code in
respect of pleadings.  
  
2\. The use of slanderous and abusive words in respect of the respondents
would also negate compliance with the above guidelines in a Public Law remedy.
The right to seek relief for infringement of fundamental rights should not be
made a means of defaming persons who would otherwise be entitled to vindicate
their rights in respect of such allegation, if they are published.  
  
**APPLICATION**  for relief for infringement of fundamental rights
(preliminary objection.)  
  
_Kuwera de Zoysa_ with _Senaka_ de Saram for petitioner  
  
_D.S.Wijesinghe, P.C_.with _C.Samaranayake_ for 1st, 5th, 8th, and 9th
respon­dents.

_Cur.adv.vult._

March 29, 2004  
  
**SARATH N. SILVA, C.J.  
**  
The Petitioner joined the public service as a lecturer in Fishing Gear and
Methods attached to the Training Division of the Ministry of Fisheries with
effect from 1.3.1982. He continued in service of that Ministry, inclusive of a
stint as a volunteer in the Sri Lanka Navy, upto 1990. He was granted 5 years
no-pay leave for employ­ment abroad covering the period January 1990 to
January 1995 and resumed duties in the Ministry on 1.9.1994. He was appointed
by the Public Service Commission as Director of the National

**232**

Institute of Fisheries Training (NIFT), being a Department within the Ministry
of Fisheries with effect from 1.6.1995.  
  
The work of the NIFT was taken over by another Institute estab­lished under
Act, No.36 of 1999. The new Institute came into oper­ation with effect from
20.12.1999 and is known as the National Institute of Fisheries and Nautical
Engineering (NIFNE), being the 1st respondent. The petitioner was appointed as
a Director of NIFNE with effect from 20.12.1999 (1R9).  
  
The petitioner claims that he should have been appointed as Director-General
of NIFNE. In terms section 14(1) of the Act, the Director-General is the
principal executive officer and the principal academic officer of the
Institute and is appointed by the Minister on 20 the recommendation of the
Council.  
  
The petitioner has filed one application in this Court alleging that his
fundamental right guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the Constitution has been
infringed by the failure to appoint him as Director-General. He has also filed
3 applications in the Court of Appeal seeking Public Law Remedies such as
writs of certiorari, prohibition and mandamus in respect of the same
appointment. Many averments in the lengthy pleadings filed by the petitioner
in these applications relate to the claim of the petitioner to be the
Director-General and to a transaction in which the property of the Government
used by the NIFT including certain buildings have been leased to a private
sector establishment (6th respondent). The petitioner alleges that this lease
of property has caused economic loss to the Government and has been entered
into with the fraudulent intent. At some point of time it appears that the
Government decided to terminate the lease in favour of the 6th respondent,
resulting in the 6th respondent filing an application in this Court alleging
an infringement of its rights guaranteed by Article 12(1), (S.C. Application
No. 896/99).  
  
After leave to proceed was granted in that application, the paries to that
application agreed upon terms of settlement, which included the termination of
the lease and certain payments being made to the 6th respondent. The
petitioner sought to intervene in that application objecting to the settlement
which the NIFNE was seeking to enter into with 6th respondent. That settlement
has

**233**

thereafter taken effect and the petitioner's application for intervention was
refused by this Court.  
  
The long and meandering averments in 113 paragraph of the petition that run
into 24 pages contain an account of the petitioner's life, education and
career starting from the time he went to school through to his higher
education, the employment in the Ministry, employment on overseas leave, work
in the NIFT and the NIFNE upto the stage at which he was interdicted by letter
dated 8.11.2001(P84).

The 1st respondent has raised a specific objection on the ground that the
petitioner is not entitled to relief since the petition has not been prepared
in compliance with Rule 44(1) (a) of the Supreme Court Rules of 1990.

This rule requires a person seeking relief in respect of an infringement or an
imminent infringement of a fundamental right by 60 executive or administrative
action to:  
  
"set out in his petition a plain and concise statement of the facts and
circumstances relating to such right and the infringe­ment or imminent
infringement thereof, including particulars of the executive or administrative
action whereby such right has been, or is about to be, infringed, where more
than one right has been, or is about to be infringed, the facts and
circum­stances relating to each such right and the infringement or imminent
infringement thereof shall be clearly and distinctly set out. He shall, also
refer to the specific provisions or the 70 Constitution under which any such
right is claimed."  
  
The rule is in turn based on the provisions of section 40(d) of the Civil
Procedure Code as to the contents of a plaint in a civil action. This
provision reads as follows:

40\. "The plaint....... shall contain the following particulars:  
  
(d) a plain and concise statement of the circumstances consti­tuting each
cause of action, and where and when it arose. Such statement shall be set
forth in duly numbered para­graphs; and where two or more causes of action are
set out, the statement of the circumstances constituting each cause of action
must be separate, and numbered,"

**234**

It is clear from these provisions that it is a salutary rule of plead­ings, be
it a plaint in a civil action, a petition in an application for an
infringement or imminent infringement of a fundamental right or an application
for any other Public Law remedy that the plaint or peti­tion should focus on
what may be generically termed as the cause of action. In a civil action, the
cause of action would be the wrong on the part of the defendant which affects
the plaintiff and in respect of which relief or a remedy is sought by invoking
the jurisdiction of the Court (vide section 5 and 6 of the Civil Procedure
Code). Similarly in an application in respect of an infringement or imminent
infringement of a fundamental right, the focus should be on the executive or
administrative action whereby the applicant's funda­mental right which is
claimed is infringed or about to be infringed and the invocation of the
jurisdiction of this Court for just and equi­table relief. The pleading filed
in Court should focus on these ele­ments and set out a plaint and concise
statement of the relevant facts and circumstances. The provisions of section
46(2) (a) and (b) of the Civil Procedure Code lay down the guidelines that
would apply with equal force to a plaint in a civil court or a petition filed
in this Court as to the manner in which the relevant facts and circum­stances
should be set out in the pleading. They are:

1\. That the facts and circumstances should be stated without prolixity i.e.
without being lengthy or long-winded;  
  
2\. That the facts and circumstances should be correct;  
  
3\. That it should not contain particulars other than those required to set
out the cause of action (the infringement or imminent infringement by
executive or administrative action of the fundamental right that is claimed).  
  
As noted above the petition contains an extensive account of virtually the
petitioner's life story commencing from the time he received education in
school. These particulars by far antidate the enactment of the National
Institute of Fisheries & Nautical Act, No.36 of 1999. As far as the
application is concerned the gravamen of the petitioner's complaint is his
interdiction contained in docu­ment P84. Ironically the petition does not even
contain an aver­ment as to the manner in which the order in P84 infringed the
fundamental right guaranteed to the petitioner by Article 12(1) of the

**235**

Constitution. There are two paragraphs in the petition concerning the
interdiction, namely paragraphs 107 and 111 contained at pages 23 and 24 of
the petition. I would reproduce paragraph 11 to demonstrate the lack of
relevancy on the one part and the verbosi­ty and prolixity on the other of the
contents in the petition.  
  
"The petitioner states that his efforts to counter his interdiction by the 2nd
respondent for his application to intervene in S.C. Application No. 896/99(FR)
and other hypothetical offences he has never been charged with, is a direct
result of his failure or refusal of the respondents to implement the Cabinet
decision to abrogate the lease agreement, recover possession of the premises
and property (by issue of a "quit notice" as recommended by the Attorney-
General) and use them for the real­ization of the proposal to establish NIFNE
as a Fisheries University, and on the contrary to act in a manner to permit
the continued exploitation by CINEC of an illegal and void contract to their
tremendous benefit and the severe detriment of the Sate in general and
Fisheries Training in Sri Lanka in particu­lar (by permitting CINEC to release
only the hostel but contin­ue to occupy and possess all the rest of the
extensive premis­es and properly for about five years after the Cabinet
decision to abrogate the treaty and recover possession of the minimum rental
due) the cover-up of the attempt to defraud the State in respect of the
proposed installation of a flicked ice plant in a training vessel, without
recovery is arbitrary, mala fide, in vio­lation of the Rules of natural
justice, done for a collateral pur­pose, patently illegal, null and void and
of no force or avail in law, and violative of the petitioner's fundamental
rights to equality before the law and equal protection of the law guar­anteed
by Article 12(1) and the freedom of speech and expres­sion guaranteed by
Article 14(1) (a) of the Constitution."  
  
The vital paragraph which purports to set out the alleged infringement of the
petitioner's fundamental rights is an incomprehensible rigmarole.  
  
In the circumstances I am inclined to agree with the objection raised by the
respondents, that the petition has not been prepared in the manner required by
Rule 44(1) (a) of the Supreme Court Rules.

**236**

As regards the ground based on multiplicity of actions, it is noted that the
petitioner has filed S.C.(FR) 692/2000 in December 2000 challenging the steps
that were being taken to appoint the 18th respondent to the post as Director-
General of the 1st respondent institute and relief sought was a direction on
the respondent to appoint the petitioner to the post of Director-General. The
applica­tion was dismissed by this Court on 20.3.2002, inter alia on the
ground that the petitioner had willfully suppressed material facts from Court.
The petitioner was also directed to pay costs of the application to the
respondent.  
  
The petitioner filed a writ application in the Court of Appeal No. 1569/2000
seeking similar relief from the Court of Appeal. This application was
dismissed by the Court of Appeal with costs, on the basis inter alia, that
there has been willful suppression of the material facts by the petitioner.
There are 2 further applications in the Court of Appeal in which it appears
that judgments have not yet been delivered. It is thus clear that the
petitioner has filed a multi­plicity of proceedings against the 1st respondent
and against some of the persons who are named as respondents in this
application.  
  
There is certainly no objection to any person who is aggrieved by a course of
executive or administrative action that affects his rights seeking Public Law
remedies either in the Court of Appeal or in this Court. However, this process
cannot be used to inflict undue hardship to the Public institutions and the
persons who are made respondents. It is noted that the petitioner has included
scathing remarks alleging fraud and impropriety on the part of the several
named persons. Relevant facts and circumstances may be appro­priately set out
in a pleading on the basis of the guidelines men­tioned above, but, a person
seeking a Public Law remedy should not use words of slanderous and abusive
nature affecting the char­acter and social standing of persons who are named
as respon­dents. It should be firmly borne in mind that these proceedings have
a sanctity of their own in that they are designed to uphold the fundamental
rights of persons and should not be made a means of defaming persons who would
otherwise be entitled to vindicate their rights in respect of such
allegations, if they are published.  
  
It is manifest in perusing the averments of the petition in this case that the
petitioner has endeavoured to portray himself as a

**237**

paragon of virtue who will work for the public good, whilst on the other hand
the persons against whom allegations are made are depicted as villains bent on
defrauding public property. In extolling in his virtues and condemning others
the petitioner has stated in paragraph 19 of the petition as follows:

"having been shocked and saddened by the prostitution of this vital training
facility to serve the narrow selfish interest of the 8th respondent and other
high ranking individuals in the Ministry, but being well aware of the dire
need of the fisher folk and the fishing industry of this country he (the
petitioner) decided to sacrifice his professionally rewarding and lucrative
employment (his monthly salary was US$ 3000) by voluntarily cancelling the
balance period no pay leave granted to him and resuming duties as Fleet
Manager on 1.9.1994."

The petitioner has in this averment endeavoured to make out that in view of
the conduct of the 8th respondent and other officers of the Ministry who
misuse public property for their personal gain, he made a sacrifice, cut short
his foreign employment and returned to work in the Ministry. In paragraph 17
of the petition he has stat­ed that he took this decision in view of the
election of the new gov­ernment which took place in 1994 and to assist the new
Minister to reorganize Fisheries Training Institute and Training Centre that
was then in total disarray and virtually non-functional.

The respondents have contradicted this averment of the peti­tioner and has in
fact produced marked R3 a plaint filed by the peti­tioner in D.C. Colombo case
No.14862/MR on 24.3.1994, against his former employer, whilst on no pay leave
granted by the Ministry. He has stated in that plaint that the vessel he was
engaged to serve on was not in a fit state and the repairs that were being
done were grossly inadequate and he urged that further repairs be done and
pointed out that it would be dangerous to sail the vessel without such repairs
being done. He has further stated that he protested strongly to the
representative of his employer who came to exam­ine the vessel.  
  
In paragraph 12 of the plaint he has stated that thereupon the representative
instructed the owner to send a relief Master who came on board the vessel and
the petitioner was compelled to sign

**238**

the necessary documents and leave the vessel. It is further stated that the
employer thereafter arranged the transport of the petition­er back to Sri
Lanka at their expense. He has claimed in that action a sum of US$ 8100 as the
equivalent of three months' wages in view of the summary termination of his
services.  
  
Thus it is clear that the averments in the petition to this Court that he
sacrificed a lucrative job to serve his country is palpably false.  
For the reasons stated above I uphold the objections that have 240 been raised
by the respondents and dismiss this application. No costs.  
  
In fairness to counsel whose appearance is noted above, I have to place on
record the fact that he came into the case only at the stage of argument. The
petitioner has been represented in this case and in the several other
proceedings referred to by an attorney-at-law who was his registered attorney
and counsel.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J**. - I agree

**SILVA, J.** \- I agree

>  
>  _Preliminary objection upheld;  
>  application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/10.html_  

