##  Fernando v. Attorney General and Another - SLR - 374, Vol 1 of 1983 [1983]
LKSC 10; (1983) 1 Sri LR 374 (16 March 1983)

# 374

FERNANDO

**v.**

ATTORNEY GENERAL AND ANOTHER

  
SUPREME COURT,

SAMARAKOON,  C.J.,

WANASUNDERA, J., J.

AND VICTOR PERERA, J.,

S.C. APPLICATION NO. 2 OF 1983,

FEBRUARY  24 AND 25, 1983.

**  **

_Violation of Fundamental Rights - Articles 10, 11, 13 (1) (b) of the
Constitution- Section 45 of the Referendum Act No. 7 of 1981 ‑ Section 77(1)
and (3) of he Police Ordinance._



The petitioner sought a declaration stating that the Respondents (the police)
violated his fundamental rights of freedom of thought and conscience,
subjected him to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment and punishment,
illegally

**375**

  
‑arrested him and did for such arrest and violated his fundamental right of
freedom of speech. He further stated that at the time of his arrest he was
attending a peaceful assembly and one day fast to protest against the
detention of three Christian clergymen, a doctor, a­ University lecturer and
his wife.  


The Pet though they planned to go in procession to the premises of the Young
Men's Hindu Association, on being warned by the Police they decided that the
fast be staged at the church premises.



The respondents stated that the petitioner and others were members of an
illegal procession on the Horowpatana Road and that when action was taken to
disperse this procession violence erupted and, therefore, these people,
including the petitioner were taken into custody and produced before the
Magistrate.



The main questions were,



1  (a) whether there was a procession?  
  
    (b) if so was it on the road to Horowpatana?   
  
    (c) was this an illegal procession ?  
  
2 Whether the police had rights and powers to act in the way they acted ?



**HELD**



(1) There was a procession which entered the Horowpatana Highway and proceeded
some distance before it was blocked by a posse Of policeman‑ Under Section 45
of the Referendum Act No.7 of 1981 and Section 77 (3) of the police Ordinance,
it was an illegal procession.



(2) The police had the power to act in the way



# 376

  
They and it does not matter if they purported to do it in reference to the
wrong provisions of law.



Application under Article 126 of the Constitution.



**Cases referred to:**



( _Vijaya Kumaranathunga vs. G.V.P.Samarasinghe- (1983)_



_V.S.a. pullenayagam_ with _S.C_ _Chandra Hasan,  
 _

_S. Perinpanayagam, C.V. Vivekanandan,  
 _

_Miss. M. Kanapathipillai, Miss. D. Wijesundera, and  
 _

_Miss. N. Fernando for_ petitioner.



Upawansa yapa, Senior State Counsel with C.R. de silva, State counsel for
Attorney-General. _ _



_Cur.adv. vult._

_  _

March 16, 1983.  


**SAMARAKOON, C.J.,**



The Petitioner Dr. S.N. Fernando complains that the 2nd, 3rd and  4th
Respondents have violated his fundamental rights:

           

(a) of freedom of though and conscience, declared, recognised and guaranteed
under Article 10 of the Constitution.



(b) not to be subject to-



(i)  degrading treatment,  


(ii)  cruel treatment, both declared, recognised and guaranteed under Article
11 of the Constitution;  


(c) (i)  not to be arrested except according to procedure established by law,
and



(ii)  when arrested to be informed of the reasons for his arrest both
declared, recognised and guaranteed  under Article 13(1) of the Constitution;

#  377



(d) of freedom of peaceful assembly, declared recognised and guaranteed under
Article 14 (1) of the Constitution.



The Petitioner is a Registered Medical Practitioner attached to the Base
Hospital, Vavuniya since1967. He is a citizen of Sri Lanka. The 2nd, 3rd and
4th Respondents are Police Officers attached to the Police Station, Vavuniya.
At the relevant time the Army held three Christian Clergymen, a Doctor, a
University Lecturer and his wife in detention in the Army Camp. They had been
arrested under the provisions of the Prevention of Terrorism Act. Such
detention led to protests from the public in places in the Northern Province.
Vavuniya was one such place. The Petitioner states that on 15-12-82 at about
9.35 a.m he arrived at the Ramaikulam St.Anthony's Church to join in a one day
fast organized by the Sudhananda Young Men's Hindu Association of Vavuniya,
the Gandiyan Organisation and other religious bodies to protect against the
detention of the priests and the other detainees. Dr. Rajasubnderam who was
the Organising secretary of the Gandiyan Society was the organiser  of the
fast. The arrangement was that the participants should gather at the said
church at 9.00a.m. and thereafter go in procession to the premises of   the
Young Men's Hindu Association to stage the fast. The Petitioner became aware
that stage the fast d been summoned to the Police Station by the 2nd
Respondent and had been informed that the proposed procession would not be
permitted. Dr Rajasunderam discussed this with the others on his return to the
Church premises and after discussion it was decided that the fast should be
staged at the Church premises. The participants then squatted on the Church
premises. The participants then the squatted on the Church compound and the
lawn facing the gate. The   fast then commenced and the devotional songs were
being sung. The Petitioner was seated on the lawn The Assistant Superintendent
of Police, the Headquarters



# 378

  
Inspector and other armed police personnel were standing on the road and the
fast went peacefully. At about 10.45 a.m. the 2nd Respondent came to the
Church in a jeep and got down at the entrance. Shortly thereafter, without any
warn at all, the 3rd Respondent and other policemen "suddenly came into the
Church compound, baton charging, assaulting, kicking and trampling the
participants who were peacefully seated in Church compound". He heard gun
shots and tear gas shells landed in the compound. Women and children were
assaulted and they took shelter inside Church. The Petitioner says that he too
went inside  the Church. When he was standing by the altar the 3rd Respondent,
on seeing him, came running tow, him uttering abuse, assaulted him with a
baton, dragged him into the police jeep. He was assaulted and abused by the
4th  Respondent in the jeep and driven to the Police  Station where also he
was assaulted. Late in evening he with eight others were produced before the
Acting Magistrate and released on bail. This in short is the case of the
Petitioner as narrated by him in the Petition and affidavit. The Petitioner
seeks a declaration that the 2nd to 4th Respondents-



(a) violated his fundamental right of freedom  of thought and conscience,  


(b) subjected him to cruel, inhuman degrading treatment and punishment,  


(c) illegally arrested him and did not in him of the reason for such arrest,  


(d) violated his fundamental right of freedom  of speech.





The Respondents deny these allegations state that the Petitioner and others
were of an illegal procession on the Horowpatana Road and that when action was
taken to disperse procession violence erupted. The police were pelted





#  379  


with stones. One policeman was injured and two jeeps damaged. Tear gas was
thrown in the process and several people, including the Petitioner, were
arrested and produced before the Magistrate.



Counsel for the Petitioner characterised this version of the Respondents' as
completely false. He contended that the gathering inside the Church compound
was a peaceful assembly and such assembly was attacked by the police for no
rhyme or reason and without any right or power to do so.



The first question I have to decide is whether there was a procession and if
so, was it on the road to Horawpatana? There is no doubt that the prime object
of those who gathered in the Church compound was to go in procession along the
highway to the Young Men's Hindu Association premises. This is admitted by the
Petitioner and Dr. Rajasunderam. The Doctor was told this could not be
permitted. In view of that ban the Doctor states the people squatted
peacefully in the compound and began the fast. They state that no one squatted
beyond the entrance to the Church. The Respondents state that at about 10.00
a.m. the procession entered the highway from the Church compound and it was
blocked by the police. The people then squatted on the road. This is denied by
the Petitioner and Dr. Rajasunderam. They would have us believe that all
intentions to go in procession had been abdndoned, the fast was in fact
commenced at the Church premises and the participants were seated peacefully
within the Church premises. No attempt whatsoever was made, they state, to get
a procession moving. It is here that the statement of Rev. Alban Rajasingham,
Parish Priest of St. Anthony's Church becomes relevant. It throws considerable
light on the controversy and even Counsel for the Petitioner sought to rely on
it to prove that those within the Church premises who were baton charged were
members of a peaceful assembly. The relevant portion of this statement 3RC)
reads as follows:‑

# 380



"Today the managing Committee of the Hindu Youth Front of Vavuniya decided to
have a procession and to proceed to the Hindu Society hall at Vavuniya to fast
as a mark protest against the arrest of the members the clergy and others by
security forces under, the terrorist act. Permission was granted the church to
assemble in the church premise Today at about 9.00 a.m. when I was at the
church some people assembled inside the church premises and they were getting
ready to le the church premises in a procession. As far as I know Dr.
Rajasunderam was the chief organiser for the fast and he too was present by
that time H.Q.I. Vavuniya came and told Rajasunderam that S.P. wanted to speak
to him. Dr. Rajasunderam accompanied H.Q.I. Vavuniya. Little later Dr.
Rajasunderam came to church. At the same time a reinforcement of Police
Officers came there and stood on road opposite the church. When the process
was about to leave the church premises. Police warned the members in the
process not to get out to go in a procession. In spite of the Police warning
the members in the procession tried to get out and when the Police Officers
prevented them in going in a  procession, most of the members in procession
sat on the ground. I went up to church and sat on the stairs leading to
church."



It is clear that from 9.00 a.m. the assembled persons were making ready to
leave the church in procession. When the procession was about to I the
premises the police officers who were standing on the road opposite the Church
warned them not to got out. in spite of the warning they tried to out and the
police blocked them. They then squatted on the ground. This gives the lie to
the story the Petitioner and his witnesses that no attempt  

#  381  


was made to get out of the Church premises and that, on the contrary, all
intentions of going in procession had been abandoned on Dr. Rajasunderam's
return from the Police Station. This statement of the priest compels me to
reject the version of the Petitioner and his witnesses and to accept the
version of the Police. I accept the Police version that the head of the
procession entered the Horowpatana Highway and proceeded some distance before
it was blocked by a posse of policemen. They then squatted on the highway and
the Church.­compound and were so seated for about an hour till about 11.00
a.m. with no interference from the Police. At 11.00 a.m. they made another
attempt to continue the procession despite warnings from the Headquarters
Inspector. Then tear gas was used to disperse them. The processionists then
pelted stones at the Police and caused injury to one policeman and damaged 2
jeeps parked on the highway. The Police then went into the Church premises and
arrested the Petitioner and some others who they say were organisers. A report
made by the Assistant Superintendent of Police (2R4) to the Superin­tendent of
Police (2nd Respondent) on 16‑12‑82 and the entry made by the Superintendent
of Police (2R2) in the Officers' Visit Book at 12.15 p.m. on 15‑12‑82 (the day
of the incident) corroborate the version of the 3rd and 4th Respondents. When
the Superintendent of Police visited the scene he found stones, placards and
slippers strewn on the road and noticed the damage on the jeeps. I am unable
to accept the version of the Petitioner and his witnesses and therefore reject
them. Counsel for the Petitioner argued that in any event the Police had no
right or power to enter the Church premises and arrest persons within such
premises as those in the Church compound comprised a peaceful assembly. I
cannot accept this. There is no doubt that they were all part of the
procession, the head of the procession was on the highway and the rear of it
was in the Church compound. They were part and

**  382**



parcel of one procession. The tail cannot disown the head when it suits it.



Was this an illegal procession/ Section 45(a) of the Referendum Act, No.7 of
1981 reads thus‑



"45\. No person



(a) shall, at any time from the date of publication of the Proclamation in
respect of a Referendum and ending on the day immediately following the date
on which the result of the ­poll taken at such Referendum is declared,
conduct, hold or take part in any procession, other than a procession on May I
in the year, or any procession for religious or social purposes.



Every person who contravenes any of the preceding provisions of this section
shall b guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction, after summary trial
before a Magistrate, be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred rupees, or
to imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding one month, or
to both such fine and imprisonment."



A Referendum had been declared and polling was to take place on 22‑12‑1982\.
The procession was therefore an illegal one.



Counsel however contended that this case must be judged solely on the basis
that the Police acted on the basis of Emergency Regulations and that the
persons arrested were charged for committing an offence under section 12(l) of
the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulation Part 3 of 1982
published in Gazette No.219/21 of November 20, 1982. Admittedly those
Regulation were not in force at the time and the charge was to that extent
incorrect. But that does not mean that the procession was legal. It was
illegal in terms

#  383  


of section 45 of the Referendum Act, It was also illegal because no notice of
it had been given to the Police in terms of section 77(1) of the Police
Ordinance (Cap.53) and the organisers were thereby guilty of an offence
(section 77(3)).These sections were quoted by the Assistant Superintendent of
Police in his report to the Superintendent of Police (2R4) on 16‑12‑1982\. The
error is a _bona fide_ one and does not by any means vitiate proceedings or by
any stretch of imagination make the procession other than an illegal one. The
Police had the power to act in the way they did and it does not matter if they
purported co do it in reference to the wrong provisions of law. (Vijaya
Ku.maranatunga vs .G.V.P. Samarasinghe et al S. C 121/82 ‑ Minutes of
3‑2‑1983).



There are the further allegations of violation of freedom of thought and
conscience, of cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment. These were not
substantiated and not pursued in the course of the argument. In regard to the
allegation of failure to inform the Petitioner of the reason for his arrest
Counsel pointed to the fact that the reason given was that of participation in
a procession made illegal by an Emergency Regulation which was not in force at
the time. The Petitioner was informed that he was part of an illegal
procession and that is sufficient reason for the arrest. The Police do not
have to quote chapter and verse from statutes and legal literature to justify
the arrest. There is no obligation on the Police to 'quote the law applicable.



I dismiss the petition with costs.



**WANASUNDERA,** J. I agree.



**VICTOR PERERA, J.** I agree.  


_**Application dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/10.html_  

