##  Mahanthegama v. The University of Peradeniya and Others - SLR - 18, Vol 2
of 2003 [2003] LKSC 10; (2003) 2 Sri LR 18 (11 March 2003)

18

MAHANTHEGAMA  
v.  
THE UNIVERSITY OF PERADENIYA AND OTHERS

_ _







SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

ISMAIL, J. AND

YAPA, J,

SC. NO. 540/2001 (FR)

11TH MARCH, 2003

_Fundamental Rights - Appointment in the University_ \- _Appointment by the
University Grants Commission (U.G.C.) on interview and selection by the
University - Application challenging the selection withdrawn due to
misunder­standing induced by the Vice-Chancellor's failure to disclose all
facts - UGC not made party to the application - Power of the court to grant
costs to the peti­tioner against the University \- Constitution, Article
12(1)._

The petitioner was an unsuccessful candidate at an interview for the selection
of Curator (Higher Grade) in the University of Peradeniya (The University).
The University Grants Commission (The UGC) which was not made a party to the
application was the appointing authority. The UGC had delegated to the
University the power to advertise the post and to make recommendations after
interview.

The University recommended the appointment of the 27th respondent which was
challenged by the petitioner on the ground that the 27th respondent did not
possess the requisite experience. Leave to proceed was granted but a
restraining order which had been earlier granted against appointment was not
extended. The correspondence between the UGC and the University showed that
the UGC initially insisted on re-advertising the post for want of requisite
experience on the part of the 27th respondent.

By a letter dated 13.06.2002 the 2nd respondent (The Vice Chancellor)
pro­vided to the UGC "evidence" of requisite experience on the part of the
27th respondent. But the Vice Chancellor did not inform the Senior State
Counsel of the existence of his letter dated 13.06.2002 with the result that
neither the court nor the counsel were aware of it. In the result the
petitioner's counsel withdrew the application in the belief that the matter
was still in issue between the UGC and the University. Thereafter the UGC
appointed the 27th respon­dent.

**19**

Consequently, on a motion by the petitioner, the UGC was added as a party to
ascertain whether it was remiss in its duty to the court in the matter. After
con­sideration, the UGC was discharged.

**Held :**

Although the petitioner was not entitled to substantial relief it was
equitable to order the University to pay the petitioner Rs.25,000/- as costs.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Manohara de Silva_ for petitioner

S. _Barrie,_ State Counsel for 1st and 2nd respondents.

_J.C. Weliamuna_ for 27th respondent.

_Gomin Dayasiri_ for University Grants Commission.

#  

# Cur. adv. vult

May, 27, 2003

**FERNANDO, J.** ****



In the year 2001 there was a vacancy in the post of Curator  (Higher Grade) in
the University of Peradeniya, the 1st respondent. It is common ground that the
appointing authority was the University Grants Commission ("the UGC"), which
had delegated to the 1st respondent the power of advertising that vacancy,
inter­viewing applicants, and making recommendations. The post was advertised,
one of the stipulated qualifications being eight years experience in a
supervisory capacity in a botanical garden or agri­cultural farm.



On 29.09.2001 the Council of the 1st respondent, having considered the
recommendations of the selection committee made after interviewing several
applicants, recommended to the UGC that the 27th respondent be appointed and
that the 29th respon­dent be placed as a reserve.



On 05.10.2001 the petitioner, an unsuccessful applicant, filed this
application - to which the UGC was not made a party - alleging

20

 that the 27th respondent did not have the required experience. When the
application was supported on 26.10.2001 the 27th respondent moved for time to
retain Counsel, and the matter was postponed for 5.11.2001. An interim order
was made, operative till 06.11.2001, restraining the 2nd respondent from
issuing a letter of appointment to the 27th respondent. On 05.11.2001 leave to
proceed was granted but the interim order was not extended. The Court noted,
however, that any appointment made was liable to be quashed if the petitioner
ultimately succeeded. Senior State Counsel then informed the Senior Assistant
Registrar of the 1st respondent of the order made on 5.11.2001, and advised
that the UGC be informed that there was no legal impediment to the appointment
of the 27th respondent.



In the meantime the UGC sought clarification from officials of the 1st
respondent as to whether the 27th respondent did have the required period of
supervisory experience. Not being satisfied on that score, the UGC decided on
16.4.2002 to request the 2nd respondent, the Vice-Chancellor of the 1st
respondent, to re-adver­tise the post. The 2nd respondent by letter dated
17.4.2002 sub­mitted further material regarding the qualifications of the 27th
respondent and again requested that he be appointed. By letter dated 8.5.2002
the UGC informed the 2nd respondent that the UGC, having considered that
request on 30.4.2002, had reiterated its previous decision as the 27th
respondent did not have the required experience.



By letter dated 13.06.2002 the 2nd respondent forwarded to the UGC a copy of a
letter from the Director-General of Agriculture "clarifying the services (of
the 27th respondent) in a supervisory capacity", and again requested his
appointment.

On 17.06.2002 when this application was taken up for hearing, Senior State
Counsel who appeared for the 1st and 2nd respondents, tendered a copy of the
UGC's letter dated 08.05.2002, and the UGC's decision referred to therein.
Counsel for the petitioner thereupon stated, without any reservation, that the
50 petitioner did not wish to pursue this application. The Counsel who had
appeared for the 27th respondent on several previous dates was not present.
Accordingly, the Court dismissed the application. It appears that the 2nd
respondent had not informed Senior State

21

Counsel that despite the letter of 8.5.2002, he had again urged the UGC, on
13.6.2002, to appoint the 27th respondent. Neither Court nor Counsel was aware
of that letter on 17.06.2002.



By a motion dated 17.10.2002, the petitioner complained that in view of the
"undertaking" by the UGC (contained in its letter dated 8.5.2002) the
petitioner had not pursued his application; that "in violation and in contempt
of (that) undertaking the UGC (had) appointed the 27th respondent by letter
dated 27.9.2002" without re-advertising the post; that the petitioner was
thereby prevented from applying; and that the UGC had not responded to the
peti­tioner's request to stop the said appointment being given effect to. He
prayed for suitable action "against the respondent" (presumably meaning the
UGC) for violation of the judgment of this Court. He made no allegation and
sought no relief against the 1st and 2nd respondents.



The question arose whether the UGC had in any way attempted to induce this
Court to believe that the post would be re-advertised, and to make an order in
that belief, and had thereafter acted contrary to its own representation.
Accordingly, the UGC was added as a respondent, and given an opportunity to
state its case. Counsel on its behalf thereafter submitted the entirety of the
rele­vant documents, and contended that the UGC had not given any undertaking
to Court on 17.6.2002 (or at any time before or after); that the UGC was not a
party and was not bound by the proceed­ings and order of 17.6.2002; that the
petitioner, the respondents and their attorneys-at-law had not informed the
UGC of the proceedings and order of 17.06.2002; that after considering the 2nd
respondent's letter of 13.6.2002 the UGC had decided on 25.9.2002 to vary its
previous decision and to appoint the 27th respondent; and that it was only
after the 27th respondent had been appointed on 27.9.2002 that the Registrar
of the 1st respon­dent forwarded a copy of the order made on 17.06.2002.



Learned Counsel for the petitioner did not dispute the above facts. The UGC
was not a party and gave no undertaking to this Court. There was no
representation that the letter of 8.5.2002 con­tained an irrevocable decision,
or constituted a settlement mutually agreed upon. On the contrary, it was a
decision which the UGC was free to vary in the normal course, if justified by
new material.

**22**

There was no order restraining the appointment of the respondent. It was the
UGC which was the appointing authority, and if the petitioner had wished to
have the benefit of either an order against the UGC, enforceable by way of
contempt proceedings of otherwise, he claim for relief upon the mere
production by the 1st and 2nd respondents of the UGC's letter of 8.5.2002, but
should instead have insisted upon such an order or undertaking.



The UDC must therefore be discharged.



The 2nd respondent's conduct is open to criticism. By failing to inform his
Counsel of his letter dated 13.6.2002, Counsel for the petitioner was probably
lulled into the belief that the 1st 2nd respondents had accepted the decision
to re-advertise the post. Had he informed the UGC of the order made on
17.6.2002, the UGC may well have hesitated to dispense with re-advertising.
However, the principal reason for the predicament in which the petitioner now
finds himself is the failure to insist on an appropriate undertaking or order
before giving up his claims. It is unnecessary to consider whether the
petitioner should be given relief analogous to restitutio in integrum because
he has not asked for it. In any event it is not equitable now to grant such
relief because the petitioner took no steps to inform the UGC of the
proceedings of 17.6.2002; because the 26th respondent has given up other
employment to take up the post of curator; and because the petitioner was not
the candidate placed second by the Selection Committee. Having regard to all
the circumstances, I consider it equitable to order the 1st respondent to pay
the petitioner a sum of Rs. 25,000/- as costs.



**ISMAIL, J.** \- I agree.



**YAPA, J.** \- I agree.





> > _**Costs against the university grated to petitioner.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/10.html_  

