##  Dhanapala Fernando v. Attanayaka, Officer In Charge, Kandana Police
Station and Others - SLR - 196, Vol 1 of 2003 [2002] LKSC 10; (2003) 1 Sri LR
196 (27 June 2002)

196

**DHANAPALA FERNANDO** ****

**v.** ****

**ATTANAYAKA, OFFICER-IN-CHARGE,** ****

**KANDANA POLICE STATION AND OTHERS** ****

** **

** **

SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

ISMAIL, J. AND

WIGNESWARAN, J.

SC NO. 330/2002 (FR)

22nd JANUARY, 2002



_Fundamental Rights - Search of a licened restaurant and arrest of its guests
and Manager - Power of arrest and search by police - Sections 32 and 33 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure Act - Sections 65 and 68 of the Police Ordinance -
Articles 12 (1) and 14 (1) (g) of the Constitution._



The plaintiff and his sister owned a partnership business called Jayasiri
Restaurant and Inn ("the Inn") at Kandana registered under the Business Names
Statute of the Western Provincial Council and licensed by the Ja-Ela Urban
Council. The business consisted of a restaurant, a reception hall for weddings
and parties and an inn with guest rooms.



On the orders of the 1st respondent, the 2nd respondent Sub Inspector of
Police who was armed with a revolver raided the Inn on 3.6.2002, 9.6.2002,
13.6.2002 and 16.6.2002 and searched it apparently at gun point and hence
without the consent of the Manager of the Inn.

197

On 3. 6. 2002, the 2nd respondent questioned three couples who were occu­pying
rooms. They disclosed their names and addresses. They were not asked to show
their identity cards. One of the couples was married, another had intended to
get married; and third couple married but not to each other. As per IB
extracts, the Manager had told the police that a licence had been obtained for
the business but he was not told to produce the licence. The Manager him­self
was arrested allegedly for failing to establish the identity of the couples.
The 2nd respondent told the Manager that the business cannot be operated
without a licence from the Tourist Board. The Manager and couples were taken
to the Kandana Police Station and released the same day after questioning.

The subsequent raids by the 2nd respondent were to re-check whether the Inn
was functional. During these visits the 2nd respondent once told the Manager
to close up the business if a licence from the Tourist Board had not been
obtained and the 2nd respondent threatened to assault the Manager if rooms
were let.

On 27.6.2002 when the restraining order against the police instructions to
close up the business came up for renewal the State Counsel submitted to court
that in view of the licence obtained from the local authority the police had
no power to prohibit the petitioner from operating his licence.

However, the State Counsel argued that, the impugned arrests and search could
be defended in terms of sections 32 and 33 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
Act, and sections 65 and 68 of the Police Ordinance.

**Held :**

_Per_ Fernando, J.



1 " ...The respondents tried to justify the arrests upon numerous grounds
-that the three couples were reasonably suspected of an offence, cogniz­ably
or otherwise and / or of underworld or of criminal activities; that they were
taking precautions to conceal their presence; that there was a need to
investigate their possible involvement in such offences or activities, that
they were found in a place reasonably suspected of being a resort of loose and
disorderly characters; that the police had reason to believe that the names
and addresses given by them were false and needed ver­ification; and that they
had given contradictory reasons for their presence at the Inn. The respondents
have totally failed to establish any factual basis whatsoever for any of these
allegations. That the arrest had really nothing to do with such matters and
was an arbitrary and high handed infringement of liberty and invasion of
privacy is manifest.

2\. Whilst there was evidence of rising crime in the area, the search was
unlawful because the respondents had no reasonable suspicion but only a vague
general suspicion that criminals from outside lodge in guest

198

houses in order to commit crimes and then leave the area. Further, the search
was effected not with the consent of the Manager but by forcing him to submit
to the search by the 2nd respondent showing his weapon.

3\. The petitioner's fundamental rights under Articles 12(1)(g) have been
infringed by the 1 st and 2nd respondents for which the State and the said
respondents were liable.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

**Case referred to :** ****

(1) _Bandaranayake v Rajaguru -_ (1999) Sri LR 104

_D. Premaratne,_ PC. with _Hemantha Situge_ for petitioner.

_Rajiv Goonatilleke,_ State Counsel for 1st to 4th respondents.

# Cur. adv. vult

March 19,2003 **  
  
FERNANDO, J.**  
  
The Petitioner and his sister are the partners of a business called "Jayasiri
Restaurant and Inn" ("the Inn") registered in terms of the Business Names
Statute of the Western Province, and licensed by the Ja-ela Urban Council. The
business is carried on in premises at Kandana, and consists of a restaurant, a
large recep­tion hall given on hire for weddings and parties and an Inn with
rooms given out to guests. The Petitioner alleges that the 1st and 2nd
Respondents (the Officer-in-Charge and a Sub-Inspector, respectively, of the
Kandana Police) infringed his fundamental rights (s) under Article 12(1) by
conducting three illegal searches of the premises on and after 3.6.2002 and
(b) under Article 14(1)(g) by compelling the closure of his business from
3.6.2003.



It is not disputed that (as shown by the Information Book ("IB") extracts) at
10.45 a.m. on 3.6.2002 on the 1st Respondent's orders, the 2nd Respondent left
the Kandana Police station, armed with his gun, together with a party of
Police officers in a private

199



vehicle, ostensibly to investigate information received regarding an
underworld gang. At 11.00 a.m. they came to the Inn and searched it. While the
Petitioner claimed that the 2nd Respondent forcibly searched the premises
after showing the Manager of the Inn a revolver, the 2nd Respondent denied
that allegation and claimed that the search was with the Manager' consent.
Thereafter the 2nd Respondent got the Manager to open up the rooms of the Inn,
and took into custody three couples, who were occupying three rooms, on the
ground (as averred in his affidavit) that they were "unable to satisfactorily
establish their identity," as well as the Manager as he too was unable to
establish their identity. The "Visitors Book" of the Inn was also taken.
According to the 1st Respondent's affidavit it had not been duly maintained
after 28.4.2002 and was retained as a production. That Book was not produced
but only a photocopy of the "last entered page" which contained an entry for
24.5.2002. Although that Book was not returned, nevertheless (according to the
2nd Respondent) the 1st Respondent had warned the Manager to maintain that
Book. It was not pleaded that any shortcoming in the maintenance of that Book
was one of the reasons for the arrest. After further questioning at the
Kandana Police station, the three couples and the Manager were released at
about 2.15 p.m. One of the mat­ters elicited in the courses of the Manager's
statement was that licences had been obtained for the business, but his
statement does not refer to any request to produce those licences.



The Petitioner claimed that the 2nd Respondent had told the Manager that the
business cannot be operated without a licence from the Tourist Board, and had
ordered its closure - all of which the Respondents denied.



At 6.30 p.m. on 9.6.2002, on the 1st Respondent's orders, the 2nd Respondent
left the station, armed, with a Police party to investigate information that a
suspect couple had obtained accom­modation in an (unspecified) guest-house.
According to the IB extracts, the Police party visited the Inn, questioned the
Manager, searched the Inn but found neither guests nor suspicious activity,
and returned at 7.05 p.m. without having attended to any other duties.



The Petitioner claimed (but the Respondents denied) that at 10.00 a.m. on
13.6.2002 the 2nd Respondent had again come to

200

  
the Inn and had asked the Manager to come to the station at 5.00 p.m., at
which time the 1st Respondent had told him to close the business, threatening
to assault him if rooms were let.



According to the IB extracts, at 3.00 p.m. on 16.6.2002, on the 1st
Respondent's orders, the 2nd Respondent left the station, armed, with a Police
party to investigate information that under­world gangs were meeting in guest-
houses in the area to organize themselves. At 3.15 p.m. they came to the Inn
and found all five rooms empty, and recorded a brief routine statement from
the Manager \- among the matters elicited in that statement was that the
approval of the Tourist Board had not been obtained for the Inn. At 3.35 p.m.
they visited another guest-house where they arrested four couples and the
Manager, and returned to the station at 4.00 p.m.



I must note at this point that although the 2nd Respondent claimed that all
three searches were with the Manager's consent, the relevant IB extracts did
not record any such consent.



The Petitioner made a complaint at Police Headquarters on 18.6.2002. Having
referred to the Police searches and arrests, he stated that the 1st Respondent
had ordered the closure of the Inn; that the Police had told the Manager to
get Tourist Board approval; and that the threats and harassment by the Police
were making it impossible to carry on his business, and were affecting
bookings which he had already obtained. He asked for an inquiry and that he be
allowed to carry on his business. An inquiry was held by an Assistant
Superintendent of Police. Although the Inspector-General of Police was the 3rd
Respondent in this case, we were not informed of the result of that inquiry.



This application was filed on 19.6.2002, and leave to proceed was granted on
25.6.2002. The Petitioner had pleaded that he had bookings for 25th, 26th and
27th June and despite the lack of notice to Respondents in view of the
urgency, an interim order was made, permitting the Petitioner to carry on
business, and directing 1st to 3rd Respondents not to interfere with the
running of his busi­ness. That order was operative until 28.6.2002, and the
question of renewal was to be considered on 27.6.2002. The journal entry of
27.6.2002 reads thus:

201

"Learned State Counsel submits to Court that the licence to operate to
petitioner has been granted by the Ja-ela Pradeshiya Sabha, and in the
circumstances the Police have no legal rights to prohibit the petitioner from
operating or (to cancel) his licence".



In his affidavit the 1st Respondent implied that it was only after this
application had been filed that he became aware that the Inn was licensed. He
complained that no such licence had been produced to the Police - perhaps
forgetting that the Petitioner and the Manager had not been asked to do so. He
went on to set out the background to the searches and arrests. There had been
a rise in armed robberies and crimes in the area. A number of crimes had been
committed in places close to guest-houses and it was sus­pected that criminals
from outside lodge at guest-houses, commit crimes, and leave the area. He had
therefore ordered patrols and searches, including checks on guest-houses, to
ascertain if any suspicious or underworld characters had taken lodging there.
Other guest-houses besides the Petitioner's had been searched.



Based on those averments, learned State Counsel contend­ed in his written
submissions that it was not "unreasonable for the Police to take in persons
for questioning to ascertain their identity when their identity could not be
established, (a) because the Manager.... was unaware of the identity of the
persons occupying rooms, (b) because the persons found there could not
establish their identity, (c) because on initial questioning the couples had
contra­dictory explanations for their presence". In the background of high
crime in the area, the circumstances "warranted the Police to con­sider them
to be either concealing their identity or of _loose charac­_ _ter ". _He
argued further that often offenders are found by chance, when they are unable
to establish their identity or to explain their presence at some place, and
asserted that if the police were to be censured for requiring a person to
attend the Police station to establish his/her identity, it would greatly
thwart the ability **** of law enforcement agencies in a civil society to
deter persons of _loose_ _character_ and detect offenders and criminals... it
is often said that it is the badge of secrecy that is the badge of a criminal.
In any event the persons taken to the Police station had not complained of
unlawful arrest and detention and had not even given supporting

202

  
affidavits. Learned State Counsel relied on sections 32 and 33 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Act and sections 65 and 68 of the Police Ordinance.



Learned State Counsel further submitted, correctly, that the Petitioner had
made no allegation of malice or ill-will against the Respondents, and that the
allegation that they had acted under pressure from his business rivals was
wholly unsubstantiated. He referred to IB extracts showing that other guest-
houses had been raided and suspects taken for questionning. He contended that
the Petitioner had failed to prove that the 1st and 2nd Respondents had
ordered the closure of the Inn, apart from the allegation made at Police
Headquarters, and that since evidence in fundamental rights applications is by
affidavit, there being no opportunity for cross-examination, when it is word
against word, neither party can be believed or disbelieved. Finally, he urged
that in any event the peti­tioner had failed to quantify his loss with
evidence of occupancy rates or past profits.

Before dealing with those submissions, it is necessary to ascertain more
precisely the circumstances in which the three cou­ples were arrested, taken
to the Police station, and questioned, as appearing from the IB extracts
relied on by the Respondents. The 2nd Respondent had made his notes at 11.50
a.m. on 3.6.2002 at the Inn itself, and these showed that all six did give
their names and addresses. Although there is nothing to suggest that they were
asked a single question regarding their identity or residence, and no record
of any reason to doubt the information given, he never­theless noted that
since they had not produced any identity cards or documents to establish their
identity he was arresting them in order to ascertain their identity and to
investigate further whether they were involved in any offences.



The 2nd Respondent's "In" entry made at 1.00 p.m. gave the names and addresses
of all "suspects", which thus confirms that they had already given their names
and addresses at the Inn itself; and no reason for disbelief was recorded. The
"suspects" were then detained, while awaiting the 1st Respondent's
instructions. Their statements were recorded - and no mention was made of
identity cards, or the lack of them. While the Respondents claim that the
three couples were released after ascertaining their identity and



203



that they were not engaged in underworld activities, they did not explain how
the brief statements recorded could possibly have sat­isfied them on those two
points.



The statements recorded show that the "suspects" were all adults, who fell
into three categories. One couple was married while the second was intending
to get married. The other two persons were married but not to each other. The
first couple explained that, having no place to stay while their house was
nearing completion, they had been lodging at the Inn for about 20 days. Both
of them were recorded as saying that, they had not informed the Police that
they were staying at the Inn - for which the wife went on to beg par­don from
the police! She also stated that she was pregnant. Instead of even a formal
expression of regret by the Police, the statements of that couple included an
assurance that they had nothing to say against the Police! They were not asked
anything about their iden­tity cards, or why they did not have them, or about
underworld or criminal activities.

**Arrest**

Learned State Counsel submitted that sections 32 and 33 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Act authorize the arrest of a person suspected of
committing a cognizable offence, or found taking pre­cautions to conceal his
presence under circumstances which afford reason to believe that he is taking
such precautions with a view to committing a cognizable offence. Any such
person can be taken to a Police station for questioning to ascertain his name
and address.

That submission does not help in the circumstances of this case. Under section
32(1 )(b) a mere suspicion is not enough. A rea­sonable suspicion or credible
information is required. Likewise sec­tion 32(1 )(h) applies only where there
is "reason to believe" that a person is taking precautions with a view to
committing a cognizable offence. There was no such suspicion, information or
reason justi­fying the arrest of the three couples and the Manager. Section 33
applies to a person accused of a non-congnizable offence in the presence of a
Police officer who either refuses to give a Police offi­cer his name and
residence or gives a name or residence which such officer has "reason to
believe" to be false: such a person may be arrested for the purpose of
ascertaining his name or residence. The IB extracts show that when questioned
at the Inn all six "sus

204

pects" gave their names and addresses, and the Respondents have not
established that they had "reason to believe" that any of these were false.

Learned State Counsel also relied on section 65 of the Police Ordinance,
which, he contended, authorized the "arrest of persons without warrant for the
ascertainment of names and addresses." Section 65 provides:

_"_ Every person taken into custody by any police officer without a warrant
(except persons detained for the mere purpose of ascertaining their name and
residence) shall forthwith be delivered into the custody of the officer-in-
charge of a station in order that such person may be secured until he can be
brought before a Magistrate..."



That is not a provision which confers a _power_ of arrest with­out warrant,
but merely prescribes the _procedure_ for dealing with persons after being
taken into custody. The parenthetical clause merely serves to exclude from
that procedure the persons therein described, but creates neither any new
offence nor a new power of arrest. That clause would therefore apply to
persons arrested under section 33 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, but
does not in any way widen the ambit of that section.



Finally, learned State Counsel claimed that section 68 of the Police Ordinance
enables "the police to enter a place without war­rant on suspicion _inter
alia_ of it having a person of _loose character " _In so far as is relevant to
this case, section 68 empowers a Police officer without warrant:



"... to enter and inspect all drinking shops, gaming houses and other resorts
of loose and disorderly characters, all premises of persons suspected of
receiving stolen property, any locality, vessel, boat, or conveyance in any
part whereof he shall have just cause to believe that crime has been or is
about to be committed... and then and there to take all nec­essary measures
for the effectual prevention of crime..."



Learned State Counsel's submission appears to be that "per­sons of _loose
character " _include couples having extra marital or pre-marital relations,
and that upon "suspicion" that there were

205



such couples at the inn, the Respondents were entitled to enter and search the
Inn and arrest any such couples because they could not establish their
identity to the satisfaction of the Police and/or because they gave
contradictory explanations for their presence at the Inn. Such an
interpretation would give the Police unacceptably wide powers to enter a great
many establishments and make numerous arrests. However, such conduct is not
criminal, although it may constitute a matrimonial offence or (in some
circumstances) misconduct attracting disciplinary action under the
Establishments Code. It does not justify search and arrest by the Police.
Further, even if _" loose character" _can be given the wide meaning suggest­ed
by learned State Counsel, section 68 only applies if the place in question is
a _resort_ of persons of _" loose and disorderly character"_: and the only
power which the police have is to take measures for the prevention and
detection of crime, and nothing else. The Respondents had, and have no
evidence or information that the Inn was such a place.



To sum up, the Respondents tried to justify the arrests upon numerous grounds
- that the three couples were reasonably sus­pected of an offence: cognizable
or otherwise, and/or of underworld or criminal activities; that they were
taking precautions to conceal their presence; that there was a need to
investigate their possible involvement in such offences or activities; that
they were found in a place reasonably suspected of being a resort of loose and
disor­derly characters; that the Police had reason to believe that the names
or addresses given by them were false and needed verifi­cation; and that they
had given contradictory reasons for their pres­ence at the Inn. The
Respondents have totally failed to establish any factual basis whatsoever for
any of these allegations. That the arrests had really nothing to with such
matters and was an arbitrary and high-handed infringement of liberty and
invasion of privacy is manifest. Thus it was that a pregnant wife was forced,
as the price of avoiding further detention, humiliation and inconvenience, to
beg pardon from the Police for failing to inform them that she and her husband
were lodging in a licensed guest-house. The arrest of the other two couples
was equally wrongful, although the circum­stances of aggravation were less.

206

Learned State Counsel seized upon the fact that the Manager and the couples
did not petition this Court in respect of their arrest. Clearly, the
Petitioner was not entitled to complain of those arrests, as such. But if
those arrests, directly or indirectly, impaired his own fundamental rights, as
for instance his right to carry on a lawful business, he was certainly
entitled to complain: The successful running of a guest-house requires a
Manager, staff, and, of course, guests. If the wrongful acts of a Police
officer in rela­tion to Manager, staff and/or guests, prevents or deters them
from discharging their duties or from patronizing the guest-house, and thereby
impedes the successful running of the guest-house, the proprietor is entitled
to complain of the infringement of his own rights. I hold that the Petitioner
is entitled to complain that the unlawful arrest of his Manager and customers
impaired his own fundamental right under Article 14(1 **** )(g).

**Search**



The Respondent's contention was that, having regard to the deteriorating crime
situation, the Petitioner's Inn was searched to ascertain whether suspicious
or underworld character were lodging there; that other guest-houses were
similarly searched; that the Police had no malice against the Petitioner; and
that the searches were with consent.

As for the other guest-houses most of the IB extracts pro­duced referred to
arrests of couples, and no instance was cited of any other guest-house being
searched three or four times within a fortnight. It is true that the
Petitioner has not proved malice.

However, while the Respondents have produced evidence of rising crime rates,
they merely pleaded a vague general suspicion that criminals from outside
lodge in guest-houses in order to com­mit crimes, and then leave the area. The
Respondents not only failed to adduce any material whatsoever which gave them
reason to believe, in general, that criminals did lodge in guest-houses, but
they also failed to establish that they had any reason to believe in
particular, that they were lodging at the Inn.



In _Bandaranaike_ v _Rajaguru_ (1) the petitioner's house was searched
allegedly upon information (of which some particulars were disclosed) received
by the Inspector-General of Police from a

207

  
long-standing and reliable informant. Nevertheless, after scrutiniz­ing the
material relied on, this Court held that the respondent had failed to
discharge his burden of satisfying the Court that he had received reliable
information, and that he had "reason to believe" that the search was
justified; and further that it was more likely that the Respondent had acted
"with some undisclosed purpose in mind." The present case is even more starved
of evidence justify­ing the repeated searches of the Inn.



The fact that the Manager and the three couples were not questioned about
underworld or criminal activities confirms that the search on 3.6.2002 was not
connected with such activities.



As for consent, the 2nd Respondent's notes at 11.50 a.m. at the Inn, his "In"
entry at 1.00 p.m. and the Manager's statement at 1.30 p.m. did not record
that the search was with consent. It is very probable that the 2nd Respondent
did draw attention to his weapon and left the Manager with no option but to
agree to a search. Even the IB extracts relating to the subsequent searches do
not mention consent.

I hold that the searches of the Petitioner's premises were arbitrary, without
valid reasons, and without consent, and were therefore in violation of his
fundamental right under Article 12(1).

**Closure of Business**



The evidence establishes that the Petitioner's business was in fact closed
from 3.6.2002 until interim relief was obtained on 25.6.2002. Indeed, the IB
extracts of 9.6.2002 and 16.6.2002 recorded that all the rooms of the Inn were
empty.

The natural and probable consequence of the arrests of the Manager and all six
guests on 3.6.2002, their detention at the Police station, and the subsequent
searches would have been to impair the carrying on of the Petitioner's
business, in violation of Article 14(1) (g).

The available evidence further shows that the Respondents were disputing the
Petitioner's right to carry on business, as indi­cated by the questions asked
about licences and Tourist Board approvals, and not investigating criminal and
underworld activ­ities. The Petitioner's complaint to Police Headquarters on
18.6.2002 was the natural consequence of the Respondent's

208

  
 orders to close his business; and so also the retention of the "Visitors"
Book "as a production" although there was no charge in contemplation.

The Respondents' submission that this was a matter of word against word and
that therefore neither party can be believed or disbelieved is not tenable.
Although affidavit evidence cannot be tested by cross-examination, it can
certainly be tested by reference to omissions, contradictions,
inconsistencies, intrinsic improbability, etc. I have no hesitation in holding
the Petitioner's version to be much more probable than the Respondents' which
is subject to the numerous infirmities which I have already pointed out.



I hold that the 1st and 2nd Respondents, directly and indi­rectly, and without
lawful justification, compelled the closure of the Petitioner's business from
3rd to 25th June 2002, in violation of his fundamental right under Article
14(1 )(g).

**Loss and Damage**



While it is true that the Petitioner has not given details of the loss and
damage suffered by him, there is evidence that he had mortgaged the premises
for Rs. 250,000 which he was liable to repay in monthly instalments of Rs.
8,000, that he had eight employees, and that rooms were let at Rs. 350 per
day. I consider it likely that he would have incurred a pecuniary loss of at
least Rs. 50,000 until he was able to re-establish himself.

**Order**



I grant the Petitioner a declaration that his fundamental rights under
Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) have been infringed by the 1st and 2nd
Respondents, and award him a sum of Rs. 100,000 as compensation payable by the
State, and a sum of Rs. 30,000 as costs payable in equal shares by the 1st and
2nd Respondents personally. These payments shall be made on or before
31.5.2003.

**ISMAIL, J.** **** \- I agree.

**WIGNESWARAN, J.** - I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/10.html_  

