##  Vinayagamoorthy, Attorney-At-Law (On Behalf of Wimalenthiran) v. The Army
Commander and Others - SLR - 113, Vol 1 of 1997 [1994] LKSC 11; (1997) 1 Sri
LR 113 (5 July 1994)

**113**

**  
VINAYAGAMOORTHY, ATTORNEY ‑AT‑LAW**

**(ON BEHALF OF WIMALENTHIRAN)**

**v _._**

# THE ARMY COMMANDER AND OTHERS



SUPREME COURT.

AMERASINGHE, J.,

WIJETUNGA, J. AND

ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.

S.C. APPLICATION NO. 26/94

NOVEMBER 25TH, 1996.



Fundamental Rights ‑ Articles 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution ‑ Arrest and
Detention ‑ Emergency Regulations 17, 18 and 19.



The detenu was arrested by the Army, without a warrant in the Kotahena area
under Regulation 18 of the Emergency Regulations. He was then detained under
Regulation 19(2) at the Panagoda Army Camp for the prescribed period
Thereafter he was detained at the Panagoda Army Camp under Regulation 17(1),
from where he was handed over to the Criminal Investigation Department where
he continued to be detained.



**Held:**



(1) In deciding whether the arrest was in accordance with "procedure
established by law" the matter in issue is not what subsequent investigations
revealed, but whether at the time of the arrest the person was committing an
offence, or that there were reasonable grounds for suspecting that the person
arrested was concerned in or had committed an offence.



(2) The detenu was arrested on some vague, general suspicion, hoping That some
evidence would turn up that might provide justification for the arrest and not
on any reasonable grounds of suspicion. Hence the arrest was not in accordance
with the procedure established by Regulation 18(1). Consequently, the
arresting officer could not have been able to give the detenu the reason for
his arrest. The arrest was, therefore, violative of Article 13(1) of the
constitution.



(3) The detenu was arrested on 2.10.93 and not on 23.10.93 as stated by the
respondents. He was not handed over to the nearest police station as required
by Regulation 18(1), but detained at the Panagoda Camp which was not an
authorized place of detention in terms of Regulation 19(4). The Secretary was
not in fact satisfied that the detention under Regulation 17(1) was necessary
but acted mechanically in issuing detention orders. The respondents failed to
produce the detenu before a Magistrate within the time prescribed by
regulation 19(3). His detention was, therefore, violative of Article 13(2) of
the Constitution.

114



_**Per**_ **Amerasinghe, J.**



"In order to prevent or minimise "disappearances or abuses", it is of
paramount importance that the requirements laid down by the regulations should
be strictly observed. They were not intended for merely cosmetic purposes, but
for the sake of fulfilling the basic obligation of the state to ensure the
personal security and liberty of all persons".



**Cases referred to:**



1.                   _Dumbell v. Roberts_ (1944) 1 ALL ER 326.



2\. _Mutthusamy v. Kannangara_ (1951) 52 N.L.R. 324.



3\. _Faiz v. Attorney ‑General _(1995) 2 Sri L.R. 372.



4\. _Faurdeen v. Jayatileke S.C._ Application 366/93, S.C. Minutes 8
September,1994.



5\. _Chandra Kalyani Perera. v. Siriwardena and Others_ (1992) 1 Sri L.R.
251,260.



6\. _Joseph Perera. v. Attorney ‑General and Others _(1992) 1 Sri L. R. 199,
235.



7\. _Kumara. v. Rohan Fernando and Others S.C._ Application 22/90 S.C. Minutes
21 July 1994.



8\. _Anura v. Rohan Fernando and Others S.C._ Application 23/90 S.C. Minutes
21 July 1994.



9\. _Mahinda v. Rohan Fernando and Others S.C._ Application 31/90 S.C. Minutes
21 July 1994.



10\. (a) _Peiris and Others v. Attorney ‑General _(1994) 1 Sri L.R. 1.



10\. (b) _Secretary of State v. Tameside_ 1976 3 ALL ER 665.



11 _. Fernando v. Silva and Others S.C._ Application 7/89 S.C. Minutes 3 May
1991.



12\. _Hirdaramani v. Ratnavale_ (1971) 75 N.L.R. 67.



13\. _Sasanasiritissa Thera v. De Silva and Others_ (1989) 2 Sri L. R. 356.



14\. _Leelaratne v. Cyril Herath S.C._ Application 145/86 S.C. Minutes 9 March
1987



15\. _Weerakoon v. Weeraratne S.C._ Application 42/92 S.C. Minutes 16 November
1992.



**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.



_R. K. W Goonesekera_ for petitioner.



_V. K. Malalgoda, S.S.C._ for respondents.



_Cur. **** adv. vult._



115



December 20, 1996

**AMERASINGHE, J.**



_ _

The petitioner, an Attorney‑at‑Law, filed an application under Article 126 of
the Constitution on the 31st of January 1994 on behalf of Vijayam
Wimalenthiran, alleging that the said Wimalenthiran's Fundamental Rights under
Articles 11, 13(1), 13(2), 14(1)(g) and 14(1)(h) of the Constitution had been
violated by the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents.



On the 8th of February 1994, the Court directed that the application be
referred to the Human Rights Task Force for inquiry and report in terms of the
Monitoring of Fundamental Rights of Detainees Regulations 1991. The Court
directed the Task Force to make an appropriate order under Regulation 9 and
required the Task Force to report to Court on or before the 25th of March
1994. The directions of Court were communicated by the Registrar by his letter
dated the 11th of February 1994.



The Project Director of the Task Force in a report received by the Registrar
on the 24th of March 1994 reported as follows:



"Officers of the HRTF have visited the CID 4th Floor and interviewed the
detainee. He has been unable to identify or give names of any army officer who
had inflicted bodily harm on him or treated him in a degrading manner as he
says he was blindfolded. However our officers have reported that at present he
appears to be in good health and he has no complain [ts].



With regard to the arrest and detention of the petitioner the Army
Intelligence Unit has been unable to give a plausible explanation. The
petitioner has been in detention for 142 days without being produced to a
Court of Law. We were therefore obliged to direct the Secretary, Ministry of
Defence to revoke the detention order and release the petitioner from
custody."



When the report of the Task Force was considered by the Court on the 29th of
March 1994, the petitioner was represented by the  


116



Attorney‑at‑Law who had filed the application on his behalf, Mr. A.
Vinayagamoorthy, and the respondents were represented by Mr. S. Rajaratnam,
State Counsel. The Court made the following order:



"The Human Rights Task Force has reported that the Army Intelligence Unit has
been unable to give a plausible explanation for the arrest and detention of
the petitioner. State Counsel undertakes to revoke the detention order and to
release the petitioner if no indictment is sent to an appropriate High Court
on or before 15.05.94; and in any event if such indictment is sent State
Counsel undertakes that the respondents will revoke the detention order and
release the petitioner if he is acquitted or discharged or if a suspended
sentence is imposed on him in the High Court. In view of that undertaking
Counsel for the petitioner does not wish to pursue this application even in
respect of Article 11.



The petitioner claims to have been blindfolded continuously for two months
from 2nd October 93 till 11th December 93, and also kept in solitary
confinement at a house, which, Counsel says, belongs to the Army Intelligence
Unit situated behind the British High Commission, close to the sea beach at
Colpetty. He was thereafter detained at the 4th Floor of the Criminal
Investigation Department.



The Human Rights Task Force is directed to forward a report to this Court on
or before 26th April 1994 as to whether these two places were visited by
officers of the Human Rights Task Force during the period 2.10.93 to 24.3.94,
whether those places were inspected and the persons detained there were given
an opportunity to make complaints or representations in terms of Regulation 2
(a) of the Human Rights Task Force Regulations."



The Registrar conveyed the directions of the Court to the Task Force by his
letter dated the 18th of April 1994. In this report dated the 20th of April
1994, the Project Director of the Human Rights Task Force (HRTF) reported as
follows:



"The HRTF has had no knowledge of any house belonging to the Army Intelligence
Unit which is situated behind the British High  


117



Commission. I wish to further respectfully submit that the HRTF has not
received any complaints of persons being held at the given premises. As such
no visits had been made to this premises.



The 4th Floor of the Criminal Investigation Department has been visited by
officers of the HRTF quite frequently and on a number of occasions during the
period 02.10.93 to 24.03.94.



The 4th Floor of the Criminal Investigation Department has been inspected
periodically by officers of the HRTF. The persons detained at the 4th Floor of
the Criminal Investigation Department have been given access to meet officers
of the HRTF and they are given the opportunity to make any complaints or
representations to our officers in terms of Regulation 2(a) of the HRTF
Regulations."



In an undated communication received by the Registry of the Supreme Court on
the 17th of June 1994, Mr. S. Rajaratnam, State Counsel for the
Attorney‑General, stated as follows:



"I respectfully wish to inform Your Lordships' Court that an undertaking was
given in the above Application on 29th March, 1994 that an indictment would be
forwarded against the Petitioner on or before 15th May, 1994.



This undertaking was given following a confession made by the petitioner
stating that he was a member of a suicide squad directed by the LTTE to
assassinate the late President Ranasinghe Premadasa.



Whereas subsequent to the above undertaking, a dossier has been forwarded to
the Attorney‑General regarding the investigation in respect of the
assassination, which reveals a network consisting of many persons who have
been independent of each other, assigned the task of assassinating the late
President in a suicide attack **;**



Most of the suspects forming part of this conspiracy have been arrested, but
there are **** others who are still at large and therefore, the investigations
have not been completed;

118



In the circumstances, the Attorney‑General is not in a position to forward
indictment against the Petitioner until persons who were involved in the said
assassination plot are arrested."



Although the petitioner had been willing to abandon his application in view of
the undertaking given by learned State Counsel on the 29th of March 1994 **,**
having regard to the failure of the State to satisfy the conditions upon which
such abandonment was proposed, the petitioner, with notice to the
Attorney‑General, on the 24th of June 1994 moved as follows:



"I most respectfully request that the Court be pleased to call this
application in open Court on 5.7.1994 to enable me to request that I be
allowed leave to proceed with this application.



In view of the report sent to this Court by the Project Director, Human Rights
Task Force, I expected Vijayam Wimalenthiran to be released. The Director
Human Rights Task Force has said in his report that he has directed the
Secretary, Ministry of Defence to revoke the detention order and release him
from custody. This has not been done so far. He has not been indicted as
well."



On the 5th of July 1994 the motion was considered by the Court. Mr.
Vinayagamoorthy appeared for the petitioner, and Mr. A. B. Meddegoda appeared
for the Attorney‑General. According to the journal entry in the record of the
case, the Court decided as follows:



"Although the State Counsel gave an undertaking on 29.3.94 that this
petitioner would be released if an indictment was not sent to the High Court
before 15.05.94, State Counsel informs court that subsequently the
Attorney‑General's Department became aware of materials suggesting the
petitioner's involvement in offences other than those of which he was
originally suspected. He states that it was under those circumstances that the
petitioner was not released.



Counsel for the petitioner moves that he be permitted to support his
application for leave to proceed. He submits that the State  


**119**



should in these proceedings produce the relevant Detention Orders, and that he
has no objection to any material, which is of a confidential nature, being
disclosed by the respondents only to court.



Support on 28.07.94."



When the application was supported on the 28th of July 1994, the Court granted
the petitioner leave to proceed "for the alleged violation of Articles 13(1)
and 13(2) only". Hearing was fixed for the 10th of November 1994. However for
the various reasons that are set out in the journal, hearing was postponed on
several occasions, for which no blame could be attached either to the Court or
to any of the parties. Eventually the Court heard the arguments of counsel on
the 25th of November 1996.



As we have seen, the petitioner was permitted to proceed with his application
only in so far as it related to the alleged violation of Article 13(1) and
Article 13(2) of the Constitution.



Article 13(1) of the Constitution provides as follows:



"13(1) No person shall be arrested except according to procedure established
by law. Any person arrested shall be informed of the reason for his arrest."



There are two versions of the facts. The petitioner in his application and
affidavits on behalf of Vijayam Wimalenthiran, and confirmed by the affidavit
of Wimalenthiran dated 3rd December 1994, set out his account of the events
that took place as follows:



Vijayam Wimalenthiran, aged twenty‑three, was taken into custody on the 2nd of
October 1993 at about 3.30 a.m. at a lodge at No. 56 Old Moor Street, Colombo
12, by army officers, including Khan and Jayasuriya. He was blindfolded and
taken to a house. He was detained in that place, blindfolded, till the 11th of
December 1994. At first, the exact place of detention was not known. Later,
however, he came to know that it was a building behind the Indian High
Commission. He was detained in that building with one Arulappu

120



Jude Arulrajah. Pictures of the building are to be seen in the report of
Amnesty International of February 1994 entitled "Secret detention in Colombo.
The case of Arulappu Jude Arulrajah." The report states that Arulrajah was
arrested on 2nd October 1993 from his lodge in Bambalapitiya. In another
report of Amnesty International of February 1994 entitled "Balancing human
rights and security; abuse of arrest and detention powers in Colombo", the
following observations are made:



Some Tamil people have been arrested by groups of armed men in military or
civilian dress, blindfolded and taken to secret places of detention where they
have been held for at least a week ... It appears that the army, and possibly
other sections of the security forces, have held people in different secret
locations in and around Colombo. Amnesty International believes that one
secret place of detention is an army camp located by the sea, off Galle Road,
Kollupitiya, behind the Indian High Commission and the American Information
Center ... Arullappu Jude Arulrajah was arrested on 2nd October 1993 at about
1.30 a.m. at his lodge in Bambalapitiya, by armed men in civilian dress. He
was blindfolded, handcuffed and driven to the army camp behind the Indian High
Commission, referred to above. It is alleged that he was held at this location
until being transferred on or about 10th December to Panagoda Army Camp, which
also does not appear to be in the list of authorized places of detention
gazetted in June 1993. On or about 15th December he was transferred to the CID
on the Fourth Floor, Colombo Police Headqaurters ..."



The reports of Amnesty International were referred to by Wimalenthiran in his
affidavit and produced by him and marked as P3.



On the 11th of December, Wimalenthiran's blindfold was removed and he was
taken to the Army Camp at Panagoda. On the 15th of December 1993, he was
handed over to the Criminal Investigation Department and remained in Police
custody. Wimalenthiran did not commit any offence nor was he concerned in the
commission of any offence and there were no reasonable grounds for his arrest
and detention. He emphatically denies the allegations made by Senior
Superintendent of Police Hemachandra that he was a member of the

121



LTTE and that he was in close touch with LTTE members. He was not informed of
the reasons for his arrest. He was produced before a Magistrate on the 23rd of
April 1994 and detained on the orders of the Magistrate. He was released on
Bail on the 22nd of September 1995.



On the 29th of November 1994, the respondents filed an affidavit from Mr. O.
K. Hemachandra, Senior Superintendent of Police, dated the 21st of November
1994. That affidavit sets out the respondents' version, which is as follows:



Wimalenthiran was taken into custody on the 23rd of October 1993 by the army
at an army check point at Kotahena at 1730 hours. He was taken into custody
"as there were reasonable grounds for suspecting him to be concerned in or to
be committing or to have committed offences punishable under the Emergency
(Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations No. 1 of 1993," and he was
so informed at the time of his arrest. In support of the circumstances of the
arrest, a statement of Sergeant K. Gunadasa of the Army who made the arrest
was filed of record marked 2R1. Wimalenthiran was detained at the Army Camp at
Panagoda pending further investigations in pursuance of a detention order
(2R2) made under Regulation 19(2). "Consequent to further investigations and
material revealed thereby", Wimalenthiran was further detained at the Army
Camp, Panagoda, in pursuance of detention order 2R3 issued under Regulation
17(1). He was handed over to the Criminal Investigation Department (CID) by
the Sri Lanka Army on the 14th of December 1993, and thereafter detained at
the CID in pursuance of a detention order issued under Regulation 17(1) marked
as 2R4. He was further detained at the CID in pursuance of a detention order
issued under Regulation 17(1) marked as 2R6. Wimalenthiran was produced before
a Magistrate of Colombo on the 23rd of April 1994 and remanded to fiscal's
custody. "Consequent to investigations conducted ... the evidence against him
clearly establishes that he was an active member of the LTTE ... Further
investigations ... revealed that around January 1993 he had been assigned the
task of collecting information relating to the movements of the late President
Premadasa and had been introduced to other LTTE cadres including ...  


122



Babu who had been assigned the task of assassinating the President ... In
accordance with the evidence available it has been clearly established that
Vijayam Wimalenthiran was closely associated with all the persons who had been
entrusted with the task of assassinating the President and that he had
collected and supplied information relating to the movements of the late
President ..."



As we have seen, Article 13(1) of the Constitution provides that no person
shall be arrested except according to procedure established by law. The
respondents maintain that Wimalenthiran was arrested in terms of regulation
18(1), _inter alia,_ provides that `... any member of the armed forces may ...
arrest without warrant, any person who is committing or has committed or whom
he has reasonable ground for suspecting to be concerned in, or to be
committing or to have committed, an offence under any emergency regulation
...".



In decidng whether the arrest was in accordance with "procedure establsihed by
law", the matter in issue is not what **subsequent investigations** may have
revealed, but whether **at the time of the arrest** the person was committing
an offence, or that there were reasonable grounds for suspecting that the
person arrested was concerned in or had committed an offence. Accepting, for
the time being, the version of the respondents that Wimalenthiran was arrested
at a check point by Sergeant Gunadasa of the Army, there was no evidence
placed before the Court that the arrest was made either while Wimalenthiran
was committing an offence, or that the Sergeant had any information that the
person he was arresting had committed any offence, or that Sergeant Gunadasa
had any reasonable ground for suspecting Wimalenthiran to be concerned in, or
to have committed, an offence under any emergency regulation. The suspicions
of Sergeant Gunadasa and his fervent hope, or even confident and honest
assumption, that some evidence may eventually turn up to make his suspicions
appear to be reasonable was not sufficient; Article 13(5) of the Constitution
provides that "Every person shall be presumed innocent until he is proved
guilty", and for that reason it is of importance that no person should be
arrested under regulation 18(1) except on grounds in which the  


123



particular circumstances of the arrest justified the entertainment of a
reasonable suspicion. (Cf. per Scott LJ in _Dumbell v. Roberts_ (1) _,_
followed in _Mutthusamy v. Kannangara_ (2) _, Faiz v. Attorney­General_ (3);
_Faurdeen v. Jayetilleke_ (4)) _._ I __ am not suggesting that Sergeant
Gunadasa should have had clear and sufficient proof of the commission of an
offence under the Emergency Regulations, or that he ought to have had
information that provided anything like a _prima facie_ basis for conviction:
Sergeant Gunadasa could, in terms of regulation 18(1), have arrested
Wimalenthiran although he had no clear and sufficient proof of the commission
of the offence which he suspected Wimalenthiran to have been concerned in or
to have committed. However, Sergeant Gunadasa ought to have had reasonable
grounds, taking into account the circumstances, including the prevailing
situation at the relevant time, (e.g. see _Chandra Kalyani_ Perera v.
Siriwardena and _Others_ (5), _Joseph Perera_ _v. Attorney ‑General and
Others_(6) __ objectively regarded, that should have induced him to reasonably
suspect that Wimalenthiran was committing, or had committed, or was concerned
in the commission of, an offence under the Emergency Regulations. (See _Kumara
v. Rohan Fernando and Others_ (7) _, Anura v. Rohan Fernando and Others_ (8),
_Mahinda v. Rohan Fernando and Others_ (9)).



In paragraph 6 of the affidavit of Senior Superintendent Hemachandra it is
stated that Wimalenthiran "was taken into custody as there were reasonable
grounds for suspecting him to be concerned in or to be committing or to have
committed offences punishable under the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions
and Powers) Regulations ...". However, no evidence was placed before the Court
to support that bald assertion: It is necessary that the Court should be
furnished with the relevant material so that the Court may be able to
objectively determine the reasonableness of the suspicion that led to the
arrest. In the absence of such evidence, one might with justification, as I do
in the matter before me, conclude that Wimalenthiran was arrested by Sergeant
Gunadasa and ordered to be detained by the Deputy Inspector‑General of Police
who made the Detention Order dated the 23rd of October 1993, on some vague,
general suspicion, hoping that some evidence would turn up that might have
provided justification for the arrest. The arrest of a person  


124



on a speculative basis is insufficient to comply with the procedure
established by Regulation 18(1). In arresting Wimalenthiran merely on vague
grounds of suspicion and not on reasonable grounds of suspicion, the officer
making the arrest was not acting in accordance with the procedure established
by Regulation 18(1) and was therefore acting in violation of Article 13(1) of
the Constitution. (See _Peiris and Others v. Attorney ‑General_(10) _,_
followed in _Kumara v. Rohan Fernando and Others_ ( _supra_ )). __ As we have
seen, in its order of the 29th of March 1994 relating to the case before us,
the Court took notice of the fact that the Human Rights Task Force had
reported that the Army Intelligence Unit had even at that date been "unable to
give a plausible explanation" for the arrest and detention of Wimalenthiran.
What then were the reasonable grounds Sergeant Gunadasa had in October 1993 ‑
either on the 2nd or 23rd day of that month ‑ for making the arrest? He had
none. Consequently, he could not have been able to give Wimalenthiran a reason
for the arrest as required by Article 13(1) of the Constitution.



The Detention Order dated the 23rd of October 1993 conveys the impression ‑ it
is not clearly expressed ‑ that Wimalenthiran was being held in custody as a
person who "had committed" "an offence in contravention of Regulation/s 25
read with 34 and 37" or that the officer issuing the detention order had
"reasonable ground for suspecting" the person ordered to be detained as a
person "concerned in or **to be committing** or to have committed an offence
in contravention of Regulation/s 25 read with 34 and 37 of the said Gazette
Extraordinary (sic.)..." However, the respondents did not, either through the
affidavit of Hemachandra or in their submissions, claim that Wimalenthiran was
arrested while he was committing any offence. The Detention Order issued on
the 23rd of October 1993 is in a standard form previously prepared into which
other information, whether true or false, appropriate or inappropriate, has
been routinely inserted. In any event, had the person detained been furnished
with a copy of the Detention Order, could he have understood why he was being
detained? If he had been given a copy of the Emergency Regulations as well, he
could have found that Regulation 25 provides that:

125



"Whoever (a) commits any offence punishable under Sections 114, 115, 116 or
117 of the Penal Code; or (b) commits the murder or conspires to murder or
attempts to murder, or wrongfully confines or conspires or prepares to
wrongfully confine, the President or a Member of the Parliament, or a police
officer or a member of the armed forces, or a public officer with the
intention of inducing or compelling the President, Member of Parliament,
police officer or member of the armed forces or public officer to exercise or
refrain from exercising in any manner any of the lawful powers of the
President, Member of Parliament, police officer, member of the armed forces or
public officer; or (c) in any manner overawes, influences, coerces, prepares
or conspires or attempts to overawe, influence or coerce, any person with the
intention of inducing or compelling the Government of Sri Lanka, the
President, a Member of Parliament, a police officer, a member of the armed
forces or public officer, shall be guilty of an offence..."



What was it the person detained had done?



According to the Detention Order, Wimalenthiran was detained for contravening
Regulation 25 "read with" Regulations 34 and 37\. Regulation 34 provides that:



"No person shall knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that any other
person is guilty of an offence under any   emergency regulation give such
other person assistance with the intent thereby to prevent, hinder or
interfere with the apprehension trial or punishment of such person for the
said offence."



What was the knowledge of the person detained? Who was the person detained
seeking to protect? What was the offence such a person was supposed to have
committed? No evidence was adduced by the respondents on these matters.  
  
Regulation 37 provides:



"(a) Whoever becomes aware of an intention or an attempt or a preparation to
commit, or the commission of an offence  under any



126



emergency regulation shall forthwith give information thereof to the nearest
Grama Niladhari or to the officer-in-charge of the nearest police station; (b)
any person who willfully fails or refuses to give the information referred to
in paragraph (a) shall be guilty of an offence."  


What was the information that the person detained had and failed to disclose?



The Detention Order dated 1st January 1994, is in terms similar to that of the
Order issued on the 29th of October 1993, except that it lists the names of
122 persons, including the name of Wimalenthiran. The Detention Order issued
on the 8th of April 1994 lists the names of 121 persons including the name of
Wimalenthiran.



The treatment of persons detained, was, as it were, on a wholesale basis. This
is evident from the Detention Orders dated the 1st of January 1994 and the 8th
of April 1994. Such an approach does not enable the Secretary to discharge his
duty under Article 13(1) of the Constitution to give a person he has directed
to be arrested and detained the reasons for doing so, if his only method of
communicating his reasons was the Detention Order. Nor does it enable a person
detained to make a case for his release to the Advisory Committee appointed
under Regulation 17(4); for he must know the grounds upon which he is supposed
to be a person who is likely to act in a manner prejudicial to the national
security or the maintenance of public order.



Neither the officers who made the arrest, nor the police, nor the persons
issuing the Detention Orders seem to have had any clear idea why Wimalenthiran
was detained. Nor was their position much better at the time the Fundamental
Rights application was filed. In fact, as we have seen, learned State Counsel
in his memorandum to Court stated that it was decided to indict Wimalenthiran
"following a confession made by the petitioner stating that he was a member of
a suicide squad directed by the LTTE to assassinate the late President
Premadasa." That 'confession' was obtained after the filing of the Fundamental
Rights application. The Attorney‑General, who had

127  


sometime after State Counsel's undertaking given on the 29th of March 1994 to
indict or release the prisoner, received a 'dossier' from the police, was not
in a position to issue indictment even on the 17th of June 1994 for lack of
sufficient information.



The Detention Orders issued under Regulation 17 on the 29th of October 1993,
the 1st of January 1994 and the 8th of April 1994 fail to give reasons for the
detention: They merely state that "being of opinion and with a view to
preventing the person specified and residing at the place mentioned in Column
I of the Schedule to this order from acting in any manner prejudicial to the
National Security or to the maintenance of public order, it is necessary so to
do", the person concerned is ordered to be detained. All that the person
detained was told were the general objects and purposes of the detention as
set out in Regulation 17(1). Whether a person is arrested under Regulation
18(1) or ordered to be detained under Regulation 17(1), he or she must be
given **the grounds** ‑ the material facts and particulars ‑ for his arrest
and detention. It is only when a person has such information that he or she
will have the opportunity to rebut the suspicion entertained by the person
making the arrest or show that there was some mistake as to identity. It is
only when a person has been given the grounds for his or her detention, that
meaningful steps could be taken to apply to the Advisory Committee to obtain
release from custody. In failing to state the grounds for arrest and
detention, Wimalenthiran's fundamental right to such information guaranteed by
Article 13(1) of the Constitution was violated.



Where was Wimalenthiran arrested? According to him, he was arrested at a lodge
at No. 56, Old Moor Street at which he was residing. On the other hand, Mr.
Hemachandra, Senior Superintendent of Police, states in his affidavit that the
arrest was made at an army check point at Kotahena. The Director of the
Criminal Investigation Department in Annexure 'A' to his letter dated the 8th
of September 1994 addressed **** to the Attorney‑General with a copy to the
Registrar of the Supreme Court, which has been filed of record, states that
"The corpus was taken into custody at Navaraj Lodge, Colombo 13 by Sergeant K.
Gunadasa of the Sri Lanka



128



Army." Discrepancies of this nature cast doubts on the credibility of the
respondents' version.



At least this much is undisputed and clear: the arrest was made in Colombo and
not in an administrative district within the Northern and Eastern Provinces,
and therefore, the procedure established by law for the arrest and detention
of Wimalenthiran must be that which was applicable to a person arrested
outside the Northern and Eastern Provinces. This has an important bearing on
the procedures established by law which the persons making the arrest had to
follow.



Nor is it in dispute that the relevant law is that which was set out in the
Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations of 17th June 1993
made by the President under Section 5 of the Public Security Ordinance and
published in Gazette Extraordinary No. 77/16 of 17.06.1993.



Regulation 18(1) states that "Any... member of the armed forces may... arrest
without warrant, any person who is committing or whom he has reasonable
grounds of suspecting to be concerned in, or to be committing or to have
committed, an offence under any emergency regulation... Provided however that
any person arrested or detained in any administrative district outside the
Northern and Eastern Provinces by a member of the armed forces shall
forthwith, and in any event before the end of the period of twenty‑four hours
from such arrest or detention be handed over to the custody of the
officer‑in‑charge of the nearest police station."



According to paragraph 13 of the affidavit of Wimalenthiran, and paragraph
3(e) of the affidavit of the Attorney‑at‑Law who filed the application on
behalf of Wimalenthiran, Wimalenthiran was handed over to the CID on the 15th
of December 1993. However, Senior Superintendent Hemachandra in paragraph 9 of
his affidavit states that Wimalenthiran was handed over to the CID on the 14th
of December 1993. If Wimalenthiran and Arulrajah were dealt with, as far as
detention was concerned, in the same way, the Amnesty International report
supports the version of Wimalenthiran and that of the Attorney‑at‑Law.

 129



Even if it is assumed that the arrest was made on the 23rd of October 1993 and
not on the 2nd of October 1993, there was a failure to comply with the
mandatory requirement of Regulation 18(1) that the person arrested should have
been handed over to the police "forthwith" and in any event, not later than
twenty‑four hours after the arrest. The safety of the citizen is better
secured by ensuring that the custody of a person arrested should be with the
civil, namely the police, rather than the military authorities; and it is best
secured when custody is under judicial authority in an approved prison: For
approved prisons are governed by laws, regulations and rules designed to
protect persons admitted to them and are administered by trained personnel who
are equipped to deal with incarcerated persons. Moreover, unlike the police,
prisons officers have no interest in the success or failure of a prosecution
and would, therefore, be less like to treat persons in custody without
restraint for the purpose of eliciting information. Clearly the intention of
Regulation 18(1) is that the person arrested should, as expeditiously as
possible, be removed from the custody of the armed forces and placed in the
custody of the appropriate civil authorities. In the circumstances, the
propriety of the Deputy Inspector‑General of Police, directing in his
Detention Order of the 23rd of October 1993 that "Vijayan Wimalenthiran"
(sic.) be detained for seven days at the Army Camp, Panagoda, rather than at a
place of detention over which the Police had control, seems questionable. By
detaining Wimalenthiran for more than twenty‑four hours in military custody,
the army officers failed to act in accordance with procedure established by
law and thereby contravened the provisions of Article 13(1) of Constitution.



Moreover, the duty of the army officers making the arrest was to hand him over
to "the officer‑in‑charge of the nearest police station." If, as Senior
Superintendent Hemachandra states in paragraph 5 of his affidavit,
Wimalenthiran was arrested at a check point at Kotahena, he should have been
handed over to the officer‑in‑charge of the Kotahena Police Station and not to
the Criminal Investigation Department. Senior Superintendent Hemachandra
states in paragraph 9 of his affidavit that Wimalenthiran was handed over by
the army to the Criminal Investigation Department. That was not what

130



Regulation 18(1) required, and therefore, the army officers were acting
contrary to the procedure established by law and thereby transgressing the
provisions of Article 13(1) of the Constitution.



The new regulations of June 1993 introduced several safeguards to ensure the
security of persons who are arrested and detained under the Emergency
Regulations. In order to prevent or minimize 'disappearances' and abuses, it
is of paramount importance that the requirements laid down by the regulations
should be strictly observed. They were not intended for merely cosmetic
purposes, but for the sake of fulfilling the basic obligation of the State to
ensure the personal security and liberty of all persons.



Regulation 18(7) provides that when an arrest is made under Regulation 18(1)
it shall be the duty of the arresting officer, where the arresting officer is
a member of the armed forces, to report to the Commanding Officer of the area
within which the arrest is made, within twenty‑four hours of such arrest. It
shall be the duty of such Commanding Officer to "forthwith" notify the Human
Rights Task Force of such arrest, setting out all the information relating to
such offence in the form prescribed for such purpose by the Secretary.



Regulation 18(7) provides that where any person is taken into custody under
the provisions of Regulation 18, it shall be the duty of the arresting officer
to issue to the spouse, father, mother or any other close relative, as the
case may be, a document in such Form as specified by the Secretary,
acknowledging the fact of the arrest.



Regulation 19(4) casts two imperative duties on the Secretary of the Ministry
of Defence, namely, (1) to cause to be published in the **Gazette** a list of
all places authorized by him as places of detention for the purposes of
Regulations 17 and 19; and (2) to notify the existence and the address of such
places of detention to the Magistrate within whose jurisdiction such places of
detention are located.



Regulation 19(5) requires the officer‑in‑charge of any place authorized by the
Secretary as a place authorized for detention for purposes of Regulations 17
or 19 to furnish once every fourteen days

131



to the Magistrate within whose local limits of jurisdiction such place of
detention is located a list containing the names of all persons detained at
such place. The Magistrate shall cause a list to be displayed on the notice
board of the Court.



Regulation 19(6) requires the Magistrate within whose jurisdiction any such
authorized place of detention is situated, to visit such place of detention at
least once in every month and it shall be the duty of the officer‑in‑charge of
that place to secure that every person detained therein, otherwise than by an
order of a Magistrate, is produced before such visiting Magistrate.



Mr. Vinayagamoorthy in his affidavit of the 4th of December 1994 specifically
states that the respondents failed to comply with the procedures established
by law by (a) not handing over Wimalenthiran to the Kotahena Police
immediately after his arrest; (b) failing to notify the Human Rights Task
Force; and (c) failing to inform the relatives of the person arrested. I find
myself in agreement with Mr. Vinayagamoorthy. Indeed, I go further in holding
that there is no evidence that the requirements of Regulations 18(7), 18(8),
and 19(4), 19(5), 19(6) were complied with in this case.



Regulation 19(2) states that "Any person taken into custody in pursuance of
the provisions of Regulation 18 may for the purpose of investigation of the
offence in relation to which such person was arrested be kept in detention
upon an order made by a police officer not below the rank of a
Deputy‑Inspector‑General of Police ... in a place authorized by the Secretary
...". Regulation 19(4) provides that "The Secretary shall cause to be
published in the **Gazette** a list, with the addresses of all places
authorized by him as places of detention for the purposes of Regulations 17
and 19 ...". At the relevant time, the authorized places of detention were
those published in **Gazette Extraordinary** No. 773/8 of June 29th, 1993.
There were 343 authorized places including, prisons, police stations and
certain army camps. The Panagoda Army Camp was not an authorized place of
detention, and therefore, the detention order was bad in law, and since the
detention under that order was not in accordance with the procedure
established by Regulation 19, it was in transgression of

132



Article 13(1) of the Constitution. The Army Detention Camp, Panagoda, was
listed as an authorized place of detention in **Gazette Extraordinary** No.
806/6 published on the 15th of February 1994. Admittedly, the order of the
Secretary of Defence listing the Panagoda Camp as an authorized place of
detention is dated the 1st of October 1993; however, until it was published in
the **Gazette** as required by Regulation 19(4), it had no force or avail: it
was at the relevant time, no more than a private proposal of the Secretary,
and the Army Camp at Panagoda, during the period of time relevant to the
matter before us, fell into the category of unauthorized, secret places of
detention at which no person arrested under Regulation 18 could be lawfully
detained.



Regulation 17(1) empowers the Secretary where he is satisfied upon the
material submitted to him or upon such additional material as may be called
for by him, with respect to any person, that with a view to prevent such
person _inter alia,_ from acting in any manner prejudicial to the national
security or to maintenance of public order, it is necessary to do so, the
Secretary may make order that such person be taken into custody and detained
in custody for a period not exceeding three months ..." Regulation 17(3)
provides that "Any person detained in pursuance of an order made under
paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be deemed to be in lawful custody and
shall be detained in such place as may be authorized by the Secretary and in
accordance with instructions issued by him ...". The detention of a person at
any place designated by the Secretary in a Detention Order issued by him does
not make such a place one that is 'authorized by him'. Places 'authorized' by
the Secretary for the purposes of Regulation 17 are such places as are
specified by him as authorized, and of which public notice is given in the
**Gazette.** This is very obviously the intention, for Regulation 19(4)
provides as follows: "The Secretary shall cause to be published in the
**Gazette** a list, with the addresses of all places authorized by him as
places of detention for the purposes of Regulations 17 and 19 ...". Regulation
19(4) issued on the 17th of June 1993 clearly, in plain words, indicated that
secrecy was to be displaced by publicity and openness: The Secretary to the
Ministry of Defence in the exercise of the powers conferred on him by
Regulation 17(1) may order the

133



detention of persons at specified places provided that he had given
notification in the **Gazette** of those places. He cannot lawfully order that
a person be detained at any other place. It is no defence that the Secretary
at the relevant time was contemplating or had privately decided, that the Army
Detention Camp at Panagoda was a suitable place for keeping persons in
custody. The Army Camp at Panagoda, as we have seen, was not, at the time the
Detention Order was issued nor during the period covered by that Order, namely
a period of three months from 19th October 1993, a place authorized by the
Secretary in accordance with the law.



The law takes a ‑serious view of detention at unauthorized places: Regulation
19(8) provides that "No person shall be detained at any place other than a
place of detention authorized by the Secretary and where any person had been
detained contrary to this regulation the person or persons responsible for
such detention shall be guilty of an offence under these regulations."



Senior Superintendent of Police Hemachandra states in paragraph 9 of his
affidavit that Wimalenthiran was handed over to the Criminal Investigation
Department by the Army on the 14th of December 1993 and was "thereafter
detained at the Criminal Investigation Department in pursuance of a Detention
Order issued by the 3rd Respondent in terms of the powers vested in him under
the provisions of Regulation 17(1) ...". This was not the case, for on the
14th of December 1993 the Detention Order in operation was the one issued on
the 29th of October 1993 in which the place of detention designated by the
Secretary was the Panagoda Army Camp. In terms of Regulation 17(3) "Any person
detained in pursuance of an order made under paragraph (1) of ... Regulation
(17) ... shall be detained in such place as may be authorized by the Secretary
**and in accordance with instructions issued by him**..." Admittedly, as we
have seen, the Panagoda Army Camp was not an 'authorized' place of detention
when the Detention Order was made; but it was nevertheless the designated
place of detention; and therefore, Wimalenthiran was not held, as required by
Regulation 17(3), "in accordance with instructions issued by" the Secretary.
Thus even the

134



Secretary defence, let alone members of Wimalenthiran's family, by looking at
the Detention Order would not have been able to say where the person ordered
to be detained was between the 14th of December 1993 and the 31st of December
1993. It was in the Detention Order dated the 1st of January 1994 that the
place of detention is accurately designated.



The Detention Orders dated the 29th of October 1993, 1st January 1994 and 8th
April 1994 were issued by the Secretary to the Ministry of Defence. Regulation
17(1) empowers the Secretary to the Ministry of Defence to order the detention
of a person with a view to preventing such person from acting in any manner
prejudicial to the national security or to the maintenance of public order.
However, Regulation 17(1) confers the power "where the Secretary is satisfied
upon the material submitted to him, or upon such further material as may be
called for by him" that "it is necessary" to order the arrest and detention of
the person. The Secretary of the Ministry of Defence is the third respondent.
He did not state either in the Detention Orders or in an affidavit that he was
satisfied upon the material submitted to him or upon such further material as
may have been called for by him, that with a view to preventing Wimalenthiran
from acting in any manner prejudicial to the national security or to the
maintenance of public order, it was necessary to order his arrest and
detention.



Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that Wimalenthiran was arrested
without grounds that justified the entertainment of a reasonable suspicion and
that therefore the arrest in the first place was not in conformity with
Regulation 18(1). Nor were there grounds, he submitted, for the making of a,
preventive detention order. There was no explanation whatsoever by learned
counsel who represented him why the Secretary issued the Detention Orders in
the matter before us. All that we have is an affidavit from Senior
Superintendent Hemachandra in which it is vaguely stated that "Consequent to
further investigations and the material revealed thereby ... Vijayam
Wimalenthiran was further detained at the Army Camp at Panagoda in pursuance
of a detention order issued by the 3rd respondent in terms of the powers
vested in him under the provisions of Regulation

135



17(1) ... 2R3"; and that "... Wimalenthiran was handed over to the Criminal
Investigation Department by the Sri Lanka Army on 14.12.93 and thereafter
detained at the Criminal Investigation Department in pursuance of a detention
order issued by the 3rd respondent ...2R4"; and that "Wimalenthiran was
further detained at the Criminal Investigation Department in pursuance of a
detention order issued by the 3rd respondent ... 2R6." No evidence was placed
before us as to the material that was placed before the Secretary that enabled
him to arrive at his decision. All we have is a bald assertion in the
Detention Orders, that the Secretary was of the opinion that it was necessary
to detain Wimalenthiran and the equally unhelpful explanations of Senior
Superintendent Hemachandra as to the reasons for the detention of
Wimalenthiran.



The Secretary may be said to be "satisfied" if his decision is reasonable in
the sense that it is or can be supported with good reasons or at any rate be a
decision which a reasonable person might reasonably reach. (Per Denning MR in
_Secretary of State v. Tameside_ (10b) __ Where the Secretary's Order is
challenged, as it has been in the matter before us, he must take steps to have
the relevant material placed before the Court and establish his averment by
'proof positive' that he was "satisfied" in the relevant sense. (E.g. see
_Kalyani Perera v. Siriwardena (supra); Fernando v. Silva and Others_ (11) _,
Hirdaramani v. Ratnavale_ (12) cited with approval in _Sasanasiritissa Thero
v. De Silva and Others_ (13); _Malinda Channa Pieris v. Attorney ‑General
(supra)). _If the information could not have been made public, the Court
should have been so informed. Had the Court been informed, it would have
indicated the procedure to be followed that would, on the one hand have
enabled the Court to assess whether there was material upon which the
Secretary could have been satisfied, while on the other, ensuring
confidentiality in the public interest. The accepted procedure is that the
material is made available to the Chief Justice who will make the information
available to the Judges nominated to hear the matter. (See _Leelaratne v.
Cyril Herath and Others_ (14)) _._ According to the Journal entry of the 5th
of July 1994, learned counsel for the petitioner stated that he had "no
objection to any material which is of a confidential nature being disclosed by
the respondents only to the

136



Court." However, no material was placed before this Court to establish that
the Secretary was "satisfied" in the relevant sense before he made the
Detention Orders. On the other hand, as we have seen, the Human Rights Task
Force in its report received by this Court on the 24th of March 1994 stated as
follows:



"With regard to the arrest and detention of the petitioner the Army
Intelligence Unit has been unable to give a plausible explanation. The
petitioner has been in detention for 142 days without being produced to a
Court of Law. We were therefore obliged to direct the Secretary, Ministry of
Defence, to revoke the detention order and release the petitioner from
custody."



Learned State Counsel in his memorandum to this Court, explaining the reasons
for the inability of the Attorney‑General even in June 1994 to indict
Wimalenthiran, nevertheless stated that the undertaking to indict the prisoner
"was given following a confession made by the petitioner stating that he was a
member of a suicide squad directed by the LTTE to assissinate the late
President Ranasinghe Premadasa." In his affidavit dated the 21st of November
1994, Senior Superintendent Hemachandra does not state that Wimalenthiran was
a member of a suicide squad, but merely that he was "closely associated with"
three groups of persons who had been "entrusted with the task of assissinating
the President and that he had collected and supplied information relating to
the movements of the ...late President." In any event, on what material were
these conclusions based? When were they discovered? Was the material placed
before and considered by the Secretary to the Ministry of Defence? I do not
know, for the respondents failed to place any material before the Court on
those matters.



The Supreme Court has on more than one occasion reminded the Secretary to the
Ministry of Defence that he should be able to state that he **himself** came
to form the opinion, and that the Secretary would not be acting in conformity
with the requirements of Regulation 17(1) by acting mechanically as a rubber
stamp at the behest of the police and signing Detention Orders without
exercising his personal judgment in each case. (E.g. See _Weerakoon v.
Weeraratne_ (15); __

137



_Sasanasiritissa Thero and Others v. De Silva and Others, (supra); Malinda
Channa Pieris and Others v. Attorney ‑General and Others, (_supra). I am of
the view that in the absence of materials to establish that the Secretary was
"satisfied", and **** in the absence of even a statement to the effect that he
was satisfied set out in an affidavit, that the Secretary was not in fact
"satisfied" and that he had acted mechanically in issuing the detention
orders.



There remains for consideration the question whether there was a violation of
Article 13(2) of the Constitution which provides that:



"Every person held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of personal
liberty shall be brought before the judge of the nearest competent court
according to procedure established by law, and shall not be further held in
custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty except upon and in terms of
the order of such judge made in accordance with procedure established by law."



Regulation 19(2) provides that a person taken into custody in pursuance of the
provisions of Regulation 18:



"may for the purposes of the offence in relation to which such person was
arrested be kept in detention ... for a period not exceeding sixty days
reckoned from the date of his arrest under that regulation, and should at the
end of the period be released unless such person is detained under the
provisions of Regulation 17, or is produced before a court of competent
jurisdiction ... Provided, however, that when any person is arrested in
pursuance of Regulation 18 in any administrative district outside the Northern
and Eastern Provinces in respect of any offence committed in any such area, he
shall not be detained under these provisions for a period in excess of seven
days and unless detained under the provisions of Regulation 17, shall be
produced before a Magistrate before the expiry of such period of detention as
is hereinafter provided or released from custody."



Wimalenthiran's position was that he was arrested on the 2nd of October 1993
at No. 56, Old Moor Street in the presence of his father.

138



Learned Counsel for the respondents repeatedly stated that if the father was
present, an affidavit by the father should have been filed, and that in the
absence of such an affidavit the respondents' assertion that he was arrested
on the 2nd of October 1993 should be rejected. Mr. Goonesekere's simple
explanation was that when the son was arrested, the father 'bolted' without
trace of his whereabouts. Besides, there is other evidence supporting the
version that the arrest was on the 2nd of October. In the petition and
affidavit filed by Mr. Vinayagamoorthy, Attorney‑at‑Law, on behalf of Vijayam
Wimalenthiran, it is stated that Wimalenthiran was taken into custody at "a
lodge at No. 56, Old Moor Street" and thereafter detained in a building behind
the Indian High Commission. The respondents' maintain that the arrest was made
at a check point at Kotahena on the 23rd of October 1993 at 1730 hours.
According to the Director of the Criminal Investigation Department, "the
corpus was taken into custody on 23.10.93 at Navaraj Lodge, Colombo 13 by
Sergeant K. Gunadasa of the Sri Lanka Army." According to Gunadasa's statement
Wimalenthiran was arrested on the 23rd of October 1993 at 1730 hours and
Arulrajah was arrested at Kotahena at a check point on the 24th of October
1993\. According to the reports of Amnesty International referred to above,
Arulrajah was arrested on 2nd October 1993. Learned Counsel for the
respondents suggested that Wimalenthiran had obtained his date from the
Amnesty International report. However, the 2nd of October was the date
specified in the application to this Court embodying the instructions given by
Wimalenthiran to his Attorney‑at‑Law. That application is dated the 31st of
January and bears the date stamp of this Court marked "1994 ‑ 1‑31." The
Amnesty International report was issued in February 1994. The report was
submitted by Wimalenthiran with his affidavit of the 3rd of December 1994\.
The Amnesty International account of the case of Arulrajah, both with regard
to the date of arrest, the places of detention at various times, and the
sequence of events, corroborates the version of his co‑prisoner ‑
Wimalenthiran. There is no reason why Amnesty International should have
invented the dates mentioned by them.



On the other hand, there was an understandable reason why the 1st, 2nd and 3rd
respondents should insist that the arrest was on the

139



 23rd of October: If the respondents admitted that the arrest took place on
the 2nd of October, they would not have been able to explain the detention of
Wimalenthiran from 2nd October ‑ 23rd October, for they had no detention order
covering that period. Learned Counsel for the respondents stated that it would
have been possible for the Detention Orders to have been dated from the 2nd of
October: the necessary implication that dates are capable of manipulation is,
to say the least, disturbing. According to the affidavit of Mr.
Vinayagamoorthy dated the 31st of January 1994, Wimalenthiran was held at the
secret place of detention by the sea till the 11th of December and then
transferred to the Army Camp at Panagoda. On the 15th of December he was
handed over to the CID. This is the sequence of events reported by Amnesty
International with regard to Wimalenthiran's co‑prisoner, Arulrajah. The
Amnesty International report states that Arulrajah was arrested on the 2nd of
October and detained at the army camp behind the Indian High Commission until
he was transferred "on or about 10 December" to Panagoda Camp and handed over
to the CID "on or about 15 December". I am of the view that Wimalenthiran was
arrested on the 2nd of December 1993.



The period of detention specified in the Order issued in terms of Regulation
19(2) was seven days. In terms of the proviso to Regulation 19(2) any person
arrested outside the Northern and Eastern Province in respect of any offence
committed in such area shall not be detained for a period in excess of seven
days, **and unless detained under the provisions of Regulation 17, shall be
produced before a Magistrate before the expiry of such period as is
hereinafter provided or released from custody.** Detention Orders under
Regulation 17 were therefore issued on 29th of October 1993, 1st January and
8th April 1994 to enable Wimalenthiran to be kept in detention without being
produced before a Magistrate. Since Wimalenthiran was arrested on the 2nd of
October, 1993, it was no defence that Detention Orders under Regulation 17 had
been issued covering the period 29th October 1993 till 23rd April 1994 when he
was produced before a Magistrate. In my view, in terms of Regulation 19(3),
since, as we have seen, there was no reasonable cause for

140



 further detention, Wimalenthiran should have been produced before a
Magistrate within forty‑eight hours after the arrest on 2nd October 1993; or
if, as the respondents contend, there was reasonable cause for detention, then
within seven days from the 2nd of October 1993. Having failed to bring
Wimalenthiran before a Magistrate within the prescribed time, whether the
relevant time was forty‑eight hours or seven days, the 1st, 2nd and 3rd
respondents acted in violation of his Constitutional rights guaranteed by
Article 13(2).



For the reasons explained in my judgment, I declare that Vijayam
Wimalenthiran's fundamental rights under Article 13(1) and Article 13(2) of
the Constitution were violated by the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents.



The State shall pay Vijayam Wimalenthiran a sum of Rs. 25,000/-­as
compensation and a sum of Rs. 5,000/‑ as costs.



**WIJETUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**ANANDACOUMARASWAMY, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Relief Granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/11.html_  

