##  Palitha v. O.I.C., Police Station, Polonnaruwa and Others - SLR - 161, Vol
1 of 1993 [1993] LKSC 11; (1993) 1 Sri LR 161 (4 May 1993)

**161**

**PALITHA** **  
v.** **  
O.I.C., POLICE STATION, POLONNARUWA AND OTHERS**

  
SUPREME COURT.  
KULATUNGA, J., RAMANATHAN, J.,

AND WIJETUNGA, J.  
SC APPLICATION NO. 880/92.  
MAY 04, 1993.

_Fundamental Rights - Constitution, Articles 13 (1) and (2) - Dismissal of
application induced by wrong information \- Inherent power of Court to vacate
dismissal._

The petitioner's application was dismissed on wrong facts given by the
respondents to the prejudice of the petitioner.

**Held**

The Court has inherent power to set aside its order by way of remedying the
injustice caused to the petitioner and grant relief.

**Cases referred to**

_1\. Wijeyesinghe v. Uluwita 34 NLR p. 362 at p. 364.  
_  
_2\. Ganeshanathan v. Goonewardena [1984] 1 Sri LR p. 319 at p. 329._

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of Fundamental Rights guaranteed
by Article 13 of the Constitution.

Petitioner absent and unrepresented. __

  
_S. Rajaratnam, S.C. for respondents._

  
May 04, 1993.  
**KULATUNGA, J.**

On 12.02.1993 this application was dismissed, on the Court being informed by
the State Counsel that the petitioner was due to be released on 30.04.1993,
after rehabilitation. However, due to a typographical error, the order made by
this Court stated that the petitioner had been so released on 30.04.1992.

162

Subsequently the Commissioner-General of Rehabilitation, by letter dated
02.04.1993, informed this Court that the petitioner had not been sent for
rehabilitation but he was still in detention at the Pelawatta Detention Camp.
According to the letter of the Commissioner-General of Rehabilitation, this
communication was made in consequence of a request by M. G. Jinadasa, the
father of the petitioner, to release the petitioner.

State Counsel now confirms that the petitioner was not sent for rehabilitation
even after the Attorney-General had, on 19.02.1993, communicated to the 3rd
respondent the fact that the Court had been informed that the petitioner was
due to be rehabilitated. This communication had been dispatched by registered
post.

State Counsel states that the petitioner has since been released directly from
the Pelawatta Detention Camp on 30.04.1993.

Considering the fact that the order of this Court dated 12.02.1993 was made on
wrong facts given to the prejudice of the petitioner, we set aside the said
order by way of remedying the injustice caused to the petitioner
(notwithstanding the failure of his Counsel to appear in Court though noticed,
which failure appears to be due to the short notice given to him) - vide
_Wijeyesinghe v. Uluwita_ , (1) and _Ganeshanantham v. Goonewardene_ (2), on
the inherent power of Courts to set aside such orders.

On the merits, we find that the petitioner was 22 years of age at the time of
his arrest. The petitioner states that he was carrying on an occupation as a
mechanic. He has been in detention from 08.11.1989.

The respondents have not filed any objection to this application.

We grant the petitioner a declaration that his rights under Articles 13 (2)
and (4) have been infringed, and direct the State to pay a sum of Rupees
seventeen thousand five hundred (Rs. 17,500) to the petitioner as
compensation.

It is hoped that in future this Court will not be furnished with incorrect
information as happened in this case. Counsel representing the respondents are
cautioned to obtain written

163

confirmation of information given to them by the respondents. The Registrar is
directed to forward copies of this order to the 3rd and 4th respondents for
appropriate action in that regard.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.

  
**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Case restored and relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/11.html_  

