##  Seetha Weerakoon v. Mahendra, O.I.C. Police Station, Galagedera and Others
- SLR - 172, Vol 2 of 1991 [1991] LKSC 11; (1991) 2 Sri LR 172 (29 July 1991)

**172**

** **

## SEETHA WEERAKOON

**v.**

**MAHENDRA, O.I.C. POLICE STATION,**

**GALAGEDERA AND OTHERS**

** **

SUPREME COURT.

BANDARANAYAKE,  J., FERNANDO,  J.,  KULATUNGA, J.

S. C APPLICATION NO. 36/90

MAY 03, AND JUNE 04, 1991.



Fundamental Rights ‑ Illegal arrest and detention ‑ Articles 13(1) and (2) of
the Constitution ‑ Failure to produce before Magistrate under Regulation 19(1)
of the Emergency Regulations.



The petitioner and her sister were arrested on 12th August, 1989 and handed
over to the Galagedera Police Station of which the 1st respondent was
'in‑charge. She was detained there till 27th August 1990 on which date the
Magistrate remanded her to fiscal's custody. The A.S.P. Kandy had earlier
issued a detention order under Regulation 19(2) of the Emergency Regu­lations
authorising detention of the petitioner for 90 days at the Galagedera Police
pending investigations into an offence under Regulation 23(c). This order
expired on 12.11.1989 but the petitioner's detention at the Galagedera Police
Station continued. On 28th February 1990 a detention order under Regulation
17(1) of the Emergency Regulations was issued by the Secretary Defence for
further detention of the petitioner to prevent her from acting in any manner
prejudicial to the national security or  to the maintenance of public order
and the 3rd respondent (IGP) made order that the detention be carried out at
Galagedera Police Station. Admittedly the petitioner was not, during the
period of her detention immediately following her arrest pro­duced before a
Magistrate as required by Regulation 19(1) of the Emergency Regulations.

** **

### 173



The Magistrate who had ordered the remand of the petitioner on 27.08.1990
extended the remand and eventually on 03.12.1990 released her. The Advisory
Committee that met to review the detention was itself in the dark as to the
reason for the detention. There was no detention order cover­ing the detention
when it met on 04.01.1990.



**Held:**



1.         The petitioner was being kept in continued detention under orders made mechanically without adequate grounds therefor.



2\.         If the offence for which the petitioner was arrested as set out in
the detention order is not specific in terms of the law and the Advisory
Commit­tee itself had not been aware of the reason for her arrest it also
supports her complaint that she was not informed of the reason for her arrest
as required by Article 13(1) of the Constitution.



3\.         There is no explanation for the failure to produce the petitioner
before the Magistrate within 30 days as required by Regulation 19(1) of the
Emer­gency Regulations.



4\.         A bare statement in the respondents affidavits that the petitioner
engaged in terrorist activity, or is a member of a subversive group or
con­ducted, anti‑government classes or engaged in anti‑government agitation
would not provide an adequate justification for the arrest and detention of
the petitioner. The Court should be furnished with the material or the
information on the basis of which the petitioner was arrested to enable the
Court to objectively determine the reasonableness of the suspicion which led
to such arrest. No such material has been placed before Court.



5\.         The arrest and detention of the petitioner are unlawful and
violative of her rights under Article 13(1) and (2) of the Constitution.



**Per Kulatunga,  J :**



"It is understandable that in suppressing insurgent activity, cor­don and
search operations may have to be conducted leading to the arrest of whole
groups of persons. Such persons may have to be detained pending
investigations; but care must be taken to ensure that persons in respect of
whom there is no evidence of involvement with any offence are released early;
they must not be forgotten or kept in prolonged detention as a matter of
expediency as happened in this cast.



**174**



            (6)        As the 1st respondent (OIC Galagedera Police Station) is also person­ally responsible for the infringement of the petitioner's fundamental rights he must pay the petitioner Rs. 2,500/‑ as a sanction for his conduct in addition to compensation by the State.



**Cases referred to:**



1.                  _Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam_ [1985] 1 Sri LR 100 



2.                  _Nanayakkara v. Henry Perera_ [1985] 2 Sri LR 375 



3.                  _  Nallanayagam v. Gunatillake_ [1987] 1 Sri LR 293



**APPLICATION** for violation of fundamental rights by illegal arrest and
det­ention.



_K. Thiranagama_ _with J. Hassan, Miss P. Nagendra_ and _A. Hettige_ for
Peti­tioner.



_D. S. Wijesinghe P.C._ with _Nihal Somasiri_ for 1st respondent.



_R. Arasekularatne S.S.C._ with _Y. Kodagoda_ for 2nd to 6th respondents.



_Cur.adv. vult._



July 29, 1991.



**KULATUNGA, J.**

** **

The petitioner who is a student preparing for the G.C.E. Advanced Level
Examination and her younger sister were arrested on 12.08.89 by army
personnel, from Uduwa Elotuw­awatte army camp. On 13.08.89 they were handed
over to the Galagedera Police Station in charge of the 1st respondent. The
petitioner complains that she was not informed of the reason for her arrest.
She states that her sister was released after 14 days but she was detained at
Galagedera Police Station until 27.08.90; that she was not shown any detention
order; but the police officers told her that her period of detention was being
extended every month. In consequence of representations made by Ukku Banda the
petitioner's father, he was summoned to



### 175



appear before the Advisory Committee under Regulation 17(4) of the Emergency
Regulations on 04.01.1990. In his affidavit (P3) Ukku Banda says that the
members of the Advisory Committee inquired from him as to the incidents that
occurred in the village and the reason for the petitioner's detention to which
he replied that there were no incidents there and that there was no reason for
the petitioner's arrest.



At first, the petitioner's parents were not permitted to see her regularly.
They were allowed to see her only once namely on 04.02.90. They were permitted
to visit her only after the representatives of the International Committee of
the Red Cross visited Galagedera Police Station in June, 1990. The petitioner
herself made representations for her release and received a reply dated
16.08.90 from the Principal Staff Officer, Operational Headquarters, Ministry
of Defence informing that her case had been referred to the Committee for
clas­sification, separation, rehabilitation and release for necessary action.
However, on 27.08.90 she was produced before the Magistrate's Court of Kandy
and was remanded. Thereafter she was kept at the remand prison, Kandy. On
06.09.90 she filed this petition alleging infringement of her fundamental
rights secured by Article 13(1), (2) and (4).



The 1st respondent (Officer‑in‑Charge of Galagedera Police Station) states
that on 13.08.89 Lieutenant Dikkumbura of the army unit at Uduwa handed over
the petitioner and her sister to the Galagedera Police. The same day the
Assistant Superin­tendent of Police, Kandy issued a detention order under
Regu­lation 19(2) of the Emergency Regulations authorising the 1st respondent
to detain the petitioner for 90 days at the Galaged­era Police Station pending
investigations into an offence under Regulation 23(c) (3R1). This order
expired on 12.11.89 but the petitioner continued to remain in detention at the
Police Sta­tion without any order for such detention until 08.02.90 when an
order under Regulation 17(1) of the Emergency Regulations was made by the
Secretary Defence for further detention of



**176   **



the petitioner to prevent her from acting in any manner preju­dicial to the
national security or for the maintenance of public order (2R4); and 3rd
respondent (The Inspector‑General of Police) directed that the petitioner be
detained at the Galaged­era Police Station. Admittedly, the petitioner was
not, during the period of her detention immediately following her arrest,
produced before a Magistrate as required by Regulation 19(1) of the Emergency
Regulations.



The 1st respondent's explanation for the detention of the petitioner without
any order therefor between 13.11.89 and 08.02.90 is that it is the Counter
Subversive Unit Kandy that attends to the obtaining of detention orders. After
making inquiries at the Counter Subversive Unit he expected to receive a
further order. Such orders are in practice invariably received at the Police
Station some time after the expiry of the current order; and the order 4R2 had
been issued late due to a delay by the Counter Subversive Unit in forwarding
their application to the Secretary, Ministry of Defence. The 1st respondent
gives no explanation for his failure to produce the petitioner before a
Magistrate as required by law. Mr. D. S. Wijesinghe, learned President's
Counsel appearing for him submitted as a possible explanation for this lapse
the fact that such failure may have been occasioned by want of instructions
from the Counter Subversive Unit whose instructions he car­ried out in all
such matters.



On 27.08.90 the 1st respondent produced the petitioner before the Magistrate's
Court of Kandy with a `B' report No. 29441/90 (P6) wherein he stated __



(a)        that he was investigating the complaint of the Uduwa army unit made
on 13.08.89 regarding the suspect who had been arrested for subversive
activity and handed over to him for further investigations;



(b)        that further investigations are being made;



### 177



(c)        that he was holding her under an order made in terms of Regulation
17(1) of the Emergency Regulations.



On that day the 1st respondent also moved for an order remanding the
petitioner to Fiscal custody pending further investigations. The Magistrate
made an order for her remand until 10.09.90 which was subsequently extended
until 03.12.90 on which date she was released from Fiscal Custody.



To a question by Court as to why the petitioner who was detained at the
Galagedera Police Station under a preventive detention order was produced
before a Magistrate the learned President's Counsel said that this was done on
the instructions of the Counter Subversive Unit. However, the petitioner
alleges in her further affidavit dated 12.04.91 that by so producing her the
1st respondent has misled the Magistrate to issue an order for her remand to
Fiscal Custody.



As justification for the detention of the petitioner, the 1st respondent
states that the investigations made by his subordi­nate officers regarding the
petitioner revealed information that she was involved in terrorist activities
with one Kalyani Saram an organiser of the J.V.P., that in her statement the
petitioner stated that the said Kalyani and another had met her and soli­cited
her support for subversive activities which she declined; and that while eight
terrorist suspects including the petitioner were in custody there was an
attack on the Galagedera Police Station which the police repelled by firing
back. The police believe this attack to be an attempt to free the suspects who
were in custody.



The 2nd respondent (the Army Commander) states that the petitioner and her
younger sister were arrested by Lieutenant Dikkumbura in a cordon and search
operation on information' regarding subversive activity after which they were
handed over to the Galagedera Police Station.



The 3rd respondent (I.G.P.) states that in February 1990 he received an
application from the Superintendent of Police



### 178



Kandy for a detention order against the petitioner under Regu­lation 17(1) of
the Emergency Regulations which he forwarded to the Secretary, Ministry of
Defence. The 4th respondent states that the said application (4R1) had been
received by his predecessor in office on 08.02.90 pursuant to which the
deten­tion order 4R2 was made. In 4R1 S.P. Kandy states that there is material
to show that the petitioner had joined subversive groups and conducted
anti‑government classes, recruited members for subversive groups and engaged
in anti­government agitation. He recommends a preventive detention order on
the basis of such allegations.



Mr. Thiranagama, learned Counsel for the petitioner sub­mitted that the arrest
and detention of the petitioner are unlawful and violative of Article 13(1)
and (2) of the Constitu­tion, for the following reasons:



1\.         There are no valid grounds for her arrest; hence there is no
justification for it. State has failed to produce any material warranting her
arrest for an offence under Reg­ulation 23(c). Consequently, the detention
order 3R1 is unlawful. There is also no detention order covering the period
from 13.11.89 to 08.02.90.



2\.         In any event, the police have failed to produce the peti­tioner
before a Magistrate not later than thirty days after her arrest as required by
Regulation 19(1) and hence her detention under order 3R1 is bad.



_Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam_ (1)  


_Nanayakkara v. Henry Perera_ (2)  


_Nallanayagam v. Gunatilake_ (3)



3\.         The order 4R2 is not based on adequate material. It has been made
mechanically. The respondents themselves had not treated that order seriously
in that whilst it authorised the petitioner's detention at the Galagedera
Police Station she was remanded to Fiscal Custody on

### 179



the application of the Police and was thereafter released by the Magistrate
even without a revocation of the order.



Regulation 23(c) is in the following terms:



"Whoever in any manner overawes, influences, or coerces, or prepares,
conspires, or attempts to overawe, influence or coerce, any person with the
intention of including or compelling the government of Sri Lanka, The
President, a Member of Parliament, a member of the Police, a member of the
armed forces or a public officer, to exer­cise or refrain from exercising in
any manner the lawful powers of the government of Sri Lanka, The President,
such Member of Parliament, member of the Police, member of the armed forces or
public officer shall be guilty of an offence ...."



The offence so created is punishable with death or rigorous imprisonment upto
twenty years and the forfeiture of all prop­erty. A mere reference in the
detention order to Regulation 23(3) does not sufficiently clarify the nature
of the act for which the petitioner was arrested. A bare statement in the
respondents' affidavits that she engaged in terrorist activity, or is a member
of a subversive group or conducted anti­government agitation would not provide
an adequate justifica­tion for the arrest and detention of the petitioner. The
Court should be furnished with the material or the information on the basis of
which the petitioner was arrested to enable the Court to objectively determine
the reasonableness of the suspi­cion which led to such arrest. No such
material has been placed before this Court; and Mr. Arasekularatne, learned
Senior State Counsel conceded the existence of such infirmity in the case for
the respondents. He also conceded that the material furnished to justify the
detention order 4R2 is also limited to bare statements in affidavits.



### 180



It was stated from the Bar that in justifying the petitioner's arrest the
respondents are handicapped by the fact that Lieut­enant Dikkumbura who
arrested her is not available as he is engaged in operations. I am unable to
accept this statement in mitigation of the infringement of the petitioner's
rights. The State had over six months to obtain Lieutenant Dikkumbura's
affidavit. If he was engaged in operations during that entire period, an
affidavit to that effect should have been filed. This has not been done. In
any event, the 1st respondent has said that the police have themselves
investigated the allegations against the petitioner and even referred to the
pages of the information book. If so, it was open to the State to have
fur­nished to this Court the material disclosed in such investiga­tions;
relevant extracts of the information book could have been produced; but none
of this has been done. As such, the impugned arrest and detention have to be
regarded as unjusti­fied.



The detention under the order 3R1 is bad for the failure to produce the
petitioner before a Magistrate which is a require­ment under the procedure
established by law for the arrest and detention of suspects. (Regulation 18(1)
& 19(1) of the Emer­gency Regulations). Referring to this requirement
Wanasun­dera J. said __



"It is more than a mere formality or an empty ritual, but is generally
rebognised by all communities committed to the Rule of Law as an essential
component of human rights and fundamental freedoms".



( _Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam_ (1) p. 118)



At page 120 he said __



"It behoves us therefore to see that provisions such as this, safeguarding
human rights and human freedom are exactly complied with".



### 181





In _Nallanayagam v. Gunatilake_ (3) this Court held the non­production of the
detenu before a Magistrate as required by Regulation 19(1) to be a violation
of Article 13(2) of the Con­stitution. Colin Thome J, said (p.298) __



"Article 13(2) embodies a salutary principle safeguarding the life and the
liberty of the subject and must be exactly complied with by the executive. In
our view this provi­sion cannot be overlooked or dismissed as of little
con­sequence or as a minor matter".



I am of the view that want of instructions from the Coun­ter Subversive Unit
is not, as learned President's Counsel sug­gested, a valid explanation for the
1st respondent's failure to produce the petitioner before a Magistrate; nor is
it open to the 1st respondent to seek to justify the needless production of
the petitioner before the Magistrate's Court on 27.08.90 on the ground that
this was done on the instructions of the Counter Subversive Unit. As on that
day she was in preventive deten­tion at the Galagedera Police Station and the
police had no lawful authority to apply for her remand to Fiscal Custody
contrary to the terms of the detention order 4R2. Such conduct gives credence
to the allegation that the police themselves did not treat the order 4R2
seriously.



It is also relevant to note that when the petitioner's father Ukku Banda
appeared before the Advisory Committee on 04.01.90 there was no detention
order covering the petitioner's detention. If the Committee was seriously
reviewing her det­ention the absence of a detention order should have come to
light. Nothing like that happened which gives credence to the version of Ukku
Banda that the Committee itself was in the dark as regards the reason for her
detention which made them inquire from him what the reason was. No affidavit
by the respondents denying this version has been filed. In the circumstances,
there is substance in the submission that the petitioner was being kept in
continued detention under orders made mechanically, without adequate grounds
therefor.



### 182



If the offence for which the petitioner was arrested as set out in the
detention order is not specific in terms of the law and the Advisory Committee
itself had not been aware of the reason for her arrest it also supports her
complaint that she was not informed of the reason for her arrest as required
by Article 13(1) of the Constitution.



For the above reasons, I determine that the arrest and det­ention of the
petitioner are unlawful and violative of her rights under Article 13(1) and
(2) of the Constitution.



In deciding upon the relief to be granted to the petitioner I take the
following matters into consideration. Without doubt some allowance has to be
given to the forces and the police in the matter of arrest during insurgent
activity. Whilst the Court will strike down unlawful acts violative of
fundamental rights, nothing will be done which would have a chilling effect on
the conduct of law enforcement agencies who are faced with numerous
difficulties in the maintenance of the national secur­ity or public order
against subversive activity. It is understan­dable that in suppressing
insurgent activity cordon and search operations may have to be conducted
leading to the arrest of whole groups of persons. Such persons may have to be
detained pending investigations; but care must be taken to ensure that persons
in respect of whom there is no evidence of involvement with any offence are
released early; they must not be forgotten or kept in prolonged detention as a
matter of expediency as happened in this case. The petitioner was detained at
the Police Station for one year which detention is illegal for more than one
reason until the Magistrate released her; but the Magistrate cannot by such
release invalidate the detention order 4R2. If there was no objection to the
release of the petitioner the appropriate course was that the Secretary should
have revoked 4R2. This has not been done up to date. However in view of my
determination that the petitioner's det­ention is illegal that order stands
quashed.





### 183



In all the circumstances, I am of the view that the peti­tioner is entitled to
a sum of Rs. 20,000/‑ (Rupees Twenty Thousand) as compensation; I direct the
State to pay her the said sum. The evidence establishes that the 1st
respondent is also personally responsible for the infringement of the
petitioner's fundamental rights. As a sanction for such conduct, I direct him
to pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 2,500/‑ (Rupees Two Thousand Five Hundred)
as costs.



**Bandaranayake, J. __** I agree.



**Fernando, J.** **__**    I agree.



_**Application allowed. Compensation ordered.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/11.html_  

