##  Cannosa Investments Limited. v. Earnest Perera and Others - SLR - 214, Vol
2 of 1991 [1988] LKSC 11; (1991) 2 Sri LR 214 (15 December 1988)

**214**

** **

## CANNOSA INVESTMENTS LIMITED

**v.**

**EARNEST PERERA AND OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT.

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J., DHEERARATNE, J. AND RAMANATHAN, J.,

S. C. APPLICATION 12/90,

MAY 18, 21, 23, JUNE 06, JULY, 02, 10, 27, AUGUST 29,

SEPTEMBER 07, 14, 18, 20 AND 21 1990.



Fundamental Rights ‑ Executive and administrative action ‑ Right to run casino
‑ Search Warrant ‑ Section 5(1) of the Gaming Ordinance ‑ Acting in pursuance
of judicial order ‑ Mala fides ‑ Wrongful exercise of judicial dis­cretion.



Under Section 5(1) of the Gaming Ordinance a Magistrate has to be sat­isfied
upon written information on oath and after such further inquiry as may be
necessary, that there is good reason to believe that the place to be searched
is kept or used as a common gaming place. It is only then the mag­istrate can
issue a search warrant.



### 215



            Even if a search warrant is improperly obtained from a magistrate for a collateral purpose and mala fide there is no infringement of a fundamental right. Where the action complained of is in consequence of the wrongful exercise of a judicial discretion even on false material furnished to a judge maliciously, such action will not attract the provisions of Article 126 of the Constitution. The violation must be by administrative or executive action.



**Cases referred to:**



1\.         _Leo Fernando v. Attorney ‑General_ [1985] 2 Sri LR 341.  


2\.         _Kumarasinghe v. Attorney ‑General_ SC Minutes of 06.09.1982.  


3\.         _Dayananda. v. Weerasinghe_ 2 FRD 292.  


4\.         _Dharmatillake v. Abeyanayake and Others_ SC 156/86 ‑ SC Minutes
of

15.12.1988.  


5\.         _Velmurugu v. Attorney ‑General_ IFRD 180.  


6.          _Perera v. U.G.C._ 1 FRD 103.   


7.         _Wijetunga v. Insurance Corporation_ [1982] 1 Sri LR 374.   


8.         _Saman v. Leeladasa and Another_ [1989] 1 Sri LR 1.



**APPLICATION** under Article 126 of the Constitution for violation of
fundamental rights.



_H. L. de Silva_ PC with _E. D. Wickramanayake_ , _A. Tittawela_ and _Kushan
de Alwis_ for petitioner.

           

_Faiz Mustapha_ PC with _S. Mahenthiran_ , _S. Kongahage_ and _Mahanama de
Silva_ for 4 and 5 respondents.



_Upawansa Yapa_ , Deputy Solicitor General with _Kolitha Dharmawar­dena_ ,
S.C. and _Kalinga Indatissa_ S.C. for the other respondents.



_Cur.adv.vult._

October 10, 1990.



**H. A. G. DE SILVA, J. read the following judgment of the Court:**

**  **

This is an application by the petitioner for relief under Article 126 of the
Constitution.



The petitioner is a company registered in Hong Kong and claims the right to
run a casino styled "Le Casino" located at the Galadari Meridien Hotel on the
roof top floor.



### 216



            The petitioner alleges that on the 6th April, 1990 at about 8.30 p.m. a party of Policemen which included the 4th and 5th respondents entered the said casino and took into custody sev­eral persons, equipment, furniture and money which were in the premises. The petitioner made inquiries from the Magis­trate's Court and was informed that the Police had obtained a search warrant for the purpose of entering the premises. How­ever the Magistrate has since informed this Court that she had issued the search warrant inadvertently without compliance with Section 5(1) of the Gaming Ordinance (cap. 59) which stipulates that a Magistrate has to be satisfied upon written information on oath and after such further inquiry which may be necessary that there is good reason to believe that the place to be searched is kept or used as a common gaming place.



It was also submitted by counsel for the petitioner that the 4th and 5th
respondents had acted mala fide for a collateral purpose in collusion with a
business rival of the petitioner company by the name of Leisure World. It was
submitted that these respondents had concealed from the Magistrate the fact
that the casino was located within the premises of Galadari Meridien and had
obtained the search warrant by falsely des­cribing it as a social club. The
case for the petitioner company was that the application for a search warrant,
the search itself and the institution of criminal proceedings had been
effected, not with the objective of enforcing the law, but to advance the
business interests of Leisure World.



Learned counsel for the petitioner states that no mala fides or impropriety
was imputed to the Magistrate. He submitted that as the Magistrate had acted
honestly and in the purported exercise of a jurisdiction which she possesses,
the order issuing a search warrant was a judicial act and therefore outside
the scope of Article 126 of the Constitution. He went on to argue however that
the execution of the search warrant by the 4th and 5th respondents was not so
protected, inasmuch as it had been secured and executed mala fide and
therefore constituted "executive action" within the meaning of Article 126.



### 217



            However, counsel for the respondents contended that as the 4th and 5th respondents had entered upon the casino in obe­dience to a search warrant issued by the Magistrate, such action being in pursuance of judicial process did not constitute "executive or administrative" action within the meaning of Article 126 of the Constitution. Counsel contended that in any event mala fides did not convert such action into "executive or administrative action" and that the question of mala fides was irrelevant in so far as these proceedings were concerned.



The preliminary question for determination in this case is whether the entry
by the 4th and 5th respondents upon the casino constitutes "executive or
administrative action" within the meaning of Articles 17 and 126 of the
Constitution. These read as follows:



Article 17 __                  "Every person shall be entitled to apply tothe
Supreme Court, as provided by Article 126, in respect of the infringement or
imminent infringement, by executive or               administrative action, of
a fundamental right to which such person is entitled under the pro­ visions of
this Chapter".

           

Article 126 (1) __             "The Supreme Court shall have sole and
exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine any question relating to the
infringement or imminent infringement by executive or administrative action of
any fundamental right or language right declared and recog­nized by Chapter
III or Chapter IV".



Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the judge­ment of this Court in
_Leo Fernando v. Attorney ‑General_ (1) and submitted that Police Officers who
acted in pursuance of a judicial order would be immune from liability for the
violation of a fundamental right only if they acted in good faith, not knowing
the Magistrate's order to be invalid. His principal



**218**



contention was that where there was mala fides on the part of the Police
Officer, such acts would not be outside the reach of Article 126 of the
Constitution.



We shall now consider some of the decisions of this Court which have a bearing
on this issue. In _Kumarasinghe v. Attorney ‑General_ (2) reported in
Fundamental Rights and the Constitution. (supra) Wimalaratne, J stated as
follows:  


"I am of the view that there has been a violation of the fundamental right
guaranteed by Article 13(2) of the Constitution but this violation has been
more in conse­quence of the wrongful exercise of judicial discretion as a
result of a misleading police report. Although we are unable to grant the
petitioner the relief prayed for, we award him costs in a sum of Rs. 750/‑,
payable by the respondents".



The approach of Justice Wimalaratne was followed in the case of _Dayananda v.
Weerasinghe_ (3). Ratwatte, J stated:



"The question that arises for consideration is whether, though the remand
orders were made by a judicial officer, the petitioner is entitled to relief
on the ground, as alleged by him that the remand orders were made as a result
of the wrongful acts of the 1st and 2nd respon­dents".



Justice Ratwatte went on to state that __  



"I do not think it is necessary to consider the allegations of the petitioner
that the 1st and 2nd respondents were actuated by malice and ill will towards
him. The fact remains that the remand orders were made by the Mag­istrate in
the exercise of his judicial discretion. Even if such orders were made on
false or misleading reports it does not help the petitioner in this case
because orders made by a Judge in the exercise of his judicial discre­tion do
not come within the purview of the special





**219**



                        jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 126 of the Constitution even though such orders may be the result of a wrongful exercise of the Judge's judicial discretion".



In the case of _Dharmatilleke v. Abeyanayake and others_ (4) the petitioner
complained of violations of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles
13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution. The petitioner had gone to the police
station in response to a message from the O.L.C. and was arrested by a
Sergeant under a warrant issued by the High Court. The petitioner was a senior
public servant and the warrant had been issued for a failure to attend the
High Court as a prosecution witness. There had been an exchange of words
between the petitioner and the Police sergeant prior to the arrest. The
petitioner alleged she had not been informed of the reason for her arrest. The
petitioner had been remanded on the application of the Police for 15 days
whereas she could have been produced before the High Court the very next day.
The Court held that this had been deliberately done by the 1st respondent
Police Officer. She was granted relief under Article 13(1) as she had not been
informed of the reason for her arrest. The petitioner however did not obtain
any relief for wrongful detention and remand as this was in consequence of 'a
judicial order.



On a consideration of the above cases it would appear to be well established
that where an action complained of is in consequence of the wrongful exercise
of a judicial discretion even on false material furnished to a Judge
maliciously, such action will not attract the provisions of Article 126 of the
Constitution.



Finally, we shall examine the decision in the case of _Leo Fernando vs.
Attorney ‑General _(1). The petitioner was seated in the well of the
Magistrate's Court witnessing a case involv­ing two other parties but
pertaining to the estate of which the petitioner was the Superintendent. The
Attorney‑at‑Law appearing for one of the parties had informed Court that the



**220**



petitioner had intimidated his client's wife. The Magistrate had thereupon
ordered the detention of the petitioner in the Court cell. The petitioner
complained of the violations of fundamen­tal rights guaranteed under the
Constitution.



Colin Thome, J.having made an exhaustive analysis of the liability of Judges
in respect of delict and under the Criminal Law, referred to the
interpretation given by this Court to the­term executive or administrative'
action in the cases of _Vel­murugu v. Attorney ‑General_ (5), _Perera vs.
U.G.C._ (6) and _Wijetunga v. Insurance Corporation_ (7). He cited with
appro­val the observation of Sharvananda, J. (as he then was) in Wijetunga's
case to the following effect:__



"The question whether the Insurance Corporation is or is not virtually a
department of the State or servant of the Government would depend on the
provisions of the Insurance Corporation Act, No. 2 of 1961. Hence, we have to
analyse this to determine the nature of its func­tion, precise degree of
control by the government and whether the amount of control establishes the
identity of the Corporation as a part of the Government".



His Lordship concluded that ___



"The principle emerging from the judgements is that the test is the nature of
the function and degree of con­trol". (vide page 357)



Applying therefore the function and control test, Colin Thorne, J. held that
as the Magistrate was not subject to Government or Ministerial control his
judicial order was not subject to review under Article 126 of the
Constitution. His Lordship did not consider the liability of the other
respondents independent of that of the Magistrate and dismissed the
appli­cation against all respondents.



Justice Ranasinghe (as he then was) while agreeing that the order of the
Magistrate was a judicial order and that the Mag‑



### 221



istrate was immune from liability went on to consider the lia­bility of the
Prisons Officer. His Lordship pointed out that the Prison Officer had acted
entirely in obedience to a direction given by the Magistrate and that it had
not been urged that he was influenced by any improper motive. Referring to the
decision in _Kumarasinghe v. Attorney ‑General_ (2), Ranasinghe, J noted that
the Court had not granted relief in that case for a violation as it had been
more the consequence of a wrongful exercise of judicial discretion as a result
of a misleading report (page 374) and held that the petitioner's claim must
fail. But Ranasinghe, J went on to make the following observation:



"The position of an officer of the State, who in the course of carrying out an
order made by a Judge in the exercise of his judicial functions violates the
fundamental right of a person, is that he would be free from lia­bility if in
doing so, he has acted in good faith, not knowing that the said order is
invalid". (vide page 374).



On an analysis of the above cases it would appear that the liability for
violation of fundamental rights in consequence of judicial orders had been
settled by the decisions of this Court, in _Kumarasinghe v. Attorney ‑General_
(2), _Dayananda v. Wee­rasinghe_ (3), and _Dharmatilleke v. Abeyanayake and
Others_ (4).



This Court, in all these cases has not severed the liability of Ministerial
officers as _distinct_ from the judicial order to which the act complained of
was referrable. Ranasinghe J, has approved the test adopted in _Kumarasinghe
v. Attorney ‑General_ (2), and as such his views expressed in regard to the
liability of a Ministerial Officer who acts mala fide in execu­tion of a
judicial order appear to be obiter.



We therefore prefer to rest our decision on, the view hithertofore expressed
by this Court that a violation arising in consequence of a judicial order even
if maliciously obtained, would not attract liability under Article 126 of the
Constitu‑



### 222



tion. The obiter dicta of Ranasinghe, J. would merit considera­tion by a
Fuller Bench.



In the case of _Saman v. Leeladasa and another_ (8) Amera­singhe, J (with His
Lordship Ranasinghe, C. J. agreeing) fol­lowed the opinions hitherto expressed
by this Court and held that the basis of the liability of the State for
violations of fun­damental rights by its officers was _sui generis_ and not
delic­tual. Seizing upon this, learned counsel for the petitioner advanced the
argument that the fact that a ministerial officer acts in carrying out the
order of a Court is relevant only when determining the liability of the State
Officer in the sphere of tortious liability of the State for the act of the
officer in respect of the violation of a fundamental right.



In _Saman's_ case the petitioner stated that when he was in prison, he had
occasion to bathe at a water tank situated close to his cell. He was assaulted
by a Prisons Officer stating that he had no right to bathe there at that time.
He com­plained that the fundamental right guaranteed to him under Article 11
of the Constitution had been violated on the ground that the assault
constituted torture or cruel inhuman or degrading treatment. State Counsel who
represented the State sought to argue that the act of assault was an
unauthorised act and that therefore the State was not liable. Hence, the
ques­tion arose as to the principles upon which the State could be held liable
for the acts of an officer where such acts had not been expressly authorised.
Amerasinghe, J followed the views previously expressed by this Court and held
that it was a sui generis liability and that therefore the issue could not be
resolved by the application of the principle of master and ser­vant liability
in the law of torts. He held that, on that basis of liability, the act
complained of was sufficiently connected with the performance of the lawful
functions of the Prison Officer concerned and as such the State was liable.
Fernando, J whilst differing as to the basis of the liability of the State,
neverthe­less held that the State was liable on the facts of that case.



### 223



Hence, it would appear that the question which arose in that case did not
relate to the distinction between executive or administrative action and a
judicial act but as to whether the act complained of was sufficiently
proximate to the perfor­mance of the Officer's functions and the views
expressed in regard to the basis of State liability related to that particular
question. We are confronted with a different issue in this case and there is
no reason to depart from the view hitherto taken by this Court on this issue.



In view of the opinion we have already formed that the question of malice is
irrelevant, we do not propose to comment on the facts relied upon by the
petitioner in inviting us to draw any inference that the conduct of the 4th
and 5th respondents have been motivated by malice.



We wish to observe however that Magistrates and Police Officers alike should
pay scrupulous attention to the obser­vance, of the statutory pre‑ condition
for the issue of process conferring investigative powers on the Police. For
the above reasons we dismiss the application. We make no order for costs.



**H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.** __    I agree.



**DHEERARATNE, J.** __    I agree.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** __     I agree.



_**Application dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/11.html_  

