##  Lama Hewage Lal (Deceased) Rani Fernando (Wife of Decased Lal) and Others
Vs Officer-In-Charge, Minor Offences, Seeduwa Police Station and Others - SLR
- 40, Vol 1 of 2005 [2004] LKSC 11; (2005) 1 Sri LR 40 (26 July 2004)

**40**

**LAMA HEWAGE LAL (DECEASED)  
RANI FERNANDO (WIFE OF DECASED LAL) AND OTHERS  
vs  
OFFICER-IN-CHARGE, MINOR OFFENCES, SEEDUWA  
POLICE STATION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT,  
BANDARANAYAKE. J.  
DE SILVA. J. AND  
JAYASINGHE. J.  
S. C. (FR) APPLICATION NO. 700/2002  
17TH SEPTEMBER, 2003  
AND 14TH JUNE, 2004  
  
_     Fundamental Rights - Death of petitioner's husband whilst in prison
custody-Articles 11, 13 (4), 17 and 126 (2) of the Constitution - Right of
deceased's wife and/ or dependant to relief - Personal liability of prison
officers in addition to State liability. -International Conventions.  
_  
The 1st and 2nd respondents were officers attached to the Seeduwa Police
Station and the 3rd, 4th and 5th respondents were superior officers of the
Negombo prison.  
  
Deceased Lai was arrested by Police officers of the Seeduwa Police Station on
05.11.2002 on a charge of stealing two bunches of bananas. One Selton who was
found with the deceased was also arrested. Both of them were brought to the
Seeduwa Police Station and after recording statements they were produced
before the Magistrate at 3.00 p.m. on 06.11.2002. They were remanded and taken
to the Negombo Prison around 4.30 p.m.  
  
The wife of the deceased said that the Police officers assaulted the deceased
in the course of the arrest. But according to the evidence of Shelton, the
deceased's wife and the medical evidence fatal injuries constituting torture
which caused the deceased's death were inflicted within 48 hours of the
deceased's admission to the Negombo Prison. As a result the deceased could not
be taken to the Magistrate's Court on 08.11.2000. Shelton who was taken to
court was not told by the jailor the reason for the deceased's absence, but
the deceased's wife had seen him at the Prison Hospital Ward No. 4 with the
head covered in polythene ; a prison guard informed her that he was brought
from the hospital, dead. Shelton gave a graphic description of how the prison
officers had earlier handcuffed the deceased and shackled him to an iron gate
and assaulted him until he fell unconscious. The medical evidence supported
that version.

**41**

**Held:**  
  
1\. On a consideration of the previous judgments of the Supreme Court, Article
13 (4) and in particular Article 126 (2) of the Constitution should also be
read widely to enable the lawful heirs and/ or dependants to bring an action
where death has occurred as a result of violation of Article 11.  
  
2\. The deceased's fundamental rights under Articles 21 and 13 (4) have been
infringed and his rights have accrued to and/or devolved upon the petitioners.  
  
3\. The 3rd, 4th and 5th respondents failed to prevent the ill treatment of
the deceased in violation of the law, the Prison Rules and the relevant
International Conventions to which Sri Lanka is a party and Articles 11, and
13 (4) ; they are, therefore, personally, liable for the infringe ment of
Articles 11 and 13 (4) whilst the State shall bear a greater portion of the
liability for such infringements.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. Somawathie v. Weerasinghe (1990) 2 Sri LR 121  
  
2\. Sriyani Silva (Wife of Jagath Kumara, deceased) v Iddamalgoda, Officer in
charge, police station, Payagala and others (2003) 1 Sri L R 14  
  
3\. Saman v Leeladasa and Another (1989) Sri L R 1  
  
4\. Senthilnayagam v Seneviratne (1981) 2 Sri L R 187  
  
5\. Amal Sudath Silva v Kodituwakku (1987) 2 Sri L R 119  
  
6\. Dissanayake v Superintendent, Mahara Prison (1991) 2 Sri LR 247  
  
7\. Premalal de Silva v Inspector Rodrigo (1991)2 Sri L R 307  
  
8\. Pelawattage (AAL) for Piyasena v OIC Wadduwa S. C. Application No. 433/93
S. C. Minutes of 31.8.94  
  
9\. Thomas v Jamaica (Communication No. 366/1989) Views of UN Hun man Rights
Committee, 2nd November, 1993  
  
10\. Sriyani Silva v Iddamalgoda, Officer-in-Charge, Police Station, Payagla
and Others (2003) 2 Sri L R 63  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
J. C. Weliamuna with M. A. Sumanthiran and Shan S. Senanayake for petitioners  
  
Arjuna Kurukulasuriya for 3rd, 4th and 5th respondents.

**42**

K. A. P. Ranasinghe, State Counsel for 6th, 7th and 8th respondents  
  
J. M. Wijebandara for 9th respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult_

July 26,2004  
  
**SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
**  
This is an application filled by the wife and three minor children of one Lama
Hewage Lai who was arrested by the officials of the Seeduwa Police Station.
Subsequently he had died whilst in the custody of the Negombo Prison
officials. The petitioners alleged that the said Lama Hewage Lai (hereinafter
referred to as the deceased) died as a result of torture while in detention
and therefore at a time when he was deprived of his personal liberty. They
have prayed for a declaration that the deceased's fundamental rights
guaranteed by Articles 11,12(1), 13(2), 13(4) and 17 of the Constitution have
been violated. The petitioners have also claimed compensation the deceased
would have received, if not for his death, which according to the petitioners,
occurred due to the cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment meted out to him by
the prison officials in whose custody he was kept.  
  
This Court granted leave to proceed for the alleged infringement of Articles
11,13 (4) and 17 of the Constitution.  
  
The petitioner's case  
  
According to the petitioners, on or about 02.11.2002, Police Officers from the
Seeduwa Police Station informed the 1st petitioner to send the deceased to the
Police Station at 5 p.m. of the same evening for an inquiry. The deceased had
adhered to this request and at the Police Station he had been told that a
complaint was made against him stating that he had stolen two bunches of
bananas. As the complainants were not present at that time, the Police Officer
had told the deceased to leave the Police Station.  
  
On 05.11.2002, while the deceased was chopping firewood along with one Shelton
in the neighbourhood, three Police Officers from the Seeduwa Police Station
had arrested both of them and had taken them to the Police Station.

**43**

 The 1 st petitioner in her affidavit averred that both the deceased and
Shelton were assaulted inside the jeep while being taken to the Police
Station. In the evening of the same day the 1 st petitioner with a sister and
a brother of the deceased, namely, Malani and Vincent, and some of the friends
and relatives of the persons who were arrested went to the Police Station. The
1st petitioner averred that the deceased was badly beaten and that he could
not even drink the tea which was offered to him by them, as his hand was
swollen.  
  
Thereafter, the deceased and Shelton were produced before the Magistrate and
remanded on 06.11.2002 and had been taken to the Negombo Prison around 4.30
p.m. On 07.11.2002, when the 1st petitioner along with Malani and Vincent and
with few other friends and relatives, visited the Negombo Prison they could
not meet the deceased. Shelton however had informed them that the prison
officials had assaulted the petitioner severely.  
  
According to Shelton, on the morning of the 07th November, after the count for
the morning was taken, he and the deceased were seated on the ground outside
Ward No. 1. Whilst they were seated, two prison officers had come near them
and started assaulting. The deceased had started running towards the wall and
had run round Ward No. 1. The path he was taking was circular and the deceased
ended up in arriving at the place he started to run. By that time, the prison
officials were annoyed of the attempt made by the deceased and had hand-cuffed
him, had shackled him and had assaulted him until he fell unconscious. The two
officials had summoned two other inmates and they had carried away the
deceased and Shelton had not seen him until the following morning.  
  
On the 08th November, Shelton, along with the other inmates, was lined up to
be taken to Court. Although he inquired from a jailor about the deceased, he
did not get a favourable reply. However, when Shelton was passing Ward No. 1,
he saw the deceased tied to an iron gate. Even at that time the deceased was
had cuffed and his head had fallen to a side. Shelton was not allowed to get
close to the deceased and he was asked to join the others who were being taken
to Court.  
  
While Shelton was standing in the line to be taken to Court, two inmates were
carrying the deceased on a stretcher and had kept the stretcher

**44**

behind Shelton. He noticed that the deceased did not move and the 'panic
stricken' prison officials running around.  
  
At the Magistrate's Court the Police had informed the 1st petitioner, Vincent,
Malani and the others that the deceased would not be produced in Court as he
was sick and that they could visit him at the Negombo Hospital once Shelton is
released on bail. Although the 1st petitioner visited the hospital she could
not find the deceased.  
  
In the meantime Malani had found a body on a trolley in Ward No. 4. The head
of the body was covered in polythene. A prison guard was seated close by and
had informed Malani that the deceased was brought to the hospital and that he
was pronounced dead on admission.  
  
The 1st petitioner submitted that the deceased was subjected to torture,
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment while in detention at the Negombo
Prison by Prison Officials serving under the 3rd, 4th and 5th respondents in
violation of Article 11 of the Constitution.  
  
The respondents version  
  
The 9th respondent, who was the Sub-Inspector of the Minor Offences Branch, at
the Seeduwa Police Station, admitted that the deceased and another person were
arrested by him and by some other Police Officers on suspicion of a theft of
two bunches of bananas on 05th November at 10.15 p.m. After the arrest of the
deceased, according to the 9th respondent, the Police had taken prompt action
to record statements and thereafter to produce the deceased on 06.11.2002 at 3
p.m. before the Magistrate of Negombo. The Magistrate had ordered the deceased
and the other suspect to be remanded. Soon after, the deceased, along with the
other suspect, was handed over to the Negombo Prison.  
  
The 1 st to 5th and the 9th respondents took up the position that the
petitioners have no locus standi to proceed with this application as they do
not allege any violation of their fundamental rights, but only of the
violation of fundamental rights that of the deceased. The said respondent
referred to the majority decision in Somawathiev Weerasuriya(1) and the
minority decision which considered a preliminary objection prior to hearing,
in Kotabadu Durage Sriyani Silva v Chanaka iddamalgoda and others (2)

**45**

The question on 'locus stand? has been considered by this Court not only in
the decision which considered the preliminary objection in Kotabadu Durage
Sriyani Silva (Supra), but also in the final hearing of the same case (Supra).
It is therefore settled law that the lawful heirs and/or dependants of a
person who is deceased as a result of an act of torture should be entitled to
a declaration of the violation and compensation. This position would be
examined further in considering the violation of Article 13(4) of the
Constitution at a later stage.  
  
According to the submissions made on behalf of the petitioners, although the
deceased was assaulted by the Police Officers who arrested him on 05.11.2002,
the 1 st, 2nd and the 9th respondents had denied such allegation. More
importantly there is no medical evidence that has been produced by the
petitioners to substantiate the allegation of torture by the said Police
Officers. Learned Counsel for the petitioners had also informed this Court on
02.04.2003 that after perusing the MOIB of 05.11.2002 (pg. 241 and para 76)
that it became clear that the officer who arrested the deceased is SI
Nishantha and permission was granted to add him as the 9th respondent. Learned
Counsel also had submitted that the petitioners are not seeking relief
personally against the 1 st and 2nd respondents. At the hearing learned
counsel for the petitioners submitted that the petitioners will not be
proceeding against the 1 st, 2nd and 9th respondents. Therefore the allegation
on torture has to be considered from the time the deceased was handed over to
the officials of the Negombo Prison.  
  
Liability of the prison officials and the alleged violation of Article 11 of
the Constitution The 3rd, 4th and 5th respondents who are the Officer-in-
Charge, the Chief Jailor and the Superintendent of the Negombo Prison,
respectively, have denied all allegations of torture against them.  
  
**The 4th and 5th respondents admitted that the deceased was handed over to
Negombo Prison around 4.20 p.m. on 06.11.2002.**

 The 3rd respondent while admitting that the petitioner was handed over to
Negombo Prison around 4.30 p.m. on 06.11.2002 stated that the deceased had to
be restrained as he became restless, violent, uncontrollable and a danger to
other inmates and officers of the prison. He further submitted that the
violent fits the deceased experienced was due to lack of alcohol in blood,

**46**

a common phenomenon in the Negombo Prison. He further stated that excessive
force was not used to control the deceased.  
  
It is to be noted that the 3rd respondent was the Officer-in-Charge of the
Negombo Prison at the time the incident in question took place. Moreover there
is an admission by the 3rd respondent that although no excessive force was
used on the deceased, that he had to be restrained and controlled.  
  
The B Report filed by the Negombo Police on 14.11.2002 refers to the
investigations carried out by them on 12.11.2002. The Police had recorded a
statement made by Shelton who had referred to the incident that took' place in
the evening of 06.11.2002. The description given by Shelton to the Police is
similar to what is stated in the petition by the petitioners. This is further
corroborated by the affidavit given by Shelton on 05.12.2002 (P1).  
  
Moreover, at the Magisterial inquiry, Shelton had clearly described as to how
the deceased was assaulted by the Prison Officials. After describing the
initial assault on the deceased, he goes on to explain as to what took place
on the 07th November in the following words :

**47**

The aforementioned report clearly substantiates the position taken up by the
petitioners. Further it also confirms that at the time the deceased was
assaulted that he was not only handcuffed, but was also shackled.  
  
Learned Magistrate, Negombo had examined the injuries on the body of the
deceased prior to the post-mortem examination was conducted. According to his
observations in the area around the deceased's wrists and his ankles there had
been dark patches indicative of tightening of handcuffs and shackles. The left
hand was swollen and had been dark blue in colour. There were laceration marks
on his fingers and on his left knee.  
  
Learned Magistrate has also examined the scene of the incident and has
described it as follows :  
  
  
Preliminary report of the post-mortem examination was submitted by the
Consultant Judicial Medical Officer and the Assistant Judicial Medical Officer
of the General Hospital, Colombo-North (Ragama). The Judicial Medical Officers
in their report have stated that the deceased was found to be dead when
brought to the Base Hospital, Negombo at 9.35 a.m. on 08.11.2002. According to
them this was recorded in the admission sheet prepared by that hospital.

**48**

The Judicial Medical Officers have also given their opinion of the cause of
death, which is reproduced below:  
  
"Shock and haemorrhage due to extensive soft tissue injuries of the trunk and
limbs. These injuries are recent, blunt force-type injuries. They are
consistent with multiple, repeated blows with blunt weapon(s) and are
consistent with injury pattern seen and recorded in battering in custody.
There were external (skin) injuries in the wrists and ankles consistent with
injuries sustained due to hand cuff and/or legation with traction. No skeletal
injury found. Head and neck were almost free of injuries except few small
abrasions. No signs of significant natural illnesses. We are of further
opinion that these injuries could not have been sustained due to an ordinary
force being used for restraining ".............  
  
On a consideration of the evidence before this Court regarding the
circumstances in which the death of the deceased occurred, it is apparent that
although there were allegations by the petitioners that the deceased was
assaulted by the Police Officers, that at the time he was brought into the
Negombo Prison that he was not suffering of any injuries. The evidence before
this Court also reveals that from the time the deceased was brought to the
Negombo Prison he has been subjected to assault and the severest kind of
assault had taken place on the 7th November while the deceased was seated on
the ground outside ward No. 1 with Shelton.  
  
Considering the aforesaid evidence and circumstances, I am inclined to accept
the version submitted by the petitioners and I am of the view that the
deceased's death occurred due to the assault which took place in the Negombo
Prison on the O7th November 2002.  
  
Article 11 of the Constitution reads as follows :  
  
"No person shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment."  
  
Petitioners have alleged that the deceased was assaulted severely while he was
kept at the Negombo Prison and his death occurred as a result of such inhuman
treatment. The 3rd respondent, as referred to earlier, has stated that minimum
force had to be used as the deceased became violent and had to be restrained
and controlled. As it appears, the method of

**49**

restraining or controlling the deceased had been to handcuff and shackle him,
prior to assaulting the deceased mercilessly and to tie him to an iron door
while he was still in handcuffs and in shackles. In Saman v Leeladasa and
another(3) the petitioner while in prison custody at the Galle Prison was
assaulted by a Prison Guard while he was bathing and as a result had suffered
a fracture of his left arm and other injuries. This had been as a result of
repeated blows with the aid of a baton. This Court held that the petitioner
was subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in
violation of Article 11.  
  
The Supreme Court of Sri Lanka has clearly stated in Senthilnayagam v
Seneviratne{4) that 'even persons whose records are not particularly
meritorious' should irrespective of such records enjoy the constitutional
guarantee of personal liberty. In Amal Sudath Silva v Kodituwakku() it was
stated that even 'notorious' or 'hard core' criminals should not be subjected
to torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Atukorala, J. was of
the view that,  
  
"Every person in this country, be he a criminal or not, is en titled to this
right to the fullest content of its guarantee Nothing shocks the conscience of
a man so much as the cowardly act of a delinquent Police Officer who subjects
a helpless suspect in his charge to depraved and barbarous methods of
treatment within the confines of the very premises in which he is held in
custody The petitioner may be a hard-core criminal whose tribe de serve no
sympathy, but if constitutional guarantees are to have any meaning or value in
our democratic set-up, it is essential that he be not denied the protection
guaranteed by our Constitution."  
  
Since the decision in Amal Sudath Silva (Supra) where this Court held that the
petitioner's fundamental rights guaranteed in terms of Article 11 of the
Constitution had been violated, several cases had followed the dictum that the
position or the petitioner's standing in the society should not be taken into
consideration in deciding whether there has been a violation of his
fundamental rights. (Dissanayakev Superintendent, Mahara Prisons (6) Premalal
de Silva v Inspector Rodrigo(7) Pellawattage [AAL] for Piyasena v OIC, Wadduwa
(8)  
  
The allegation against the deceased was that he had stolen two bunches of
bananas. However, as has been decided in several cases, this position

**50**

would not be a matter that should be taken into account when considering
whether there has been a violation of his fundamental rights guaranteed by the
Constitution.  
  
It is to be remembered that at the time of the incident the deceased was an
inmate of the Negombo Prison and was in the charge of the Prison authorities.  
  
In Thomas v Jamaica(9) where a prisoner, who was awaiting execution was
assaulted with a rifle butt and stabbed with a bayonet by soldiers conducting
a search of a prison. His clothes were also torn and was thrown back into his
cell. No medical treatment was given to him. It was held by the UN Human
Rights Committee that the treatment to be degrading and contrary to Article 7
as well as Article 10 of International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.  
  
Admittedly in the present case under consideration, the deceased had not been
in the prison for even a few hours before he was assaulted by some of the
officers. In a matter of less than 48 hours after being brought into the
Negombo Prison the deceased had passed away. The medical evidence, clearly
indicates that the deceased could not have sustained the injuries he had
suffered due to an "ordinary force being used for restraining" . Considering
the fact that the deceased was in good health at the time he was handed over
to the Negombo Prison ; that he was severely assaulted by some of the Prison
Officials ; that his death had occurred within a short period thereafter and
the circumstances on which the deceased has come to his death, it is apparent
that his death was as a result of the assault on him while he was at the
Negombo Prison.  
  
Assault on a prisoner by Prison Officers, who are officials of the State must
be considered to be an especially grave form of ill-treatment. This indicates
that the officers concerned have exploited the vulnerability of the victim.  
  
The Rules relating to Jail Guards contained in the Prisons Ordinance refer to
the duties of such officers and section 132 states clearly that,  
  
"It shall be the duty of all Prison Officers, without exception, to treat the
prisoners with kindness and humanity, to inform the Jailor at his next visit
of any prisoner who desires to see him."

**51**

There have been several International Covenants and Declarations concerned
with the rights of the prisoners. The General Assembly Resolution 43/174 of
9th December 1988 adopted the UN Body of Principles for the Protection of All
Persons under any Form of Detention or Imprisonment.  
  
The United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders had adopted the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners (adopted at the Congress held in Geneva in 1955 and approved by the
Economic and Social Council by its resolutions 663 C (XXIV) of 31 st July 1957
and 2076 (LXII) of 13th May 1977). These Standard Minimum Rules refer to
Discipline and Punishment and states that,  
  
"Rule 27 - Discipline and order shall be maintained with firmness, but with no
more restriction than is necessary for safe custody and well ordered community
life Rule 31 - Corporal punishment, punishment by placing in a dark cell, and
all cruel, inhuman or degrading punishments shall be completely prohibited as
punishments for disciplinary offences."  
  
The Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners also refers to the
Instruments of Restraint and Rule 33 reads thus :  
  
"Instruments of restraint, such as handcuffs, chains, irons and strait-
jackets, shall never be applied as a punishment. Furthermore, chains or irons
shall not be used as restraints. Other instruments of restraint shall not be
used except in the following circumstances :  
  
(a) As a precaution against escape during a transfer, provided that they shall
be removed when the prisoner appears before a judicial or administrative
authority ;  
  
(b) On medical grounds by direction of the medical officer;  
  
(c) By order of the director, if other methods of control fail, in order to
prevent a prisoner from injuring himself or others or from damaging property;
in such instances the director shall at once consult the medical officer and
report to the higher administrative authority."

**52**

Considering the Rules contained in the Prisons Ordinance and the Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners adopted by the first United
Nations Congress, it is quite obvious that the Prison Officers are bound not
only to perform such duties for the purpose of preserving discipline and
enforcing diligence, cleanliness, order and conformity to the rules of the
prison, but also to treat the prisoners with kindness and humanity.  
  
On a consideration of all the facts and circumstances of this case referred to
above, I hold that the deceased's fundamental rights guaranteed in terms of
Article 11 were violated, while he was detained at the Negombo Prison.  
  
**The alleged violation of Article 13 (4) of the Constitutor)  
**  
The petitioners have alleged that the deceased's fundamental right guaranteed
in terms of Article 13 (4) of the Constitution was violated by the actions of
the 3rd, 4th and 5th respondents.  
  
Article 13 (4) of the Constitution reads as follows :  
  
"No person shall be punished with death or imprisonment except by order of a
competent Court, made in accordance with procedure established by law, and
shall not be further held in custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty
except upon and in terms of the order of such judge made in accordance with
procedure established by law."  
  
A careful reading of Article 13 (4) of the Constitution clearly reveals that
no person should be punished with death or imprisonment except by an order of
a competent Court. Accordingly if there is no order from such a Court no
person should be punished with death and unless and otherwise such an order is
made by a competent Court, any person has a right to live. Considering the
contents of Article 13 (4) of the Constitution, Fernando, J. In Kotabadu
Durage Sriyani Silva v Chanaka Iddamalgoda, Officer-in-Charge, Police Station
Payagala(10) stated that, "expressed positively, that provision means that a
person has a right to live, unless a Court orders otherwise".  
  
Furthermore, when Article 13 (4) of the Constitution creates a right to life,
even impliedly, there cannot be a situation where such right is without

**53**

a remedy. Referring to a creation of right by statute, Bindra, was of the view
that (Interpretation of Statutes, 7th Edition, pp. 729-730)  
"If a statute which creates a right does not prescribe a remedy for the party
aggrieved by the violation of such a right, a remedy will be implied and the
party aggrieved may have relief, in an appropriate action founded upon the
statute."  
  
As referred to in Kotabadu Durage Sriyani Silva v Chanaka Iddamalgoda,
Officer-in-Charge, Police Station, Payagala (Supra)(2)this concept viz., a
right must have a remedy is based on the principle which is accepted and
recognized by the maxim ubi jus ibi remedium, viz., 'there is no right without
a remedy'. One cannot therefore think of a right without a remedy as the right
of a person and the remedy based on the said right would be reciprocal.
Furthermore, when the rights of a person who has been subjected to torture or
to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is protected by Article
11 of the Constitution which could be treated as a lesser infringement
compared with the situation where death occurs as a result of torture or
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, it is difficult to
apprehend as to how the graver infringment could be ignored.  
  
On a consideration of the aforementioned positions as well as the decisions
taken in both judgments of Kotabadu Durage Sriyani Silva (Supra) I am of the
view that Article 13 (4) should be interpreted broadly to mean that the said
Article recognizes the right to life impliedly and that by reading Article 13
(4) with Article 126 (2) of the Constitution which would include the lawful
heirs and/or dependents to be able to bring in an action in a situation where
death had occurred as a result of violation of Article 11.  
Order  
  
For the aforesaid reasons I hold that the deceased's fundamental rights
guaranteed under Articles 11 and 13 (4) have been infringed and that his
rights have accrued to and/or devolved upon the petitioners.  
  
On a consideration of the circumstances of this case it is apparent that the
alleged assault and the consequent death occured at the Negombo Prison where
the deceased was incarcerated. However, although the 3rd, 4th and 5th
respondents have been named, there is no evidence as to who

**54**

had taken part in assaulting the deceased. Nevertheless, it is the
responsibility of the 3rd, 4th and 5th respondents to satisfy the basic
requirements pertaining to the safety of the deceased. The 3rd, 4th and the
5th respondents, as the Officer In Charge, the Chief Jailor and the
Superintendent of the Negombo prison, respectively, were under a duty to take
all reasonable steps to ensure that the persons kept in the Prison are treated
with kindness and humanity. Moreover, it is of paramount importance that the
lives of the prisoners are safeguarded. Although there should be discipline
and order that should be maintained with firmness, such discipline cannot
invoke punishments, which are inhuman and violative of Article 11 of the
Constitution. On a consideration of the totality of the circumstances of this
case, I declare that there had been dereliction of duties by the 3rd, 4th and
5th respondents for not being able to prevent the assault on the deceased by
some of the Prison Officials and therefore they too are responsible for the
infringement of the deceased's fundamental rights guaranteed in terms of
Articles 11 and 13 (4) of Constitution.  
  
In the circumstances, in evaluating the liability of the State, and personal
liability of the 3rd, 4th and 5th respondents, it would be necessary to
consider the basic material before this Court. The deceased was a father of 3
minor children and the treatment meted out to him while he was at the Negombo
Prison has painted a gruesom picture where a hapless prisoner was brutally
tortured and left alone tied to an iron door to draw his last breath. The
reason for his incarceration was stealing two bunches of bananas, valued at
Rs. 850, an offence punishable under section 367 of the Penal Code, which
reads thus :  
  
"whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both."  
  
The punishment meted out to the deceased was far in extent than what is
provided by section 367 of the Penal Code and more importantly it is to be
remembered that the deceasd, who was 36 years of age, faced his death while he
was in the custody of a State Prison at a time where he was deprived of his
personal liberty.  
  
I accordingly award the petitioners a sum of Rs. 1 million in equal shares as
compensation and costs of which a sum of Rs. 925,000 payable by the State and
Rs. 25,000 each payable by 3rd, 4th and 5th re-

**55**

spondents. These amounts to be paid within three months from today. The sum of
Rs. 250,000 each for the three minor children to be deposited in the National
Savings Bank, Negombo Branch in the name of the minor children in separate
accounts and the interest to be drawn monthly by the 1 st petitioner for the
maintenance of the children. The 2nd, 3rd and 4th petitioners (minor children)
should be entitled to the principal sum on majority.  
  
The Registrar of the Supreme Court is directed to send a copy of this judgment
to the Commissioner General of Prisons.

**DE SILVA, J.** I agree .

**JAYASINGHE, J.** I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/11.html_  

