##  Priyantha and Others V Ceylon Petroleum Corporation and Others - SLR -
383, Vol 2 of 2003 [2003] LKSC 11; (2003) 2 Sri LR 383 (12 September 2003)

**383**

**PRIYANTHA AND OTHERS  
V  
CEYLON PETROLEUM CORPORATION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
ISMAIL, J. AND  
JAYASINGHE, J. S.C.NO.103/2002 FR  
2 JULY, 2003  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Termination of petitioners' services on a Cabinet
decision \- Applicability of the Cabinet decision to the petitioners \-
Constitution, Article 12(1).  
_  
The services of the petitioners were terminated in January 2002 pursuant to a
Cabinet decision dated 26.12.2001 which nullified all appointments and
promotions during the period between the dissolution of Parliament and the
General Election of 2001.  
  
The petitioners were Security Assistants who had been recruited on contract in
and after 1988. They participated in an "industrial action" in August 2000
demanding permanent employment and their services were summarily terminated on
22.8.2000.  
  
During the period between the dissolution and General Election they were
reinstated on 17.12.2001 on the same terms and conditions. Thereafter they
were made permanent with effect from 01.10.2001.  
  
**Held :  
**  
The Cabinet decision which nullified "appointments and promotions" during the
elevant period had no application to the petitioners. Hence the "termination
of their services was violative of Article 12(1) of the Constitution.  
  
_Per_.Fernando, J.  
  
"It is clear that the mischief at which the Cabinet decision was legitimately
directed was the burdening of the corporation by recruiting surplus staff and
giving improper promotions".  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Chandima Weerakkody_ with _Nandun Fernando_ for petitioners.  
  
_Upul Jayasuriya_ with _Nalin Laduwahetty_ for respondents.

_Cur.adv.vult_

**384**

September 12, 2003  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
The petitioners complain that their fundamental rights under Article 12(1)
were infringed by the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation, the 1st respondent, by the
termination of their services by letters dated 12.01.2002. Those letters gave
as the reason for termination that the Cabinet of Ministers had decided on
26.12.2001 that all appointments and promotions during the period between the
dissolution of Parliament and the General Election of 2001 should be
invalidated.  
  
The petitioners were Security Assistants who had been recruited (mainly in and
after 1998) on a contract basis for an indefinite period. They participated in
an "industrial action" on 21st to 23rd August 2000 demanding permanency in
employment, and their services were summarily terminated by letters dated
22.8.2000.  
  
During the period between dissolution and General Election, by letters dated
17.10.2001 the Personnel Manager of the 1st respondent (with the prior
approval of the then Chairman) informed the petitioners that they had been re-
instated on the same terms and conditions. Thereafter, in pursuance of a
Public Administration Circular providing for the grant of permanency to
casual, temporary and contract employees who had completed a continuous period
of service of not less than 180 days, the petitioners were informed that they
had been made permanent with effect from 01.10.2001. Those letters stated that
permanancy was subject to their having completed 180 days of continuous
service prior to 01.10.2001, their having the qualifications stipulated on the
approved scheme of recruitment, and there being vacancies in the approved
cadre. The respondents have not placed any material to show that the
petitioners had failed to satisfy those conditions and/or that the termination
of their services was on one of those grounds.  
  
Although it is true that on 26.12.2001 the Cabinet did take a decision to
invalidate all appointments made during the relevant period, yet on 30.01.2002
the Cabinet decided to suspend its previous decision and to review all
appointments and promotions in order to determine whether any of them had been
made outside the normal procedures.

**385**

Learned Counsel for the petitioners contended that the Cabinet decision of
26.12.2001 was not applicable to them but only to "appointments and
promotions", while in their case there were neither appointments nor
promotions, but only "re-instatement in service". It is clear that the
mischief at which the Cabinet decision was legitimately directed was the
burdening of the Corporation by  
recruiting surplus staff and granting improper promotions. The summary
dismissal of the petitioners for industrial action may well have been
considered a disproportionate penalty, for which re-instatement was justified.
I hold that the Cabinet decision was inapplicable to the petitioners.  
  
But even if it is assumed that the Cabinet decision of 26.12.2001 did apply to
"re-instatements", the petitioners must nevertheless succeed. Firstly, that
decision would have been arbitary if it purported to apply to a bonafied
reinstatement in service pursuant to a review of a dismissal. Secondly, when
that decision was varied on 30.01.2002, the 1st respondent was obliged to re-
examine its previous decision to terminate the services of the petitioners
because the legal justification for that decision had disappeared.  
  
I therefore hold that the termination of the services of the petitioners by
letters dated 13.01.2002, and the failure to rescind such termination after
the second Cabinet decision was arbitrary and unreasonable, and in violation
of Article 12(1). I order the re-instate-ment of the petitioners with effect
from 1st October 2003, without a break in service but without back wages, and
direct the 1st respondent to offer the petitioners the benefit of any
voluntary retirement scheme, which was offered to other employees holding
comparable posts, and which was in force in and after 13.01.2002. The 1st
respondent will pay the petitioners one set of costs in a sum of Rs. 25,000/-  
  
**ISMAIL, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**JAYASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/11.html_  

