##  Jayakody v. Karunanayake, Officer In Charge, Police Station, Polgahawela
and Attorney General - SLR - 264, Vol 2 of 1994 [1992] LKSC 1; (1994) 2 Sri LR
264 (18 November 1992)

**  264**

**JAYAKODY**

**v.**

**KARUNANAYAKE, OFFICER ‑IN‑CHARGE,**

**POLICE STATION, POLGAHAWELA AND**

**ATTORNEY-GENERAL**

SUPREME COURT.

AMERASINGHE, J.

ULATUNGA, J. AND

DHEERARATNE, J.

S.C. APPLICATION NO. 91/91.

JUNE 03 AND OCTOBER 9, 1992.



_Fundamental Rights ‑ Arrest without warrant for alleged transport of voters
at Local Authorities Elections of 1991‑ Local Authorities Elections Ordinance
ss. 81, 81A, 81B and 81C‑ Constitution, Articles 12, 13(1) and 14(1) (c)._



The transport of voters at Local Authorities Elections is an offence under s.
81C of the Local Authorities Elections Ordinance but it is not a cognizable
offence. Hence arrest without a warrant is not valid and constitutes an
infringement under Article 13(1) of the Constitution.



Where a person puts on the mantle of a _de facto_ leader of a Group at the
elections and is acknowledged as such there is no infringement under Article
12 and 14(1) (c) of the Constitution. Being a strong supporter of a Group
alone will not entitle a person to exercise the same rights and privileges as
enjoyed by the _de jure_ leader of a recognised group at the election.



**APPLICATION** for infringement of fundamental rights.



_Lalith Athulathmudali P.C._ with _Ranjan Gooneratne, Dr. Ranjith Fernando,
Mahendra Amerasekera, Anil de Silva, Ranjani Morawaka, T. M. S. Nanayakkara,
Nalin Dissanayake, Kalinga Indatissa_ for petitioner.



_Upawansa Yapa, Additional Solicitor ‑General _ with _B. Aluwihare S.C._ for
respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 18, 1992.

**KULATUNGA, J.**



The petitioner was the United National Party Member of Parliament for
Polgahawela until December 1988. He was not nominated by the U.N.P. to contest
the General Elections held in 1989. Consequently, he moved away from the
U.N.P. and during the Local Authorities

**  265**

 Elections in 1991 he worked against the U.N.P. At the election of members to
the Polgahawela Pradeshiya Sabha, he supported the Independent Group which was
led by one Tennakoon. Although the petitioner was neither the leader nor a
candidate contesting as a member of that group, he claimed and was
acknowledged during the election campaign, to be the _de facto'_ leader
thereof. One of the posters published on behalf of the Independent Group
refers to the petitioner as the 'Lion of the North‑West region'.



The petitioner complains that the 1st respondent, the Officer‑in­-Charge of
the Polgahawela Police Station obstructed the election campaign of the
Independent Group from the nomination day, until the conclusion of the
election whilst the U. N. P., S. L. F P. and B. J. P. members including
Members of Parliament were allowed to campaign freely and tour the electorate
on the day of the poll. The petitioner himself was arrested without a warrant
on the polling day for alleged transport of voters (which is a non‑cognizable
offence), and was remanded to Fiscal Custody where he remained until the
conclusion of the election. He alleges that by reason of such treatment his
rights under Articles 12(1), 12(2), 13(1) and 14(1) (c) of the Constitution
have been infringed.



The petitioner states that on 26.03.91 two persons who were prospective
candidates of the Independent Group were arrested for a motor traffic offence
and were detained at the Polgahawela Police Station with the result that they
were precluded from signing the group nomination paper; that for eight years
he had been residing at the Lihiniya Rest House, Polgahawela with the
Resthouse­-Keeper who is a relation of his when on 24.04.91 the Assistant
Superintendent of Police Maho (who he says is ill‑disposed towards him)
visited the Polgahawela Police Station and ordered that all his belongings be
removed from the Resthouse Keeper's residence within 6 hours; that on the same
day the 1st respondent obstructed him when he was on his way to an election
meeting; and that on 29.04.91 he made a complaint (P3) at the Police
Headquarters regarding the said acts of harassment directed against the
election campaign of the Independent Group.



The petitioner also produced marked P4 a copy of a statement made to the
police on 01.05.91 by one Seneviratne, a candidate of the Independent Group
who alleges that on 24.04.91 the A.S.P.,

**  266**

Maho disrupted one of his election meetings which was attended by the
petitioner; and that the next day the Officer‑in‑Charge of the Potuhera Police
Station met him and suggested that he ceases to function as a member of the
Independent Group.



On the day of the poll (11.05.91), the petitioner gave his car to Tennakoon,
the Leader of the Independent Group and toured the electorate with him,
meeting polling agents, counting agents and making arrangements to safeguard
the interests of the Independent Group at the count. At about 1.30 p.m. they
met Buddhadasa, one of their supporters and went to his house (which is a plan
close to the Mawatta Junior School Polling Station). At that stage the 1st
respondent accompanied by three other police officers arrived and arrested the
petitioner and Tennakoon without informing them of the reason for their arrest
and removed them to the Police Station. Tennakoon was released at about 3.00
p.m. but the petitioner was kept in police custody. On 12.05.91 police
officers informed him that the allegation against him was that he had
transported voters. He was, thereafter produced before the Magistrate who, on
the application of the police, remanded him until 16.05.91.



The petitioner denies the alleged transport of voters (which is an offence
under s. 81C of the Local Authorities Elections Ordinance) and contends that
in any event it is not a cognizable offence and hence he could not have been
lawfully arrested without a warrant.



The 1st respondent states that prior to the Local Authorities Elections which
were held in 1991 after the lapse of several years, Police Stations throughout
the country had been directed to be vigilant in view of possible attempts to
disrupt the peaceful conduct of the poll; that on the night of 26.05.91, the
police arrested two persons who were found inside a railway carriage parked at
the Polgahawela Railway Station; that the same night three persons who were
riding a motor‑cycle were arrested as they could not produce identity cards
and the motor‑cycle had no proper registration number. According to the
petitioner, two of them namely, Premaratne and Illangakoon were prospective
Independent Group candidates and by being detained at the Police Station on
27.03.91 they were precluded from signing the group nomination paper. They
requested the police to release them to enable them to attend to that matter;
but the police did not release them. The 1st respondent, however, denies that
they



**  267**

had informed him of the fact that they were prospective candidates for the
Pradeshiya Sabha Elections. He states that they were released after recording
their statements (1R4 and 1 R5), on 27.05.91.



In justification of the petitioner's arrest, the 1st respondent states that he
received information that the petitioner was transporting voters and
canvassing votes; that when he visited the scene, he observed the petitioner
committing those acts in the proximity of the Mawatta Junior School Polling
Station, using vehicle No. 50 Sri 9797 which was being driven by a driver;
that the said acts constituted offences under Sections 81, 81 A and 81 B of
the Local Authorities Elections Ordinance; and that he arrested the petitioner
and the driver, having informed them of the allegation against them after
which he took them to the Police Station along with the said vehicle. The 1st
respondent denies the allegation that he arrested Tennakoon. In support of his
version the 1st respondent has produced marked 1 R6, 1 R7 and 1 R8 ‑ I. B.
Extracts of the notes of investigations in the case. These include the
statements of three voters (Arumugam, Chandrasiri and Jayaratne Banda) who
state that the petitioner called them to vote and provided transport by
vehicle. According to the entries made by the police, the information that the
petitioner was transporting voters had been given to the 1st respondent by a
radio message transmitted by the Chief Security Officer for Mr. Rekawa, Member
of Parliament; and at the time of his arrest, the petitioner had shouted
threats against Mr. Rekawa.



I shall first consider the validity of the petitioner's arrest. In this
respect, it is very clear that Sections 81 and 81B relied upon by the 1st
respondent have no application to the facts before us. Under s. 81, the use of
undue influence at an election is an offence. Under s. 81B the display of
handbills, posters etc. on the day of the poll is an offence. There are no
such allegations against the petitioner. S. 81A penalises a variety of acts
including canvassing for votes and soliciting the vote of any voter. The
learned Additional Solicitor­-General submitted that according to the
statements of the three voters, the petitioner had, besides transporting them,
canvassed for votes or solicited their votes in favour of the Independent
Group and thereby committed an offence under s. 81A (3) which offence is
declared cognizable by subsection 6 of the said section; and that the
petitioner's arrest was, therefore, lawful.

**  268**

The petitioner denies the alleged transport of voters (which is an offence
under s. 81 C) and states that on the available facts he could not have been
arrested for offences under s. 81, 81A or 81B. It is his position that he was
arrested at Buddhadasa's house. Learned President's Counsel for the petitioner
submitted that even assuming the commission of an offence under s. 81 C, the
petitioner could not have been arrested without a warrant for such offence;
that apart from a prosecution, the only step which the police are empowered to
take thereunder is to seize the vehicle used in committing the offence and to
detain it until the conclusion of the election. Upon the conviction of a
person for an offence under s. 81C, a Court may also make order declaring the
vehicle forfeit to the State. Counsel submitted that‑



(a)        as per the 1st respondent's notes, he arrested the petitioner for
transporting voters after informing the petitioner of such reason for the
arrest;



(b)        that the 'B' report made to Court on 12.05.91 (and all subsequent
reports) confirm that the impugned arrest had been made for alleged
transportation of voters; the said report further states that the petitioner
is thereby guilty of an offence under s. 81 C;



(c)        that the present claim of the 1st respondent that he arrested the
petitioner for offences under sections 81, 81 A and 81 B is an afterthought
when he realised that the petitioner could not have been lawfully arrested
without a warrant for an offence under s. 81 C or under the relevant
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure.



In support of his position that he was arrested at the house of Buddhadasa,
the petitioner has produced affidavits from Buddhadasa (P5), Atapattu (P6),
Tennakoon (P8) and Karunaratne (P12). Tennakoon was the Leader of the
Independent Group and the others referred to were loyal supporters of that
group. All of them were faithful followers of the petitioner who was their
_de facto'_ leader. As such, they are not impartial witnesses. Hence, in the
absence of corroboration from an independent source, I am unable to accept
their version as to the place of the petitioner's arrest. On a balance of

**  269**

evidence, I accept the 1st respondent's version that he was arrested whilst
transporting voters. The three voters concerned have made statements to the
police stating that at the time of the petitioner's arrest he was transporting
them to the polling booth in a vehicle. The petitioner has failed to adduce
any reason as to why the said voters should have falsely implicated him in an
offence. I, therefore, reject the petitioner's version.



However, I accept the submission of the learned Counsel for the petitioner
that on the basis of the available evidence the 1st respondent's claim that he
arrested the petitioner for offences under Sections 81, 81 A and 81 B is not
true and that on the basis of his own entries and the report to Court, the 1st
respondent had purported to arrest the petitioner without a warrant for an
offence under s. 80C (which is not a cognizable offence); and that the said
arrest was unlawful. If as the 1st respondent now claims the petitioner was
arrested for a different offence, then, as per the notes of investigations,
the 1st   respondent failed to inform the petitioner of the reason for such
arrest, in which event also, the impugned arrest would be unlawful. (on
account of such failure). I, therefore, hold that the petitioner's rights
under Article 13(1) of the Constitution have been infringed.



Next, I consider the alleged violations of Articles 12(1) and (2) and 14(1)
(c) of the Constitution. The petitioner's complaint in respect of the said
Articles arises in consequence of alleged obstruction by the 1st respondent of
the election campaign of the Independent Group. In considering this complaint,
the following matters are relevant:



(a)        The petitioner was neither the Leader nor a candidate of the
Independent Group. His legal status was that of a strong supporter of the said
group. He was also responsible for its formation and he gave it such support
as made it appear that he was its virtual leader.



(b)        The petitioner appears to believe that by reason of his _'de_
facto' leadership of the Independent Group, he was entitled to the same rights
enjoyed by its _de jure'_ leader. However, the correct position is that his
rights are no more than those enjoyed by any ordinary supporter of the group.

**  270**

(c)        Neither the Leader of the Independent Group (Tennakoon) nor any
other member of that group has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court in
consequence of alleged acts directed against the group. Tennakoon has only
filed an affidavit regarding the arrest of the petitioner.



(d)        The two persons said to be prospective candidates of the
Independent Group and who were arrested by the police on 26.03.91 have not
filed any affidavits to rebut the allegation that they were found without
identity cards and riding a motor cycle without a proper registration number.
There is also no admissible evidence that they informed the police of the fact
that they were prospective candidates of the Independent Group.



(e)        Independent Group candidate Seneviratne who in his statement to the
police (P4) makes allegations against the police has not filed an affidavit.
Neither the A.S.P. Maho nor the H.Q.I. Potuhera who are said to have
obstructed his election campaign has been added as a party to these
proceedings to enable this Court to make a fair determination in the matter.



(f)         On the basis of my findings, a _prima facie_ case of an offence
under s. 80C of the Ordinance has been made out against the petitioner. Even
though he was not arrested for the offence of soliciting the votes, a _prima
facie_ case of such an offence (under s. 80A) has been made out on the basis
of the statements of the three voters who are said to have been travelling in
the petitioner's vehicle.



It seems to me that the petitioner was not similarly circumstanced as M.P.'s
belonging to the U.N.P. or the S.L.F.P. who were campaigning at the election
except to the extent that each of them was a supporter of a recognised
political party or an Independent Group; but the petitioner has exceeded his
limit by purporting to put on the mantle of the Leader of the Independent
Group, in particular on the day of the poll and seeking to exercise the same
rights and privileges as enjoyed by the _de jure'_ Leader of the Group. In
the circumstances, I hold that the alleged infringements of the petitioner's
rights under Articles 12 and 14(1) (c) have not been established.

**  271**

For the foregoing reasons, I grant the petitioner a declaration that his
rights under Article 13(1) have been infringed. In determining the
compensation payable to him, I have taken into consideration the fact that in
my view the 1st respondent did not intend to ride rough shod over the law when
he arrested the petitioner on 11.05.91. The 1st respondent made a mistake in
making an unlawful arrest. In all the circumstances, I consider it just and
equitable to award the petitioner compensation in a sum of Rs. 3000/‑ (Rupees
Three Thousand) together with Rs. 500/‑ (Rupees Five Hundred) as costs. I
direct the state to pay the said sum to the petitioner.



**AMERASINGHE, J.**  I agree.



**DHEERARATNE, J.  I** agree.



_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/1.html_  

