##  Sirisena and Others v. Earnest Perera and Others - SLR - 97, Vol 2 of 1991
[1990] LKSC 12; (1991) 2 Sri LR 97 (20 April 1990)

**97**



**SIRISENA AND OTHERS**

**v.**

**EARNEST PERERA AND OTHERS**

** **

SUPREME COURT,

BANDARANAYAKE, J. FERNANDO, J. AND

KULATUNGA, J.

S. C. APPLICATION NO. 14/90,

MAY 07 & 08,1991.



Fundamental Rights, Articles 11 and 13 of the Constitution ‑Compensation for
infringement ‑ Liability of State and Public Officer



A Pajero jeep belonging to one Ariapala a businessman collided on 04 April
1990 with a car driven by a lady who died of her injuries sustained in the
collision. The 1st and 2nd Petitioners were engaged in carpentry work at
Ariyapala's residence in Bullers Lane between 02 and 08 April. The 3rd, 4th
and 5th Petitioners were arrested by the Police when they visited the
Coron­er's Court at the General Hospital Colombo on 21 April 1990 to see the
1st and 2nd Petitioners who had been arrested by the Police and produced
before the Coroner to give evidence at the inquest. The 3rd to 5th Petitioners
were detained by the Police and so deprived of their liberty from 11.30 a.m.



The 3rd respondent assaulted the first two Petitioners and threatened them and
wanted them to implicate Ariyapala's son Indika as having driven the jeep. In
view of the assaults they made the statement. On 22 April 1990 they were
released. On the basis of the evidence led at the inquest the Police obtained
an order from the Coroner to arrest the driver Weeraratne and Indika
Ariyapala. The 2nd and 3rd respondents denied the allegations that the 1st and
2nd Petitioners were detained or subjected to torture by the Police.

**  **

**Held:**

**  **

(1)        The allegation of torture is subject to infirmities but the
petitioners had established infringement of their rights by illegal arrest and
deten­tion (under Articles 13 (1) and (2) of the Constitution) by the 2nd and
3rd respondents.



### 98



            (2)        Whether or not a person has been arrested depends not on the legality of the arrest but on whether he has been deprived of his liberty to go where he pleases. According to the plain meaning of the provisions of Article 13 (1) and (2) the rights claimed by the Petitioners are not limited to persons arrested on suspicion of having committed or being concerned with an offence. The protection against arbitrary arrest and detention is the central feature or the core of these provisions.



**Per Fernando J :**



"Article 13 (1) thus contains a prohibition on deprivation of liberty __ no
person shall be arrested. However, there is an exception, that such
deprivation of liberty may be effected "according to the proce­dure
established by law" (and this is certainly more restrictive than the phrase
"except in accordance with the law"). Further even if a person is arrested in
accordance with the procedure established by law, he must nevertheless be
informed of the reason for his arrest".



(2)               In addition to the State, in appropriate cases, the public
officer con­cerned may also be held concurrently liable in respect of the
infringe­ment and he may be ordered to pay compensation where the Court
considers such an order to be just and equitable.



**Cases referred to:**

**  **

1.         _State of_ _Punjab v. Ajaib Singh_ AIR 1953 S. C. 10



2.         _Namasivayam v. Gunawardena_ [1989] 1 Sri LR 394

  
3.         _Somawathie v. Weerasinghe S. C._ Application No. 227/88 Supreme Court Minutes of 20.11.1990



4.         _Saman v. Leeladasa_ [1989] (1) Sri LR 7



5.         _Thadchanamoorthi v. Attorney ‑General_ 1 FRD 129 



6.                  _Velumurugu v. Attorney ‑General_ 1 FRD 180, 212, 213   


7.                  _Ratnasara Thero v. Udugampola_ 2 FRD 364 



8.                  _Mariadas v. Attorney ‑General_ 2 FRD 397 



9.                  _Vivienne Goonewardena v. Perera_ 2 FRD 426, 439 



10.                  _Kapugeekiyana v. Hettiarachchi_ (1984) 1 Sri LR 153 



11.                  _Piyssiri v. Fernando_ [1988] 1 Sri LR 173 



12.                  _Spicer v. Holt_ [1976] 3 All ER 71, 77 __ 78 



13.                  _Karunaratne v. Rupasinghe S. C._ 71/90, S, C. Minutes of 17.6.1991



**APPLICATION** for relief against infringement of fundamental rights.



_Faiz Mustapha P. C._ with _A. Panditharatne_ and _Gaston Jayakody_ for
Peti­tioners,



_C. R. de Silva D. S. G._ with _V. Kodagoda S. C._ for respondents.



_Cur.adv.vult._

### 99



August, 26,1991



**FERNANDO, J .**

**  **

            On 4.4.90 there was collision between a car driven by a young lady and a jeep owned by a businessman named Ariya­pala. There were four persons in the jeep: Ariyapala's minor son, his driver Weeraratne, and the 1st and 2nd Petitioners (carpenters who had been engaged shortly before to effect some repairs to Ariyapala's residence). The young lady, the other passenger in the car, and others who witnessed the collision were not able to say who was driving the jeep. Weera­ratne drove the jeep to the Bambalapitiya Police Station, while Ariyapala's son went home to inform his family. The 1st and 2nd Petitioners say that they too went to the Police Station, but that they were not questioned by the Police. Weeraratne's statement and the notes of investigation have not been pro­duced, and hence we do not know whether he (or anyone else) had disclosed the fact that there had been others in the jeep, and their identity. There was no reason for Weeraratne to withhold the names of the Petitioners. A few days later the young lady died in consequence of the injuries sustained in the collision, and the Police investigations took a drastically dif­ferent turn, giving rise to this application.



According to the 3rd Respondent (the Officer‑in‑charge of the Traffic Branch
of the Bambalapitiya Police), investigations revealed that the 1st and 2nd
Petitioners had been in the jeep, and that they were working under Ariyapala;
he also received reliable information that it was not Weeraratne but
Ariyapa­la's son who had driven the jeep. On 14th, 15th, 17th and 18th April
he visited the Ariyapala residence, but Ariyapala and the Petitioners were not
present. On the 18th he asked Mrs. Ariyapala to convey a message to the
Petitioners to come to the Bambalapitiya Police. According to A. S. P. Anthony
of the Colombo City Traffic Headquarters, several days after the accident he
too received reliable information that it was not



### 100



Weeraratne out Ariyapala's son who had driven the jeep: and that the latter
was a young boy not competent to drive motor vehicles. On the 18th, he says,
he "enlightened the 2nd and 3rd Respondents", and instructed them to conduct
investigations as to the identity of the driver; these instructions were not
given immediately on receipt of the "reliable information", but only after he
heard (on the 17th) that the young lady had died. No one mentions any attempt
by the Police to question Ariya­pala's son. I assume that as a matter of
routine the statements of the persons who gave this "reliable information"
would have been recorded; or, if there was some compelling reason not to
record their statements, that appropriate entries would have been made in some
official record. In any event, notes of investigation should also have been
made, regarding the pro­gress of the investigation, the instructions given by
A.S.P. Anthony and the several visits to the Ariyapala residence. No such
statements, notes or entries have been produced, and this tends to cast grave
doubt as to the nature of the information and investigations.



If by the 18th the Respondents had reason to believe that it was not
Weeraratne but Ariyapala's son who had driven the jeep, both could have been
questioned. If they feared that such questioning might result in an attempt to
influence the two Petitioners to support the version already given by
Weera­ratne, then I would have expected the Respondents to attempt to contact
the Petitioners direct, and as soon as possible, instead of asking the
Ariyapala's to produce them; if, as the Respondents say, they did not have the
addresses, they should have attempted to obtain from Mrs. Ariyapala either the
addresses or the name and address of the person who intro­duced the
Petitioners to her. The fact that on the 18th the 3rd Respondent asked Mrs.
Ariyapala to inform the Petitioners to come to the Bambalapitiya Police
suggests that there was then no fear that the Petitioners might be influenced.
According to Ariyapala's affidavit, when Mrs. Ariyapala had said that she did
not have their addresses, the 3rd Respondent had threa‑



###  101



tened that if they were not produced, Ariyapala would be taken into custody:
this was not denied by the 3rd Respond­ent. Mrs. Ariyapala went in search of
the person who had brought the Petitioners, obtained their addresses, went to
the 1st  Petitioner's residence and left a message for the two Peti­tioners.
The threat made to his wife probably induced Ariya­pala not to be content with
merely asking the Petitioners to go to the Police Station; instead, on the
19th he took them him­self so that his compliance with the Police directive
could not have been doubted. He then left the Police Station. The 3rd
Respondent states that on questioning the Petitioners he sus­pected that they
were suppressing vital information on the advice and instigation of Ariyapala.
Obviously, they main­tained that Weeraratne had driven the jeep. Their
statements were not recorded, and no entry was produced indicating that they
had been questioned at the Police Station.



The principal complaint of the 1st and 2nd Petitioners is that they were not
allowed to leave the Police Station on 19.4.90 and that they were unlawfully
detained till 22.4.90. The Respondents' position is that they were not
detained on the 19th, but were asked to report again at the Police Station the
next day. According to the Petitioners, they were threa­tened by the 3rd
Respondent in an endeavour to induce them to implicate Ariyapala's son; they
were detained overnight; since they had not returned home even by 8 p.m., the
3rd Petitioner (the wife of the 1st) and the 4th and 5th Petitioners (the
parents of the 2nd) contacted the Ariyapala's, since it was Mrs. Ariyapala who
had conveyed the message the pre­vious evening. Ariyapala came to the Police
Station at about 9 a.m. on the 20th to inquire about the two Petitioners; he
saw the two Petitioners there; while waiting for the 3rd Respondent, the 2nd
Respondent abused and threatened him; when the 3rd Respondent arrived, he
directed that Ariyapala's statement (as to why he came to the Police Station)
be recorded; this was done at 9.40 a.m. and Ariyapala went away; this
statement too has not been produced. If produced,



**102**



this would have indicated whether the complaint that the Petitioners had been
detained from the previous day had been made as early as 20.4.90. The
Respondents' position is that the Petitioners came to the Police Station on
the 20th morn­ing; that the 3rd Respondent saw them at about 8.30 a.m.; that
the Respondents had reason to believe that Ariyapala was taking steps to
hamper the investigation, and hence was required to make a statement; since
the 3rd  Respondent was engaged in special traffic duties, he instructed the
Petitioners to come again at 2.30 p.m. The latter reason is contradicted by a
contemporaneous note of investigation made by him at 9.50 a.m. to the effect
that when questioned further, it appeared that the Petitioners were concealing
the truth. Further, if the Petitioners had come at about 8.30 a.m., there was
ample time to question them between 8.30 and 9.50 a.m. It is difficult to
understand why the 3rd Respondent wasted time recording Ariyapala's statement
at 9.40 a.m., but apart from that he had one hour to question the Petitioners.
Yet another possible reason for the failure to question the Peti­tioners
emerges from A.S.P. Anthony's affidavit: that on 20.4.90 (at what time he does
not say) he instructed the 3rd Respondent to inform the Petitioners to meet
him or Chief Inspector Ranjit Perera at the Crime Detective Bureau ("C.D.B.")
Headquarters, but the time is not mentioned. This was because, says A.S.P.
Anthony, by this time he had been informed by the 2nd and 3rd Respondents that
Ariyapala had come to the Banbalapitiya Police Station to hamper the
inves­tigation. These instructions must have been given after the Petitioners
left the Police Station, because otherwise the direc­tion to return to
Bambalapitiya at 2.30 p.m. would have been pointless. The Respondents do not
say whether the Petitioners did return at 2.30 p.m. but say that an officer
was instructed to inform the Petitioners to proceed to the C.D.B. (again, the
time is not mentioned). According to A.S.P. Anthony, the Petitioners arrived
at 7 p.m. There is no explanation, in the Respondents' version, as to what
happened between 2.30 p.m. and 7 p.m.; it is not suggested that the
Petitioners came to



### 103



Bambalapitiya several hours later than directed, and it is most unlikely that
they would have dared to do this; in any event, I cannot assume that they
would deliberately have waited till late evening to present themselves for
questioning, for it would have been natural to have preferred to return to
their homes before dark. The lst and 2nd Respondents claim that the
Peti­tioners were not detained on the 20th; that having come to the C.D.B. at
7 p.m. they made voluntary statements; after these were recorded they left at
10.30 p.m. Apart from their own affidavits, they point to the absence of any
entry relating to the Petitioners in the detention register as proof that the
Peti­tioners were not detained.



There are a number of infirmities in the Respondents' ver­sion. They claim
that Ariyapala was attempting to hamper the investigation by influencing the
Petitioners; even on the 19th morning. Having directed Ariyapala, under threat
of taking him into custody, to produce the Petitioners, it seems ironic that
his presence at the Police Station should be construed as an attempt to hamper
the investigation. However, accepting that they did actually entertain such a
fear, did they think that Ariyapala's malign influence would cease if the
Petitioners remained at liberty? Or would they have sought to exclude
Ariyapala's influence by keeping the Petitioners in Police cus­tody? The fact
that the 3rd Respondent gave contradictory reasons for not questioning the
Petitioners and recording their statements on 20.4.90 tends to support the
Petitioners position that they were being kept in custody until they became
more amenable to disclose what the Respondents considered to be the truth. The
failure to produce all the statements recorded and the notes of investigation
adds to the infirmities in the Respondents version. The only entries produced
are notes of investigation made by the 3rd Respondent (a) at 8.50 a.m. to the
effect that he met the Petitioners at the entrance to the Police Station and
asked them to wait inside, and (b) at 9.50 a.m. that he questioned them
further and found that they were concealing the truth. Apart from the slight
discrepancy of 20



**104   **



minutes as to the time at which he saw the Petitioners, these entries appear
to have been a rejoinder to the statement made by Ariyapala that he came to
inquire about the fate of the two Petitioners who had not returned home the
previous night after their visit to the Police Station __ an attempt to
suggest that the Petitioners had not been detained overnight, but came again
on the 20th morning. In view of the failure of the Respondents to place all
the material, in the form of state­ments, notes and other entries, before this
Court, I am unable to accept these entries as reliable. Next, how did the
Petition­ers know at what time they should report to the C.D.B.? According to
Chief Inspector Ranjit Perera, A.J.P. Anthony asked him to be present at 7
p.m. Obviously therefore if the A.S.P. communicated with the Respondents, he
would have stipulated the time, and the Respondents should in turn have caused
the Petitioners to be informed that they come to the C.D.B. at 7 p.m.; if not,
they may have turned up later, thus keeping senior officers waiting. But
nowhere do the Respond­ents claim that the Petitioners were informed of the
time at which they should report to the C.D.B. The only situation in which it
would not have been necessary to inform the Petition­ers was if they were
already in custody, and could be taken wherever, anti whenever, the
Respondents chose. Finally, the Petitioners say they were released only at 9
a.m. on the 22nd, after they had pleaded with Inspector Wijeratne, the
Officer­in‑Charge of the Bambalapitiya Police. The 2nd and 3rd Respondents
deny this, the former adding that none of the Pet­itoners were detained _on
the 21st_ , and the latter adding that he does not see how they could have met
Inspector Wijeratne on the 22nd since they were not at the Bambalapitiya
Police Sta­tion that day. If Inspector Wijeratne did not order their release
on the 22nd, it would have been perfectly simple to have pro­duced an
affidavit from him, but there is no such affidavit. In these circumstances, I
have no hesitation in rejecting the Respondents' version. The 1st and 2nd
Petitioners' version is consistent, is supported by the affidavits of the
other Petition­ers and Ariyapala, and is intrinsically more probable. I hold



### 105



that they were deprived of their liberty from 9 a.m. on the 19th until 9 a.m.
on the 22nd.



The Petitioners were kept in custody obviously to persuade them to make
statements different to those made on the 19th and again on the 20th, and
implicating Ariyapala's son. It is their case that on the 20th in addition to
threats and abuse, they were hit, kicked, and dragged by their hair; that the
assult was of such a serious nature that they had wounds on their elbows and
knees, their faces were swollen, and there was blood all over their bodies.
Their clothes would have been bloodstained, and even the next morning there
would have been visible signs of the assault. They were produced before the
Coroner on the 21st, and the 1st Petitioner gave evidence at the inquest;
there is nothing to indicate that the Coroner noticed anything unusual. The
affidavit of the Attorney‑at‑law who represented Ariyapala's son and driver
was produced, but I do not take this into consideration as the Petitioners had
not served a copy of this affidavit on the Respondents, whose Counsel became
aware of it only in the course of the hearing. The Petitioners obtained
medical treatment on the 22nd, but no medical evidence is forthcoming as to
their condition. In these circumstances, while I accept that the Petitioners
were subjected to harsh and unlawful treatment, there is not the required
degree of proof that it amounted to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment.



The 3rd to 5th Petitioners claim that at about 11.30 a.m. on the 21st, after
the conclusion of the inquest proceedings, they were arrested by the 2nd
Respondent and detained at the Bambalapitiya Police Station till 8 p.m.
Ariyapala and a hospi­tal employee support this allegation. The 2nd Respondent
denies this. I have set out the reasons why the 2nd Respond­ent's affidavit
cannot be acted upon, and I prefer to act on the affidavit of the 3rd to 5th
Petitioners. I hold that the 3rd to 5th Petitioners were deprived of their
liberty from 11.30 a.m. to 8 p.m. on the 21st .



**106**



It is clear that the 1st and 2nd Petitioners were deprived of their liberty
because the Respondents wished to interrogate them, and not because they were
suspected of any offence. The learned Deputy Solicitor‑General submitted that
such a depri­vation of liberty was not an "arrest" within the meaning of
Article 13(1), and would only be an actionable civil wrong. An arrest, he
submitted, is a deprivation of liberty based upon an allegation of the
commission of an offence; i.e. as contem­plated by the law relating to
criminal procedure. When it was pointed out to him that the law made provision
for "arrests" in other circumstances (e.g. for preventive detention, for
deportation and under section 298 of the Civil Procedure Code), he modified
this definition, submitting that an arrest was a deprivation of liberty for
the purpose of being dealt with under the law; he gave the example of a Police
Officer who compelled an able‑bodied citizen to clean the precincts of a
Police Station, which, he said, would not be an arrest within the meaning of
Article 13(1). Having in mind the disastrous consequence of this line of
reasoning, I inquired whether a Police Officer who deprived one candidate of
his liberty in the course of an election campaign, solely in order to enhance
the prospects of a rival candidate, would be infringing Article 13(1). His
reply was that this would not be an arrest. He relied on _State of Punjab v
Ajaib Singh_ _(1)_ , _Somawathie v Weera­singhe_ _(3)_ , and extracts from an
article by Dr. Glanville Willi­ams entitled "Requisites of a valid arrest",
(1954) Criminal Law Review 6:



"............. obviously it is not every imprisonment or arrest that
constitutes an arrest. To be an arrest, there must be an intention to subject
the person arrested to the criminal process ‑ to bring him within the
machinery of the criminal law; and this intention must be known to the person
arrested. Arrest is a step in law enforcement, so that the arrestor must
intend to bring the accused into what is sometimes called the custody of the
law ..........."





### 107



Since this contention was advanced, and pressed on behalf of the State

(despite the decision in _Namasivayam v Gunawar­dena_ , _(2)_ , approved in
_Piyasiri v Fernando,_ (11)), it is neces­sary to deal with it fully.



Dr. Glanville Williams was not dealing with the concept of an "arrest" in
relation to fundamental rights; he was not even purporting to define an
"arrest" for the purpose of the crimi­nal law. Rather, he was seeking to
clarify the requisites of a _valid_ arrest. Thus the intention of the
arrestor, and its com­munication to the arrestee, are not ingredients of an
arrest; rather, they are the conditions essential to the _validity_ of an
arrest. "Arrest" in Article 13(1) does not refer to a _valid_ arrrest, but
rather to a _defacto_ arrest; indeed, it is difficult to conceive of
situations in which an arrest which is valid would contravene Article 13(1).
In common usage, "arrest" connotes a physical act: to stop (growth, motion,
moving person or thing) or to seize (person or ship) especially by legal
authority (Concise Oxford Dictionary). Some of its synonyms given in Roget's
International Thesaurus (3rd edition, sections 132, 144, 269, 728, 758, 759)
are stop, stay, detain, confine, res­train, take captive, take prisoner,
apprehend, capture, seize. In _Spicer v Holt_ _(12)_ , the phrase "arrested
under section 5........." had to be construed. It was held that if the word
"arrested" had stood alone, then it had to be given its natural meaning; but
since it was followed by the words "under section 5.......", it meant an
arrest authorised by section 5 and so must mean a lawful arrest. Arrest
according to Halsbury's Laws of England (Vol, 11, 4th edition, pare 99)
"consists in the seizure or touching of a person's body with a view to his
restraint; words, however, amount to an arrest if, in the cir­cumstances of
the case, they are calculated to bring, and do bring, to a person's notice
that he is under compulsion and he thereafter submits to the compulsion."
Whether or not a per­son has been arrested depends not on the legality of the
arrest _but on whether he has been deprived of his liberty to go where he
pleases._

_  _

**108**



            Article 13(1) thus contains a prohibition on deprivation of liberty ‑no person shall be arrested. However, there is an exception, that such deprivation of liberty may be effected "according to the _procedure_ established by law", (and this is certainly more restrictive than the phrase "except in accor­dance with the law"). Further, even if a person is arrested in accordance with the procedure established by law, he must nevertheless be informed of the reason for his arrest. Thus Article 13(1) clearly and unambiguously prohibits the arbitrary deprivation of liberty, and it is unnecessary to consider the very different language of the corresponding Indian provisions and the _Ajaib Singh_ case. Reference to _Somawathie v Weera­singhe_ _(3)_ , is superfluous, since "arrest" does not now appear to my brother Kulatunga as it appears to have appeared to him then.



I must add that had there been any ambiguity in regard to the meaning of
Article 13(1) there are two reasons why I would have preferred the wider
meaning of the word "arrest". Article 13(1) recognises a basis human right; it
is not absolute or unqualified, as the law may prescribe the "procedure" for
arrest; and Article 15(7) permits certain restrictions. In these
circumstances, any ambiguity must be resolved in favour of the liberty of the:
citizen, by preferring that interpretation which enhances the right rather
than another which diminishes it, thereby complying with Article 4(d) which
directs the Judi­ciary to "respect, secure and **_advance_** " fundamental
rights, and not to " **abridge, _restrict_** __ or deny" them. A consideration
of relevant international declarations and covenants ‑ although these may not
be a source of municipal law ‑reveals a general trend in the protection and
advancement of fundamental rights which it would be legitimate to consider in
dealing with a doubt or difficulty. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights
proclaimed that no one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or
exile; the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights recognised
that everyone has the right to



### 109



liberty and security of person, and that no one shall be sub­jected to
arbitrary arrest or detention. When these, as well as other instruments to
which Sri Lanka is not a party, indicate that the law of nations is
progressing towards a general recog­nition as a basic right of the freedom
from arbitrary depriva­tion of liberty, it would be a retrograde step to give
Article 13(1) the restrictive interpretation contended for.



The arbitrary deprivation of the liberty of the Petitioners was caused by the
2nd and 3rd Respondents, not because they _bona fide_ suspected that the
Petitioner was involved in the commission of an offence, but for the wholly
improper and illegal purpose of extracting statements containing what they
conceived to be the truth. They have .thereby infringed the fundamental rights
of the Petitioner, for which Article 126 makes them liable; the circumstances
do not warrant them being excused or exempted from liability. For the reasons
set out in _Karunaratne v Rupasinghe_ , _(13)_ , I am of 'the view that relief
should be granted against them personally.



Accordingly, I grant the Petitioners the following reliefs:



(1)        (a)        a declaration that the fundamental rights of the 1st and
2nd

Petitioners under Articles 13(1) and 13(2) were infringed by the 2nd and 3rd
Respondents by reason of their arrest on 19.4.90, and their detention from
19.4.90 to 22.4.90;



(b)        compensation in a sum of Rs. 3,000/‑ each to the 1st and 2nd
Petitioners, payable by the State;



(a)                compensation in a sum of Rs. 500/‑ each to the 1st and 2nd
Petitioners, payable by the 2nd and 3rd Respondents;



(2)        (a)        a declaration that the fundamental rights of the 3rd,
4th and 5th

Petitioners under Articles 13(1) and 13(2) were infringed by the 2nd
Respondent by reason of their arrest and detention on 21.4.90;



### 110



            (b)        compensation in a sum of Rs. 500/‑ each to the 3rd, 4th and 5th               Petitioners, payable by the State;



(c)        compensation in a sum of Rs. 250/‑ each to the 3rd, 4th and 5th
Petitioners, payable by the 2nd  Respond­ent; and



(3)        one set of costs in a sum of Rs. 2,000/‑ payable by the State.



I further direct the 1st Respondent, the Inspector General of Police to hold a
full inquiry into the allegations made by the 1st and 2nd Petitioners in
respect of the treatment meted out to them from 19th to 22nd April 1991, and
to submit to this Court a report in respect of such inquiry within four months
of the date of this order; the case will be called on 16th January 1992 to
consider that report.



**Bandaranayake, J.**

**  **

I have read the judgements of my brothers Fernando, J., and Kulatunga, J., and
agree with the orders made by them.



Where the fundamental rights of a petitioner are found to have been infringed
by a public officer, acting under colour of his office, I agree that in
addition to the State, in appropriate cases, such public officer may also be
held concurrently liable in respect of such infringement, and that he may be
ordered to pay compensation where the Court considers such an order to be just
and equitable.



**Kulatunga, J.**



The 1st and the 2nd Petitioners are carpenters, the 3rd Petitioner is the wife
of the 1st Petitioner and the 4th and 5th Petitioners are the parents of the
2nd petitioner. They com­plain of unlawful arrest by the 2nd and 3rd
Respondents. The 2nd Respondent is an Inspector of Police who functioned as
the Officer‑in‑Charge of the Bambalapitiya Police Station and



### 111



the 3rd respondent is a Sub‑Inspector of Police who was the O.I.C. Traffic
Branch of that Police Station, during the rele­vant period. The Petitioners
also complain of unlawful deten­tion at the Bambalapitiya Police Station and
elsewhere subse­quent to their arrest. The 1st and the 2nd Petitioners allege
that during their detention they were subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment by the Police. They pray for a declaration that by the
said acts their rights under Articles 11 and 13 of the Constitution have been
infringed and for damages totalling Rs. 300,000/‑.



The case for the Petitioners which I shall presently refer to in greater
detail is that the 1st and the 2nd Petitioners were arrested by the Police in
order to, procure their evidence regarding an accident which had occurred on
04.04.90 when a Pajero jeep belonging to one Ariyapala a businessman who is
ensued in the sale of motor vehicles collided with a car caus­ing serious
injuries to a lady who drove the car. A few days thereafter, she succumbed to
the injuries and died. The 3rd, 4th and 5th Petitioners were arrested by the
police when they visited the Coroner's Court at the General Hospital Colombo
on 21.04.90 to see the 1st and the 2nd Petitioners who had been arrested by
the Police and produced before the Coroner to give evidence at the inquest.



The first two Petitioners were engaged in carpentry work relating to repairs
to Ariyapala's residence in Bullers Lane between 2nd to 8th April. On the
morning of the 4th they went to Ariyapala's stores in Bambalapitiya in a jeep
driven by the driver one Weeraratne to obtain timber required for their work
but returned without timber as the Security guard of the stores was not
available at the time. They made a second trip when Ariyapala's son Indika
Ariyapala who is about 16 years old accompanied them in the jeep which
according to them was driven by Weeraratne. Indika was seated in the front
seat. When they were going along Duplication Road, a black car emerged from
Vajira Road when the jeep collided with it. The



### 112



lady driver of the car .was thrown out of the car. She and another passenger
were seriously injured and rushed to the hospital.



Two policemen arrived. As required by them Weeraratne drove the jeep to the
Bambalapitiya Police Station while one of the policemen drove the car involved
in the collision to the Bambalapitlya Police Station. Indika left for home to
inform his parents about the accident. The two Petitioners also claim to have
gone to the Police Station and state that they saw the driver seated on a
bench and that after about half an hour they all returned to the residence of
the said Ariyapala.



On 05.04.90 the driver Weeraratne was produced before the Magistrate and was
bailed out. Neither the passenger of the car nor the witness who had been
present at the scene and whose statements had been recorded by the police were
able to identify the person who drove the jeep at the time of the acci­dent.
The statements of the two Petitioners had not been recorded though they claim
to have, gone to the Police. It appears from their averments that even if they
had gone to the Police they had not identified themselves as witnesses and the
police had probably not been aware of fact that they had tra­velled in the
jeep.



Subsequently, on the instructions of the police Ariyapala sent for the two
Petitioners who lived in Battaramulla and when they arrived at his house took
them to the Bambalapitiya Police Station on the morning of 19.04.90 and left
them there. At about 10.00 a.m. the 3rd respondent took them in a police jeep
to the City Traffic Police, Mihindu Mawatha, Pettah There the 3rd Respondent
threatened them to implicate Indika saying that the police were aware that he
drove the jeep at the time of the collision; however they were not prepared to
make a statement to that effect. In the afternoon they were brought back to
the Bambalapitiya Police Station. Whilst they were thus detained the 3rd
Respondent again threatened them and





### 113



unsuccessfully attempted to record their statements on the desired lines after
which they were detained at the Bambalapi­tiya Police Station that night.



As the first two Petitioners failed to return home on the 19th the 3rd, 4th
and 5th Petitioners got a relation of Ariya­pala resident in Battaramulla, to
telephone Ariyapala and inform him about their failure to return home.
Consequently on 20.04.90 Ariyapala visited the Bambalapitiya Police Station
and saw the two Petitioners there. On that occasion the 2nd Respondent abused
Ariyapala for visiting the Police Station and had his statement recorded by
the 3rd Respondent before he was allowed to leave the Police Station.



At about 10.30 a.m. on the 20th the 3rd Respondent took the Petitioners in a
jeep to the Mihindu Mawatha City Traffic Police Station. There, the 3rd
Respondent had them blind folded and took them in a jeep in the company of
others whom they believed were police officers to an unknown desti­nation.
Later they came to know it to be the Crime Detective Bureau, Gregory's Road,
Colombo 7\. On the way and at the Bureau the 3rd Respondent and the other
Police Officers abused them; they also threatened the Petitioners with death
by burning on tyres, and assaulted and kicked them. As a result there was
blood all over their bodies; they were bleeding from their lips; they had
wounds on their elbows and knees and their faces were swollen. They screamed
and pleaded with the 3rd Respondent and finally agreed to make a statement
implicating Ariyapala's son as required by the 3rd Respondent. Thereafter the
3rd Respondent left. At about 9.30 p.m. three Police Constables made them to
sign two statements which were not read over to them or explained. They spent
that night at the Bureau and were asked to sleep on benches.



On 21.04.90 at about 7.30 a.m. they were taken by Police Officers to the
Traffic Headquarters at the Secretariat build­ing, Fort and later at about
10.30 a.m. to the Coroner's Court General Hospital, Colombo. The 2nd and 3rd
respondents and



**114**



two Assistant Superintendents of Police were there. One of them (A.S.P.
Karunaratne) called the 1st Petitioner to testify at the inquest and led his
evidence by a series of leading ques­tions. The lst Petitioner fainted twice
and was sobbing in the witness box; at about 11.30 a.m. the 2nd Respondent
arrested the 3rd, 4th and 5th Petitioners at the General Hospital and handed
them over to several Police Constables. At about 12.30 p.m. the 1st and 2nd
Petitioners were brought to the Traffic Headquarters, Fort and kept there till
about 7.30 p.m. and at about 8.00 p.m. they were taken to the Bambalapitiya
Police Station where they saw the 3rd to 5th Petitioners who were released at
about 8.00 p.m.; however, the lst  and 2nd Petition­ers were detained at the
Police Station and they were required to lie on benches throughout the night.



On 22.04.90 they met Mr. Wijeratne O.I.C. of the Bamba­lapitiya Police Station
and pleaded for their release. He per­mitted them to go home but with
instructions to report at the Police Station again at 5.00 p.m. However, they
did not comply with the said instructions. Instead they went to the Government
Hospital, Thalangama for treatment. But when they said that they had received
injuries by a police assault the Medical Officer at the O.P.D. refused to
examine them for want of a police report. As such, they obtained treatment
from a private medical practitioner without disclosing the fact of the police
assault.



On the basis of the evidence led at the inquest the police obtained an order
from the Coroner to arrest the driver Wee­raratne and Indika Ariyapala. They
were accordingly produced before the Magistrate and were remanded until they
were sub­sequently enlarged on bail.



In support of their case the Petitioners have produced sev­eral affidavits in
particular from Ariyapala senior, a hospital labourer Kumara Perera and Ananda
Malalgoda the Attorney­at‑Law who watched the interests of Indika Ariyapala
and the driver Weeraratne at the inquest (Pl, P3 and P4). Ariyapala



###  115



senior states that on 19.04.90 he accompanied the two Peti­tioners to the
Bambalapitiya Police; that they were at the Police Station on the 20th when he
went there; and that on the 21st when they were brought to the Coroner's Court
by the Police they appeared to be in pain. He also speaks to the arrest of the
3rd, 4th and 5th petitioners by the 2nd respond­ent at the Coroner's Court on
the 21st .



Kumara Perera states that he saw the 1st Petitioner limping and walking with
difficulty when he was being brought to the Coroner's Court by the police. He
had also seen the 3rd Peti­tioner and two others weeping and wailing there and
that they were arrested and taken away by Police Officers on the orders of the
2nd Respondent.



Mr. Malalgoda, Attorney‑at‑law states that he watched the interests of Indika
Ariyapala and the driver Weeraratne at the inquest; that the 1st Petitioner
was helped into the witness box; he was crying, appeared to be weak and
unsteady on his feet and on two occasions assumed a crouching position in the
witness box; and that the proceedings in the Coroner's Court ended in
confusion.



On behalf of the Respondents affidavits have been made by the 2nd and 3rd
Respondents, A.S.P. Harold Anthony who was in overall charge of investigations
into the fatal accident, Chief Inspector of Police Ranjit Perera who recorded
the statements of the 1st and 2nd Petitioners at the Crime Detec­tive Bureau
on the 20th and A.S.P. Karunaratne who led evi­dence at the inquest on the
21st into the death of the deceased Miss Deepani Premaratne.



The case for the Respondents is that several days after the accident the
driver of the motor car Miss Deepani Premaratne died of injuries sustained in
the collision and it became neces­sary to further investigate to identify the
driver who drove Ariyapala's Jeep at the time of the accident. Such
investiga­tions had become important presumably for the reason that



**116**



neither the other passenger who travelled in Deepani's car nor the persons who
were at the,scene of the accident had been in a position to identify the
driver. In the meantime the police had information that the lst and 2nd
Petitioners who had been employed by Ariyapala were in the jeep at the time of
the accident. Consequently, the 3rd Respondent made several efforts from about
the 14th of April to trace the Petitioners and for this purpose visited
Ariyapala's residence and failed to meet Ariyapala or the Petitioners.



By the 18th A.S.P. Harold Anthony had information that it was not Weeraratne
who drove the jeep at the time of the accient but Indika Arivapala although
Weeraratne had reported the accident and admitted to the police to have driven
the jeep. On the 18th the A.S.P. directed the 2nd and 3rd Respondents to
investigate the matter and the 3rd Respondent visited Ariyapala's residence
and as Ariyapala was again not present requested his wife to send a message to
the Petitioners to attend the Bambalapitiya Police Station. On the 19th,
Atiyapala brought the Petitioners. On being questioned they appeared to
suppress vital information on the advice of Ariyapala and hence the 3rd
Respondent told them to come next day by themselves. They came on the 20th at
about 8.30 a.m. but as the 3rd Respondent was on special traffic duty, they
were told to come at 2.30 p.m. the same day. On the instructions of A.S.P.
Harold Anthony the Petitioners were instructed to proceed to the Crime
Detective Bureau, Grego­ry's Road, Colombo 7.



The A.S.P. says that he shifted the place of inquiry as the 2nd and 3rd
Respondents had reported that Ariyapala was interfering with the
investigations. At the Bureau he himself questioned the Petitioners who
admitted Indika Ariyapala hav­ing driven the jeep at the time of the accident.
Their state­ments were recorded by Chief Inspector Ranjit Perera, at about
10.30 p.m. on the 20th after which he instructed them to leave and to attend
the Coroner's Court the next day. On the 21st when the 1st Petitioner was
giving evidence before the



### 117



Coroner suspect Indika Ariyapala and his father were seen pointing their
fingers at the witness who then appeared to be frightened and confused
whereupon the Coroner offered him a seat. A crowd of about 10 (believed to
have been instigated by Ariyapala senior) created a disturbance in the
Coroner's Court. After the inquest the Petitioners were permitted to leave
with instructions to give evidence when noticed by Court. Subsequently, both
of them left.



The Respondents deny the allegation that the 1st and 2nd Petitioners were
detained or subjected to torture by the police; they also deny the allegation
that they were at one stage taken to the City Traffic Police Quarters, Mihindu
Mawatha. It is their position that this application has been filed at the
behest of Ariyapala as the police had taken action against his son.



It is apparent that the interests of the prosecution and of Indika Ariyapala
in the investigations into the death of Miss Deepani Premaratne were evenly
matched. The investigations by the police were carred out under the direction
of A.S.P. Harold Anthony to establish the complicity of Indika Ariya­pala. The
suspect's father would be naturally interested in doing everything to
safeguard his son including by assisting the Petitioners in this application.
This is evident from the fact that he has given an affidavit to the
Petitioners together with a supporting affidavit from one of his customers
(P2); Mr. Malalgoda, Indika's Attorney‑at‑Law has also given an affi­davit.
The Petitioners contend that the accusation against the suspect Indika is
false and engineered by the police without justification. The Respondents
contend that it is based on a reasonable suspicion and that they were only
interested in ascertaining the truth.



The police have no record of the information on which they suspected Indika.
If the police acted on mere conjecture their conduct in suspecting Indika
would be totally unjust or liable to impeachment on the ground of actual
malice. How­ever, their suspicion is also attributable to the fact that



### 118



although Indika had been in the jeep at the time of the acci­dent, he was
admittedly not at the scene when the police visited the scene. It also appears
that the 1st and 2nd Petition­ers who were witnesses to the accident and who
claim to have gone to the Police Station with the driver Weeraratne had not
presented themselves as witnesses; and the police had not been aware of their
existence immediately after the accident. As such, their statements were not
recorded and there was no witness who was in a position to identify the person
who drove the jeep at the time of the accident. It was in this background that
the police decided to interrogate the Petitioners as to the possible
involvement of Indika in the accident and hence I am unable to regard the
conduct of the police as being altogether unjust or affected by actual malice.



The Respondents have produced marked X and Y the statements of the Petitioners
recorded on 20.04.90. Even if these statements were made under duress they
describe in detail the events on the day of the accident. The Petitioners say
that as they were leaving the house on the 4th of April to bring timber,
Indika asked the driver to first go to the place where the air‑conditioner had
been given for repairs. The jeep was then driven to a place near the railway
track in Castle Street when the driver got down and went up to the gate of a
house. He spoke to a man. At this stage Indika got into the driving seat. When
the driver returned, he found Indika at the wheel and therefore occupied the
front seat and Indika drove the jeep until it met with the accident. After the
accident Indika went to inform his parents, a shortwhile thereafter Ariyapala
returned with Indika, and said that he would attend to the accident and asked
the two Petitioners to go home and attend to the work which they did.



I am satisfied that the above statement (whether they state the truth or not)
have been made under duress through fear of the police in whose custody the
Petitioners had been unlaw­fully detained from the 19th to 22nd of April 1990;
In the cir‑



### 119



cumstances of this case, I am unable to accept the Respond­ents' version that
when the Petitioners were brought to the Bambalapitiya Police Station on the
19th they were instructed to call over the next day and that on the 20th they
went to the Crime Detective Bureau on their own as instructed by the police.
The Respondents have not produced any information book extracts of the notes
of investigation which would give credence to their version; and I accept the
position that the Petitioners were in continuous detention and were taken by
the police to the several places mentioned by them in order to procure their
statements and were kept in police custody even after the conclusion of the
inquest on the 21st.



I am also satisfied that the 3rd, 4th and 5th Petitioners have been arrested
by the police in the Coroner's Court on the 21st and were detained at the
Bambalapitiya Police Station until their release the same evening. The
evidence shows that they were agitated by the detention of the 1st and 2nd
Peti­tioners by the police and were weeping and wailing. The inquest itself
ended in confusion. In normal circumstances, the police might have arrested
any person committing a breach of the peace there but here the position is
different. These Peti­tioners were the wife of the 1st Petitioner and the
parents of the 2nd Petitioner respectively. I do not think that their con­duct
warranted arrest and detention for a breach of the peace. I therefore hold
that their arrest and detention is unlawful.

            It must be noted that the over enthusiam of the respond­ents in investigating the offence has been counter productive and has thwarted the successful prosecution of the offender. What is more it has led to an allegation of the infringement of rights under Articles 11 and 13 of the Constitution.



For the reasons I shall presently elaborate I am satisfied that the
Petitioners have established an infringement of their rights under Articles 13
(1) and (2) of the Constitution. How­ever, the evidence as regards the alleged
infringement of Arti­cle 11 is not sufficiently cogent and is affected by
certain



**120**



infirmities. Thus the averment that the 1st and 2nd Petitioners had blood all
over their bodies and that they were bleeding from their lips or the statement
that they had wounds on their elbows and knees and that their faces were
heavily swollen by the police assault is not supported by the evidence of Mr.
Malagoda, Attorney‑at‑Law. If the conditions spoken to existed in the night of
the 20th Mr. Malalgoda should have observed them next morning. The Petitioners
were produced to the Coroner's Court from police custody and presumably in the
same clothes as they had on them the previous night; but Mr. Malalgoda does
not refer to any blood stains or injuries. There is also no medical evidence
of injuries although the Peti­tioners did obtain treatment from a Medical
Practitioner. Hav­ing regard to the competing interests and influences in the
case, exaggeration of the petitioners' case in this respect is probable. Mr.
C. R. de Silva, Senior State Counsel pointed out to the fact that the
affidavits are in English and have not been read out and explained to the
Petitioners some of whom have signed them in Sinhala whilst one has placed his
thumb impression. It would not be safe to act on bare allegations contained in
such affidavits unless they can be regarded as intrinsically true in the
circumstances or are corroborated by other evidence. I hold that the alleged
infringement of Article 11 has not been established.



I now revert, to the alleged infringement of rights under Article 13 (1) and
(2) of the Constitution. In response to cer­tain questions by me during the
hearing the learned Senior State Counsel submitted that in the event of this
Court hold­ing that the Petitioners had been taken into custody by the police
he would submit that it would not entitle the Petitioners to relief for an
infringement of Article 13 (1) and (2) of the Constitution. On the authority
of _State of Punjab v. Ajaib Singh_ (1) he submitted that such taking and
detention did not constitute "arrest" and "detention" within the meaning of
the said article because there was no allegation or accusation of an offence
by the Petitioners or an intention on the part of





### 121



the respondents to subject the Petitioners to the process of law. He contends
that the remedy of the Petitioners is limited to claiming civil damages whilst
the officers liable for such unlawful conduct may also become liable for an
offence; but the Petitioners cannot seek relief for violation of fundamental
rights. Mr. Faiz Musthapha, P.C. for the Petitioners submitted that there is
no justification for such a restrictive interpreta­tion of Article 13. He
cited in support the decision of this court in _Namasivayam v. Gunawardena_
(2).



In _Ajaib Singh's_ case (supra) the taking into custody of an abducted person
by a Police Officer and the delivery of such person by him into the custody of
the Officer‑in‑Charge of the nearest camp under S.4 of the Abducted Persons
(Recovery and Restoration) Act, 1949 was challenged on the ground of conflict
with certain fundamental rights provisions of the Indian Constitution. It was
alleged inter alia, that S.4 was in conflict with and violative of the
provisions of Article 22(1) and (2) of the Constitution which provide 



22 (1) _          "No person who is arrested and detained in custody shall be
detained in custody without being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds
for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right to con­sult, and to be
defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice."

(2) _          "Every person who is arrested and detained in cus­tody shall be
produced before the nearest Magis­trate within a period of twenty four hours
of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of
arrest to the Court of the Magis­trate and no such person shall be detained in
cus­tody beyond the said period without the authority of a Magistrate."



Das J. held (p. 15) -



"The language of Article 22(1) and (2) indicates that the fundamental right
conferred by it gives protection against such arrests as are effected
otherwise than





### 122



                        under a warrant issued by a Court on the allegation or accusation that the arrested person has, or is sus­pected to have, committed, or is about or likely to commit an act of a criminal or quasi criminal nature or some activity prejudicial to the public or the State interest".



The Court was of the opinion that the protection which has been made a matter
of substantive fundamental right (with improvements) is the protection which
is contained in the Criminal Procedure Code. Thus under S.56 an arrested
person is entitled to be informed of the grounds for his arrest. This right is
enshrined in Article 22(1). As regards Article 22(2) Das J. observed (p.15) __



"It is also perfectly plain that the language of Article 22(2) has been
practically copied from Sections 60 and 61 of the Criminal Procedure Code
which admittedly prescribe the procedure to be followed after a person has
been arrested without warrant".



The petitioners before us have invoked Article 13(l) and (2) of the
Constitution which reads ___



13(1) ___           "No person shall be arrested except according to the
procedure established by law. Any person arrested shall be informed of the
reason for his arrest".



    (2) ___               "Every person held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of personal liberty shall be brought before the Judge of the nearest competent Court according to procedure established by law, and shall not be further held in custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty except upon and in terms of the order of such Judge made in accordance with procedure estab­lished by law".



According to the plain meaning of these provisions the rights claimed by the
petitioners are not limited to persons arrested on suspicion of having
committed or being concerned



###  123



with an offence. The protection against arbitrary arrest and detention is the
central feature or the core of these provisions. Under the Indian Constitution
such protection is afforded by Article 21 which reads ___



"No person shall be deprived of his life or personal lib­erty except according
to the procedure prescribed by law".



Article 22(1) and (2) of that Constitution provides protec­tion to persons
arrested without a warrant in the circumstan­ces set out in Ajaib Singh's case
(supra). Article 13 of our Constitution enshrines the rights provided by
Articles 21 and 22(1) and (2) of the Indian Constitution.



The 1st and 2nd Petitioners complain of arbitrary arrest and detention by the
police for the purpose of procuring their evidence against Indika Ariyapala.
The other Petitioners also complain of arbitrary arrest and detention when
they came to the Coroner's Court. I am of the opinion that such arrest and
detention are violative of Article 13(1) and (2) of she Constitu­tion. Neither
the facts nor the constitutional provisions which came in for consideration in
_Ajaib Singh's_ case (supra) have any application to this case whilst the
decision of this Court in

_Navasivayam's_ case (supra) is exactly in point. I wish to add that having
listened to a full argument on the point I have changed the view which I
expressed (obiter) in my separate judgment in _Somawathie v. Weerasinghe_
(supra) on the scope of Article 13. Accordingly I determine that the 2nd and
3rd Respondents have infringed the fundamental rights of the Peti­tioners
secured by Article 13(1) and (2) of the Constitution.



The 2nd and 3rd Respondents have by their acts made the State liable to pay
compensation to the Petitioners. However, the evidence establishes that these
Respondents are personally responsible for the impugned acts. I am, therefore,
of the view that this is an appropriate case to make the order for relief



**124**



against them and the State. Before making my order, I wish to consider the
decision of this Court in _Saman v. Leeladasa_ (4), in which the majority of
the Judges ordered compensation only against the State. After examining the
previous decisions Amerasinghe J. said (p. 38) __



"It is therefore the State that is liable to pay compensa­tion to the
Petitioner".



Fernando J. however, awarded compensation against the 1st Respondent and the
State jointly and severally applying the common law principle of delictual
liability against master and servant. He said (pp.23‑24) __



"Article 126 does not define an ingredient of an infringement of fundamental
rights; it merely ousts the jurisdiction of other Courts and tribunals in
respect of one category of such infringements namely those committed by
executive or administrative action".



  The question is whether the decisions of this Court prior to _Saman v.
Leeladasa_ (supra) preclude relief under Article 126 being granted against a
Respondent who is found personally responsible for the infringement of
fundamental rights and the State. In _Thadchanamoorthi v. Attorney General_
(5), the alleged torture (infringement of Article 11) was held to have been
not proved for want of cogent material. Wanasundara J. proceeded to consider
the preliminary objection taken on behalf of the State that an act of a State
functionary would not constitute "executive or administrative action" unless
it is done within the scope of the powers given to him, which means that if it
is an unlawful or ultra vires act, it would not be considered State action but
only as the individual act of the person concerned. He agreed that such a test
would make Article 11 a dead letter and held that an act of a public officer
under the colour of office would constitute State action except when it ought
to be considered purely as an individual or private act. This exception is
subject to the qualification that even such acts would entail State liability
if their exception is



### 125



subject to the qualification that even such acts would entail State liability
if there is an administrative practice sanctioning or tolerating them.



In _Velumurugu v. Attorney ‑General_ (6), it was held (Shar­vananda J. (as he
then was) and Ratwatte J. dissenting) that the evidence failed to establish
the alleged torture of the Peti­tioner. In this case, the State took up the
position that an act of an officer would constitute "executive or
administrative action", if it is performed in the course of his duties and
under colour of authority and in support relied on decisions on vicar­ious
liability of a master for the acts of his servant in the sphere of the law of
tort. Wanasundera J. said (p.210) __



"We are here dealing with the liability of the State under public law, which
is a new liability imposed directly on the State by the constitutional
provisions. While the decisions relating to the vicarious liability of a
master for the acts of his servant may be useful to the extent that all cases
where a master can be held liable in tort would undoubtedly fall also within
the liability of the State under the constitutional provisions, the converse
need not be true unless we are to give a restricted interpretation to the
constitutional provisions. The Common Law test of tortious liability therefore
cannot provide a sufficient test and we have to look elsewhere for the
appropriate principles".



He expressed the view that all acts done under colour of office including
ultra vires acts or acts in disregard of a prohibition would raise State
liability; and that the concept of "administrative practice" would help to
extend such liability viz. State liability would arise if the acts complained
of are attributable to a general situation created by negligence or
indifference of those in authority (pp. 212, 213).





In the above decisions the Court was concerned with defining State liability
for infringement of fundamental rights in the widest possible terms. The Court
had no occasion to go into



**126**



the nature of the liability for such infringements by private persons not
subject to public law e.g. liability arising under Article 12(3) by exclusion
of any person from a shop etc. on the ground of race, religion, language,
caste or sex; nor did the Court consider whether compensation may be awarded
against both the offending officer and the State which is a question relating
to the scope of the redress an applicant would be entitled to under Article
126.



In _Ratnasara Thero v. Udugampola_ (7) a Divisional Bench of this Court
ordered the 1st Respondent (a Superintendant of Police) to pay the Petitioner
a sum of Rs. 10,000/‑ for infrin­gement of Article 14(1)(a) by the seizure of
certain pamphlets.



In _Mariadas v. Attorney ‑General_ (8), the State was ordered to pay
compensation in a sum of Rs. 5,000/‑ for infringement of the Petitioner's
rights under Article 13(1) whilst the 1st Respondent was ordered to pay the
Petitioner the costs of the application. The Court said it would not make an
order against Sub Inspector Godagama who was also found respon­sible for the
infringements as he was not a party to the pro­ceedings.



Sharvananda J. said (p. 404) __



"The protection afforded by Article 126 is against infringement of fundamental
rights by the State, act­ing by some public authority endowed by it with the
necessary coercive powers. The relief granted is prin­cipally against the
State, although the delinquent offi­cial may also be directed to make amends
and/or suffer punishment".



In _Vivienne Goonewardena v. Perera_ (9) this Court adopted the above dicta as
to the nature and the scope of the liability for infringement of fundamental
rights by the State. The officer who was responsible for the wrongful arrest
of the Petitioner was not a party to the application. Accordingly, the Court
awarded Rs. 2,000/‑ as compensation against the State for infringement of
Article 13(1).



### 127



In _Kapugeekiyana v. Hettiarachchi_ (10), the 1st and 2nd Respondents were
ordered to pay Rs. 10,000/‑ as compensa­tion for violation of the Petitioner's
rights under Article 13(2) by illegally detaining him on the fourth floor of
the Criminal Investigation Department for three days.



With great respect, there is nothing in these decisions which would support
the implication of the majority opinion in _Samara v. Leeladasa_ (supra) that
a determination under Article 126 would enable the grant of relief only
against the State. In fact relief has been freely granted previously not only
against the State but also against Respondents who were found to have been
personally responsible for infringement of fun­damental rights. Even if the
liability is not based on delict but liability _sui generis_ under public law,
this Court has the power under Article 126(4) read with Article 4(d) to grant
relief against the offending public officer and the State. That Article reads
__



"The Supreme Court shall have power to grant such relief or make such
directions as it may deem just and equitable in the circumstances in respect
of any petition or reference referred to in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this
Article .......... "



"Executive or administrative action" would make the State primarily liable for
such action viz. independently of the state officer concerned and as a matter
of public law. But Article 4(d) which provides that fundamental rights shall
be respected, secured and advanced by all organs of government would make the
offending public officer being a member of the exec­utive organ also liable
for the infringement of such rights; and Article 126(4) would empower this
Court to grant relief against the State and such officer. It is necessary that
such relief should be just and equitable. Giving relief against indi­vidual
officers in addition to the State in appropriate cases would also help to curb
any tendency on the part of State officers to violate fundamental rights in
the belief that the State alone is liable for such violation.



**128**



In ordering relief to the Petitioners before us, I wish to emphasize that
whilst it is the duty of the police to investigate offences using all lawful
powers, they are not entitled to arrest or detain persons in the course of
investigations in the manner disclosed in these proceedings. As already
pointed out such overzealous conduct would only impede the successful
prose­cution of offenders and give rise to complaints of violation of
fundamental rights. In all the circumstances, I think it just and equitable to
make order that the 1st and 2nd Petitioners are each satisfied to compensation
in a sum of Rs. 3,000/‑ (Rupees Three Thousand) payable by the State. The 1st
and 2nd Peti­tioners will also be entitled to compensation in a sum of Rs.
500/‑ (Rupee Five Hundred) each payable by the 2nd and 3rd Respondents
respectively. The 3rd, 4th and 5th Petitioners will each be entitled to Rs.
500/‑ (Rupees Five Hundred) as com­pensation payable by the State. Each of
them will also be entitled to compensation in a sum of Rs. 250/‑ (Rupees Two
Hundred and Fifty) payable by the 2nd and 3rd Respondents respectively. I
direct the payment of these amounts accordingly by the State and the 2nd and
3rd Respondents together with one set of costs in a sum of Rs. 2,000/‑ (Rupees
Two Thou­sand) payable by the State. I also agree to the making of the further
direction as stated by my brother Fernando J. in his judgement whereby the
Inspector General of Police is required to inquire and report on the
allegations made by the 1st and 2nd Petitioners.



# **Compensation  ordered  
_against State and   Public _**

**_officers concerned for illegal_**

**_arrest._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1990/12.html_  

