##  M. N.D. Perera Vs Balapatabendi, Secretary To the President and Others -
SLR - 185, Vol 1 of 2005 [2004] LKSC 12; (2005) 1 Sri LR 185 (19 October 2004)

**185**

**M. N.D. PERERA  
vs  
BALAPATABENDI, SECRETARY TO THE PRESIDENT AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
WIGNESWARAN. J.  
TILAKAWARDENA, J. AND  
DISSANAYAKE. J.  
S. C. (F. R.) NO. 27/2002  
APRIL 28TH AND SEPTEMBER 8, 2004  
  
Fundamental Rights - Appointment of the Prime Minister - Article 43(3) of the
Constitution - Whether the function at the President's House for the taking of
the Prime Minister's oaths was a public function - Prohibition of petitioner
from attending the function \- Articles 12(1), 12(2) and 14(1) (a) of the
Constitution.  
_  
The petitioner was the news Editor of the Teleshan Television Net Work (Pvt.)
Ltd. (TNL).  
  
After the General Election of 5th December 2001 Mr. Ranil Wickremasinghe was
appointed Prime Minister (PM) by the President under Article 43(3) of the
Constitution and he was to be sworn in as PM on 9.12.2001.  
  
The petitioner informed the Director of Information (3rd respondent)
particulars of his identity (NIC) and others who were due to accompany him to
cover the event.

**186**

When the petitioner and his party visited the President's House they were body
searched along with their equipment by the security division of which the 2nd
respondent was the Superintendent of Police and were taken to the President's
House ; but the Deputy Inspectors-General of Police of the Presidential
Security Division told them that the President had instructed that media
personnel from the "TNL". "Ravaya" newspaper and 'The Leader" Newspaper should
not be allowed in the President's House that afternoon.  
  
In the result the petitioner and his crew were precluded from covering the
swearing in of the Prime Minister.  
  
**Held (Dissanayake, J dissenting):  
**  
1\. The President's House is not merely the private living quarters of the
President, and for the swearing in of the Prime Minister the occasion was a
public function at the President's House to which the media was entitled
access.  
  
2\. By excluding the petitioner and his crew from attending the said function
their rights under Articles 12(1), 12(2) and 14(1)(a) (Equality and freedom of
speech and expression including publication) were infringed. Those provisions
were not restricted under Articles 15(2), 15(7) or 15(8). Hence the order of
the President to exclude them was illegal. Notwithstanding Article 35 which
conferred personal immunity on the President, the respondents who complied
with such illegal order had to defend their action. This they failed to do.  
  
Per Wigneswaran, J. .  
  
"Decisions with regard to the personnel to be allowed to enter, the number to
be accommodated should have been professionally decided not on the pique and
punctilio of the President".  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. _Bernard Soysa and Others v AG._ (1991) Sri LR 56, 58 .  
  
2\. _Victor Ivan v Silva_ (1998) 1 Sri LR 340, 347  
  
3 _. Prabha Dutt v Union of India_ AIR (1982) SC 6  
  
4\. _Visuvalingam and Others vs Liyanage and Others No (_ 1) (1983) 1 Sri LR
203, 240.  
  
5\. _Wijesuriya v The State_ 77 NLR 25, 56  
  
6\. _Sunila Abeysekera v Ariya Rubasinghe Competent Authority and Others_
(2000) 1 Sri LR 314, 361

**187**

7\. _Azam Khan v State of Audra Pradesh_ (1972) 2 ANDH WR 288  
  
8\. _State of Maharasthra v Namdeo Dhanu_ (1972) Bom. L. R. 583  
  
9\. _Perry Education Association v Perry Local Educators Association (_ 46) US
37.74L Ed 2d 794.  
  
APPLICATION for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Laxman Perera_ with _J. C. Weliamuna_ and _Anuradha Gunawardena_ for
petitioner.  
  
_Bimba Jayasinghe Tillekeratne, Deputy Solicitor General_ with _Rajiv
Gunatilleke, State Counsel_ for 2nd and 4th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult_

October 19, 2004 **WIGNESWARAN J.**  
  
The Petitioner was the News Editor of the Teleshan Television Network
(Private) Ltd. (TNL).  
  
After the General Election held on 5th December 2001 Mr. Ranil Wickremasinghe
was appointed Prime Minister and was scheduled to be sworn in as Prime
Minister at the President's House on the 9th of December 2001.  
  
The Petitioner as on previous occasions faxed a letter to the Director of
Information (3rd Respondent) giving the names and National Identity Card
Numbers of the Petitioner and others who were to accompany him to "cover" the
event.  
  
Thereafter the Petitioner and his crew proceeded to the office of the 3rd
Respondent. They were searched and identified by the officers of the
Presidential Security Division. They then left for the President's House in
the company of an officer of the Presidential Security Division.  
  
At the entrance to the President's House, the Petitioner and his crew members
were not allowed to enter the President's House by the officers of the
President's Security Division who were in charge at the gate. The reason given
for such refusal was that the 1 st - 3rd Respondents had not given permission
for them to enter the President's House.  
  
Such refusal was reported on the same day in the Sinhala and English TNL news-
cast. The Petitioner was compelled to borrow a video clipping

**188**

from Swarnavahini (another Television Company) and telecast same over the TNL
news channel.  
  
Such discrimination had affected the standing, business and income of the
company of which the Petitioner was the News Editor. The Petitioner.
complained of unlawful animosity, hostility and discrimination towards the
Petitioner and the Company.  
  
He alleged violation of his fundamental rights. The Supreme Court granted
leave to proceed on the alleged infringement of Articles 12(1), 12(2) and 14(1
)(a) of the Constitution. Leave was not granted in respect of the alleged
infringement relating to Articles 10 and 14(1 )(g).  
  
The Petitioner prayed for a declaration that the 1 st to 3rd Respondents were
not entitled to preclude the Petitioner and other authorized employees of the
TNL and their agents from entering the President's House with necessary
equipment for the purpose of their legitimate business mentioned above. He
also asked for compensation and costs.  
  
Apparently admitting refusal to the Petitioner and his crew, the learned State
Counsel appearing for the 2nd and 4th Respondents has submitted as follows -  
  
1\. Swearing in of the Prime Minister is not a public function.  
  
2\. The President's House is not a. public place.  
  
3\. The Petitioner was not treated unequally.  
  
His arguments summarized are as follows -  
  
1\. **A public function or not**  
  
In terms of Article 30 of the Constitution the President is the Head of the
Executive and the Government and the Commander - in \- Chief of the Armed
Forces.  
  
In terms of Article 43(3) the Prime Minister is appointed by the President.
Entering upon a public office, the Prime Minister must subscribe to the
oath/affirmation set out in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution. Taking or
making such oath/affirmation prior to entering upon the duties of such office
does not have to be at a public function. The Constitution does not specify
unlike in the case of the President (Article 32(1)) or Judges of the

**189**

Higher Judiciary (Article 107(4)) as to how a Prime Minister should take or
make oath or affirm. The President and the members of the Higher Judiciary are
required to take or make oath/affirmation before a certain official. Not so
the Prime Minister.  
  
A public function is one which is open to the public to attend. Since the
Prime Minister is not stipulated to take or make oath/affirmation before a
particular official he could take or make such an oath/affirmation at a non-
public function. If he takes or makes oath/affirmation in a place where the
public shall have general access, then it would become a public function. But
since he need not take or make oath/affirmation before any official publicly
the occasion of his oath/affirmation does not become a public function.  
  
The above said argument is connected to the next argument as to whether the
President's House is a public place which would be set out presently. What the
learned State Counsel says in effect regarding his first submission is that a
Prime Minister is not mandated to take or make oath/affirmation before a
specific official. But he could take or make oath/ affirmation in a public
place but such place should be open to the public. Since the Prime Minister in
this instance took or made oath/affirmation in the President's House, it being
not a public place the swearing in of the Prime Minister was not a public
function. Hence the next argument needs to be considered.  
  
2\. **Is the President's House a public place?  
**  
Public have no access to all properties owned by the State. Military bases,
official residences are some examples mentioned where pubic are not allowed
free access. Learned State Counsel quotes Justice Mark Fernando in Bernard
Soysa & Others Vs. AG(1) and says "... what is permissible in a traditional
public forum or a semi public forum, is not necessarily permissible in other
public places." He submits that the President's House is public property which
is not by tradition or designation a forum for public communication. It is the
official Residence of the Head of State and the public have no right of access
to it without invitation and permission of access. It is in effect not a
public place.  
  
If it is not a public place then the Petitioner should have had an invitation
to enter the President's House. The learned State Counsel submitted that

**190**

the Petitioner had no invitation to enter. There was in fact no obligation on
the part of the President to allow access to the Petitioner. Therefore the
Petitioner has no right of access to the President's House. If the general
public had not right of access to the President's House, the Petitioner nor
his media institution could not have had any such right, (vide Victor Ivan Vs.
Silva(2))  
  
Referring to the Indian Case of Prabha Duff Vs. Union of lndia(3) the learned
State Counsel pointed out that in that case the prisoner was willing to be
interviewed whereas the President in this instance had not consented to the
presence of the Petitioner nor consented to being televised by him.  
  
4\. **Was the Petitioner treated unequally ?  
**  
As an extension of his argument that the occasion was not a public function
and that the President's House was not a public place the learned State
Counsel placed the argument that the Petitioner in any event was not treated
unequally in terms of the Law, since allowing the Petitioner if at all would
have been only a courtesy extended and not an obligation placed on anyone
since he had no right of access. An unwanted person cannot force himself into
a public property which is not a forum for public communication.  
  
The above said submissions would presently be examined.  
  
The powers and functions of the President of the Democratic Socialist Republic
of Sri Lanka are spelt out in Article 33 of the Constitution as follows:  
  
"In addition to the powers and functions expressly conferred on or assigned to
him by the Constitution or by any written law whether enacted before or after
the commencement of the Constitution, the President shall have the power -  
  
(a) to make the Statement of Government Policy in Parliament at the
commencement of each session of Parliament;  
  
(b) to preside at ceremonial sittings of Parliament;  
  
(c) to receive and recognize, and to appoint and accredit, Ambassadors, High
Commissioners, Plenipotentiaries and other diplomatic agents;

**191**

(d) to keep the Public Seal of the Republic, and to make and execute under the
Public Seal, the Acts of Appointment of the Prime Minister and other Ministers
of the Cabinet of Ministers, the Chief Justice and other Judges of the Supreme
Court, such grants and dispositions of lands and immovable property vested in
the Republic as he is by law required or empowered to do, and to use the
Public Seal for sealing all things whatsoever that shall pass that Seal;  
  
(e) to declare war and peace; and  
  
(f) to do all such acts and things, not being inconsistent with the provisions
of the Constitution or written law, as by international law, custom or usage
he is required or authorized to do."  
  
It is functionally obligatory on the President to "appoint as Prime Minister
the Member of Parliament who in his opinion is most likely to command the
confidence of Parliament" (Article 43(3)).  
  
In terms of Article 43(2) the President shall be a member of the Cabinet of
Ministers and shall be the Head of Cabinet of Ministers. It is because the
President is deemed to be the Head of the Government and the Cabinet of
Ministers that Article 32(1) refers to the Chief Justice or any other Judge of
the Supreme Court as persons before whom the President is to take and
subscribe the oath/affirmation set out in the Fourth Schedule to the
Constitution. Article 107(4) reciprocates and reverses the roles wherein
Judges of the Higher Judiciary take or subscribe to the Oath/Affirmation
before the President.  
  
Because the President is constitutionally the Head of the Cabinet of
Ministers, the Prime Minister who is primus inter pares among the Ministers
and such other Ministers have been referred together in Article 53. This does
not in any manner detract the importance of the office of the Prime Minister.
Inter alia Articles 37(1), 44(1), 45(1) and 46(1) confirm the importance of
the Prime Minister. In fact where the President and the Prime Minister belong
to different political parties the stature and importance of the Prime
Minister who leads a party which has defeated the party led by the President,
thus showing confidence of the people in a party other than the party of the
President, must necessarily be higher than a lieutenant of the President from
the same party. Whatever may be the contrary perceptions of a President and
his party and his supporters may be, the leader of a different party who has
received the majority of votes at a poll

**192**

and whom the President per force has to appoint as Prime Minister in terms of
Article 43(3) must necessarily attract public adoration and attention. Thus
the decision taken by the President in this instance to appoint Mr. Ranil
Wickremasinghe to the post of Prime Minister was a constitutionally mandated
decision. It is in order to give effect to her decision that the President
decided to hold the swearing in ceremony in the President's House, her
official residence. In terms of Article 33 she was again mandated to make and
execute under the Public Seal the Act of Appointment of the Prime Minister.
Therefore what was to take place in her official residence on the 9th of
December 2001 was an official function, the venue for which had been decided
by the President herself. Having decided that an official function is to take
place in an official residence, except for considerations of security
specifically raised such as an imminent threat to life, limb or property, was
it available for the President to deny that the occasion was a public function
? Whether it was a public function or not has to be ascertained from all the
circumstances of the occasion rather than weighting it in a water tight
compartment. There has been no complaint that the Petitioner or any one in his
crew was a security threat. The swearing in of a new Prime Minister after an
election was no doubt an occasion for rejoice to majority of the voters in the
country. The occasion was no doubt looked forward to be enjoyed by people at
large, because the Prime Minister was a people's choice. He was even in the
President's opinion the person most likely to command the confidence of
Parliament. If the occasion was a private occasion then none of the other
televising institutions had any business at the President's House. So long as
other televising institutions like Swarnawahini were granted permission to
"cover" the event, it is to be concluded that the occasion was a public
function but that discrimination had been shown probably due to some form of
ill feeling. Even if private security considerations were the cause for such
discrimination such decisions cannot be made in the air. They had to be
factually verifiable. Otherwise such decisions could be considered capricious.  
  
The 2nd Respondent stated as follows in paragraph 6(C) of his affidavit dated
09.04.2002.  
  
"Like any other person gaining entry to President's House, media personnel
must also be invited. The procedure adopted with regard to the media accessing
President's House is as follows : A list of names of media personnel who are
to cover any event at President's House is forwarded by the Director
Information of the Government

**193**

Information Department. Thereafter, officers of the Presidential Security
Division visit the office of the said Director of Information and check the
identity of the said media personnel and also check their equipment and do a
body-search. Thereafter, the said personnel are taken to President's House
under the escort of the Presidential Security Division so that security is not
breached".  
  
The abovenamed procedure was gone through by the Petitioner and his crew
according to the petition and affidavit filed by the Petitioner. The contents
of paragraph 9 of the petition has been admitted by the 2nd Respondent
confirming that the said procedure was followed on that day. Though the 2nd
Respondent refers to various logistical shortcomings faced on 09.04.2001, the
real reason for debarring the Petitioner and his crew is set out in paragraph
6(f) as follows -  
  
In the meanwhile, at about 2.15 p.m. that day, the Deputy Inspector General of
Police of the Presidential Security Division, Mr. Illangakoon, spoke to me and
informed me that Her Excellency the President has instructed that media
personnel from "TNL", the "Ravaya" newspaper and "The Leader" newspaper should
not be allowed into President's House that afternoon. I produce herewith
marked 2R1, a true copy of an affidavit made by the said Deputy Inspector
General of Police, in confirmation of the facts averred above".  
  
There is no reference to any security threat anticipated from the Petitioner's
quarters. On the pleadings of the Respondents themselves the source of
authority for the disallowance seems to have been the President.  
  
Article 35 of the Constitution provides only for the personal immunity of the
President from proceedings in any Court of Law and that too only during his or
her tenure of office. The President cannot be summoned to Court to justify his
or her action. But nothing prevents a Court of Law from examining the
President's acts. Justice Sharvananda (as he then was) said as follows in the
case of Visuvalingam & Others Vs. Liyanage and Others No. (1) (a) Full Bench
consisting of nine Judges(4).  
  
"Actions of the executive are not above the law and can certainly be
questioned in a Court of Law Though the President is immune from proceedings
in Court a party who invokes the acts of the President

**194**

in his support will have to bear the burden of demonstrating that such acts of
the President are warranted by law; the seal of the President by itself will
not be sufficient to discharge that burden".  
  
In this case the 2nd Respondent has relied on the purported directive of the
President to justify his action.  
  
Justice Thamotheram in Wijesuriya Vs. The State(5) stated as follows :  
  
"The law is that a soldier is bound by law to obey the order of his superior
so long as what is ordered is not manifestly and obviously illegal".  
  
A directive from the President cannot be a defence to the 2nd Respondent if it
was manifestly and obviously illegal. A leader of a sovereign country is not
expected to be parochial nor vindictive nor spiteful what ever the
provocations of his subjects might be, real or imaginary. Leaders no doubt are
human beings. But they are humans clothed with power and privileges granted by
their compatriots out of their love and respect. This power is not to be used
to harass such compatriots. The Chapter on Fundamental Rights as well as
Article 35 of the Constitution have been enacted to curb such harassment by
the Executive which is clothed with tremendous power and privileges. Leaders
in authority should not transgress the fundamental rights of their compatriots
by becoming subjective in their attitudes and decisions. Complementarity the
compatriots themselves should not harass their leaders at least while they are
in office. They should be allowed to do a job of work. Nor should minions take
cover under the provisions of Article 35 transgressing the law while claiming
orders from "above".  
  
The Articles under which leave to proceed was granted by the Bench of which
His Lordship the Chief Justice was Chairman, related to Articles 12(1), 12(2)
& 14(1) (a) which read as follows:  
  
12(1) "All persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equal
protection of the law".  
  
12(2) "No citizen shall be discriminated against on the grounds of race,
religion, language, caste, sex, political opinion, place of birth or any one
of such grounds.  
  
14(1 )(a) "Every citizen is entitled to the freedom of speech and expression
including publication;"

**195**

Article 14(1) (a) includes "publication". The rights of the media are thus
included in this Article. The restrictions placed by the Constitution to the
enjoyment of such Fundamental Rights are set out in Article 15(2), (7) and (8)
of the Constitution. They are as follows :  
  
15:2 The exercise and operation of the fundamental right declared and
recognized by Article 14(1 )(a) shall be subject to such restrictions as may
be prescribed by law in the interests of racial and religious harmony or in
relation to parliamentary privilege, contempt of court,. defamation or
incitement to an offence.  
  
15:7 The exercise and operation of all the fundamental rights declared and
recognized by Article 12,13(1), 13(2) and 14 shall be subject to such
restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the interest of national security,
public order and the protection of public health or morality, or for the
purpose of securing due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of
others, or of meeting the just requirements of the general welfare of a
democratic society. For the purposes of this paragraph "Law" includes
regulations made under the law for the time being relating to public security.  
  
15:8 The exercise and operation of the fundamental rights declared and
recognized by Articles 12(1), 13 and 14 shall, in their application to the
members of the Armed Forces, Police Force and other Forces charged with the
maintenance of public order, be subject to such restrictions as may be
prescribed by law in the interest of the proper discharge of their duties and
the maintenance of discipline among them.  
  
Justice Amerasinghe in Sunila Abeysekera Vs. Ariya Rubasinghe, Competent
Authority & Others(6) stated as follows -  
  
"In addition to being "prescribed by law", restrictions on the Constitutional
right of freedom of speech, in order to be valid, must have a legitimate aim
recognized by the Constitution. No doubt after balancing interests, albeit at
a very general, wholesale level, the makers of our Constitution have in
Article 15\. made a threshold categorization, infer alia, of the varieties of
speech that are not protected absolutely, but which may be limited by law".  
  
Article 15(7) refers to 'restrictions as may be prescribed by law and the
Supreme Court has interpreted that in addition, restrictions must have a

**196**

legitimate aim recognized by the Constitution. Restrictions placed arbitrarily
by those in authority for subjective reasons or on account of personal
selectivity or idiosyncrasies as in this case, not appreciating the type of
journalism or televising style of selected media organizations, cannot be
considered as either restrictions "prescribed by law" or restrictions having a
'legitimate aim recognized by the Constitution". Freedom of speech and
expression entails recognition of diverse views and perceptions. The law in
its wisdom does not condone the silencing of opposite views since positions
can be reversed and the victim might one day become the vanquisher. It was
Voltaire who said that though he would not agree with anything someone said,
he would yet fight with all at his command to establish that other's right to
say so. Rights of the millions in this country should not be compromised at
the altar of personal preferences and prejudices of the Executive.  
  
The very reason trotted out by the learned State Counsel, to prevent public
from attending a function at the President's House is the reason which favours
media coverage of such an event. The public and the media are entitled to know
the events as they occur at the swearing-in ceremony of their Prime Minister.
The journalists cover such events to impart such information though their
respective media. Though the President's House is no doubt within the control
and direction of the President and the public at large cannot all be
accommodated for a public function of such a nature yet all recognized media
personnel after checking on their identities and also after body checks if
necessary have been conducted could have been allowed in order to 'cover' the
event for publication or telecasting to the people at large. After all the
fundamental right of freedom of speech not only protects individuals but also
the society at large. Societal functions to preserve free public discussion of
Government affairs are also included under Article 14(1 )(a). The press and
the televising institutions under these circumstances act as agents of the
public at large. They disseminate free flow of information and ideas. They
function as surrogates for the public in the modern context. Perception of
fairness towards the new Government formed by a party different from the party
to which the President belonged, would have been possible for the public to
gather only if there was openness in dealing with a media identified by the
President as adversative. The concept of democracy demanded transparency,
openness and fair play. Any reservations against the Petitioner or his
employer on the grounds of political opinion should not have come between the
President and the People.

**197**

As pointed out by the learned counsel for the Petitioner, the President's
House is not exclusively a living quarters. It has an area for public meetings
and an office complex. The living quarters no doubt should have been
restricted for understandable reasons. The arguments of the learned State
Counsel that the whole of the President's House should be considered as her
living quarters and such restrictions be made to cover the entire building is
unacceptable. No question of security nor privacy arose. In fact the
Petitioner and his crew had been subjected to body checks and their identities
ascertained. They were accompanied by a member of the Presidential Security
Division. And in fact other media personnel had been allowed. If
considerations of privacy prohibited outsiders, Swamawahini (from whom the
Petitioner obtained clippings later) and other televising institutions should
not have been allowed entry. There was no question of the President choosing
whom she wanted, to attend the swearing-in ceremony. Having chosen the Prime
Minister herself, having chosen the venue for swearing-in herself, having
decided on the time of swearing in with her approval, the question of who
should attend the function and who should not have, would have been best left
to the Presidential Security Division and her Director of Information (2nd
Respondent was the Director of the PSD and the 3rd Respondent was the Director
of Information). Decisions with regard to the personnel to be allowed to
enter, the number to be accommodated, the area where they had to be seated and
so on should have been professionally decided not on the pique and punctilio
of the President.  
  
Once the occasion has been identified as a public function, restriction to
enter could only have been for acceptable reasons such as considerations of
security, logistical constraints and similar reasons recognized in Article
15(7). If the President considered the President's House inconvenient for a
public function of such a nature as the swearing-in of a newly elected and
appointed Prime Minister, nothing prevented her to have had it in some other
venue where her security as well as the right of the public to view the event,
both, could have been professionally balanced.  
  
The Petitioner and his crew have been singled out for discrimination for
extraneous political or personal considerations and that from persons

**198**

however highly placed cannot be condoned. In any event the 2nd and 3rd
Respondents cannot take cover under directions which are manifestly illegal.
Such directions are illegal because the law does not condone vindictiveness
and spitefulness in official acts, more so, on the ground of political
opinion. If the entire media personnel were restricted for security
considerations which were immediate, imminent and real the Petitioner may not
have been able to show discrimination against him. But in this instance there
was naked discrimination as reflected in the affidavits filed. There were no
reasonable nor valid grounds for refusal. I am unable to accept that the
swearing-in ceremony of the Prime Minister of this country was not a public
function. I am unable to accept, under given circumstances, the President's
House cannot be considered a public place. I am unable to accept that the
Petitioner in this instance was not treated unequally.  
  
I hold that inasmuch as the Petitioner and his crew were unreasonably and
without any valid reasons refused permission to "cover" the swearing-in
ceremony of the Prime Minister on 09.04.2001 there has been violation of the
Petitioner's entitlement to the freedom of speech and expression including
publication (by telecasting) and also a violation of the Petitioner's right to
equality before the law and equal protection of the law. I hold and declare
that 1st and 2nd and 3rd Respondents individually and/or collectively have
violated the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioner enshrined in Articles 12(1),
12(2) and 14(1) (a) of the Constitution.  
  
In my opinion the transgression of the Petitioner's rights would be
sufficiently compensated and the ends of justice met if he is awarded Rs. 5000
and accordingly award same. He would also be entitled to costs in a sum of Rs.
2500. This is a liability to be incurred by the State and payable by the
State.  
  
**TILAKAWARDENA, J.  
  
**I agree with the pith and substance of the judgment of my brother judge
Justice Wigneswaran. I also wish to add that in all public and official
decisions, personal preference has to be subjugated, and must accord with the
high standards of just decision making based on the fundamental principles of
impartiality, equality and objectivity. To act otherwise would be to act
unreasonably, to open the doors to arbitrary, capricious and subjective
decision making which must necessarily eventually erode the

**199**

fundamentals of a free and democratic society, as well as pave the way for
gross injustices, especially in an environment where political parties are
polarized.  
  
This just not only applies to the substantive decision itself but equally
applies to the process, where the highest and best standards such as reasoned,
transparent, clear and intelligible principles and values must apply. By this
not only would the recipient of a decision know that justice has been rendered
to him or her, but it would be manifest and apparent to him or her to see and
understand that the decision is just. These standards would also prevent and
bar other persons from even unconsciously perverting, misleading or even
indirectly manipulating those in authoritative positions.  
  
**N.E. DISSANAYAKE, J.  
**  
I have had the advantage of reading the judgment, in draft of my brother
Wigneswaran, J with which I find myself unable to agree.  
  
The Petitioner by way of his petition and affidavit complained to Court that
on 9th December 2001 he was refused entry to President's House to report on
and cover the swearing in of the Prime Minister, Mr. Ranil Wickremasinghe
consequent to the Parliamentary Election held on 5th December 2001. The
Petitioner claimed that such refusal of entry to the President's House,
constituted a violation of his fundamental rights in terms of Articles
10,12(1), 12(2), 14(1 )(a) and 14(1 )(g) of the Constitution. Leave was
granted only in respect of the alleged infringement of Articles 12(1) (2) and
14(1) (a).  
  
The 2nd Respondent, the Director, Presidential Security Division, in his
affidavit has set out the facts and circumstances with regard to how the
Petitioner was not allowed access to President's House. The facts set out in
the said affidavit have not been controverted by the Petitioner.  
  
According to the contents of the affidavit of the 2nd Respondent access to
President's House is by invitation only.

The Petitioner's petition and affidavit does not speak of any invitation
received by him to be present at the swearing in of the Prime Minister on 9th
December 2001, at President's House.

**200**

The pith and substance of the position taken up by the Petitioner is that, the
swearing in of the Prime Minister was a public function and that it was held
in a public area of President's House and therefore as a media personnel he
had a right of access to cover the aforesaid occasion.  
  
I shall now examine the question whether the swearing in of the Prime Minister
is a public function.  
  
In terms of Article 30 of the Constitution the President of the Republic is
the Head of State, Head of the Executive and the Government and Commander in
Chief of the Armed Forces.  
  
The President assumes office in terms of Article 32(1) by taking an oath
before the Chief Justice. Except in one instance where President Jayawardene
took his oaths at a public place i.e., when he took oaths before the then
Chief Justice at Galle Face Green, at other times this oath has been taken
within the precincts of the President's House.  
  
In terms of Article 43(3) of the Constitution the Prime Minister is appointed
by the President and in terms of Article 44(1 )(b) of the Constitution,
Ministers are appointed by the President. The mode of appointment is not
specified save that Article 53 of the Constitution states that a person
appointed to any office referred to in Chapter VIII of the Constitution shall
not enter upon the duties of that office until he takes and subscribes to the
oath/affirmation in the fourth schedule of the Constitution.  
  
Article 107(4) of the Constitution with regard to appointment of the Judges of
the Superior Courts is more specific in that it states that any person
appointed to be or act as Chief Justice, President, Court of Appeal or a Judge
of the Supreme Court or Court of Appeal shall not enter upon the duties of his
office until he takes and subscribes to the oath/affirmation in the fourth
schedule before the President.  
  
In terms of Article 63 of the Constitution, no member shall sit and vote in
Parliament (except to elect the Speaker) until he takes and subscribes to the
oath stated therein.  
  
This is so even for members of the public service. In terms of Article 61D
(17th Amendment) of the Constitution, a person appointed to any

**201**

office in terms of Chapter IX of the Constitution is required to take and
subscribe the oath in the fourth schedule.  
  
All the aforesaid persons have to take and subscribe the oath in the fourth
schedule. It does no necessarily follow however that taking of the oath in the
fourth schedule to the Constitution, prior to entering upon the duties of that
office, has to be at a public function.  
  
It is only with regard to the President who is the Head of the Executive
{Article 32(1)} and the members of higher Judiciary {Article 107(4)} that
there is any mention of the manner in which this oath is taken.  
  
A public function is one which is open to the members of the public to attend,
and it is held at a place to which the public have access.  
  
In the case of _Azam Khan Vs State of Andra Pradesh(7)_ it was stated that the
word "public is ordinarily used with reference to a joint body of citizens. It
means that it is shared in or participated in or enjoyed by the people at
large. Otherwise it is common to all the people."  
  
"In Stroud's Judicial Dictionary 3rd ed p 19, the meaning of the words public
access to a place means a place open to all public in fact, whether by right
or permission" {State of Maharasthra Vs Namdeo Dhannu(8).}  
  
The above passages are found at page 796 of K. J. Aiyar's Judicial Dictionary
13th edition.  
  
In Dr. Sir Hari Singh Gour's work on "Penal Law of India", 11th edition Vol 2,
in reference to the charge of affray a public place has been defined at page
1479 as follows:  
  
"4\. What is a Public Place ? A public place is a place where the public go no
matter they have a right to go or not. If the public resort to a place without
let or hindrance, it is a public place, though strictly speaking, they may be
trespassing. Whether a place is public or not depends on the right of the
public as such to go to the place, though of course a place to which the
public can go as of right must be a public place. The place where the public
are actually in the habit of going must be deemed to be public for the purpose
of the offence of affray, for

**202**

instance, places like railway platforms, theatre halls, and open spaces
resorted to by the public for purpose of recreation, amusement etc.  
  
It is to be observed that in the case of the President and members of the
superior courts, the only requirement is that the persons assuming office must
take oath/affirmation before the Chief Justice and the President respectively.
There is no doubt that it is of public importance. However whether it takes
place at a public function depends on where it is held. If it is held at Galle
Face Green or Independence Square or any such other place to which the public
have access, which is a public place then the swearing in becomes a public
function.  
  
In the case of the Prime Minister, Ministers of the Government and Public
Officials there is no stipulation as with the President and members of the
higher Judiciary as to before whom the oath shall be taken. Article 53 of the
Constitution is silent on this point. It therefore connotes that such an oath
could be taken at a non-public function. Once again the place at which the
oath is taken, if it is a place to which the public have access as of right,
would determine whether it is a public function.  
  
However by the very fact of Article 53 of the Constitution being silent on the
point to how the oath should be taken, implies that intrinsically, the
swearing in does not take place at a public function.  
  
Is the President's House or a part of it a public place ?  
  
This question assumes importance as the position taken by the Petitioner by
way of his written submissions that the aforesaid swearing in, is a public
function held in a public area of the President's House which can be accessed
by the public, and the counter submissions made on behalf of the 2nd and 4th
Respondents to the effect that a ceremony, or event will be a public function
only if it is held in a public place to which the members of public have
access.  
  
In the US case of Perry Education Association vs Perry Local Educators
Association et al (9) it was held in determining First Amendment rights (the
right to free speech) that the existence of right of access to public property
and the standard by which limitations on such right must be evaluated, differ
depending on the character of the property in issue.

**203**

It was held in that case that "in places which by long tradition or government
fia    t have been devoted to assembly and debate, the rights of the State to
limit expressive activity are sharply circumscribed. At one end of the
spectrum are streets and parks which have immemorially been held in trust for
the use of the public and  .......................  
  
A second category consists of public property which the State has opened for
use by the public of expressive activity. The Constitution forbids a State to
enforce certain exclusions from a forum generally open to the public even if
it was not required to create the forum in the first place.  
  
We have recognized that the First Amendment does not guarantee access to
property simply because it is owned or controlled by the Government. _United
States Postal Services Vs Council of Greenburgh Civic Assns. (Supra)_  
  
The said case of Perry was quoted by Fernando, J at page 58 in Bernard _Soysa
and others Vs AG (Supra)_ He identifies three categories of public places :  
  
(i) Traditional public fora,

(ii) Limited purpose-semi public fora,  
  
(iii) Public property which is not by tradition or designation a forum for
public communication.  
  
At page 58, he stated "It is unnecessary to consider whether such a
classification is applicable in Sri Lanka. However, it demonstrates that what
is permissible in a traditional public forum, or a semi public forum, is not
necessarily permissible in other public places".  
  
Public property and public place do not have the same meaning. Property owned
by the State is public property. However it does not mean that the public have
access to all property owned by the State. Military bases, official
residences, certain government buildings and offices are off limits to the
general public or have restricted access. Similarly official residences of the
Chief Justice and other judges are public property but not public places and
therefore not accessible to the general public.  
  
It has been contended on the written submissions tendered on behalf of the
Petitioner that areas of President's House where she holds public

**204**

meetings and the office complex are in the category of public places and no
restrictions can be placed on members of public accessing the said areas.  
  
It is to be observed that there is no material before this Court to indicate
that the swearing in of the Prime Minister was held at an office complex of
the President or in an auditorium. As a matter of fact by paragraphs 6(ii) and
7 of the petition, the petitioner reiterated that the swearing in function was
held at the President's House, which was conceded by him to be the official
residence of the President  
  
It is to be observed that the President's House is dedicated as a building or
property which is the official residence of the Head of State. It may have
function rooms and office rooms of the Head of State. However, the character
of the building remains unchanged. It admittedly is the official residence of
the Head of State. Therefore it would appear that the members of the public
would have no right of access to it, without invitation and permission of
access, as it is not a public place.  
  
Out of the 3 categories of public places enunciated by Fernando, J in _Bernard
Soysa and others Vs AG (Supra)_ the President's House falls into the 3rd
category, i.e public property which is not by tradition or designation a forum
for public communication. It is not in the same category as a street or a park
which falls into the first category nor a public institution to which public
have restricted access as to time and purpose which is the second category.
The third category encompasses places to which the public have no right of
access, Military bases, high security prisons, official residences and certain
other government or public buildings come within this category.  
  
It is of significance to note that the Petitioner has failed to provide any
proof that he possessed an invitation to enter President's House. The 2nd
Respondent had denied that the Petitioner had an invitation and this position
is accepted by the fact that no counter affidavits or documents have been
filed to show that the Petitioner was invited.  
  
The Petitioner has a right to use a public place, such as roads and parks.
However in places where access is restricted he does not have a right to
extract an invitation.

**205**

The Petitioner has failed to establish an obligation on the part of the
President who was performing an official function in her official residence,
to allow access to the President's House to the Petitioner. The Petitioner's
right of access would necessarily correspond to such an obligation on the part
of the President.  
  
Therefore it is clear that the Petitioner had no right to be at the
President's House on the aforesaid date.  
  
If the general public had no right of access to President's House then the
petitioner can claim no more merely because he represents a media institution.  
  
In the case of _Victor Ivan Vs Silva (Supra)_ Fernando J said ;  
  
"I don't think that a newspaper enjoys any greater privileges of speech,
expression and publication, or immunity from prosecution, than the ordinary
citizen. The freedom of the press is not a distinct fundamental right, but is
part of the freedom of speech and expression, including publication which
Article 14(1 )(a) has entrenched for everyone alike."  
  
Let me now consider the question whether the Petitioner was treated unequally
by the 2nd and 4th Respondents and thereby violated Article 12(1) of the
Constitution. .  
  
It is significant to observe that Article 12 has to be referable to a right as
distinguished from a privilege or a courtesy which is extended. An invitation
to attend a function in a non-public forum/place to which access is restricted
or prohibited to the general public is a privilege or courtesy that is
extended. Equality or unequal treatment can be claimed for a right but not a
for a privilege or courtesy.  
  
As access to the President's House is not available to the general public and
access is only on invitation, the Petitioner can have no right to be present
thereat. There can therefore be no unequal treatment when there is no
corresponding right of the Petitioner. The Petitioner can have no right to a
privilege or courtesy or invitation.  
  
I reject the contention of the Petitioner that there was unequal treatment in
violation of Article 12(1), discriminatory treatment in violation of Article

**206**

12(2) and his freedom of speech and publication guaranteed under Article 14(1
)(a) have been violated by the Petitioner not being among the invitees and
other persons to whom the courtesy of participation at the aforesaid has been
extend.  
  
I dismiss the application of the Petitioner with costs fixed at Rs. 5000/-.  
  
_**Relief granted.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/12.html_  

